Sverre Lodgaard Routledge Global Security Studies Nuclear Disarmament and Non-Proliferation This book examines the current debate on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, notably the international non-proliferation regime and how to implement its disarmament provisions.
The analysis centres on the relationship between disarmament and non-proliferation in an increasingly multi-centric world involving China and India as well as the US, the European powers and Russia.
It concludes with a description and discussion of three different worlds without nuclear weapons and their implications for nuclear-disarmament policies.
This book will be of great interest to all students of arms control, strategic studies, war and conflict studies, and IR/security studies in general.
Sverre Lodgaard is a Senior Research Fellow at the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs, Oslo.
They were heavily criticised both by their own establishments and by others, and the world was taken by surprise.
The call was followed up by Barack Obama and leaders of other countries.
In many parts of the world, states are waiting to see what comes of it.
Elimination of nuclear weapons has been proposed before the Baruch plan of 1946, the McCloy-Zorin proposal of 1961, the ReaganGorbachev attempt in Reykjavik in 1986, Rajiv Gandhi’s plan and plea before the UN General Assembly in 1988 and those initiatives were short-lived.
Mostly, other countries have not been negative, but they are cautiously waiting to assess the realism of it.
They see the call as part of a double agenda, the real purpose of which is to sustain and enhance Western unilateral advantage.
The synergies of disarmament and non-proliferation may stop smaller and weaker states from acquiring the “great equaliser” a nuclear capability of their own and new United States conventional weapons that can instantly destroy targets all around the globe are more likely to be used than nuclear systems.
In a world without nuclear arms, the United States may therefore be even more superior, for nobody can match its conventional strength.
At low levels of offensive nuclear forces, improved United States ballistic missile defences may, furthermore, create fears of first-strike capabilities.
If the shield becomes increasingly effective, others may be threatened from a position of near impunity.
Seen in one or more of these ways, nuclear disarmament is not a hallmark of progressive politics, but a change to maintain the dominance of the United States and the West.
The United States unipolar moment was precisely that a moment yielding to a multicentric world.
Emerging powers wedded to state sovereignty, territorial integrity 2 Introduction and non-interference in internal affairs are changing the parameters of global geopolitics, and states in Asia, Africa and Latin-America cooperate more with each other to reduce their dependence on Western powers.
The systemic changes redefine fundamentally important questions of cooperation and conflict in international affairs.
Nuclear disarmament presupposes a cooperative approach to international security.
Big power cooperation is of the essence; regional cooperation likewise.
The Cold War left important legacies that continue to influence nuclear weapon policies.
President Clinton focused on the benefits of globalisation as much as on how to avert threats, but when the period of opportunity of the early 1990s was over, the politics of fear picked up again.
To the extent that specific threats no longer sufficed to justify the maintenance of strong nuclear postures, they were arguably needed to defend against the unknown.
In the mindset of the Cold War, uncertainties about the future had to be met by the strongest of weapons.
Later, 9/11 put the terrorist threat up front; Saddam was turned into a threat beyond proportion; and Iran became a strong driver of threat-based policies.
Legally speaking, failure to take “effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmamenf’ does not necessarily amount to non-compliance by any particular state.
Progress depends on the seriousness of all negotiating parties and is arguably beyond the powers of any single participant.
Converging expectations were created and a review mechanism was set up to facilitate abolition.
Although no timeline was given, “cessation of the arms race at an early date’"" left a sense of urgency.
Attempts have been made to clarify the meaning of it and to make the commitments more explicit, binding and tangible.
However, in the view of a great many parties to the Treaty, the results have been disappointing.
In addition to the five NWS recognised by the NPT, only four states have acquired nuclear weapons.
Throughout the nuclear age, more than 20 states did “something” in the direction of a nuclear weapon capability at some point or other, but dropped the ambition or were stopped in their tracks.
Russia became the sole heir of Soviet nuclear weapons; South Africa abandoned its weapons and joined the NPT; NPT membership increased considerably; the Conference of Disarmament agreed on a mandate for negotiation of a fissile material cut-off treaty ; and by the time the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference was convened, a comprehensive test-ban treaty was in sight.
The United States and Russian nuclear arsenals were significantly reduced.
The Review Conference therefore came at the end of a period of good news, facilitating the decision to extend the Treaty indefinitely.
At this point in time, non-proliferation seemed to be a winning proposition.
India, Pakistan and North Korea went on to test, and Iran became a state of growing proliferation concern.
Proliferation concerns grew, disarmament negotiations came to a halt, big power relations deteriorated, and more functions were assigned to nuclear weapons in national military doctrines.
The grand bargain from 1968 that led to the NPT came apart until a new United States government with high disarmament ambitions opened a new window of opportunity to revive it.
The chapter reviews the explanatory power of realist assumptions and idealist perspectives, and concludes with a list of 16 propositions shedding light on what it may take to turn would-be proliferators back to non-nuclear status.
In legal terms, the link between disarmament and non-proliferation is well established.
More than anything else, the NPT review process has centred on the relationship between them, and the academic literature has excellent analyses of the subject.
Therefore, the discussion in Chapter 9 is not conducted in the legal framework, but focuses on the political and military dimensions of the disarmament-non-proliferation relationship.
Special attention is paid to the distinction between disarmament as a process and disarmament as a state of affairs, and to the concept of rank disequilibrium, which appears to have strong explanatory power in cases like Iran and India.
Looking ahead, the NPT is a regulatory mechanism for non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses all the way to zero.
However, it says nothing about the precise meaning of zero and it is no more than a skeleton agreement, so new rules guiding the final approaches to a NWFW will be needed.
All the way, due respect must be paid to the path dependency of nuclear disarmament.
However, some force constellations are more dangerous than others, and much is known about the conditions of military stability.
The book is comprehensive in its coverage of disarmament and nonproliferation issues, but stays within the confines of the state paradigm.
Peaceful uses of nuclear energy the third pillar of the NPT are referred to intermittently in some of the chapters, but not discussed at any length.
The notes and cross references are made in order to enable the readers to use single chapters without having to read the entire book.
Theoretical assumptions, historical experiences, future challenges”, Oscarsborg, Oslo, June 2009.
Chapter 10 is a much expanded version of an article with the same title in Daedalus, Fall 2009.
My thanks go first of all to John Hamre, Li Bin and William Potter who hosted me and shared of their rich insights with me.
I am grateful to Ambassador Kaare Aas, in particular, for his cooperation and encouragement in the early phases of the work.
First of all, however, my gratitude goes to the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs , which I had the privilege to direct for ten years and which gave me optimal working conditions when I stepped down from the directorship.
Introduction 5 I have benefited from comments by colleagues in many parts of the world at conference tables and informally, in reference to conference papers and in freewheeling discussions.
I would like to thank Steven Miller, Oystein Noreng, Benoit Pelopidas, Leon Sigal, Nikolai Sokov and Aruni Wijewardane in particular, for their inputs in the final stages of the work.
Like so many times before, Jan Risvik assisted me, competently and efficiently, language-wise and otherwise.
Lala Kylycheva assisted in the preparation of notes and references and in meeting other editorial requirements.
It raises the opportunity costs of hostilities and wars, and offers hope for a better-organised world where arms regulation is deemed to be in the common interest.
However, state sovereignty remains a defining characteristic of the international system, and international organisations are usually asked to facilitate cooperation between sovereign states.
The security sector, in particular, is not bound by growing volumes of international interaction, but follows its own logic.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, trade between European states was booming, but this did not prevent the First World War.
Today, China is Japan’s largest market and Japan is China’s third largest, but they remain wary of each other as far as national security is concerned.
Growing interdependence has not led to political integration and the formation of security communities.
The European Union, where economic cooperation did develop into political integration and cooperation on security and defence issues, is an exception in this respect.
The framework conditions for nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are further complicated by the ongoing shifts of power in the international system from the west to the east and south.
For the hegemon, the “second country” the state that is next to it in the international power hierarchy has been the main problem.
Others watch such rivalries carefully, satisfied states rallying around the hegemon and dissatisfied ones tending to side with the challenger.
Even if the challenger aims at no more than equal status, what the hegemon sees is a trajectory that threatens to cross and overtake its own.
In the 1970s, the Soviet Union said it aimed for no more than nuclear parity with the US, but the United States had its eyes on capabilities that were rising faster than its own, leading to another round of intensified arms racing.
China proceeds cautiously, stressing the peaceful nature of its development, while Americans debate their hedging 10 Power shifts and nuclear weapons strategies, some arguing that cooperation is possible and others that confrontation is unavoidable.
The state of the American economy discourages new, expensive foreign policy adventures, and American public opinion wants the administration to extricate itself from the wars in the Middle East.
Obama emphasises international cooperation on the basis of international law.
To set nuclear disarmament in motion, Obama has to come to terms with Russia.
If not, the grand ambition of a nuclear-weapon-free world will fail before it gets started.
The successor agreement to START I is no big deal, but without cancellation of the missile defence plans for Poland and the Czech Republic, it may not have been possible.
Agreement on deeper cuts requires more comprehensive accommodation of national interests.
Obama recognises that disarmament depends on cooperative big power relations, so his vision of an NWFW the number-one priority in his maiden speech at the United Nations is a driver for a cooperative security environment.
For the time being, the rationale for nuclear disarmament and the economic and political incentives for improved international cooperation therefore reinforce each other in the conduct of United States foreign affairs.
However, United States emphasis on military superiority and the reactions and priorities of other powerful actors in an increasingly multi-centric world make the continuation open to question.
The security environment may become more cooperative and so facilitate disarmament, or it may deteriorate into the traditional security dilemma that fuelled the arms race of the Cold War, where an increase in the power of one state weakens the position of others and drive them to increase their own military capabilities.
The negation of the Bush administration’s priorities does not mean that unilateralism is out for ever.
Unilateralism is a structural phenomenon that derives from the superior position of the United States in world affairs, and it would be no surprise if the pendulum were to swing back in an effort to reconfirm United States superiority and keep the challengers at bay.
The Bush administration left Russia, China and others with a deep distrust of the United States, so it would be premature for them to assume that Obama’s policies are the beginning of a new, benign longterm trend.
Elimination of nuclear weapons may take decades, and those who prefer a more assertive foreign policy backed by sophisticated nuclear forces may get the upper hand again before disarmament has gone very far.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is predicated on international cooperation across a broad range of issues concerning peaceful as well as military utilisations of nuclear energy.
To function effectively, it requires more concord between the big powers than is common in the international system.
The Treaty also labours under conflicts of interest between states in the northwest and states in the south.
The latter object to supplier-state restrictions on international nuclear commerce and sharply criticise the NWS for their failure to disarm.
Under mounting pressure from both sets of conflicts, the Treaty was in jeopardy when UNSC Resolution 1887 from the Security Council summit of September 2009 reconfirmed the validity of its main elements.
The West The unipolar moment The unipolar moment in world politics the unrivalled hegemonial position of the United States, the first truly global military power in the history of humankind was short-lived.
It came into being in the 1990s; reached its apex in the spring of 2003 following the invasion of Iraq; and dissipated quicker than anybody expected.
In part, the moment was squandered by the destructive policies of the United States itself; in part, it yielded to economic and political developments that had been in the making for several years.
The foreign policy of the Bush administration has been amply described by analysts in and out of the United States.
Unilateralism was part and parcel of it, but not among its defining characferisfics.
Unilateralism grew in the 1990s, after the Cold War, and was inherited by the neoconservatives who took it to new heights.
The neocons added exceptionalism to it the idea that exceptional rules should apply to the exceptionally strong, sometimes in reference to the Roman empire and Roman law.
In the history of the United States, exceptionalism is not new either, but after 9/11 the Bush administration leaped ahead to take it in new directions.
Notable among them were the policies of preventive action and regime change, by force if need be.
Another distinguishing feature was the administration’s unwillingness to talk with its most ardent opponents.
In practice, unilateralism meant that the United States withdrew from some international agreements and refrained from joining others.
International rules, norms and standards were treated selectively in order to not restrict United States freedom of action.
However, once it decided to leave an agreement, it did so the way the treaty prescribed.
If the treaty said that a party might leave on 6 months’ notice, the United States did so.
Unilateralism limited the scope of applicable international law, but did not challenge its foundations.
Insofar as United States policies promoted these values, there would be no need to legitimise them in reference to the UN Charter, international law and multilateral organisations.
The policies would legitimise themselves by their contribution to basic values.
On the international scene, the rule of law was therefore discarded in favour of unilateralism and exceptionalism.
While the rule of law is based on a single standard for all parties, hegemonial rule is based on two standards, one for the hegemon and one for the subjects.
The United States was the global rule-maker, but did not always have to play by the rules.
When Bush declared victory in Iraq, exceptionalism was in high standing in Washington.
However, while unilateralism is almost certain to stay in some form or other, exceptionalism has been on the retreat.
Exceptionalism’s longest shelf life will therefore be in military affairs, where the United States is likely to reign supreme in high-tech capabilities for a long time to come.
Since the beginning of the Cold War, the United States has toppled many governments of other countries, but the prominence given to it by the Bush administration has gone.
The Bush administration stands out as being both more extreme and more straightforward in its declaratory policies than other administrations some say more honest than many others.
Under the heading Global Strike, the Bush administration planned for quick destruction of all targets of significance wherever and whenever it was deemed necessary.
The plans were offensive and pre-emptive in nature and based on advanced conventional, space and information warfare capabilities.
The network of foreign military bases tells a lot about the world’s first global military power.
Additional to these numbers were the forces in Iraq and Afghanistan and non-declared facilities in Kuwait, the Philippines, Israel and other places.
The sword had become impressively potent, but the shield remained imperfect.
Chinese weapons rendered United States assets in outer space vulnerable, and other Asian states were exploiting United States and Western military vulnerabilities by going for ballistic missiles that might do great harm to United States bases.
More than anything else, however, the experiences in Iraq and Afghanislan shed doubt on the realism of the ambition.
While the military instruments were sharper than ever before, their political utility left much to be desired.
In Clausewilzian terms, the United States military machine failed to provide an effective continuation of politics by other means.
That lesson came on top of a long-term undercurrent globalisation that reduces the applicability of military force by raising the stakes in peacelul futures and the opportunity costs of war.
Nevertheless, the United States military budget shows no sign of abating, big budget and current-account deficits notwithstanding.
The United States remains determined not to allow any other state or combination of states to challenge its military superiority.
President Obama’s FY 2010 budget represents a further 2. per cent increase in real terms , in spite of the financial crisis.
Military superiority is written in stone, and political leaders know that proposals for budget cuts may be devastating for their careers.
Behind the high-tech conventional weapons there has often been a nuclear shadow.
The Bush administration widened the option of nuclear weapons use to include contingencies where the adversary has no WMDs, only conventional forces.
The restrictions that previous administrations professed to abide by always sharply criticised by NNWS for being too weak were eliminated.
This was the way the United States established its hegemonial position after the Second World War, spearheading the UN and the Bretton Woods institutions and launching the Marshall Plan.
This century, the United States has acted in blatant disregard of these ground rules and has paid a heavy price for it.
In most regions of the world, United States reputation has fallen dramatically.
A notable exception is India, where the US-India nuclear agreement made headway.
President Obama inherited a long tradition of threat-based foreign and security policies.
Except for a period in the 1990s, when the Clinton administration had its eyes on the opportunities of globalisation, the Cold War fixation on threats remains vibrant, much invigorated by 9/11.
It is as if foreign policy has to be based on threats in recent years radical Islam, terrorism, Iran and to some extent North Korea even when statistics show that the world has become less violent.
For a couple of decades, the expansion of the global economy has been the dominant theme of international affairs, only interrupted by the Asia crisis at the end of the 1990s and the global financial crisis a decade later.
Nevertheless, contrary to much of the rest of the world, the United States has focused not only on what it sees as violent threats, but has also become sceptical of immigration and of globalisation practices that suppress wages.
In the state that spearheaded globalisation, there are now protectionist tendencies at work.
President Obama tries to reconstruct the image of the United States by reaching out to others across major dividing lines in international affairs; using multilateral diplomacy; substituting cooperation for confrontation; and calling for nuclear disarmament.
This way, he may be able to convince others to pursue agendas similar to his own.
The shift is reminiscent of Hegelian dialectics, which says that in all socio-political processes there are contradictory elements, and it is the tensions between them that create the dynamics of development.
The question is to what extent he will be able to follow up on his ambitions.
Limitations on immigration, which restrain the innovative capabilities that have come with foreign scientific talents working and settling in the US, have a distinctly negative impact on the United States economy.
When they go home, as is now increasingly the case, the creative capabilities will shrink.
Poorer economic prospects in the United States combine with better working conditions in many countries of origin to bring more highly educated people back home.
The United States has benefited greatly from owning the international means of payment, much the way Britain benefited from the pound in the days of the British Empire.
If need be, huge deficits can be temporarily managed by printing more money, which the United States did during the financial crisis of 2008/2009.
History shows that the international currency comes and goes with power shifts in international affairs.
When the British Empire went down, the pound was replaced with a certain delay by the dollar.
Today, as the United States is ceding power to others in an increasingly multi-centric world, a handful of power centres will have a say in the development of a system that would be beneficial for many and not just advantageous for one.
To own the international currency is to own a very important means of economic and political influence, so the struggle over this issue is going to be intense.
The United States unipolar moment was exactly that just a moment in modern history.
It is followed by a rapid transition to a world where the United States remains unrivalled in military terms, but where other powers are on a steep rise economically and politically.
In the evolving multi-centric system, the United States will be one of many centres and in that sense more of a “nonnal” country, although still a particularly important one.
The “second country” is the problem The “second country” is the problem, the challenge or, eventually, the enemy.
In the days of the British Empire, London had its eyes fixed on the “second country”, that is, on the one that was next to it in the power hierarchy and that might be able to undermine its hegemonial status.
However, while being involved in a subdued arms competition with China, India is intent on maintaining an independent foreign policy in all directions and keeps its options in relation to China open.
In Japan, the Hatoyama government launched a comprehensive review of the United States alliance for the first time in decades, setting out to reduce the United States footprint in Japan and to improve relations with China.
The Union is based on international rules, norms and standards, and in that sense programmatically obliged to sustain international rules of the road in its external affairs.
The Bush administration’s attempts to circumvent international law demonstrated that the costs of doing so can be very high.
The Bush administration tried to split EU members into “new” and “old” Europe.
To enhance the likelihood that the Americans will come to their defence, they welcomed United States military bases right up to Russia’s borders, bringing relations with Russia to their lowest after the end of the Cold War.
Russia suspended its participation in the CFE agreement and threatened to withdraw from the INF Treaty.
Alarmed by NATO’s war over Kosovo, it upgraded the role of nuclear weapons in its military doctrine.
When NATO could go to war against Serbia without a mandate from the UN Security Council, it might do so again closer to Russia’s borders.
The United States partnerships with East European states drove a wedge into the Union’s efforts to develop a common security and defence policy.
The “second country” was hampered in its integration endeavours and constrained in its ability to act in international affairs.
The shift may be slow and arduous, but this is the political law of gravity.
The EU integration process is all-encompassing, and the new members in the east are small compared with the founding states and other member countries further west.
There may be United States bases in Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and other East European countries for a long time to come, but the most contentious plans are gone.
The more cooperative relations between the USA and Russia become, the easier it will be to unite new and old members behind common approaches to security and defence.
The moves are incremental and modest, but they point in the direction of enhanced integration.
Still, for a long time to come the EU will be unable to muster its economic strength for global geopolitical ends.
Power shifts and nuclear weapons 17 When the Cold War ended, European political leaders stressed that Russia had to be drawn into European cooperation and security, but US/NATO policies and Russian nationalism came in the way.
East European anxieties and the domestic situation in Russia authoritarian rule, restrictions on civil and human rights, corruption and uncertainties about economic policies continue to pose problems.
In the long term, geographic proximity, mutual economic interests, absence of military threats and security challenges in their common neighbourhoods will knit them closer together.
However, what could have changed quickly in the beginning of the 1990s, during the latest period of opportunity for systemic change, is now likely to be a slow movement towards Russian integration into the European economic space and an all-European security architecture.
Diverging interests across the Atlantic The Western world is a network of democracies.
Politically, the transatlantic community is tied together by tradition and common institutions.
In the United States, the political regions of gravity have shifted from the northeast to the south and west.
Most important, the United States no longer relates to international law the way Europeans do.
While most Europeans remain true to international agreements and multilateral cooperation, United States unilateralism persists.
There will be more or less of it with the Obama administration, less but the shifts are likely to be variations of the same theme.
Different attitudes towards international mles, norms and standards are at the core of transatlantic controversies and are also likely to be a source of much contention across the Atlantic in the years to come.
Most Europeans do not condone United States use of force in violation of international law.
For many years, use of force against Iran has been a recurrent issue in United States politics, and Obama’s diplomatic overture did not rule this option out.
The Europeans, on the other hand, have 18 Power shifts and nuclear weapons warned against it all the time.
East European governments may be inclined to follow where the United States leads, but there is no certainty about it.
On Iraq and other issues of war and peace, European public opinion has been more reserved about cooperation with the United States than European govermnents, and that goes for Eastern Europe as well.
NATO has adapted to the transatlantic cleavages by changing from being a coherent alliance under United States leadership to becoming a two-pillar structure where both sides of the Atlantic may use NATO infrastructure for their own purposes, and sometimes for a common purpose like stabilisation of Afghanistan.
NATO is no longer the decision-making body it used to be decisions are made in Washington and in Europe but a platform for transatlantic consultations.
The US, which urged the Europeans to unite after the Second World War to become a better partner, now has to treat the Union and its largest members both as a partners and challengers.
Implications for armaments and disarmament The Europeans are norm-bound and supportive of the international nonproliferation regime.
The EU attaches non-proliferation provisions to its trade agreements, which are negotiated and entered into at the Union level.
In the NPT review process, common EU positions are comprehensive, and the Union can be counted on to strongly support the Treaty and the regime that it harbours in the future.
The United States is less predictable over the long haul because of the likely fluctuations of unilateralism.
Under President Obama there appears to be a comprehensive overlap between United States and European non-proliferation polices, but that was not the case under President Bush and it may not be the case under the next president.
Differences can amount to complementarities, but will more often cause tensions.
The United States is committed to superior military strength and increases its military expenditures in spite of its economic problems.
This translates into a propensity to solve foreign-policy problems by military means, whereas the Europeans have cut their military investments to the bone after the Cold War and therefore emphasise non-military solutions to problems out of necessity as well as conviction.
Confronted with acute challenges at the outskirts of the non-proliferation regime, this may lead to different responses on the two sides of the Atlantic.
As for the NPT commitment to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and disarmament and the United States call for abolition, the Europeans are split.
In simplified terms, non-nuclear Germany is pitted against pro-nuclear France with the UK being outspoken in favour of multilateral nuclear disarmament while considering modernisation of its sea-based deterrent.
Obama’s call for nuclear disarmament is strongly supported by most Europeans.
Power shifts and nuclear weapons 19 Progress in disarmament affairs depends very much on accommodation with Russia.
To reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons, threat perceptions must be alleviated.
The United States accounts for 45 per cent of world military expenditures; Russia for 3 per cent; so to wait for stronger conventional forces to reduce the role of nuclear weapons makes little sense.
For the West, that means policies that can ease tensions along Russia’s borders in Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia.
When Obama pushed the “reset button” to improve relations with Russia, United States policy got closer to that of the big West European countries, but caused anxiety in Eastern Europe.
The second one is likely to swing back and forth on the way to closer EU integration.
United States culture bodes for political shifts of much greater consequence.
The World Without the West Defining characteristics The West is economically, culturally and scientifically attractive, and politically and militarily powerful.
Given its dominant position in world affairs, anything else would have been a surprise.
The pull is supplemented by political and military power, which instils respect and projects influence.
Quite often, bandwagoning pays off Globalisation, which makes everything flow more easily across borders, emanated from the West.
Western technologies facilitated it and the West is capitalising on it.
The extension of norms, institutions and habits is essentially an outward flow from the West.
The Western world has formidable soft power, and those who defy co-option and assimilation may be exposed to its equally formidable hard power.
Small and medium-sized states either play with the West or they risk being discredited and isolated.
The other holds a starker view, envisioning an inevitable conflict between the two countries, ft is either systemic conflict or assimilation.
Discussions often boil down to the question of how much hedging is enough and how much is too much,e. risking becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.
This rudimentary description fits the past better than the present, however, and ignores other options that are opening up to the non-Western world.
During 20 Power shifts and nuclear weapons the United States unipolar moment it would have been a fair description; today, it fails to capture the power shift that is going on in the international system.
For the emerging powers of Asia, Africa and Latin America, the power shift also presents new international options.
They are no longer confined to integrating into the existing liberal order or challenging the West for international leadership.
By building relations with each other, they are making the West less relevant.
More and more, they take what they need from the West while routing around the US-led order.
Empowered by the same technologies that the West has been using in its globalisation drive, they are giving preferential treatment to each other, gradually establishing their own frames of reference in international affairs.
To enact their own preferences they no longer have to confront the West, but can more often afford to ignore it.
While connectivity for the globe as a whole has increased in the last twenty years, it is increasing at a much faster rate among countries outside the Western bloc.
The World Without the West is becoming preferentially and densely interconnected.
This creates the foundation for the development of a new parallel international system, with its own set of mles, institutions and ways of doing things and currencies of power.
For instance, trade between the 20 largest and wealthiest countries in the world is growing significantly faster than world trade, and faster than standard economic models would predict.
Economic growth in big countries like China, India and Brazil does not account for all of it.
They are not cutting their ties to the West, but the relative importance of those ties is diminishing.
Indigenous media networks make it increasingly difficult for the Western media to penetrate other political cultures.
The World Without the West is shaping its own narratives of world affairs, reducing that source of power in Western hands.
Preferential connectivity SouthSouth is underwritten by intergovernmental institutions that coordinate and stimulate cooperation between its members.
During the Bush presideney, the nonaligned movement also beeame more active again.
In Asia in particular, states tend to behave the way the authors of the UN Charter said they should back in 1945 less so in India, South Korea and Japan; more so in China, Russia and Iran.
Inviolable sovereignty the right to determine one’s own social, economic and political order rejects key tenets of liberal internationalism like global civil society, development aid tied to good governance, and international responsibility to protect people who are ill-treated or left in misery by their governments.
Sovereign states determine their own domestic order while dealing with each other on a market basis.
The material foundations are natural resource endowments, manufacturing capacities and incremental innovation,e. learning by doing.
International institutions have no legitimate business other than to serve and facilitate these ends.
Interdependence is growing, gradually shifting from the West to the World Without the West, but without fostering political integration.
The strategy of the West is to turn the emerging powers into responsible stakeholders in the institutions of the existing liberal order.
To make it work, the rules are adapted to the new distribution of power.
The G8 is being replaced by the G20, but the leaders of the former will continue to meet a couple of times per year, apparently as an inner core.
The new heavyweights have got greater roles and expanded voting rights in the Bretton Woods system, the WTO and other international organisations, but all the time on the assumption that the global political economy shall be structured around rules sponsored by the West and that the organisations shall be led by Westerners.
The head of the World Bank is American and the head of the IMF is European, by a tradition to be upheld.
For some time, China and the other emerging powers have been working within this system, accommodating to it and not trying to overturn it.
The major beneficiaries were major oil exporters in the Middle East and the former Soviet Union and major industrial exporters such as China, Japan and Germany.
In 2008 and 2009, the prices came down again, but at the level of $70 per barrel, the petroleum business remained lucrative.
Twothirds of current oil exports from the Persian Gulf are going to Asian customers, and for the Gulf States and Russia the most important growth markets lie in the East.
The other way, India, China, Japan and other Asian energy importers have compelling strategic interests in deepening their ties to major oil and gas exporters.
Before the financial crisis struck, the combined current account surpluses of Russia and the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council exceeded that of China, leading to increasing volumes of eastbound investment.
To secure its energy and rawmaterial supplies, China is investing wherever supplies can be obtained.
The interests are strong and mutual, adding economic substance to the World Without the West.
Leverett notes that sovereign wealth funds and similar kinds of stateowned investment channels provide a potential for coalitions of creditor nations to restrain the United States from acting contrary to their interests.
So far, the central banks of major creditor countries have had their eyes on macroeconomic stabilisation, and most SWFs have focused on maximising the value of their assets.
Looking ahead, state-controlled entities may turn to strategic as well as economic considerations.
Such actions can restrict the flow of financing for the United States currentaccount deficit, further diversify away from the dollar as a reserve asset, and broaden the currency regime for international oil trading to include other currencies than the dollar.
Iran is at the interface between the West and the rising powers of Asia.
Russia and Iran back China on the Taiwan issue; China and Iran support Russia in Chechnya; and for Russia and China it is important that Iran does not fall back into the United States sphere of influence.
India weighs in to strengthen Iran’s eastward orientation, tempered by its new relationship with the United States.
Iran may support the Nabucco pipeline to Europe, which does not pass Russian territory and which may not be fully fed without Iranian supplies, or it may send more gas eastwards and leave westward deliveries to Russia through South Stream and other pipelines.
Traditionally, Iran has been as much oriented towards the East and Northeast as it has been oriented towards the West, and more comprehensive Western sanctions in response to its nuclear programme are likely to enhance its eastward orientation.
The Western part of its external affairs is where its problems and conflicts lie; the Eastern part meets growing opportunities.
Under the circumstances, Asia is about to become a comfort zone for Iran.
As for China, there are numerous question marks about its ability to manage the effects of globalisation.
Power shifts and nuclear weapons 23 Another vulnerability is access to energy to fuel its blistering economic growth.
The energy market is tense; the competition is tough; state intervention is all over the place; and the leadership has little experience in handling political risks in the Middle East, Africa and Latin America.
India faces risks of fragmentation and is hampered by poorly developed infrastructure.
India and China have an agreement about joint exploration of foreign energy sources to temper competition, but more often than not they compete for commercial opportunities.
Russia, with its comprehensive definition of “strategic sectors”, has proven less interested in opening its economy to market forces than in leveraging its energy wealth to consolidate domestic politics and restore Moscow’s international influence.
This has limited its growth potential, as does its singular concentration on the energy sector.
This sector accounts for about 1 per cent of Russia’s jobs, yet energy exports account for 20 per cent of its economic growth.
However, the financial crisis, which struck Russia very hard, may persuade it to diversify its economy and leave some strategic sectors for privatisation.
Interdependence, but not integration Gradually, states outside the Western world are left with more choices than assimilating with the West or confronting it.
China, India, Brazil and other economic powerhouses make the West less dominant and relevant, and they can enhance that trend by enhancing the connectivity with each other.
Globalisation, and the power that unfolds in this rapidly expanding space, is based on factors that often change.
Assets are shifting hands all the time, and the uncertainties are exacerbated by domestic dislocations and political instabilities.
Usually, authoritarian political systems like China, Russia and Iran are assumed to be more vulnerable to domestic ruptures than democratic ones such as India, South Korea and Japan.
Growing interdependence between emerging powers does not translate into political integration between them.
China, India and Russia have opened their economies to the outside world China from 1978, India from 1991, Russia in fits and starts from its reconstitution in the early 1990s but they all stress the importance of state sovereignty.
Coming to it from different backgrounds Russia from the liberal and chaotic years under Yeltsin and China from the totalitarianism of traditional communist rule they are trying hard to control their own domestic order.
China and Japan are trading partners of sorts, but this does not convert into a high degree of political trust.
If trade and investments between China and India develop into a common market hyperbole, maybe, but not excluded they may still be wary of each other when it comes to geopolitics and military dispositions.
They rightly emphasise that globalisation is the essential driving force that limits the ability of any nation to control its own development and makes adaptation the key to success.
But realists are also right in claiming that the politico-military sphere is different from the economic realm.
There is no comparison with the European Union, where the Coal and Steel Union was established with a view to political unification and became the starting point of remarkable progress in that direction.
The principles of state sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference mesh with nation-building and nationalism.
Following “the century of shame”, the civil war, the turbulence of the great leap forward and the cultural revolution, China has had only 30 years of steady nation-building.
The Russians, about to regain their pride and part of the power position that was lost with the demise of the USSR, are in a nationalist mood as well.
Provoked by the establishment of United States and NATO positions along its borders, the government thrives and legitimises its policies in reference to Russian history and big power traditions.
In some of fhem, nafionalism also arises out of frustration over American and other Western narratives of history and interpretations of contemporary affairs.
Divergent narratives are nothing new, but now the information revolution exposes and disseminates them.
Nationalism adds to state sovereignty in restraining the impact of globalisation and whatever interests there might be in going from interdependence to integration.
First, strong economic growth facilitates strong growth of military budgets.
In the case of China, significant hidden expenditures come on top of this.
There has been no distinct tendency for national military acquisitions to interact and feed on each other, except for the Indian-Pakistani relationship where Pakistan tries hard to keep pace with India.
China by introducing different versions of the DF-31 ICBM Power shifts and nuclear weapons 25 and building four or five new SSBNs; India by aiming at a minimum deterrence triad; and Pakistan by building more nuclear warheads for delivery by landbased ballistic missiles.
While the United States and Russia reduce their nuclear arsenals, the Asian NWS are doing the opposite.
Interdependence raises the costs of war, but for lack of political integration the security sector is a sphere of its own depicting a dangerous world.
Far from constituting a security community,*’ Asian powers attend to the risks of war all the time.
They are rearming but, conscious of how much is at stake, they try to avoid the dangers posed by arms racing.
Third, a nuclear-disarmament strategy that tries to generate support from likeminded states in order, subsequently, to build mounting pressure on recalcitrant ones in the east and south would be short-sighted.
The power shift away from the West, and growing cooperation within the World Without the West, translate into diminishing Western leverage and greater staying power for the emerging powers.
China, India and other states are less and less susceptible to pressure and increasingly able to pursue their national interests.
The call for an NWFW started as a United States and Western initiative, and without United States leadership such a call would have gotten nowhere, but the sooner the Asian NWS are included in dialogues on how to proceed, the better.
If their priorities are not taken properly into account, leaving them with no feeling of ownership to the process, progress will be hard to sustain.
For instance, IBSA played a role in forging support for the USIndia nuclear cooperation agreement.
Similar to the growth in South-South economic cooperation, South-South political consultations are also likely to expand in the time ahead.
However, India is not a fully legitimate partner in nuclear-weapon discussions.
Even if India is recognised as an NWS, China and India are generally too far apart to discuss nuclear-weapon issues with a view to common positions.
The others are non-nuclear-weapon parties to the NPT and in the great majority of cases also members of nuclear-weapon-free zones, urging all NWS to disarm.
India remains a member of NAM, and NAM can reinforce important tenets of Indian foreign policy by facilitating the transition from a uni-centric to a multi-centric world.
The World Without the West knows to distinguish between the main Cold War antagonists and the emerging powers of Asia.
For one thing, the growing body of economic cooperation between China and other states in Asia, Africa and Latin America makes the latter less eager to criticise China.
For another, there is less of a reason, too, as long as China’s nuclear profile is a low one focused on core deterrence and prevention of nuclear coercion.
China and India abstain from nuclear posturing, keeping their weapons in a low state of preparedness.
Their power play is unfolding on arenas other than the nuclear one, first of all in the economic sphere where trade relations, the attractions of their huge domestic markets and their savings and investment capital are powerful assets that can be used for political ends.
China’s centralised political system makes it particularly well equipped to do so.
In short, the salience of nuclear weapons in China’s foreign affairs is modest while in India, if looms larger as long as the fight for big power status on a par with other centres of the emerging multi-centric system is going on.
The shift to Asia The historical narrative In a leclure in Copenhagen in 1831, the German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel said that history is moving from the East to the West.
It started in the East and is ending in the West, where the highest level of civilisation is taking shape.
When the Cold War ended, Francis Fukuyama said much the same, a. in reference to Hegel.
He declared “the end of history”, claiming that the economic and political organisation of the West -e. market economy, multiparty democracy, human rights and rule of law represents the end station of a long historical development.
The West has come to the end of history while the rest is still in it, having longer or shorter distances to go.
One flaw has to do with the West’s own shortcomings a big subject that the financial crisis helped us to recognise another that it fails to make proper account of history.
As late as 1820, when the Qing dynasty had been on the decline for a while, China and India slill accounted for some 45 per cent of the world’s economic output.
Today, when the Chinese speak of rejuvenation, they mean restoring China’s power position to that which it used to enjoy in previous centuries.
This can only be realised if China grows significantly faster than the others, and Chinese elites consider that to be fair.
There is something natural about it that can only be understood against the background of long historical periods of superior performance and strength.
The first prime minister upon independence, Jawaharlal Nehru, noted that fate had marked India out for big things, and that it was entirely natural for New Delhi to take a leadership role in world affairs.
Similar to China’s notion of rejuvenation, Nehru’s notion of greatness is part of the nation’s mental make-up.
Indian exceptionalism is not of American proportions Americans keep emphasising that the United States is “a great force for good”, “the greatest force for good” or even “the greatest force for good in the history of mankind” but it seems stronger than that of the Chinese.
The strategy is openness China from the end of the 1970s, India from the beginning of the 1990s.
From the 1430s onwards, the voyages were cut back and soon discontinued altogether.
They were considered too costly as Mongols and other raiders threatened the frontiers.
Seafaring was judged to be an expensive distraction from more important tasks.
China turned its back on trade and exploration and oriented itself inwards.
While the Western powers were energised by the new discoveries and substituted observations, experiments and critical thought for the dogmas, beliefs and rituals of the Middle Ages, China stagnated.
The fact that by 1820 it still accounted for as much as 30 per cent of world output has to be explained in demographic terms.
China can therefore be trusted to stay open to the outside world to the best if its ability, and so can India.
Like China, development is India’s overriding priority, informing a foreign policy that prioritises accordingly, stressing the importance of peace and stability.
It therefore reserves itself in relation to United States balancing strategies against China.
When Russians emphasise that they can manage this and that on their own without attending to others, the Chinese disapprove of it and so do many Indians.
In a stark illustration of the difference between the security sector and other sectors, China is highly secretive on nuclear matters.
Secrecy is an important part of its nuclear posture, and in this respect there is no sign of change.
Contemporary China For good reasons, analyses of ongoing power shifts revolve around the United States and China.
Despite mounting problems and declining influence in recent years, the United States still sees itself in a global leadership role.
In the view of many Americans, the United States remains the essential nation and a force for good, destined to lead the world.
No politician aspiring for high office would suggest that the United States should abdicate from the leadership role.
The means by which it is exercised vary from one administration to the next.
President Obama is upgrading the importance of alliances and multilateral cooperation in conformity with international law.
China treasures partnerships in all directions, conscious of the importance of harmonious external relations to sustain its formidable domestic modernisation project.
At the same time, it is keenly interested in its own power position in the world.
Measuring comprehensive national power is a favourite sport among think tanks and university institutes specialising in foreign affairs.
What is measured is China’s strength relative to other big powers, to the United States in particular.
The objective of China’s rise is therefore to regain its lost international status, and what should be regained is top rank in the international system conditioned by superior achievements and overall strength.
However, realising that “rise” has offensive connotations that may worry China’s neighbours and opposite numbers in world affairs, “peaceful developmenf’ substituted for “peaceful rise” in 2004.
China wants to alleviate concerns that a rapidly growing China will upset the global status quo, conscious that the rise of new powers tends to cause turbulence, especially as ascending powers have been about to overtake established leaders.
In particular, peaceful development is intended to reassure neighbours that China is seeking win-win outcomes in its foreign affairs.
In a well-documented analysis, David Kang shows that, so far, China has been successful in this respect.
The smaller countries of Southeast Asia cooperate more and more with China without cutting their ties with the US, not because they are afraid of China but because it is deemed to be in their best interest.
Chinese commentators link the strategy of peaceful development to China’s domestic situation.
The magnitude of its growth is matched by the magnitude of Power shifts and nuclear weapons 29 its internal problems.
If the past is a guide to the future, domestic upheavals are very much what the leadership should watch out for.
The “Great Leap Forward” caused a major set-back in 1959-1963; the “Cultural Revolution” meant another period of decline in 1966-1976; and in 1989-1993, starting with the Tiananmen Square massacre, the reform economy hit a blow and China’s political standing suffered.
Since 1993, it has emerged from the international isolation that started in 1989 and achieved around 10 per cent annual economic growth.
The East Asian financial crisis of 1997 hit hard at other countries in the region but not at China, which greatly enhanced its overall position in the area.
Based on the firm conviction that isolation was the major factor behind China’s periods of decline and that openness to the outside world is a sine qua non, the strategy therefore acknowledges the need for a peaceful international environment in order to not jeopardise domestic developments.
These strategic assumptions found their way into declaratory policy in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
Second, China aims to augment its wealth and influence, but in a way that reassures its neighbours about its peaceful and mutually beneficial intent.
In similar fashion, China is saying to its neighbours that in the age of globalisation, economic, social and political progress is something that nations must pursue together, for mutual benefit.
Rejuvenation is a long-term process, and there is no better choice for China than to step carefully in relation to the one and only existing superpower.
China has, moreover, a strategic purpose and a will to pursue its national strategy.
If comprehensive power is understood to be the product rather than the sum of hard and soft power the way Cline’s function assume Pp^ X , where Pp is perceived power, C critical mass, E economic capability, M military capability, S strategic purpose and W the will to pursue national strategy China is therefore relatively well positioned.
If power is seen not only as something states possess, but also as something that is embedded in the structure of international affairs, China is progressing from a low starting point.
A natural preference is East Asian regionalisation but Japan is reluctant to accept the rise of China and is a brake on regional cooperation.
Implications for armaments and disarmament In China and India, the nuclear-weapon programmes are rooted in great national ambitions.
For China, rejuvenation in reference to the power position it used to enjoy in previous centuries suggests that the aim is a dominant position in international affairs.
In India, there is a strand of exceptionalism in its pursuit of a leadership role in world affairs, and nuclear weapons are deemed necessary in order to attain that role.
If the United States is seen to reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons as part of a strategy to maintain United States military superiority nobody can match its conventional forces while achievement of an NWFW is in the blue, none of them are likely to be cooperative.
Then, disarmament would run contrary to their historical claims for greatness.
In order for China and India to contribute to a disarmament process in good faith, there has to be a distinct element of equity built into it.
High economic growth and vibrant nationalism fosters it, and it was enhanced by successful management of the latest financial crisis.
The emerging powers China, India and Brazil foremost among them were reassured of the appropriateness of their development strategies and foreign policies.
The main missing element is a strategic dialogue with the United States based on mutual deterrence.
Influenced by the United States disarmament initiatives, India has revived its radical disarmament rhetoric, but will hardly be prepared for much disarmament action until a minimum deterrent force has been established and a seat at the negotiating table has been secured.
Both are sensitive to the contents and sequencing of the specific steps to be taken India in particular, since it is playing for time.
The Asian giants are powers in their own right, increasingly averse to external attempts to interfere with their national interests.
For China it is an important element of its strategic posture, and a sign of weakness.
Confronted with improved United States ballistic missile defence systems and long-range conventional precision-guided munitions, it may therefore want to maintain a high level of secrecy while modernising its arsenal and going for less vulnerable deployment modes.
In the face of such policies, it will not be an easy partner in disarmament deliberations in the years ahead.
Power shifts and nuclear weapons 31 The structure of geopolitics The US, China and the EU It is commonly assumed that global geopolitics will revolve more and more around the United States and China, and they see it that way themselves.
For the US, China and the EU are “second countries”; for China, the United States is number one in all main respects, being the only superpower, while the EU is unlikely to emerge superior to China in comprehensive power because of the slow pace of its political integration.
In terms of economic growth, China is outdoing the United States and the EU by a wide margin.
Politically, China’s ascent depends on the political mobilisation capabilities of the United States and on European integration.
The United States capability to rally international support behind its policies has declined considerably, but may take a U-tum with Obama’s commitment to multilateralism, alliance politics and international law.
In Europe, EU enlargement put a brake on integration and the financial crisis hit the Union hard, but integration remains an overriding political objective.
In short, the United States and China are the likely drivers of geopolitics in the time ahead, while the EU attracts the keen attention of both of them.
Geopolitics is about the impact of geography on politics, and the geography of the Arctic is changing rapidly as a function of global warming.
The EU is China’s largest market, and in ten years’ time China may eclipse the United States as the EU’s largest trading partner.
The EU has no hard power aspirations in East Asia and does not share United States perceptions of the need to curb China’s military capabilities.
Growing Chinese military investments do not present a threat to Europe; Taiwan is a peripheral issue for the Europeans; and Chinese activities in the South China Sea and the Malacca Strait are not of prime concern either.
Protection of SLOCs all the way to the energy sources in the Middle East, from which they both draw, establishes an interface between them, but far from being any new departure in international politics, China’s emerging blue water navy brings it in line with other big powers.
China’s shortcomings with regard to democratic practices and human rights are sources of irritation.
The plight of ethnic minorities in Tibet, Sinkiang and other places are discouraging and censorship practices comprehensive.
Official statistics tell that there are some 100,000 public protests of various kinds per year.
However, if China’s economic and political performance continues to improve, and Europe adopts broader and more instrumental approaches to democracy and human rights as China becomes better known, tensions will be alleviated.
They have no security concerns in relation to each other, and substantial economic and political interests in common.
They share a common interest in a multi-centric world order, and they both wish to enhance their role in global governance institutions.
Most observers believe that for a long time to come, the commonalities of interest between the EU and the United States outweigh the cooperative potential of European-Chinese relations as far as security issues are concerned.
India is another huge country on a steeply rising curve, although not as steep as China’s.
India has a rugged and resilient democracy, and historical and linguistic ties to the West.
With the end of the Cold War and Russia’s opening to the United States and China, its common geostrategic interests with Russia dissipated and threatened to leave it isolated.
During Wen Jiabao’s successful visit to India in 2005, a strategic partnership was declared.
China formally recognised Indian sovereignty over the Himalayan territory of Sikkim, and India reaffirmed its position that Tibet is a part of China.
The two sides also agreed on a road map for settlement of the border dispute, which had brought them to war in 1962.
Along the border, a number of confidence-building measures have been instituted, including a ceiling on troop deployments, agreement to clarify the line of control, advance notification of military movements and manoeuvres, periodic meetings of force commanders, and measures to avoid violations of each other’s airspace.
Given the historical complexities; China’s traditional support for Pakistan; and the potential rivalry between them; this turn of events was remarkable.
Still, the border conflict is far from settled, and economic cooperation is hampered by material shortcomings such as weak Indian infrastructure and lack of knowledge about each other’s social and economic systems and ways of doing business.
China sees Russia, Japan and the United States as neighbours, but India is far away.
Oscillating between indifference and rivalry, the relations between India and China Power shifts and nuclear weapons 33 are vulnerable to tactics of divide and rule.
The nuclear cooperation agreement between the United States and India has such a geopolitical aspect.
It opens a broad range of economic, political and military cooperation between them.
Within the framework of the US-India agreement, India can produce in the order of 50 nuclear weapons per year if it makes maximum use of its capacity.
By the end of 2008, India was estimated to have in the order of 60 to 70 weapons, aiming at a minimum deterrent in the low hundreds.
China from the United States and India in the form of United States missile defences and an expanding Indian arsenal, and India from Pakistani and Chinese expansion and modernisation.
China is modernising and diversifying its forces, but it is unclear to what extent it intends to expand its capabilities beyond substituting new, more survivable missiles for old ones.
In the India-Pakistan relationship, threats and use of nuclear weapons cannot be excluded.
However, it takes politically astute leaderships in Beijing and Delhi and skilful diplomacy to clarify the functions of their nuclear weapons and avoid being entangled in competitive arms acquisitions.
Standing in an unbroken tradition of non-alignment, India shuns alliances.
It is mindful of its independence and widely assumed to be the fulcrum of balance in Asia.
Russia The Soviets did not use the term “geopolitics”, but the Russians do.
Geopolitical analyses tend to see the world through zero-sum lenses what one party gains another loses and the Russians have always been inclined to read international politics this way.
Today, geopolitics is prominent in Russian analyses of international affairs.
NATO’s bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999, without a UN mandate and therefore in violation of international law, triggered a sea change in Russia’s attitude towards the West.
Since NATO could do this, it might do more of the same closer to Russia’s borders.
Its conventional forces were weak and clearly inferior to NATO’s, so Russia upgraded the role of nuclear weapons in response.
While the Bush administration suffered severe set-backs in the Middle East, it was successful in extending its sphere of influence to Russia’s borders in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus.
New physical facts were established on the ground in the form of United States military bases in Eastern Europe and assistance to Georgia, while efforts to enlarge NATO even further to include the Ukraine and Georgia were thwarted.
These developments could only come at the expense of relations with Russia and the arms control architecture.
In contrast with China, which tries to avoid open confrontation with the US, rising Russia tried to hit back as soon as it overcame the economic difficulties and humiliations of the 1990s.
US-Russian relations were therefore at a low point when George Bush left the White House.
Under Barack Obama they quickly improved, much as a function of his ambitious nuclear disarmament plans.
Without another agreement with Russia for further cuts, his high-profile call for an NWFW would have come to nought.
When the plans for a missile shield in Poland and the Czech Republic were shelved, the stage was set for another agreement to replace START I, which expired on 5 December 2009.
The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation promotes common interests in fighting terrorism and keeping the United States out of Central Asia.
The SCO may also be used to regulate their access to Central Asia’s energy resources, but so far there is more competition than cooperation in that respect.
Russia and China support each other on Taiwan and Chechnya, and they have a common geopolitical interest in keeping Iran out of United States hands.
To the extent that they feel encircled and contained by the US, they are likely to strengthen their ties in opposition.
However, China does not want geopolitics to tilt in this direction and Russia, which has been a major arms supplier to China in recent years, is ambivalent with regard to arms and oil supplies, vacillating between economic interests and political concerns not to boost China’s position.
Russia’s relations with the EU suffer from its own economic policies as well as from its authoritarian political system.
Its economic openness is limited by a comprehensive governmental hold of strategic sectors, and human rights and rule of law deficiencies obviate against closer cooperation.
In the long run, however, history, geographic proximity, a growing Russian market and economic complementarity speak in favour of closer cooperation between them.
Similar to China and the EU, Russia acts out of respect for the UN Charter and international law.
For Russia, its veto power in the Security Council is particularly important given its weakness on many other dimensions of power.
Russia’s relations with Japan are constrained by the territorial dispute over the Kurile Islands, for which there are no signs of early resolution.
The coupling of Japanese technology and economic strength to Russian raw materials in Siberia, a matter of much speculation and intermittent hopes since the end of the Cold War, has not materialised.
First of all, the answer is energy, which is a formidable economic and geopolitical card.
Most of Russia’s economy is in the European part of the country and oriented towards the West.
The exercise of this option to become an integral part of the European economic space is up to Russia itself, for it is primarily a matter of economic and political reforms.
If China and the EU form a binary star system some day, Russia is somewhere in its gravitational field.
Putin took Russia from chaos and decay in the 1990s to stability and economic growth in this century.
The correlates of that transformation were authoritarian presidential rule, a firm governmental grip on a comprehensive set of strategic sectors, and virulent nationalism.
The next phase may see democratic reforms and economic liberalisation stimulating more diversified and robust economic growth and opening the doors both to Europe and the economic powerhouses of Asia.
The military doctrine of 2000 stated that the upgraded role of nuclear weapons was temporary, awaiting the reconstitution of sufficient conventional forces.
In addition to being a counterweight against NATO, nuclear weapons are deemed important also in defending the vast and thinly populated expanses of Siberia bordering China.
There is considerable uncertainty about Russia’s inventory of sub-strategic or tactical nuclear weapons, but on the basis of available delivery platforms, SIPRI estimates that Russia has approximately 2,000 operational warheads and about 5,400 altogether, reserves and weapons awaiting dismantlement included.
In 2008, the Russian chief of staff affirmed Russia’s commitment to non-strategic weapons in reference to the situation in Europe.
If a reduced role for nuclear weapons must await conventional force upgrades that are substantial enough to assure the Russian leadership that its borders can be defended by conventional means, one will have to wait a long time.
However, in view of Obama’s rapprochement with Russia, the threat perceptions may be downgraded and the importance accorded to nuclear weapons likewise.
Certainly, in order to reach another disarmament agreement beyond the START I replacement, the sub-strategic weapons have to be included in the negotiations.
Japan Few relationships display such a stark contrast between economic interdependence on the one hand, and political and military animosity on the other, as that between Japan and China.
Trade is flourishing while historical grievances, territorial disputes in the South China Sea, political rivalry in Southeast Asia, strategic competition for vitally important natural resources and mutual security concerns Japanese perceptions of Chinese assertiveness and Chinese worries about the evolution of the US-Japan alliance put heavy strains on relations between them.
The Taiwan issue exacerbates the tensions, and so does Japan’s involvement in the United States missile defence programme.
Following the incursion of a Chinese submarine into the waters off Okinawa in November 2004, Japan unveiled new defence policy guidelines which for the first time named China as a possible military threat.
In response, China expressed deep concerns over the adjustments of Japan’s military strategy and over a joint US-Japan statement in February 2005 declaring Taiwan to be a common security issue for the two of them.
At that time, Chinese officials deemed the relationship to be at its lowest since the establishment of diplomatic relations in 1972.
When Bush left, the US-Japan alliance was stronger than ever before, and Obama wants to enhance United States alliances both in Asia and in Europe.
The guidelines for Japan-US defence cooperation includes consideration of situations in areas surrounding Japan, which the Chinese take to be a reference to Taiwan.
Rather than using the alliance to constrain Japan, China is concerned that the United States empowers it.
United States defence commitments to Taiwan rely on logistical support based in Japan and if it comes to another Taiwan Strait contingency, Japan might be involved.
The new Japanese government seems, moreover, to take a different view of United States extended deterrence, possibly favouring a doctrine of no-first-use.
No-first-use means that nuclear weapons would be used only to retaliate in kind.
In this respect, Hu Jintao’s visit to Japan in May 2008 may be compared with his visit to India in November 2006.
He went out of his way to highlight the cooperative dimensions of the relationship and downplay the conflicts of interest.
The United States missile defence deployments in Alaska and California, ostensibly to defend against missiles from North Korea, may as well detract from the Chinese deterrent.
This amounts to a strong common interest in bringing North Korea back to nonnuclear status, but not always to agreement on the best strategy to make it happen.
China to maintain a credible deterrent; India to establish a minimum deterrent.
Having a huge population, a vast territory, impressive economic growth, a prestigious historical record and rapidly growing selfconfidence, China cannot be ignored.
The United States never resolved to base the relationship with China on mutual vulnerability and deterrence.
Opponents of mutual deterrence argue that it would be irresponsible to leave the US, Japan and Taiwan vulnerable to Chinese nuclear weapons as long as these weapons can be negated by a combination of offensive and defensive capabilities.
In the face of emerging United States missile defence systems, China is therefore bound to take precautionary measures in the form of more weapons in less vulnerable deployment modes.
Also, it reserves its position on the fissile material cut-off issue because it is not sure that it has enough weapongrade materials in stock to meet future requirements.
To remove these rearmament incentives and build confidence in future cooperation, a United States decision to accept mutual deterrence along with a strategic dialogue on how to manage it is therefore of the essence.
The United States wants to reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons by assigning more functions to new conventional systems systems that others do not have.
To avoid the first-use dilemma in the face of a declaratory policy never to be the first to use nuclear weapons, new investments to enhance their survivability is a logical answer.
This is what China is doing,a. by investing more in nuclear-equipped submarines.
The challenge is not unique for China, but presents similar dilemmas for 38 Power shifts and nuclear weapons Russia and others.
In the view of ardent United States critiques, it confirms one of the most sinister interpretations of United States disarmament policy, which sees it as a variation of the conservative theme of change in order to preserve,e. preserving United States military superiority.
China acquired nuclear weapons to deter others and avoid being coerced, and adopted a policy of no-first-use from the beginning.
In this respect, it is usually credited with a progressive disarmament policy.
First, with the century of shame in mind, there are lingering concerns that others may be trying to get at China, and a feeling that nuclear weapons help to keep challengers at a distance.
Second, even if nuclear weapons are marginal to China’s overall status in international affairs, there is an element of pride in the nuclear achievements also in this country.
India will continue its nuclear-weapon programme until a minimum deterrent force of some sort has been established.
In the meantime, it may feel compelled to accede to the CTBT if the US, China and others ratify the Treaty and urge it to do the same, but this is far from certain.
It is not ready for a fissile material cut-off, but willing to participate in negotiations.
It had a high profile on disarmament matters before it started to align itself with the international arms control order after the 1998 tests.
Other states may encourage India to build on the tradition from Jawaharlal Nehru and Rajiv Gandhi and get ready for disarmament talks as soon as possible.
In the bipolar world of the Cold War, it was logical to start with measures that would bring the qualitative and quantitative dimensions of the arms race to a halt and then proceed to disarmament.
A CTBT and an FMCT are important both for substantial and symbolic reasons, and have been uppermost on the priority list of states from the beginning of nuclear-arms-control endeavours 50 years ago, but so have reductions in operative arsenals.
Today, the interests of India and China suggest that further deep cuts in United States and Russian arsenals should come first.
Increasingly, the Asian giants are able to put political weight behind their preferences.
For instance, Russia and the United States have conducted about 1,000 nuclear weapon tests each, while India have conducted five.
China is hedging and hesitates to proceed to an early cut-off agreement.
India is in the process of building up its arsenal and is therefore all the more unprepared.
But if the response is an arms-control agenda that constrains them while leaving the usual suspects largely off the hook, initiatives will quickly go sour.
Unable to equilibrate upwards, it does its utmost to preserve and capitalise on the top-dog positions it holds, using its oil and gas exports both politically and economically, and assigning important roles to nuclear weapons in its national military doctrine.
Russia’s economic growth is slower, more uneven and more vulnerable than China’s and India’s, so at best, it will take a long time to beef the conventional forces up to the point where nuclear weapons would no longer be needed for other purposes than core nuclear deterrence.
Alternatively, it takes a much more benign security environment to get there.
The scars from the Cold War have not been healed, but to prepare Russia for deep and comprehensive cuts, they must be overcome.
The United States and its allies in Europe and Asia are conducting policies of extended deterrence.
The alliances are not at stake and neither is nuclear deterrence, but the question concerns what nuclear weapons are supposed to deter.
The Hatoyama government that came to power in Japan in 2009 started a comprehensive review of the alliance with the United States inter aha with a view to redefine the role of nuclear arms.
Most Europeans want to send the remaining United States nuclear weapons in Europe back to the United States, and few consider the first-use option to be important for the cohesion of the Alliance.
During the Cold War, United States and European hardliners fed on each other to build support for new arms acquisitions.
Hardliners on one side of the Atlantic colluded with likeminded people on the other to raise security concerns that arguably needed a military response, to which they could conveniently refer when arguing for new weapon programmes at home.
The same kind of interplay has been at work in US-Japanese affairs to thwart Obama’s disarmament ambition.
At this juncture, however, it may be that the governments of European countries, Japan and the United States, all of which are poised to take a fresh look at the role of nuclear weapons, will develop common interests in reducing the role that these weapons 40 Power shifts and nuclear weapons play in their bilateral relationship and internationally, and that this cooperation will outweigh the collusion of nuclear-weapon interests.
During the Cold War, nuclear weapons were spread over large parts of the globe, at sea and on land.
The first bomb sprang to life not in 1945, but in the brain of Leo Szilard a decade earlier.
It is the bomb in the mind that stands at the heart of the nuclear proliferation problems, for the mental one is available to all.
The physical one, in the possession of states, came about for fear of others.
Szilard was appalled by the physical destruction of the bomb, but feared Hitler even more.
Later, all members and aspirants to the nuclear club have said that they wanted the bomb for fear of others.
In other words, if the threat is not manifest it will always be latent, for the bomb in the mind does not know geographical borders and the future is unpredictable.
Current rationales for retention and modernisation of nuclear arms are reminiscent of the MAUD report.
For instance, the stated rationale for the British proposition to build a replacement for the Trident submarine system emphasises the need to defend against the unpredictable.
The same rationale can be used by many other states, and it fits some states much better than it fits Britain.
During the Cold War, the fundamental flaw of this rationale was coined “the fallacy of the last step” the mistaken belief that the latest military acquisition would provide a lasting advantage.
Further proliferation, horizontal and vertical, remains a matter of great concern, horizontal proliferation more so than during the Cold War.
First, the recurrent attempts at threat inflation and the corresponding politics of fear.
When the period of opportunity of the early 1990s was over, this practice was resumed in reference to new threats, from non-state as well as state actors.
Second, the doctrine of nuclear deterrence outlived the global rivalry and confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Threats of using nuclear weapons, a recurrent practice during the Cold War, have also been issued later.
Third, the arms race left enormous stocks of weapons and fissile materials behind, many of them in excess of military needs and without adequate protection.
Risks connected with lax controls fed into strong elements of push and pull for nuclear proliferation both in the state and non-state paradigm, and still do.
Finally, as the Cold War drew to an end, the superpower leaders offered a vision of a world without nuclear weapons, in all earnest a vision that was revived 20 years later.
Threat inflation and the politics of fear The first period of the nuclear age the first nuclear era was part and parcel of the Cold War.
The distinct characteristics of this world order translated into an equally distinct nuclear arms race driven by threat inflation and politics of fear.
For a couple of centuries, the lifetime of international orders had been limited to a few decades.
Innovators know that to get on to something new, it is important to go back to basics and start from scratch.
Like bad chess players, decision-makers considered each move to be a necessity, without trend-breaking alternatives.
Scholars and observers met to discuss security and arms-control issues, but the agenda was usually confined to small-scale, reformist variations of existing policies, and even modest refinements seemed unrealistic.
Threat inflation and politics of fear were essential features of security politics on both sides of the East-West divide.
Its origin and form differed, but it was so deeply ingrained both in Moscow and Washington that it survived the Cold War and got a new lease on life in this century.
In the United States, the practice reemerged towards the end of the 1990s and got a formidable boost when terrorism struck the United States on 11 September 2001.
The first nuclear era 45 The way it worked in the United States All through the Cold War, threat inflation was used by American politicians and experts to promote arms programmes.
Under the pretence of analysis, a series of reports were in effect advocacies of enhanced arms build-up.
The report (NSC68... 1950) claimed that, should a major war occur that year, the Soviet Union could immediately overrun Western Europe, drive towards the oilrich areas of the Near and Middle East, consolidate communist gains in the Far East, launch air attacks against Britain and air and sea attacks against the shipping lanes of both the Atlantic and the Pacific, and attack selected targets in Alaska, Canada and the United States with nuclear weapons.
While Truman was sceptical at first, the Korean War helped persuade him to endorse the report, leading to a fourfold increase in the defence budget.
Most administrations after Truman have determined defence requirements first, and then allocated the rest to domestic needs.
The weapons laboratories did not wait for the military to define the needs, but found out themselves what the art of the possible would be.
Presidential candidate John Kennedy took it on board, appealing to fear for political advantage.
The real initiators of the review were John Foster and Edward Teller, both of the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, taking the view that intelligence officers should deliberately try to influence policy by emphasising the worst that the Soviet Union could do.
Within the ten year period of the National 46 The legacies of nuclear history Estimate the Soviets may well expect to achieve a degree of military superiority which would permit a dramatically more aggressive pursuit of their hegemonial objectives.
With the benefit of hindsight, the B-team’s allegations about Soviet weapon systems were all wrong but that, in a sense, is beside the point.
However, their conclusions were followed up by the Committee on the Present Danger, which declared war on Jimmy Carter and his notions of nuclear sufficiency.
The Strategic Anns Limitation Talks agreement was not ratified and Jimmy Carter was not re-elected.
During his presidency, the hegemon-challenger dilemma the challenger claiming parity; the hegemon fearing it would go for more ushered into another major wave of Cold War.
At times, East-West affairs were about little more than nuclear arms racing and bean counting.
For a while, Soviet spokesmen characterised the early 1980s as a pre-war period.
The Soviet side To hide Soviet weakness after the Second World War, Stalin put the loss of human lives at 15 million.
Real losses were much higher, and they came on top of millions of victims of the “Great Terror” of the 1930s.
When the nuclear age began, the Soviet Union was, therefore, on its knees, much inferior to the United States.
The feeling of inferiority haunted Soviet leaders all through the Cold War.
Soviet politics of fear emanated from this inferiority complex, and from the self-interests of a military sector that grew to almost one half of its gross national product , eventually breaking the back of Soviet economy.
In another reading of the same period, the resource limitations left the leadership without any real possibility of matching the United States.
However, the political restraints of those years become clear when juxtaposed to what followed after the Cuban crisis.
At the time of the Cuban crisis, modest numbers of Soviet Bear and Bison bombers were based deep inside the Soviet Union and would have to be forward deployed before flying inter-continentally.
That could reveal their intention and make them vulnerable to pre-emptive attack.
That day, Castro asked Khrushchev for a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the United States.
Swallowing their humiliating retreat, the Soviet leaders were determined to deny the United States another dictate.
Parity with the United States became economic priority number one a formidable ambition for a much smaller economy but the dictatorship had it in its powers to pursue it.
For the United States leaders, the outcome confirmed the importance of strategic superiority.
The result was an annual 10 per cent increase in United States military expenditures from 1980 to 1986 and renewed fear in Moscow about United States superiority and nuclear war.
In 1998, the Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat to the United States, better known as the Rumsfeld Commission, focused on the dangers posed by rogue states developing ballistic missiles capable of reaching the United States, arguing that the United States intelligence community had underestimated these threats.
In due course, missile-defence deployments in Alaska and California were justified in reference to North Korea and the planned deployments in Poland and the Czech Republic in reference to Iran.
In Russia, President Putin was riding high on a nationalistic trend, upgrading external threats and capitalising on his own strongman image.
Nuclear deterrence During the first nuclear era, nuclear weapons were tailored to all sorts of delivery systems to land-, airand sea-based missiles of various ranges, to landand carrier-based aircraft, and to artillery systems.
Nuclear weapons substituted for conventional munitions to such an extent that by the 1960s and 1970s, important United States and Soviet force categories had little capacity for conventional warfare.
In the United States, Eisenhower sought unilateral advantage through quantitative superiority.
The Cuban crisis triggered a veritable Soviet catch-up effort, demonstrating in the course 48 The legacies of nuclear history of 15 years the fallacy of the last step also in quantitative respects.
When the Cold War ended, the world’s arsenals contained about 60,000 warheads, 98 per cent of them Soviet and American ones.
These numbers, and the incessant pursuit of nuclear superiority and parity that produced them, speak to the formidable importance that the United States and the Soviet Union assigned to nuclear weapons during the Cold War.
To explain the ever-expanding size of the arsenals, nuclear war-fighting doctrines were added.
To be able to destroy each other’s weapons in series of attacks and counterattacks, large diversified and well-protected arsenals were arguably needed.
For deterrence to work there has to be a will to use the weapons if attacked; the best way to convince the adversary about that is to prepare for it; and the only way to be seen to be ready is actually to be ready.
Especially if you think you can win a nuclear war and this is what the war-fighting doctrines were about the inhibitions against use goes down; hence the argument that war-fighting doctrines are helpful in making deterrence credible.
He argued that the mere existence of nuclear weapons had a restraining effect irrespective of the sophistry of nuclear-war planning.
In the “real world”, deterrence theory may have boiled down to existential deterrence all through the Cold War yet the nuclear build-up continued and the nuclear doctrines became ever-more sophisticated.
Nuclear doctrines are no longer in the foreground of international affairs, but nearly one decade into the twenty-first century they stayed much the same.
Deterrence, war-fighting and possible first-use of nuclear arms remained key organising concepts.
After the tests in 1998, India also adopted such a policy, but later extended the role of nuclear weapons to include deterrence of chemical and biological weapons.
As was the case during the Cold War, nuclear policies were driven by fear of the other; by vested domestic interests in research, development and production of arms; and by a belief in the political significance of military superiority, notably in the United States, where it was written in stone.
Others may think the same way without admitting to it, because they are unable to challenge it.
During the second wave of US-Soviet arms racing in the 1980s, China showed remarkable restraint, and The first nuclear era 49 by 2009 it still had only 24 ICBMs capable of reaching the West Coast of the United States.
The Chinese evidently consider that if a few bombs can be detonated over United States cities, that is enough to deter a United States nuclear attack, and they are most probably right.
For any United States administration, a few Fl-bombs on United States population centres mean unacceptable destruction.
India has not defined what its objective of minimum deterrence would mean and it is too early to judge where it is heading, but it seems bent on avoiding an arms race with China.
Remnants of the Cold War When the duel was over and the Berlin Wall came down, 40 years of arms racing had produced 70,000 nuclear weapons and huge amounts of highly enriched uranium and plutonium.
The collapse of the Soviet Union, which had based its nuclear management on physical control without any rigorous material accountancy, caused grave concerns about proliferation to state and non-state entities.
Later, the discovery of the Abdul Qadeer Khan network widened it into a concern tons azimuth', firms and individuals from more than 30 countries on four continents had contributed to the network, but nothing seemed to have come from the former Soviet Union.
Effective implementation of Article I of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , obliging suppliers not to assist others in the acquisition of nuclear weapons, became an issue of the highest order.
Testing was not considered necessary, for by shooting two significant amounts of HEU at each other, the weapon developers were virtually certain that a nuclear explosion would follow.
The plutonium bomb that was used over Nagasaki had been tested at Alamogordo.
Most of the newcomers chose to test, while Israel and South Africa adopted policies of opacity and ambiguity.
When the risk of nuclear proliferation began to transcend the state paradigm, the lesson from Hiroshima became particularly relevant.
Equally obvious, the first and most effective line of defence is at the source, meaning reduction of weapons and weapons-grade materials, and effective control of the remaining inventories.
The outcome may be a question of what a nuclear explosion will do to an urban area,e. another Hiroshima.
Somehow, the superpower would probably strike in revenge,g. against states that are believed to host or support the group behind the terror.
The political system of the United States may change very much for the worse, and so may that of others.
Reykjavik As the Cold War began to wind down, a spectacular attempt was made to rid the world of nuclear weapons.
Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan shared the objective of a nuclear-weapon-free world , and had a go at it in Reykjavik in October 1986.
The prelude was the summit meeting in Geneva in November 1985, best known for a joint statement emphasising that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought.
The following year, Gorbachev sought direct dialogue with the United States at the highest level, aiming, first of all, at agreements in the field of arms control and disarmament.
He shied away from bottom-up summits issuing communiques that had been negotiated in advance.
Geneva had been conducted in a top-down way, and Reykjavik was cast in the same mode.
Without it, there was no chance of getting around old habits blocking new departures towards cooperative security.
Some argued that comprehensive disarmament would undermine the Western alliance and make the Europeans accommodate to the Soviets.
The argument was anchored in the past, in the textbooks of the Cold War, void of readiness and ability to imagine what a world without East-West confrontation and nuclear weapons might be like.
At Reykjavik, Reagan and Gorbachev confirmed to each other their objective of eliminating all nuclear weapons, observing parity and equality at each step along the way.
The Commission had emphasised that, in the nuclear age, security was something the parties had to seek together, to mutual advantage, ft was not something one party could achieve at the expense of the The first nuclear era 5 1 other.
In his correspondence to Gorbachev of 25 July 1986, Reagan had proposed that the side that wished to deploy strategic defences should be obligated to present a plan for sharing the benefits of them and for eliminating offensive ballistic missiles.
If the missiles were eliminated before deployment of defences against them, then no capability for a first strike would exist.
Gorbachev tried as best as he could to curtail the SDI, partly because of commitments he had made at home, partly because the programme was of genuine concern to him.
Soviet scientists had told him that the SDI could be neutralised for 10 per cent of what the missile shield would cost.
At Reykjavik, Gorbachev insisted that the SDI should be confined to laboratory research and testing for a period of ten years and that blocked the big deal.
In effect, the Reykjavik summit nevertheless prepared the ground for the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces agreement, which eliminated all United States and Soviet missiles in this category, and for the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty , which reduced operational strategic nuclear weapons by 50 per cent.
As an eyewitness to Reykjavik, I feel Gorbachev was no less responsible than Reagan for its failure because he held SDI hostage for the success of the meeting.
He held good cards with impressive disarmament proposals, and he could have played them far better if he had not been as stubborn on SDI as Reagan.
It could have been postponed for further consideration if they had reached agreement on a deep reduction of nuclear weapons, and as a matter of fact Gorbachev followed that bargaining strategy in later negotiations toward the end of the Reagan administration.
This assessment seemed appropriate at the time it was written, and even more so today, knowing the technological difficulties that ballistic missile defence still encounter.
First, when talking about an NWFW, the superpowers seem to have taken the consent 52 The legacies of nuclear history of the other NWS for granted.
Neither are there any references to the question in the United States and Soviet memoranda of conversation, nor is there any mention of it in Reagan’s, Shultz’s, Gorbachev’s and Dobrynin’s accounts of the discussions.
The other NWS were mere appendices to the bilateral dimension of this world order.
Second, there was no mention of the NPT, despite the fact that Article VI of the NPT made elimination of nuclear weapons an international legal obligation.
This confers credence to the view that, for the major powers, the NPT was somewhat marginal to their core security concerns.
Or they had never paid much attention to Article VI and, therefore, failed to recognise it even as they tried to implement it.
The achievements at the Reykjavik summit were greater than those in any U.S.-Soviet meeting before, but the popular perception of the outcome in Iceland at the time was one of near disaster or near farce.
There was something unreal about it all, partly because it had not dawned on those who received the news that the Cold War might soon be over.
Between Geneva and Reykjavik, there had been some 25 communications back and forth in preparation of the summit, but they were high-level secret ones setting the stage for a leader-driven negotiation.
Also, they were met with incredulity because the leaders had been thinking big in unconventional ways.
While much progress was made in the field of disarmament, an NWFW was not to be.
However, Reykjavik revived the vision, shaking governmental bureaucracies entrenched in the nuclear paradigms of the Cold War and giving hope to the people who had been at their mercy.
When commemorating Reykjavik 20 years later, he was joined by other former United States leaders.
They were deployed in the name of national security and they enhanced the status and prestige of their possessors.
By moving them forward, including them in military manoeuvres and keeping them in high states of readiness, nuclear weapons were used to maintain superpower spheres of interest and mark political ambitions.
Produced in enormous numbers, widely distributed and well-integrated in the military machines of their owners, there was a nuclear shadow to many deployments, operations and conflicts.
After the Cold War, some of these functions have continued unabated; others have been weakened and discarded; and yet others have been given a new lease of life by adapting the nuclear postures to new political and military circumstances.
To better understand what it takes to change the role of nuclear weapons, a closer look at their current functions is in order.
The structural impact Karl Marx wrote that the most effective power is the structural one which functions without being used.
Military strength is an important determinant of the international hierarchy of states, and nuclear weapons are the ultimate expression of strength.
Nuclear weapons are unique in their destructive capacity, instilling a sense of awe in the minds of opponents and fostering caution and respect in the minds of others.
France also got the muscle to chart an independent foreign 54 The legacies of nuclear history policy.
In 1968, when the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was opened for signature, the structural significance of nuclear weapons was enshrined in treaty form.
The NPT is based on the distinction between “haves” and “have-nots”, between five big powers and all others a distinction that persists in a somewhat diluted form another four de facto nuclear-weapon states have been added despite the fact that it was supposed to be temporary.
Precisely because the weapons are in the hands of a privileged few, their status value becomes all the more conspicuous.
Some 30 years later, domestic as well as international prestige played a role in India’s declaration of nuclear-weapon status.
Elements of the Indian scientific community pushed for it to show that they mastered the technology.
In the beginning, the international reactions to the 1998 tests were harsh and condemning, but today, India is well on its way to become a recognised NWS, adding self-confidence to strong sentiments of national sovereignty and independence.
Deterrence and war-fighting The end of the Cold War eliminated the political and ideological confrontation between East and West, but the nuclear doctrines remained much the same.
The United States and Soviet/Russian forces were much reduced, but the Clinton administration’s Nuclear Posture Review became an exercise in continuity, the first-use policy included.
Russia changed its doctrine to make it more similar to that of the United States.
The stated rationale for acquisition of nuclear weapons has always been phrased in terms of national security.
During the Cold War, all NWS adopted this logic, although operationally, they gave very different meanings to it.
The United States and the Soviet Union built enormous forces to guarantee unacceptable destruction; China, France and the United Kingdom introduced notions of sufficiency and minimal deterrence.
For the United States, this goes back to the Soviet blockade of West Berlin in 1948 and what it might take to defend the city.
In the face of superior Soviet conventional forces, use or threats of use of nuclear weapons were deemed necessary to maintain access to the city and to defend it.
First-use became a crucial part of NATO strategy from the inception of the alliance, and led to the deployment of thousands of tactical nuclear weapons in Europe.
Russia discarded the Soviet declaration of no-first-use of 1982 and adopted the Western first-use policy.
Later, the role of Pakistan’s nuclear weapons also came to centre on firstuse, deterring India from making deep intrusions into its territory.
Post-Cold-War doctrines 55 A third function was that of nuclear war-fighting, contemplating nuclear exchanges between the USA and the USSR involving thousands of nuclear weapons back and forth, as if nuclear war could be similar to conventional war and be lost or won.
Even in the absence of any expectation of waging large-scale nuclear war, both powers therefore went for demonstrated capabilities to win or at least deny victory to the other party.
These plans, which could justify whatever number of weapons about 10,000 deployed strategic nuclear weapons on each side during the height of the Cold War were among the worst excesses of the Cold War.
The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty eliminated land-based intermediate range missiles; the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty reduced the strategic forces by one-third; the Presidential initiatives of 1991/1992 ordered comprehensive withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons; the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty limited the number of deployed strategic weapons to 1,700-2,200 by 31 December 2012; and a new agreement replacing START I further reduced the strategic arsenals.
Today, the role of nuclear weapons in war is geared less to strategic big-power settings and more to regional contingencies.
The United States maintains extended deterrence postures in cooperation with its allies in Europe and East Asia.
The end of the Cold War changed the weapons configurations in these regions,^ but not the essence of the doctrines.
The United States keeps the option of being first to use nuclear weapons in response to an attack on its allies, be it an attack by conventional or by unconventional means.
At one point, Henry Kissinger warned the European allies not to repeat requests for assurances that the United States could not possibly mean.President Obama’s disarmament initiatives triggered renewed debate about extended deterrence at official levels both in Japan and Europe, leading politicians holding that the role of nuclear weapons should be limited to deterring their use by others.
The impact of nuclear threats Over the years, the United States has issued specific nuclear threats more than 20 times.
Before Barack Obama, nine out of ten presidents of the nuclear age have done so during crises and limited wars in Berlin, Cuba, East Asia, Indochina and the Middle East.
The one exception Ronald Reagan did not experience a crisis of the kind that made the other presidents invoke such threats.
To many Europeans, this seemed a logical thing to do when the conventional imbalance that justified NATO’s first-use policy disappeared and big-power cooperation got off to a new start.
That, however, was naive, because it ignored the importance that the United States attaches to possible first-use elsewhere in the world.
Also, the United States was increasingly bent on exploiting its superiority, seeing no need for compromise and accommodation of Russian interests or those of others.
Threats of first-use have been made to maintain United States spheres of interest.
Sometimes, they were invoked to protect United States forces far away from home from larger ground forces in their neighbourhoods.
Sometimes, friends and allies who might not be able to stand their ground on their own needed support.
Some of the threats were bluffs, some were defied and some may have worked more or less as infended.
Shortly after the Iron Curtain came down, nuclear threats were levelled at Iraq in connection with the first Gulf War.
Two of these three actions were actually taken by the Iraqis during the last days of the war, which perhaps implies that they were not deterred from using chemical weapons either.
The regime had to explain to its military commanders why it was pulling back from the brink, so it looked a lot better to say that it was sparing the Iraqi people from nuclear holocaust than to admit that the leaders were worried about their own skins.
Post-Cold-War doctrines 57 However, Baker believes the calculated ambiguity about the United States response was part of the reason why Iraq did not use its chemical and biological weapons.
To him and others, the utility of nuclear threats therefore appeared to be confirmed.
Whether that interpretation was correct or not, whatever chance there might have been for the United States to adopt a policy of no-first-use after the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union, it effectively disappeared with this experience.
The Bush administration issued threats against Iraq to deter Saddam from using chemical and biological weapons against United States and allied troops and against Israel.
To make contingency plans is quite customary, however, and to say that all options are on the table falls well short of specific threats for specific purposes, but governmental statements made the nuclear option a live issue for public attention and debate.
Among the leading candidates for the 2009 presidential election, only Obama took partial exception to the use of nuclear weapons against Afghanistan and Pakistan, “involving civilians” but not against Iran.
The military brass seemed more sceptical of threats and use of nuclear weapons than their political leaders.
The threats against Iraq and Iran were not made in defence of United States spheres of interest, but in an effort to expand American influence in the Middle East.
However, during the second term of Bush’s presidency, the policy of regime change lost much of its appeal and credibility because of the traumatic experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan.
To qualify for inclusion on the list, a physical change in the disposition of armed forces had to occur for the specific purpose of influencing the behaviour of another actor in a particular situation, short of any intent 58 The legacies of nuclear history to go to war.
Ships are easier to move around than army units or land-based aircraft.
They can be nearby yet out of sight, and therefore be used more discreetly than land-based forces.
During the Cold War, nuclear weapons were deployed at sea and in other countries for strategic and tactical warfare.
Warships had nuclear weapons on board for surface-to-air missiles and anti-submarine warfare, and aircraft carriers had nuclear air-to-ground ordnance as well.
Any deployment of such forces to the vicinity of hot spots, or involvement in incidents in other regions of the world, could therefore be used to extend a nuclear signal of some sort.
At the very least, the projection of nuclear weapons on to foreign shores, their use in military exercises and shifting levels of readiness were recurrent reminders of their comprehensive existence and integration into the force postures.
Without extending specific threats of nuclear-weapon use, they left the impression that nuclear weapons were weapons of war, and that was indeed the intention.
Other weapon systems had a designated role in the strategic war plans against the Soviet Union.
Of course, the relative size and sophistication of military forces influence the propensity to use them.
Stronger postures widen their applicability and enhance the confidence of their owners that they can be brought to bear on others with positive results.
In particular, the United States monopoly on nuclear weapons was an important asset in its foreign affairs for as long as it lasted.
Still, for many years they were clearly inferior, learning it the hard way during the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962.
If the will is seen to be weak and wavering, their credibility will be undermined.
This is what Post-Cold-War doctrines 59 more than 60 years of non-use in combat tends to do.
Ever since 1945, decisionmakers have shied away from using these weapons in war.
There is a certain truth to the observation that the more time that passes without a nuclear weapon being used, the stronger the norm of non-use.
In a globalising world, both governments and non-govemmental organisations have to care about their reputation.
The United States abstained from nuclear-weapon use in Vietnam, and the Soviet Union shied away from using nuclear arms in Afghanistan.
During the Cold War, the leading powers had a relatively easy job upholding the credibility of nuclear-weapon use.
Well-established threat-based policies were always helpful in this respect.
The threats were highlighted and exaggerated, and stronger nuclear forces were recommended in response.
In this environment, the focus was all the time on the risks of nuclear war, not on the view that the threat might be receding because of a creeping norm of non-use.
Shows of force in the vicinity of hot spots around the world also helped to maintain the credibility of nuclear policies.
They raised the visibility of the nuclear assets and alerted the conflicting parties to the stakes involved.
Usually, these manifestations were many steps away from nuclear use, but they reminded others of the global reach of nuclear weapons and had the potential to instil awe and respect in their minds.
They testifled to the relevance of nuclear weapons in the conduct of international politics.
Nevertheless, the nuclear-weapon establishments could not but be concerned about the utility of what they were producing.
The United States had a big military-industrial complex closely linked to the political system.
To keep and, if possible, expand their share of government budgets, the nuclear weapon establishments went for new nuclear weapons that would be more usable.
A range of weapons suitable for a variety of tasks were built, including low-yield weapons approaching the yield of the largest conventional bombs.
Manipulation of effects blast, heat, radiation and fallout to tailor them to speciflc purposes was also tried.
President Carter turned them down, against the recommendation of his closest advisors.
After a lull in the early and mid-1990s, when President Clinton focused on the opportunities of globalisation and Russia had more than enough to do in coping with its own internal problems, threat-based policies picked up again towards the end of the decade.
This time, the focus was on regional contingencies rather than global ones between the major powers.
The idea that one could 60 The legacies of nuclear history gain a significant advantage in relation to other nuclear powers by investing heavily in nuclear forces had lost much of its currency.
The presidential initiatives of 1991/1992, which eliminated tactical nuclear weapons from surface ships and removed all nuclear deployments from foreign soil except airborne weapons in the low hundreds in Europe, did away with almost all those options.
The introduction of new types of nuclear weapons has also been severely restricted by the moratoria on nuclear-weapon tests and the signatures on the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty , although to some extent more sophisticated simulation techniques enable the most advanced NWS to circumvent the limits imposed by a test ban and defy its original purpose.
By the turn of the century, the means to counter the creeping norm of non-use had therefore shrunk.
That predicament was soon to be addressed, however, in new and provocative ways.
In so far as United States policies promote these values, there would be no need to legitimise them in reference to international law, the United Nations Charter and multilateral organisations.
On the international scene, the rule of law was downplayed in favour of unilateralism and exceptionalism.
To maximise its freedom of action, the United States withdrew from some international agreements and abstained from others.
At the core of United States hegemonial rule was economic, cultural, technological and political strength and, increasingly, the use or threat of use of force to dissuade, deter or if deterrence failed defeat those who sought to challenge it.
Ever since the deployment of solid-fuelled intercontinental ballistic missiles in the 1960s, the United States had had such a capability in the form of ICBMs and submarine-launched ballistic missiles on alert.
Global Strike was different, however, because it focused on regional scenarios; incorporated conventional capabilities along with nuclear ones; and emphasised pre-emptive and preventive attacks rather than retaliatory strikes.
By forcing total vulnerability upon any potential adversary and creating near-invulnerability for the United States, it was primarily intended to stop countries from challenging the American hegemony.
The sword had become impressively potent, but the shield was marred by technological problems and remains incomplete to this day.
The evolution of nuclear doctrines United States doctrine The National Security Strategies of 2002 and 2006 said that the United States must deter and defend against the threat of weapons of mass destruction before they are unleashed.
It will not do to wait until the targeted regimes have built their weapons and can retaliate with them.
President Bush called it a strategy of pre-emption, in accordance with the way this expression had been used in the past, but that use of the term blurs the important distinction between pre-emption and prevention.
Substituting for the old triad of the Cold War ICBM, SLBM and heavy bombers the new one had an offensive leg combining these delivery systems with conventional strike capabilities; a defensive leg including ballistic missile defences; and a revitalised defence infrastructure including the nuclear weapon production complex.
Putting all kinds of offensive weapons into a continuum also invited new weapons to fill eventual gaps.
The effect on the nuclear threshold therefore seemed different depending on which aspect one chose to emphasise.
However, when considered in conjunction with simultaneous doctrinal changes that allowed for the use of nuclear weapons not only to deter chemical and biological weapons, but also in situations where the adversary has conventional arms only, the picture becomes clearer.
By integrating all means of offensive warfare nuclear and conventional into one and the same continuum with no special doctrinal restrictions on any of its elements, use of nuclear weapons became easier to contemplate and in that sense more likely to happen.
More enemies and greater target complexity called for a wider array of military options against regional adversaries.
Therefore, strategic weapons would be available for tactical purposes as well, and there would be greater flexibility in the numbers of nuclear weapons that might be used.
In part, this could be seen as compensation for the withdrawal of sub-strategic weapons that the presidential initiatives of 1991/1992 set in motion; in part, it strengthened the utility of nuclear weapons in regional conflicts.
Nuclear planning was reoriented in order to enhance United States force-projection capabilities.
More than anything else, the NPR departed from past nuclear policy by downplaying and repudiating international arms-control instruments.
Therefore, the removal of restraints on the United States exercise of power should have come as no surprise.
The Bush team criticised the Clintonites for not having done more to exploit United States superiority after the Cold War.
In 1978, the Carter administration stated that the United States would not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon state parties to the NPT unless they were allied or associated with an NWS in an attack against the United States or its allies.
Clearly, United States policy evolved to become substantially at odds with UNSC Resolution 984.
It may be argued that a UNSC Resolution has the force of international law and therefore trumps national strategy documents.
Flowever, there is little doubt that, in reality, it was the other way around, especially as the Bush administration showed little respect for the UN and disregard for much of what the Clinton administration did.
For a while, the moratorium on nuclear tests and the end to discrete political use of nuclear force enhanced the norm of non-use.
Flowever, doctrinal changes starting in the 1990s and taken to the extremes in this century stemmed that development.
The United States widened the spectrum of possible nuclear use, thereby correcting the diminishing utility of nuclear arms.
The Russian and French doctrines also assigned new roles to nuclear weapons, and the British and Indian doctrines did the same, only to a smaller extent.
This administration will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NPT members in good standing.
Chemical and biological weapons will be deterred by conventional means, with reservations made for new scientific developiuenfs in the biological sector.
Exempt are the NWS and NPT members that in the US’s view do not comply with their NPT obligations, such as Iran and possibly Syria.
In the case of Russia, this is a tall order, for the European political architecture would have to change in a way that substantially reduces Russian threat perceptions.
The United States wants follow-on negotiations with Russia when New START has been ratified.
Ofher obsfacles are Pakistan, which sticks to a policy of first-use because of its conventional inferiority vis-a-vis India, and Israel and North Korea.
The Geneva Protocol of 1925 prohibiting the use of chemical and biological weapons in practice, a no-first-use protocol made these weapons illegitimate, whereupon possession of the weapons were prohibited by international treaties.
Also, such doctrines have an intriguing in-built disarmament corollary.
They limit the functions of nuclear weapons to one and one only deterring others from using theirs.
Russian doctrine In 1993, Russia formally dropped the Soviet no-first-use policy.
Promulgated in the early 1980s, some Westerners saw it as admission that nuclear weapons were no longer essential.
In the view of others, this policy had little credibility as long as large numbers of tactical nuclear weapons were deployed along the dividing line in Europe.
Had war broken out, there would have been strong pressures to use them early, and possibly first.
There is no evidence, however, that the Soviet nuclear posture was ever optimised for first strike, as was widely believed in the United States under Reagan.
Like previous doctrines, the Russian military doctrine of 1993 reserved nuclear weapons for the eventuality of global nuclear war.
The MAD policies outlasted the political rivalry with the United States.
Inertia prevailed, the sea change in US-Russian relations notwithstanding.
By the turn of the century, renewed tension between the Cold War antagonists removed any the need for artificial life support.
For Russia, the nuclear arsenal underpins its sovereignty and helps it maintain an independent foreign policy.
The nuclear sector is the only field where Russia can claim equal status with the United States, so it benefits from the structural impact of nuclear weapons on international affairs.
By 2009, it deployed a fifthgeneration silo-based as well as road-mobile ICBM ; introduced a new SLBM ; built new ballistic-missile submarines (SSBNs; the Borey class); had developed a manoeuvrable warhead for the Topol M and enhanced defence-penetration capabilities for the Bulava and a new version of the SS-N23 ; and upgraded existing longand medium-range bombers.
Except for the Bulava, virtually all of these modernisation programmes were launched during the Soviet era.
Sharp budget reductions limited modernisation to already-existing programmes.
The background was United States and NATO expansion towards Russia’s borders and, specifically, the war over Kosovo.
Since NATO could bomb Serbia in violation of international law, without any mandate from the UNSC, it might exploit Russia’s weakness and do the same closer to its borders, or even inside it.
In 1999, Russian leaders were worried about possible Western interference in Chechnya, where a second war broke out that year.
If such an attack were to occur, demonstrative nuclear strikes would force the enemy to stop hostilities or face nuclear escalation.
The more inferior the Russian conventional forces turned out to be, the lower the nuclear threshold.
Since the stakes would be higher for the defender than the attacker (US, NATO), it is assumed that the attacker would not be willing to escalate the war to the strategic level, but prefer retreat.
Therefore, limited use of nuclear weapons could be an effective tool for deterring and fighting limited conflicts.
The credibility of nuclear use would neutralise threats of force for political ends, and actual use of a few weapons might be an effective means of de-escalation.
Limited use of nuclear weapons was entertained during the Cold War as well.
Such options could best be performed by tactical nuclear weapons causing less damage and entailing lower risks of escalation than strikes with strategic systems.
Efforts to contain nuclear war were likely to fail, leading to a strategic nuclear war that nobody wanted.
Contemporary Russian doctrine attaches realism to limited use in regional contexts, primarily to stop conventional attacks by Western NWS, but tactical weapons are not necessarily the weapons of choice any longer.
The United States had kept important assets at considerable distance from the areas of combat, so the counterstrategy had to target weapon systems and command, control and communications centres in the enemy’s rear.
Long-range aircraft equipped with dual-capable cruise missiles and precision-guided gravity bombs might be suitable for such missions.
Tactical or sub-strategic weapons have therefore lost part of their relevance, although they are still considered essential theatre-level assets.
Elements of the strategic forces, which have been justified in reference to the increasingly unlikely eventuality of global nuclear war, can be assigned to regional missions as well without undermining strategic deterrence.
This may facilitate inclusion of 66 The legacies of nuclear history sub-strategic weapons in US-Russian disarmament negotiations.
So far, however, the Russians have been recalcitrant in the face of Western demands for transparency and reductions of this category of weapons.
The new mission is the product of perceptions of dire threats as well as acute weakness.
The main threat is believed to come from the West from the United States and its allies in Europe which may use force on a limited scale for limited political goals in a manner similar to the wars in the Balkans.Targets in Japan, the Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean have also figured in Russian military exercises.
Clearly, pressures from the West are seen in the wider context of United States and allied encirclement of Eurasia.
There is a latent concern, moreover, about Russia’s territorial integrity in the Far East, where vast and thinly populated areas in Siberia meet a populous and rapidly growing China.
However, the Russian military still considers China as a potential future adversary, and nuclear weapons feature prominently in such scenarios.
The weakness pertains to the conventional forces, which all of a sudden became inferior when the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union fell apart, and which labour under stricter financial consfraints than potential opponents both in the East and in the West.
Like the earlier document, the new doctrine reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in response to nuclear attack, attack with other WMDs and also in response to conventional attack.
To carry out these missions, a deterrence capability at the level of sufficiency, defined as the ability to inflict predetermined or tailored damage to an aggressor under any circumstances, is required.
Russia used to distinguish between nuclear and conventional firepower both in its military doctrine and in its organisational set-up.
The doctrine assigns high-precision conventional weapons to strategic deterrence, apparently following the United States lead in equipping some longrange delivery vehicles with conventional warheads.
In so far as this happens, the organisational distinction between nuclear and conventional weapons is lost.
Like in the US, the mix of conventional and nuclear assets may also provide for greater flexibility in the choice of weapons to meet security challenges.
Russia’s de-escalation concept includes possible first-use of nuclear weapons in response to attack by any kind of weaponry.
It is unclear whether the military doctrine is consistent with these assurances.
The much-emphasised threat of NATO involvement in regional conflicts near its borders indicates that it is.
The 2000 doctrine expanded the range of missions to include regional contingencies, and the probability of use in such scenarios has gone from nil to something more.
Concerns about the effectiveness of the strategic retaliatory capabilities persist regarding the debate about missile defence deployments in general and regional defences for Europe in particular but the probability of global nuclear war is deemed to be close to zero.
Retaliatory capabilities are maintained and modernised “just in case”, and in order to reinforce the credibility of regional deterrence.
The 2000 doctrine emphasised that the increased reliance on nuclear weapons will last only until the conventional forces are sufficiently modernised and strengthened.
The 2010 doctrine puts stronger emphasis on conventional weapons relative to nuclear ones, but unless the threat perceptions are much alleviated, it may take a long time to remove the need for nuclear stop-gap measures.
French and British doctrines France’s nuclear weapons were never intended for use on the battlefield.
The French weapons were deployed to deter other nuclear powers tons aziniut omni-directionally; the main target being Russia.
If it comes to war, the objective is to give the French armed forces a decisive advantage.
Deterrence of other nuclear powers is primarily for the navy, while the air force may be better suited for missions that require flexibility.
In January 2006, President Chirac indicated a number of other functions.
The leaders of states who use terrorist methods against us, as well as those who consider using in one way or another weapons of mass destruction.
In October 2001, Chirac had warned that France could not rule out the use of nuclear weapons against regimes which “are busy developing their own weapons of mass destruction.
At that time, his statement was primarily intended for Iraq and North Korea.
Strategic supplies meaning petroleum, first of all is another vital interest that may be protected by the nuclear deterrent.
France has had regular discussions of nuclear issues with Britain since 1995.
President Sarkozy touched on the same proposition sometimes referred to as “concerted deterrence” inviting a broader dialogue on the role of nuclear weapons in European security.
French nuclear doctrine has traditionally included the possibility of a nuclear warning shot to persuade an aggressor to desist or risk a massive nuclear strike.
The prestige that Iran has come lo attach to its nuclear programme is similar to the pride that France takes in its nuclear achievements.
The British nuclear force consists of four SSBNs, each carrying 16 Trident D5 missiles.
The time it takes to fire the missiles has been extended from a few minutes to a few days.
Flaving eliminated its air-launched nuclear weapons, the British force is less flexible than the French one.
British doctrine has nevertheless evolved in directions similar to the United States and French doctrines.
The strategic role is first and foremost to deter aggression against the United Kingdom and its allies.
Like the French doctrine, a small nuclear weapon might be used as a demonstration or “a shot across the bow” to signal to aggressors that they have miscalculated Britain’s resolve, without using the full desfrucfive power that Trident offers.
A third role is retaliation against biological and chemical weapon attacks on Britain or its allies.
Finally, pre-emptive use is envisaged against a state that threatens Britain’s vital national interests.
Post-Cold-War doctrines 69 In many respects, the French doctrine is similar to that of the United States under George W Bush.
The regional focus, the emphasis on state-sponsored terrorism, putting power centres at risk, deterrence of chemical and biological weapons use and the possibility of nuclear use to deter proliferators are much the same.
Not surprisingly, the British doctrine also ties in, but in ways that are somewhat less specific.
The accuracy of the Trident missile allows for regional uses in much the same way that the United States envisaged to use its strategic systems in regional roles.
Chinese and Indian doctrines To maintain a credible deterrence posture in the face of improved enemy intelligence and surveillance assets, ballistic missile defence systems and conventional precision-strike capabilities, China deploys road-mobile ICBMs and introduces new long-range missiles on new submarines.
Groundand air-launched cruise missiles add to the survivability and flexibility of the nuclear force.
Nuclear artillery and other sub-strategic systems may be on their way in.
A comprehensive modernisation programme is going on, probably leading to a net expansion of the force.
Much infonnation is missing, however, for secrecy remains an important part of China’s military posture.
The goal is also to prevent conventional war from escalating into nuclear war, and to prevent low-intensity nuclear war from escalating.
Deterrence therefore imposes stringent requirements on the Chinese nuclear posture, from the strategic level down to the tactical.
The leadership of the Second Artillery Corps has consistently highlighted the importance of educating highquality officers.
China did not acquire nuclear weapons to make up for conventional weakness.
The fundamental motive was to avoid nuclear coercion and be able to retaliate if attacked.
By entering the core group of NWS, it enhanced its status in the international system, but today, a modest nuclear force does not count much compared with the status that economic and political strength provide.
For China as well as others, the sequencing of disarmament measures is important to ensure that its national security is not diminished on the way to zero.
Generally, however, the military and political utility of its nuclear weapons is limited, so in that fundamental sense it is well-positioned for global disarmament to zero.
No-flrst-use has been China’s doctrine since the flrst nuclear test in 1964, and remains a much-emphasised part of its posture.
The ongoing modernisation and expansion programme addresses these questions and may put China on a rearmament path for quite some time to come.
If the People’s Liberation Army faces defeat and China’s territorial integrity is at stake, there would be strong incentives to lower the nuclear threshold.
India issued a draft nuclear doctrine in 1999 and unveiled a final sef of polifical principles and administrative arrangements in January 2003.
The ultimate size and structure of the force the operationalisation of credible minimum deterrence remains to be seen.
While China has a rudimentary capacity for tactical nuclear warfare, India has none so far.
Nuclear weapons would only be used in retaliation of a nuclear attack on It territory or Indian forces elsewhere.
However, in a departure from this announcement, the official doctrine of 2003 extended the mission to include deterrence of chemical and biological weapons as well.
India treats nuclear weapons as political instruments of deterrence rather than military tools of war-fighting.
This is in line with idealist and liberal currents in the Indian political culture.
Trying to come to terms with a hostile international environment after the tests in 1998, India aligned itself with the international arms-control order.
However, elements of its traditional disarmament policy, such as an international convention on security assurances for NNWS and an international convention on nuclear disarmament, were retained.
Under the impact of Western doctrinal developments, India took a step away from its original no-first-use stance, but it may not take much to drop the reference to chemical and biological weapons again.
Like China, it routinely maintains its nuclear capabilities at low levels of readiness, keeping warheads and delivery vehicles at different locations.
For both, the primary function of nuclear weapons is to avoid coercion and ensure retribution in case deterrence breaks down.
There is no strategic dialogue between Beijing and Delhi, but they have common interests in avoiding a competitive arms build-up.
First, it wants to establish its minimum-deterrence force at a level it may have defined, but not declared.
If it is to be included in multilateral disarmament negotiations, de jure recognition is a sine qua non.
However, when that has been achieved, India may be ready to participate in good faith.
Status and prestige were important in going nuclear, but once a seat at the table has been obtained, that ambition is fulfilled.
Much like China, India’s international status would no longer depend on the possession of nuclear weapons.
From then on, it might revive its strong disarmament tradition and build on that heritage in pursuit of global disarmament.
Inspired by the American gang of four and President Obama, it has already begun to do so.
Impediments to disarmament When the bipolar world order that fuelled the nuclear arms race came to an end, a fundamental reconsideration of the role of nuclear weapons would have been appropriate.
When so much else was in for radical change, a radical change of nuclear doctrines would have been natural.
The underlying premise for the main mission of the weapons the confrontation between the United States and the USSR disappeared, inviting a fundamental rewrite of nuclear logic.
On the contrary, the Clinton administration’s nuclear posture review carried the stamp of inertia.
The changes boiled down to elimination of surplus weapons from the Cold War and to management of the disintegration of the Eastern bloc and the Soviet Union.
More significant doctrinal changes came later, and they went in the opposite direction of what the end of the Cold War had invited.
Except for China, a gap opened up between the national strategy documents of the five NWS and their negative security assurances as summarised in UNSC Resolution 984.
The strategy documents became more permissive of nuclear-weapon use than the assurances codified in the UNSC resolution.
These doctrinal changes may be understood in the context of ongoing changes in the international system.
By the turn of the century, international affairs were in a state of flux.
In the state paradigm there were conflicting elements of unipolarity and multipolarity, and in the non-govermuental sphere international terrorism became a big concern, especially after 9/11.
The emergence of slates that could challenge the world order Iran, in particular also drove policy developments, especially in the United States.
During the Cold War, elaborate plans were made for the use of nuclear weapons, including thousands of weapons for battlefield use, yet it was widely believed that any use would lead to large-scale war.
This century, assumptions were entertained that in regional contexts, where the big powers were not at loggerheads with each other, nuclear war could be contained.
Russia upgraded the role of nuclear weapons under the influence of Kosovo.
Seized by the unipolar moment and under the influence of 9/11, the United States did the same.
What followed was a series of strikingly similar doctrinal developments, not so much because the United States leant on other NWS to do the same, but because it set an example that other powers found it convenient to imitate.
This served to uphold the utility of nuclear weapons in world affairs, counteracting the restraints that the testing moratoria and the Presidential Initiatives imposed.
Whether such considerations were part of the motivation for the new doctrines is not known.
It may not have been designed to stem the norm of non-use, but it had that effect.
Generally, the doctrinal changes detracted from the inhibitions of international norms.
When the one and only global superpower turned its back on important international agreements, it could not but influence the salience of international law.
Another opportunity to enhance the applicability of nuclear weapons emerged, and the big powers seized it, to the detriment of the norm of non-use.
The new United States policy may once again lead other NWS to follow the United States example.
Russia hardly considers the non-nuclear members of NATO to be a threat, and may therefore extend assurances to them while retaining the option of using nuclear weapons first if confronted with NATO as a whole.
Since the end of the Cold War, the arsenals of the NATO powers have been reduced and so has Russia’s.
Weapons are withdrawn from active service and kept in reserve or slated for dismantlement.
Post-Cold-War doctrines 73 While the Western world and Russia cut their arsenals, Asia is on a different trajectory.
China modernises its forces, and in numerical terms the introduction of new systems will probably outweigh the withdrawal of old ones.
Assuming that they will end up in the low hundreds of weapons, none of them is more than halfway towards such levels.
India claims, moreover, that one of the 1998 tests was a thermonuclear one, which may lead to an arsenal of fusion as well as fission weapons.
In Asia, more states are acquiring ballistic missiles of longer range and higher precision that may carry nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
One of them has acquired nuclear weapons ; another may or may not do so ; and yet others may be taking steps in this direction.
The Middle East and East Asia are the main regions of proliferation concern.
In South Asia, Pakistan is under scmtiny for fear of proliferation to non-state actors.
Bracken argued that, just as Asia began to assert itself economically in the 1960s and 1970s, by the turn of the century it was doing so militarily.
Not by taking up a competition with the United States and the Western world on their terms, but by exploiting Western military vulnerabilities.
Asian weapons of choice were ballistic missiles and WMDs, and the Achilles heel of the United States was fixed military bases in the region.
Some of them pursued chemical or biological weapons, and some were building nuclear weapons.
Targeted on United States vulnerabilities, Asian ballistic missiles and WMDs might trump the West’s technological lead, making state-of-the-art technology a somewhat irrelevant measure of actual military capability.
Distinguishing between technologies that sustain advantage and technologies that disrupt it.
Bracken made a powerful analogy to the way IBM was outflanked by Microsoft.
Concentrating on its undisputed lead in PC hardware and how best to maintain it, IBM was undercut as Microsoft wrapped up the software market.
Similarly, the US’s focus on further improvement of electronic surveillance systems, aircraft and mechanised land power made it vulnerable to asymmetric, disruptive Asian responses.
The stage was set for a major contest between United States efforts to sustain its advantage and Asian efforts to undermine it.
The full significance of these developments emerges when seen in conjunction with the deployment of missile defences.
In response to the threat that increasingly sophisticated Asian ballistic missiles pose to United States and allied bases, the United States has deployed ballistic-missile interceptors in Alaska and California, laying the foundation for more robust systems intended to thwart intercontinental capabilities in East Asia officially against North Korea, but affecting the Chinese deterrent too.
Together with NATO, it is building a 74 The legacies of nuclear history missile-defence system to neutralise Iranian and other Middle Eastern shortand medium-range missiles.
For a long while, it has been deploying theatre defences in the vicinity of United States and allied bases and forces.
A race in asymmetric technologies is going on between Asian efforts to exploit United States vulnerabilities and United States and other Western efforts to hold Asian states at risk from a position of impunity.
As the role of nuclear weapons is reduced, conventional weapons will take on a greater share of the mission requirements.
Additional options are explored to be able to destroy targets around the world on shorter notice.
The Obama administration therefore proposes a new spin on the Bush administration’s Global Strike plan, now named Prompt Global Strike, using the most advanced technology in the military today and some not yet invented, such as warheads on missiles travelling through the atmosphere at several times the speed of sound, which would be much more manoeuvrable than ballistic missiles.
The Bush administration shelved important parts of Global Strike because the Russians feared that if conventional weapons were placed on ballistic missiles, it would be impossible to know whether the missiles carried nuclear warheads or conventional ones.
The Russians and Chinese are worried that they could be targeted at them, and that the United States would be more inclined to use them because they are conventional.
For instance, anti-satellite capabilities in central China may be destroyed promptly and pre-emptively at the start of a potential conflict.
To meet the objections, the PGS concept envisages that other powers would be invited to regularly inspect the PGS silos to assure themselves that the weapons are conventional and not nuclear, and the silos would be placed in locations far from the strategic nuclear forces.
While a benign interpretation would put this concept in the context of nuclear disarmament, facilitating deeper cuts in United States arsenals, sceptics see it as part of a broader effort to sustain United States military superiority and widen the gap between it and the rest of the world.
Post-Cold-War doctrines 75 In conclusion, this poses three major challenges to the drive for disarmament.
First, the growth of Asian nuclear arsenals represents a challenge, especially the South Asian ones since India, and by implication Pakistan, may go for fullfledged minimum-deterrence postures before being ready to accept arms-control measures and participation in multilateral disarmament talks.
Second, the asymmetric offence-defence competition between the United States and other Western powers on the one hand, and Asian states on the other, has to be defused in the name of disarmament and non-proliferation.
This question taps into the broader debate about the relationship between disarmament and ballistic-missile defence.
The ABM Treaty of 1972 was built on the premise that ballistic-missile defences were destabilising.
Today, that Treaty is gone, but in the view of many states the premise remains valid.
And third, PGS adds to the fear that the transition from nuclear to conventional weapons is a way to enhance United States military superiority, creating new security concerns rather than eliminating existing fears.
In the next round of US-Russian disarmament negotiations, the Russians will certainly want to include both PGS and ballistic-missile defence.
There is the risk that a programme that can win broader support for nuclear disarmament within the United States political system creates additional obstacles for global disarmament and non-proliferation endeavours.
The end of the Cold War brought significant progress both in terms of disarmament and non-proliferation.
Nuclear arsenals were significantly reduced; Russia became the sole heir of Soviet nuclear weapons; South Africa abandoned its weapons and joined the NPT; NPT membership increased considerably; the Conference of Disarmament agreed on a mandate for FMCT negotiations; and, by the time the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference was convened, a CTBT was in sight.
At that point, the P5 may have thought that the proliferation problems could be managed irrespective of their own investments in nuclear weapons.
Governmental and non-govemmental experts reiterated that nuclear proliferation was driven by security concerns of a regional nature, more or less unrelated to the nuclear investments of the major powers.
The NNWS, for their part, had reasons to believe that the downsizing of nuclear arsenals would continue in the years ahead.
A global consensus 77 The delusion of 1995 This proved to be shallow, misleading analyses, however.
First, the NNWS were wrong for the simple reason that the end of the Cold War naturally gave way to significant reductions of arsenals.
After the breakdown of the Soviet Union and the end of a world order characterised by arms racing, elimination of overkill capabilities had its own unavoidable logic.
In 1995 this was not yet clear, for in so many respects the future of international affairs seemed an open question.
The NWS seemed firmly intent on keeping major arsenals for the foreseeable future.
Second, the analysis was shallow for lack of consciousness about the special nature of post-war politics.
There is a period of opportunity after all major wars and so, too, after the Cold War.
In these situations, decision-makers have to rely on current information flows and are therefore freer and more likely to move in new directions.
For instance, in the beginning of the 1990s, for the first time in UN history except for a brief interlude immediately after the Second World War, the UN Security Council functioned the way the founders had envisaged.
In the minds of many, the period of opportunity was misread as a new, encouraging trend in international affairs.
With the benefit of hindsight, the sense of progress that inspired the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference was unfounded.
A few years later, indefinite extension would no longer have been possible.
Then, the outcome would probably have been a limited extension of the Treaty for one or more periods,' giving the NNWS more leverage in relation to the nuclear powers.
In the absence of such checkpoints, the NWS are freer to behave the way they see fit, which they did, to the point of jeopardising the entire Treaty.
The bargain that had been struck between the three pillars of the NPT 78 The legacies of nuclear history non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses came apart.
After 1995, India and Pakistan, which had been nuclear-weapon states in the making for quite a while, tested; North Korea did the same; and Iran became a case of grave concern.
The NPT was in jeopardy not least because the NWS paid little attention to their disarmament commitments.
The United States and others treated Article VI much like Article V ,^ and the 1995 Resolution on the Middle East an integral part of the decision to extend the NPT indefinitely was not followed up upon.
Under these circumstances, NNWS found it hard to accept more comprehensive safeguards and more proliferation-resistant peaceful-use practices that would qualify their rights under Article IV, because it would further aggravate the skewed implementation of rights and obligations.
Despite the fact that only North Korea has left the NPT and that the “holdouts” states that had not joined the NPT had shrunk to comprise Israel, India and Pakistan only, the Treaty suffered from a growing legitimacy deficit.
In theory, coercion, economic and diplomatic pressures may substitute for voluntary compliance.
The United States tried that, largely in the shape of policies of regime change, but without success.
It threatened North Korea and Iran; they responded by intensifying their nuclear programs; whereupon the United States used it to strengthen its own case against these regimes.
In the case of North Korea, many years were lost until a negotiating approach based on reciprocal concessions, step-by-step, was agreed in early 2007.
These policies did not compensate for the legitimacy deficit, but compounded them to the detriment not only of the NPT, but of the non-proliferation regime in general.
This century, the United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty, and the grand NPT bargain from the second half of the 1960s eroded.
Also in Northeast Asia and the Middle East, where proliferation may occur and get out of hand, there is broad support for the Treaty.
If il unravels, there are no nuclear-weapon-free zones to fall back upon in these regions.
International safeguards may continue on the basis of facility agreements , but this is an incomplete substitute for NPT-type safeguards.
For the great majority of states, breakdown of the NPT would therefore be a significant loss.
The best, and quite possibly the only, realistic chance for a new global consensus on non-proliferation is therefore to reconfirm the validity of the old one, e. the grand bargain that was struck in the second half of the 1960s, which led to the NPT and a comprehensive international non-proliferation regime.
They tie into each other, so the order in which they are listed is neither an order of importance nor an order of priority.
The unit of account For a global consensus to be re-established, requirement number one is to forge agreement on the unit of account.
It is the weapons that should not proliferate and it is the weapons that should finally be eliminated.
The President frequently asserted that the weapons had to be in the right hands, or that the worst weapons had to be kept out the worst hands.
One favoured way to do it was by regime change, if need be by use of force.
The United States would itself be the arbiter of the new two-tier system.
The novelty of the Bush administration was that it took it to the extremes, both in its declarations and in 80 The legacies of nuclear history its actions.
He showed respect for the Islamic Republic of Iran, its leaders and its people, as is ordinary code of conduct in inter-state affairs, and entered negotiations to steer the Iranian nuclear programme away from weapons.
Regime change may not have been completely abandoned for instance, it was unclear whether or to what extent the covert programmes that Bush ran in Iran were cancelled but it was no priority.
With Israel, Obama remained true to the understanding originally reached by Richard Nixon and Golda Meir in September 1969,e. to the policy of opacity.
The United States supports the objective of NPT universality, but for all practical purposes Israel is treated as an exemption.
Negotiations Second, negotiations must be reinstated as a bona fide modality of nonproliferation policy.
As long as the United States was unwilling to talk with its most ardent adversaries to representatives of the nexus of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction there could be no agreed strategy for non-proliferation and disarmament.
As noted above, the quest for regime change and the refusal to negotiate became proliferation drivers.
It stands to reason that, under such a policy, the other side was not keen to talk either.
Knowing that the United States objective was to cut their throat, the adversaries had little incentive to negotiate.
Unfortunately, it happened on the heels of the North Korean test in October 2006, which seemed to confirm the political utility of nuclear weapons.
The P5+1 were ready to negotiate with Iran if Iran brought all fuel-cycle works to a halt and accepted an Additional Protocol to the NPT safeguards agreement.
This position turned what should have been the object of negotiations restrictions on uranium enrichment first of all into a precondition for them.
To Iranian eyes, it was tantamount to saying that, first, you must accept defeat, and then we may sit down and talk.
Negotiations with Iran began in Geneva on 1 October 2009, and ways to resume talks with North Korea were explored.
Still, diplomacy and other non-military measures were the favoured instruments of non-proliferation policy, but preventive use of force was not deleted from the agenda.
Preventive military action The United States National Security Strategy of 2002, updated in 2006 (see White House 2006), stated that the United States must deter and defend against the threat of weapons of mass destruction before they are unleashed.
It will not do to wait until the enemies have built their weapons and can use and retaliate with them.
President Bush called it a strategy of pre-emption, in accordance with the way this expression had been used for a decade, but that use of the term blurs the important distinction between pre-emption and prevention.
In international law, pre-emption at the moment an attack is about to be launched is permitted.
Except for A1 Kibar which may have been a success on Israeli premises, but a mixed blessing for the non-proliferation regime the results have been discouraging.
The international non-proliferation regime is rooted in international law.
Had the intelligence on El Shifa been right this pharmaceutical plant allegedly produced precursors for chemical weapons and had links to bin Laden the bombing of it could perhaps have been justified as an act of self-defence in reference to Article 51 of the UN Charter, similar to the way in which the United States justified its attack on Afghanistan after 9/11.
However, eight months later, the United States admitted that it had made a mistake.
The actions have been marred by intelligence failures (admitted in the cases of Iraq and El Shifa); flawed diagnosis and failure to grasp the consequences of bombing in the case of Osiraq (the bombing of it accelerated the secret nuclear weapons programme that was discovered ten years later, and may even have triggered it*”); waiting to be corroborated in the case of A1 Kibar, where Israeli intelligence seems to have had it right.
The target appears to have been a nuclear reactor built with the assistance of North Korea.
The political implications have been detrimental to non-proliferation endeavours.
Illegal acts of war trigger strong sentiments and much emuity, especially when based on claims that are unfounded.
The case of Osiraq leaves a lesson that is pertinent to Iran and possibly also Syria.
If Iranian nuclear facilities are 82 The legacies of nuclear history bombed, Iran may try even harder the next time.
If it was not going for nuclear weapons before being bombed, it would be more likely to do so afterwards.
Its territory is much smaller than Iran’s, and it is more vulnerable to Israeli intelligence and military capabilities than is Iran.
Israel, which is well known for being critical of the effectiveness of international safeguards, did not inform the IAEA either.
Unilateral action substituted for the way the non-proliferation regime is designed to handle such a matter, undercutting its international verification instrument.
The third requirement is therefore that preventive military action yields to legal, treaty-based approaches.
However, military action to stop nuclearproliferation programmes is central to Israeli political and military thinking, and while President Obama upgraded the role of diplomacy and downplayed the use of force, unilateral military options are not ruled out.
Unilateralism is a stmctural phenomenon rooted in the superior position of the United States in world affairs, and unilateral action is nearest at hand where it is strongest,e. in the military field.
So the caveat is that for the NPT, the question is how best to co-exist with policies which, when enacted, may weaken it.
Playing on the assumption that differences do not necessarily amount to incompatibilities, but can be made complementary, the tensions between regime procedures and unilateral counter-proliferation policies may be alleviated and even transformed to become mutually supportive.
Verification The original NPT verification standard was full-scope safeguards following all fissile materials in member states.
The model agreement provided for more intrusive international verification than had previously been accepted by states.
There were concerns in highly industrialised NNWS that industrial secrets might be revealed, but they were put to rest already by the mid-1970s.
When Saddam’s secret nuclear weapon programme of the 1980s proved them Inadequate, an Additional Protocol was elaborated that greatly improved the Agency’s ability to look for activities and facilities that might not have been declared.
To oppose the Additional Protocol on the ground that it was not a part of the original bargain is therefore misguided.
This is the fourth requirement for reconfirmation of the basic bargain.
In 2003, the United States did not allow UNMOVIC to come to a conclusion.
Recurrent demands that it should ratify the Additional Protocol; provide early design information; and offer voluntary transparency measures are made with the knowledge that nobody can prove the negative and in the hope that incriminating evidence will be found.
On the one hand, it is obliged to provide information to the IAEA; on the other hand, it wants to minimise its vulnerability to attack.
As long as this is the situation, transparency demands ostensibly to enable Iran “to come clean” enhance suspicions rather than build confidence.
Cooperation between the IAEA and possessors of relevant national intelligence data has been mixed.
Some governments have shared some information with the Agency, but there is no systematicity to it, and it is not always clear for what purpose it is done.
In the later phases of UNSCOM’s work, national intelligence agencies also infiltrated the Commission.
Provision of national intelligence information to the IAEA was not a part of the original bargain, and it is fraught with difficulties.
But to use national intelligence to complicate and obstruct the verification process was certainly not part of the bargain either.
Reconfirmation of the basic bargain means that member states should refrain from any activity or policy that may detract from adequate verification procedures.
Those who are in a position to enhance the effectiveness of international safeguards should be encouraged to do so in good faith.
What has changed the original balance is, first of all, the failure to meet the disarmament obligation of Article VI, while imposing a number of supply-side measures restricting the right to peaceful uses under Article IV in the name of non-proliferation.
Article IV was deliberately written to avoid attempts to reinterpret the NPT in ways that would make peaceful utilisations more difficult.
The only qualification was that international transactions must be in conformity with Article I and II, excluding acquisitions for weapons purposes.
One type of trade-offs that has long been discussed is assurances of fuel supplies and access to nuclear technology in return for restrictions on national fuel-cycle programmes.
In 1971, the Zangger Committee was established to operationalise the NPT export control provision contained in Article III.2.
In 1975, the Nuclear Suppliers Group was established following India’s nuclear explosion the year before, setting out to control the export of dual-use items.
The NSG a selfappointed group of supplier states originally referred to as the London Club, holding secret discussions in London drew resentment right from the beginning.
Critics recommended, instead, the negotiation of mutually agreed rules of international nuclear commerce between suppliers and recipients.
These diverging approaches have existed ever since and they have been further accentuated recently.
Technology restraints may still be clarified, improved and consolidated.
For instance, there are proposals for a division of labour between the Zangger Committee and the NSG, Zangger staying with nuclear items (especially designed or prepared items) and the NSG with the dual-use list; for linking export control information with the IAEA verification system (current practices lack systematicity); and for negotiating a global export control convention to strengthen the standards and promote their universality and legitimacy.
Clearly, there is merit to moves that can shore up present arrangements along such lines.
Many NNWS object to restrictions on their Article IV rights as long A global consensus 85 as the NWS pay so little attention to their own obligations.
In their view, the original balance of rights and obligations has shifted too much in their disfavour already.
Legally speaking, failure to take “effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament” does not necessarily amount to non-compliance by any particular state.
The Article is simply too vague to provide benchmarks for legal assessments of compliance the way, for example, safeguards agreements do.
Right from the beginning of the NPT negotiations in the mid-1960s, disarmament was considered to be a quid for the non-proliferation quo.
On 15 August 1968, one-and-a-half months after the NPT was opened for signature, the co-chairs of the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee the USA and the USSR presented an agenda for the Committee that struck a compromise between those NNWS that had wanted commitments to specific measures to be written into the NPT and those who were willing to leave it for follow-up action.
The nuclear part of the agenda was essentially a package proposed by India and Sweden, who had argued for inclusion of specific measures in the Treaty text.
A month later, the non-nuclear members of the Committee presented a comparable agenda.
Both agendas included a test ban, a cut-off of all production of fissile materials for military purposes, security assurances for NNWS, and reduction and subsequent elimination of nuclear weapon stockpiles.
Measures were identified, converging expectations were created, and a review mechanism was set up to facilitate the realisation of them.
In the years following signature and entry into force of the NPT, the Treaty became the backbone of an international regime comprising arms-control agreements, a growing number of nuclear-weapon-free zones, security assurances for NNWS, full scope safeguards, rules of international nuclear commerce and national export-control regulations.
In her account of the negotiations, the Swedish negotiator and Nobel Peace Prize winner Alva Myrdal felt betrayed.
The review conferences of 1980 and 1990 failed over Article VI issues, and the 1975 and 1985 conferences papered over profound divergences of views on the same issues.
Except for SORT , which strictly speaking was not a disarmament treaty , no negotiations were conducted.
The CTBT had not entered into force; negotiations for a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty had not started; and the security assurances for NNWS always conditional were further weakened.
Substantial progress in implementing Article VI, setting the world on a path towards a nuclear-weapon-free world, is requirement number seven for the original bargain to be reconfirmed.
President Obama has taken a series of initiatives in this direction, but how far they will lead is an open question.
A global consensus 87 Security assurances Security assurances for NNWS were part of the NPT bargain from the beginning.
In return for accepting a temporary division of the world into nuclear and non-nuclear-weapon states, the NNWS demanded assurances that they would not be subject to use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
All of them were qualified in various ways, except the Chinese no-first-use assurances.
Prior to the NPT Review and Extension Conference in 1995, the P5 summarised their assurances in Security Council Resolution 984.
Except for China, the assurances remained qualified in ways that limited their value.
Reversing this development, extending assurances that are more forthcoming to the NNWS, is the seventh requirement for a new non-proliferation consensus.
It will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NPT members in good standing.
Chemical and biological weapons will be deterred by conventional means, with reservations made for new scientific developments in the biological sector.
Exempt are the NWS and NPT members that, in the United States view, do not comply with their NPT obligations, such as Iran and possibly Syria.
Where mutually assured destruction applies, resort to nuclear weapons is an ordained act of suicide, while in relation to NNWS, the aggressor may get away with it.
Non-aligned states have therefore called for an international convention committing the NWS not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NNWS parties to the NPT, no qualifications added.
That question would certainly also be raised in connection with a Security Council resolution, but if the resolution is a collection of national assurances, the question does not require a uniform answer.
North Korea, which withdrew from the NTP in 2002, is in a category of its own.
It has been a member of the NPT , and the objective must be to bring it back into the Treaty.
From being the world’s leading protestor against discrimination in the nuclear order, India transformed itself into a nation ready to support the existing order.
The nuclear deal with the United States rubbed some of these commitments in the commitment to world-class export controls in particular.
India’s orientation towards the existing order makes it easier to forge a new global consensus on non-proliferation and disarmament.
India has a strong tradition to uphold in the disarmament held, and a legacy from Rajiv Gandhi to honour.
Influenced by the “gang of four” and President Obama, it has put renewed emphasis on its traditional pleas for nuclear disarmament.
It maintains its support for a time-bound international convention for elimination of nuclear weapons.
In principle, the “as if’ fonuula is applicable to Pakistan and Israel, too.
For the near term, efforts to extract non-proliferation commitments from Israel should therefore not be predicated on a change in declaratory policy.
Often criticised for being recalcitrant and arrogant and for blocking arms control in a region that desperately needs it, the merit of this for Israel would be to soften that perception.
De jure recognition of India as an NWS may have to wait until it undertakes a full “as if’ commitment.
Pakistan must live up to the same standards in order to be treated the same way.
Pakistan is far from that standard today, but it is in the best interest of non-proliferation that it gets there.
Another possibility would be a more comprehensive criteria-based approach applicable to all outliers, building on the elements that were highlighted by the NSG when the exemption was made for India and adding some more requirements such as a disarmament commitment equivalent to Article VI; signature and preferably accession to the CTBT; restrictions on fissile material production while waiting for a cut-off treaty to be concluded; and, possibly, a clearer separation line between civilian and military activities.
Sooner or later, de facto nuclear weapon status will lead to de jure recognition, which is necessary in order to bring them into armscontrol and disarmament negotiations.
This, however, is unlikely to happen unless it becomes part of a broader package to redress the balance of rights and obligations under the Treaty.
Universality was always the ambition, reiterated at all review conferences of the Treaty.
In this respect, the NPT has already been more successful than any other multilateral arms-control treaty.
If North Korea can be brought back to the NPT as an NNWS, application of the “as if’ formula to the remaining three would bring the Treaty as close to universality as is practically possible.
Some version of this controversial proposition may be element number eight in a new 22 consensus.
In so far as this is the case, the strategy must be to reduce the incompatibilities and exploit potential complementarities between United States positions and those of others whenever possible.
One such element is that of counter-proliferation preventive action in some form or other using military or non-military means to eliminate nuclear installations.
Counter-proliferation and unilateralism may change with changing administrations and there may be more or less of it, but the changes are likely to be variations of one and the same theme.
For these policies derive from the superior status of the United States in world affairs, and United States military superiority, in particular, is unlikely to go away any time soon.
The nonproliferation regime will have to co-exist with these elements of United States policy.
Counter-proliferation and non-proliferation policies may be incompatible.
When the IAEA reports a case of non-compliance to the Security Council, authorisation of the use of force in a counter-proliferation mode is not excluded on questions of international peace and security the Council is free to decide; there is nobody above it but it is unlikely to happen.
Such action is more likely to be taken unilaterally or by “coalitions of the willing” and be conducted in defiance of the regime.
For instance, bombing of nuclear facilities in Iran would be a violation of international law, for it could not be justified as an act of selfdefence in reference to Article 51 of the UN Charter, and the Security Council will not authorise it.
On the other hand, by extending credible threats of the use of force, United States counter-proliferation policy may be a useful supplement to the non-proliferation regime.
Such threats can have a deterrent effect which the international regime has little or no prospect of providing.
Deterrence does not address the root causes of proliferation, and in that sense does not solve the problems, but it can affect the balance of incentives in favour of staying non-nuclear.
For instance, a wouldbe proliferator may defer a decision to go nuclear, or refrain from weaponising the programme, seeking political solutions to security concerns instead.
For threats to be credible, there has to be a capability and a will to implement them.
Actual use of force to destroy nuclear facilities may, however, do more harm than good.
Bombing would set the nuclear programme back, but in the long run it is more likely to become part of the problem than of the solution.
Requirement number nine is therefore to live with the differenees between non-proliferation and counter-proliferation and exploit the opportunities to turn them into mutual advantage.
Security Council Resolution 1540, dealing with measures to be taken against non-state proliferators, was passed by consensus under Chapter VII of the UN Charter.
Usually dubbed terrorists, they tend to be resolutely addressed, including by use of force if needed and at all possible.
Leadership For international regimes to function properly, some important actor must exercise leadership.
A new global consensus on nonproliferation and disarmament depends on United States leadership.
Nuclear weapons are usually regarded as a source of strength, but they can also be seen as signs of weakness and vulnerability.
For the UK and France, nuclear weapons served to underwrite their big power status, which rests on narrow grounds.
Currently, it modernises and probably also expands its arsenal in response to the United States missile-defence programme.
India largely driven by status ambitions justified its tests in reference to China, and Pakistan in reference to India.
For North Korea, it is a matter of regime survival, and for Israel the nuclear arsenal is the ultimate national insurance premium.
When considering how best to facilitate nuclear disarmament, this perspective is an indispensable guide to what to do.
While all parties NNWS as well as NWS are obliged to work for nuclear disarmament, United States leadership is vital.
The political chain reaction outlined above started in the US, and reversal of it also has to begin there.
The logic of the argument rests on the fact that the nuclear weapon acquisitions of the other big powers can be fully understood only in reference to that of the US,e. coming back to the country of origin.
The realism of it lies in the fact that the United States is strong on so many dimensions and in a category of its own when it comes to conventional military strength.
First, because the Council’s Heads of State reconfirmed the validity of the three pillars on which it is built nonproliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses.
The disarmament pillar got little attention in comparison with the non-proliferation dimension, and no mention was made of the 1995 Middle East Resolutionthe initiators were consumed by the Iranian problem in particular yet disarmament was more prominently addressed than in a long while.
Third, the summit was convened and chaired by a United States President who had made nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament his number-one priority.
In the diplomatic process that led to the resolution, the negotiating sequence was unfortunate.
It failed to properly reflect the shift of power to the east and south.
The Security Council is, moreover, often perceived as ignoring the interests of lesspowerful states while the veto protects the interests of the NWS and their allies.
Many non-aligned states found that their interests were poorly reflected.
They see the Council as a means by which the NWS and their allies can short-circuit the international decision-making process where, in reality, there is no consensus among UN member states.
Tailoring the conduct of disarmament and nonproliferation affairs to evolving world order changes is no less important.
While the realism of this is open to doubt, the case of North Korea is, therefore, different from that of India, Israel and Pakistan.
North Korea apart, universality for the NPT is a question of how to draw the outliers into the web of obligations that the Treaty harbours.
Pakistan to India, India to China, China to the United States and Russia, France and the United Kingdom to Russia, and Russia to the United States.
The paternalistic language of the UN Security Council Resolution 1172 of 6 June 1998, adopted after the testing in South Asia that year, never had the intended effect.
The author concluded that under the circumstances, status quo might be the best option.
One year later, that option was no longer available, for at long last the US-India agreement was clinched.
That agreement recognises the fact that India is an NWS, but stopped short of formal recognition.
Subsequently endorsed by the 45-member NSG, it redefines the relationship between India and the rest of the world, making India a bona fide commercial partner in the nuclear field.
Status quo would have been an untenable situation anyhow, just waiting for a better way to engage the outliers.
The failure of the 2005 NPT Review Conference and the failure of the September 2005 UN Summit to agree on anything regarding nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament fully demonstrated that the Treaty was in danger.
Amidst all the conflicting interests and diverging policies, there was a growing realisation that it should be re-established as a matter of urgency.
The best, and maybe the only, way to achieve it would be to reconfirm the validity of the old bargain and, in 2009, UNSC Resolution 1887 did so.
A better approach to the three-state problem must be sought in that framework.
Some 40 years after the bargain was struck, this is to note the obvious.
Also, it applies to the international system in which the non-proliferation regime functions.
The first is India-specific,but influences considerations of how to engage the other outliers.
The US-India agreement The origin of the US-India Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation Agreement goes back to the nuclear-weapon tests in 1998, when India began to rework its nuclear diplomacy.
From being the world’s leading protestor against discrimination in the international non-proliferation regime, India transformed itself into a nation ready to support the existing order.
It stepped up its support for incremental arms control, endorsed the objectives of the NPT, declared its readiness to join negotiations for a Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty , endorsed the NSG guidelines without being a member of the NSG, issued a moratorium on testing, supported nuclear-weapon-free zones elsewhere in the world, announced its willingness to seek substantive confidence-building measures with Pakistan and tightened export-control regulations.
The agreement with the United States, the safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the NSG decision to give India access to the international nuclear market in reference to its non-proliferation commitments turn these undertakings originally unilateral into international obligations.
The deal therefore grew out of many years of pragmatic, concrete reorientation towards the existing arms-control order.
In view of the fundamental change of Indian foreign policy that it amounted to, the gestation period ten years was surprisingly short.
The big political battle that followed can be fully understood only against this background.
Indian right-wingers were concerned that the agreement would block further testing and constrain the nuclear arsenal; left-wingers feared that India would become loo subservieni lo the United States.
Since 1974, the United States had systematically denied broad categories of sensitive technologies to India, such as supercomputers, missile and space technology, satellites, advanced fighters, microelectronics and fibre optics; now, the door to those technologies was opening up.
Access to nuclear technology was important both substantially and symbolically.
Having developed a comprehensive nuclear programme since the 1950s, largely on its own, utilisation of nuclear energy resonates well in Indian public opinion.
It opened an important market for United States export industries; it helped meet India’s rapidly 98 Proliferation problems growing energy needs and reduce carbon dioxide emissions in a country where almost 70 per cent of the electricity production was based on coal; and it paved the way for India to join global efforts to stop the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
In short, it freed the bilateral relationship from the limitations that were introduced after India’s test of a nuclear device in 1974 and its nuclear-weapon tests in 1998.
In the words of Nicholas Burns, the United States chief negotiator, the nuclear agreement is the symbolic centrepiece of something much larger a comprehensive engagement between the world’s oldest and the world’s largest democracy.
Twoand-a-half years later, when the agreement was clinched, the contours of a multicentric world had become clearer and the geopolitical importance of the Agreement more obvious.
In view of the rise of China and of Islamic radicalism in Afghanistan and Pakistan, it was argued that the national security of the United States would be enhanced by a strong and enduring partnership with India.
The geopolitical arguments were easily understood by the politicians themselves, irrespective of lobbies.
India cares very much about its sovereignty and independence, and the sceptics were critical to the point of suspecting that the government had reassured the United States by extending promises in secret.
An “as if” kind of deal Some suggestions for how to get beyond the dilemma described above have addressed India, Israel and Pakistan in joint fashion.
This was French policy for quite a while, until it became a regular member in 1992.
Unlike the NPT parties, they are not under any legal obligation to disarm.
In addition, they should be asked to join other elements of the non-proliferation regime.
The statement treated India for what it is, a de facto NWS, yet without formally recognising India as a nuclear power.
However, the end result the US-India Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation Agreement, often called the “123 Agreemenf’'^ stopped short of being a fully-fiedged “as if’ agreement.
It turned around from being world champion in criticising the NPT for being discriminatory and the big powers for being hypocritical, to supporting and promoting the Treaty and the regime that it anchors.
Basically, the non-proliferation rationale for the agreement is simple.
To lean on India to eliminate its nuclear arsenal and join the NPT as a non-nuclearweapon state is unrealistic to the point of being counterproductive.
Neither can it join as an NWS, for the NPT recognises five NWS only and, in practice, cannot be amended.
Better, then, to treat India for what it is an NWS and to commit it to the non-proliferation regime on an “as if’ basis.
In the long run, policies are best when based on facts and not on fiction.
In view of all the pressing proliferation concerns both in the state and non-state paradigms, the universality of the regime is more important than ever.
It substitutes engagement of India and commitments to nonproliferation standards for isolation and top-down talk.
Access to nuclear materials, equipment and technology on a par with NPT parties was a major concession to India.
A fast-breeder test reactor and a prototype breeder under construction at Kalpakkam are on the military side of the line and will, therefore, not be safeguarded.
Eight heavy-water reactors are exempted from safeguards in order to provide plutonium for current and future breeders in their start-up phase.
However, it takes some years to make the prototype operational, and a decade or two before it can start producing plutonium for weapons.
Therefore, its plutonium potential has the character of a nuclear insurance premium for the long term.
HWRs also yield plutonium of weapon quality and are used for that purpose, but at the cost of reduced efficiency in electricity production.
As for the research reactors, Cirus which produced the plutonium for the test in 1974 will be decommissioned in 2010 while the other two Dhruva and Kamini are used for military ends.
The core of the oldest reactor, Apsara, will be removed from the Bhaba Atomic Research Centre and submitted to safeguards in 2010.
India has an enrichment plant in Mysore , which enriches uranium for use in Indian submarines.
This plant and all enrichment research programmes are exempted from safeguards.
India will build a new reprocessing plant to make the distinction between civilian and military uses clearer.
The United States will then treat India the same way as Japan and the European Atomic Energy Community , where the United States allows reprocessing of fuel of American origin.
Heavy-water production facilities there are six of them are not safeguarded on the basis of INFCIRC 153, but will be reported under the Additional Protocol , to which India will accede.
It remains to be seen how many plants will be placed on the civilian side and covered by safeguards.
Without the Agreement, only six of 22 power reactors would have been safeguarded;'^ under the Agreement, 14 will be covered.
On the other hand, the Agreement permits India to import uranium fuel for its civilian reactors so that India’s own uranium production, which did not allow all reactors to work at full capacity, can be used for military purposes instead.
However, the bottleneck concerns the mining and processing of the uranium rather than the size of the reserves, and is about to be removed.
The NSG provision of full-scope safeguards is, furthermore, a guideline for its 45 members, not a rule.
India has received much safeguarded assistance over the years, subject to INFCIRC 66-type controls.
By and large, India can continue its nuclear-weapons programme according to existing plans.
The United States, therefore, argued that it was unnecessary to repeat it in the Agreement.
Safeguards In the United States, Russia and China, the IAEA applies safeguards to select facilities only, on a voluntary basis.
However, the Protocol was developed to help detect undeclared activities in NPT member states, so in the case of India the value of it is limited.
The NSG guidelines According to the Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers agreed by the NSG, triggerlist items or related technologies can only be transferred to an NNWS when the receiving state has brought into force an agreement with the IAEA for safeguards on all source and special fissionable material in its current and future peaceful activities.
There is, in other words, nothing more to achieve by stressing the full-scope safeguards requirement.
It is by accepting India as an NWS and applying safeguards to the civilian activities that the safeguards coverage can be further extended.
Today, the equivalent to the full-scope safeguards requirement introduced by some suppliers already in the 1970s and adopted by the NSG in 1992 is the attempt to make the Additional Protocol part of a new, enhanced safeguards requirement for nuclear transfers.
India’s acceptance of the Protocol is a minor step towards universal application of the new requirement.
Presumably, there is a tipping point at which the NSG might agree to make acceptance of the Protocol a condition for transfers, but that would be at a much higher number of acceptances.
India’s record of compliance with the rules of international nuclear commerce sheds credibility on its commitment to go by the NSG guidelines and refrain from transferring fuel-cycle technologies to states that do not have them.
Under UNSC Resolution 1540, India is already committed to the strongest possible non-proliferation practices in this respect.
Legally, the Agreement, therefore, does not add to the obligation already undertaken.
Concrete export-control improvements can just as well be worked out on the basis of Resolution 1540.
However, the Agreement raises the awareness and stresses the importance of strict controls.
The commitment under Article I of the NPT is not limited to the governmental sphere.
The governments must see to it that the private sector, too, complies with it.
In order to live up to these commitments, effective export-control systems and proper reporting routines to the IAEA are needed.
Under an international legal arrangement to this effect, other states can legitimately raise questions about export regulations and, also, offer their cooperation in establishing more effective domestic-control systems.
The NSG guidelines do not have that status, but UNSC Resolution 1540 has.
Fissile Material Cut-Off Treaty The commitment to work for an FMCT is not new either.
It was part of the Indian policy package to soften the political shockwaves created by the 1998 tests, along with a moratorium on new nuclear tests, a no-first-use pledge and a minimum deterrence posture.
The Conference on Disarmament adopted a mandate for FMCT negotiations in 1995, but no negotiations have taken place.
The prospects got even dimmer when the Bush administration stated that an FMCT would not be verifiable.
India promises to work towards a treaty which is not expected to come about, or the negotiation of it may be marred by so many difficult problems that it would go on until a sufficient amount of materials has been produced.
Four of the five recognised NWS have issued a moratorium on production of fissile materials for weapons.
Critics of the Agreement see the lack of such a commitment by India as a serious weakness.
Nuclear testing India declared a moratorium on nuclear-weapon tests in 1998 and has an understanding with Pakistan not to be the first to resume testing.
United States law entitles the administration to stop further cooperation, and this is the likely consequence if India is the first to break out of the current moratorium.
If another NWS starts testing and India follows suit, the reaction is not so obvious.
A party signing an international agreement commits itself not to do anything that may complicate the ratification of it.
However, since the Bush administration had been looking for ways to erase Clinton’s signature of the Treaty, it was not in a position to urge India to sign.
Missile technology control regime India committed itself to follow the guidelines of this regime.
The commitment is important, for India has an advanced missile programme.
Similar to its nuclear export controls, India already has a good record of compliance with these rules.
While all members of the NPT are under an international legal obligation to work for nuclear disarmament, the non-members are not.
In view of the dismal disarmament record of the NWS parties, the same undertaking by India would not necessarily make much of a difference.
Similar to the test-ban issue, the United States could not be expected to press India to undertake a disarmament commitment that it itself belittled.
The domestic debate about the agreement hardened India’s opposition to it, the rightwing fearing that the nuclear arsenal would be unduly constrained.
Traditionally, however, India has had a high profile on disarmament issues, and under the influence of recent United States policies it revived that declaratory policy.
It continues to support the proposal for a nuclear-weapon convention to abolish such weapons worldwide on an agreed timeline.
As the controversies about it are put to rest, it may therefore see fit to make such a commitment, especially if, in the meantime, progress is made on disarmament and non-proliferation matters.
Assessment If India exploits its capacity fully, it can produce in the order of 50 nuclear weapons per year without violating the Agreement.
Challenged by the evolution of the United States force posture, it modernises and expands its nuclear forces at the risk of provoking India, but with no special intention of doing so.
China tries to maintain its retaliatory capabilities while avoiding steps that may lead to a more demanding security environment.
This is a delicate balance, conducted in the best interest of domestic economic and political development and reform.
It justifies its force acquisitions in reference to China, but has no interest in triggering any arms competition with it.
Its maximum production capacity is therefore of little or no practical interest.
However, India also has a balancing act to conduct between China and Pakistan, building a nuclear arsenal that addresses both without being trapped into arms-racing.
For the Bush administration, a strategic partnership with India was a major foreign-policy objective.
A breakthrough in relations with one of the heavyweights on the Asian scene would be a major achievement.
However, pressures for such a partnership had been building up in India, too.
India worked hard to become a legitimate partner in international affairs, especially after the tests in 1998, and the nuclear deal lifted it from a lower tier of nations to a bona fide partner wifh the United States and other big and small nations.
The fact that the Agreement was passed with the smallest of luargins in India, while both Houses of the United States Congress endorsed it with big majorities, suggests that if any of them could have offered more without risking defeat at home, it was the United States rather than India.
Non-proliferation critics charge that the United States gave priority to economic interests and geopolitical considerations at the expense of nonproliferation concerns.
The critics seem to ignore India’s new-won economic and political strength.
Powers that are strong and about to grow even stronger usually have the confidence to pursue their interests with particular vigour, and India is no exception.
In its current phase of rapid growth, India stiffly opposes exfemal attempts to dictate its foreign policy.
The United States never had a say in Indian affairs anywhere near its influence in, for instance, Pakistan and many countries in the Middle East and East Asia.
Still, in some respects the nuclear deal was important enough to warrant accommodation to United States interests.
On both occasions, it may have yielded to United States and Western pressure not to jeopardise the deal.
Had it not gone with the majority, it could also have complicated India’s relations with Israel, its second largest defence supplier.
The United States also lent on India to cancel the plans for a gas pipeline from Iran via Pakistan.
While India had reasons of its own to oppose another NWS in the region, it kept stressing that it had friendly relations with Iran.
However, the Indian opposition remained suspicious of hidden concessions to the United States, and kept questioning the government about it.
Many non-proliferation experts argued that the Agreement amounts to a reward for bad behaviour and that as a consequence, other states would feel less committed to the Treaty.
They feared that some states would actively exploit it for objectives of their own other than nonproliferation.
In particular, the critics argued that the Agreement left the door wide open for Israel and Pakistan to emulate it, using the Indian precedent to gain access to the international nuclear market, irrespective of their weapon acquisitions.
Iran and other NPT members in dubious standing might see fit to do the same.
In the view of some, the cause of non-proliferation would have been better served by sticking to the full-scope safeguards requirement as a condition of supply, avoiding any exception to the NSG rules.
In the view of others, the Agreement is flawed for lack of non-proliferation and disarmament commitments from India.
True, Pakistan wants an agreement with the United States similar to India’s, and it has been speculated that China and Pakistan may emulate it.
Israel has also explored the possibility of being exempted from the NSG guidelines.
However, Pakistan has not reoriented itself the way India has, and does not enjoy the same status.
This is not the time, therefore, to invite the NSG to make an exemption for Pakistan.
China hardly appreciates the US-India agreement certainly not its geopolitical aspects but went along with it so as to not antagonise the United States and others.
Israel does not admit to having nuclear weapons and is therefore not prepared to draw any separation line between civilian and military programmes.
It follows that it is not in a position to claim exemption from the NSG guidelines in reference to India.
Russia and China, the Asian members of the P5, are holding back on UN sanctions, and India is a big potential customer of Iranian petroleum.
Economically, Asia is about to become a comfort zone for Iran, compensating for the restraints that are imposed by the Western world.
In the history of Iran, relations with countries to the East and North East have been at least as important as relations westwards.
A reorientation in that direction therefore means resumption of long traditions.
Arab states strongly criticised the exemption and continue to do so, mainly out of concern for the potential implications for Israel.
Other NAM countries likewise, although at the IAEA Board of Governors meeting on 1 August 2008, several NAM members gave broad support to the conclusion of the new safeguards agreement with India^'' and, implicitly, to the NSG exemption.Some NSG members that argue for stricter non-proliferation provisions may have succumbed to pressure from the United States and others, but the great majority willingly supported the Agreement.
States in the South (Argentina, Brazil, South Africa) as well as vendors in the North came out in favour.
No NPT member has signalled reduced support for the Treaty because of the exemption, and no one has withdrawn from any other part of the international non-proliferation regime.
In the future, those who favoured stricter provisions will shift their attention from criticising the Agreement to becoming first-line guardians of the nonproliferation commitments that were listed in the NSG decision and work for further restraints.
The NSG decided to review the implementation of the Agreement on a regular basis.
In one way, the US-India agreement is stricter than the NPT; in another, more permissive.
The stricter part concerns the fact that, under the NPT, the NWS are free to assist each other in developing nuclear warheads and in testing them; to receive from any state the material necessary to pursue their nuclear-weapon programmes; and to decide by themselves whether, and to what extent, they should accept international controls over their peaceful activities.
The United States wanted to ensure that India applies world-class export controls, blocking Indian contributions to any and all weapon-oriented programmes.
The prohibition of enrichment, reprocessing and heavy-water technology transfers in the NSG guidelines, but not explicated in the agreement corroborates it.
The fact is that India is an NWS and is unlikely to eliminate its arsenal any sooner than any of the five.
Since it cannot become a member of the NPT, this means that the only way to commit it to the principles and practice of non-proliferation and disarmament is to urge it to behave “as if’ it were a member of the Treaty and commit it to all other relevant parts of the non-proliferation regime.
The US-India agreement is a step in that direction a building block that may lead to full-scale involvement in the regime.
The warnings of negative effects, so strongly propounded by alarmist non-govemmental critics, were exaggerated.
Given the differences between the three outliers, there was always a case for addressing them separately, one by one.
If they follow the Indian example and move closer to the international regime, similar agreements may sooner or later be agreed for the other outliers.
For all of them, however, there is a point at which they cannot be brought deeper into non-proliferation and disarmament endeavours unless they are formally recognised de jure for what they are,e.
Recognition Unless international law has a life of its own, disconnected from the realities of the world, de jure recognition of India is a matter of time.
The question is not whether it will happen, but when and under what circumstances.
In the following analysis of arguments for and against recognition, “recognition” is used in the full de jure sense of the term.
First, representatives of some states have indicated that, if the nuclear club were to be enlarged beyond the five, they might have to reconsider their nonnuclear status.
For instance, such voices have been heard in Japan, despite the difficulties that this would pose in the consensus-minded Japanese political system and the pain that nuclear issues evoke among the victims of nuclear bombing.
For Japan, like the United States, geopolitical factors favouring closer relations with India out of concern for China, and economic interests in the Indian market, played a role in this connection.
Second, none of the countries that entered the NPT on the understanding that there would be only five NWS Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Japan, South Africa and South Korea can credibly claim that their security is jeopardised by the nuclear-weapon acquisitions in South Asia.
As India acquires missiles of longer range, some of them may come within their reach.
Still, it would be far-fetched to argue that the formal aspect recognition of the nuclear facts is a factor upsetting their security calculations.
States base their security policies more on tangible facts than on formalities.
However, there is a category between tangibles and formalities political perceptions of prestige and civilisational pride that affect security policies.
For instance, deterrence relies not only on tangible facts but also on impressions of willpower.
Recognition would be a sign of success and strong will on the part of those who were determined to follow through on their nuclear ambitions.
In a sense, recognition would not only recognise India’s nuclear assets, but pay tribute to its assertiveness and willpower as well, leaving other states a bit inferior in comparison.
At least in rudimentary terms, states distinguish between the mighty and the less mighty, and adjust their behaviour to that ranking order.
Nuclear weapons have not been used since 1945, but they remain attractive because they translate into status and weight in the international system.
Higher status for some means lower status for others, so there is a feeling among some NNWS that higher status for India will leave them at a loss.
For instance, India’s nuclear programme may be invoked against a permanent seat in the UNSC, not to provide any reward for the 1998 tests and not to extend the unhappy combination of between permanent membership and nuclear weapon possession, but in the long run such arguments are likely to dissipate in favour of gross size and weight, to which its nuclear weapons contribute.
So there is probably a bonus to be reaped both in absolute and relative terms.
Fifth, the agreement provides full access to civil nuclear technology in return for stronger non-proliferation commitments.
Some see this as a reward for imprudent behaviour; others consider it a win-win situation.
If it leaves the impression that hereafter threshold countries could move ahead to test, gain access to nuclear technology and be recognised as NWS on the Indian precedent the implications are clearly unfortunate for the cause of nonproliferation.
Should other states want to go nuclear, they would have to renege on their NPT commitment.
Seventh, as noted above, recognition of India qua NWS would make it possible to draw it into arms-control arrangements from which it is now excluded.
It could be asked to extend security assurances to members of NWFZ; a bilateral no-firstuse commitment between India and Russia might be possible, on the model of an existing exchange of letters between the leaders of Russia and China containing such a commitment; or a trilateral agreement to this end could be considered.
If the United States and Russia were to reduce their arsenals to no more than 1,000 operative weapons while inviting the other NWS for multilateral disarmament negotiations, excluding India and others on the ground that participation would confer recognition on them would be absurd.
Given that we are dealing with an NWS that has come to stay, it would be unwise not to extract commitments from it.
The cost is, first of all, the enhanced status that recognition confers on India.
This is nothing new, but reconfirmation of the status benefits of nuclear weapons is bad enough.
The main advantage is that recognition allows for Indian involvement in arms control and disarmament agreements.
Since India stands to gain from being recognised, it should be invited to undertake additional arms control and disarmament commitments, on the basis of a list of criteria to be applied to all three non-parties.
All states the members of the NPT as well as the non-parties should be drawn into a new consensus on non-proliferation and disarmament based on the grand bargain of 1968.
Tying into the ten requirements of a new global consensus outlined in Chapter 4, eight of them have implications for one or more of the three non-parties.
First, in the NPT, it is the weapons that are the units of account, not their possessors.
India and Pakistan follow the NPT in this respect, while the Israeli position is ambiguous.
India and Pakistan also favour negotiations, while Israel has little faith in such an approach towards Iran.
Third, in international law, preventive attack against an opponent who may or may not become a real threat in the future is not permitted.
Such attacks are at odds with the non-proliferation regime, which is part and parcel of international law.
In Israel, preventive attack has been military doctrine for more than 25 years^^ and advocated as a means of last resort to stop the Iranian nuclear programme.
India and Pakistan do not favour preventive attack against the nuclear programmes of other states, and have agreed not to attack each other’s nuclear facilities.
Israel and Pakistan stay with pre-NPT facilityspecific INFCIRC 66-type agreements.
Among the outliers, Pakistan is known to be one of the worst proliferators ever.
All of them would like to be admitted into the international market for nuclear material, equipment and technology, but for Israel this has been a lower priority than for the South Asian states.
India and Pakistan have been world champions in criticising the NPT for being unbalanced and discriminatory, and the NWS for being hypocritical.
After 1998, that criticism has abated, but it remains a significant undercurrent in both countries.
Sixth, all parties to the NPT are obliged to work for nuclear disarmament.
India and Pakistan have criticised the NWS vehemently for their failure to disarm the United States and the Soviet Union/Russia in particular.
Instead, they are trying to fend off global measures to implement the first part of Article VI “cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date” which includes a test ban and a cut-off Israel was never very outspoken on behalf of nuclear disarmament, in reality being an NWS itself from the late 1960s, and has been wary of criticising its close partner and security guarantor, the United States.
Seventh, the relationship between counter-proliferation and non-proliferation is ambiguous and complex.
Counter-proliferation threats may supplement the regime in the best interests of non-proliferation adding a deterrent capability to a regime that is very weak on means of enforcement while actual use of force may undermine the same objective.
The aim must therefore be to live with the differences between non-proliferation and counter-proliferation as best one can, and exploit opportunities to make them mutually re-enforcing.
Eighth, for international regimes to function properly, some important actor or actors have to exercise leadership.
The roles of India, Israel and Pakistan can only be secondary in this respect, for the very reason that they are outliers.
By endorsing the agreement and exempting India from the NSG guidelines, all NSG members did the same.
International law which currently holds that there are only five nuclear powers will have to be reconciled with the realities of the contemporary world.
In October 2006, it outlined a set of proposals for nuclear disarmament, determined that its post-1998 alignment with the existing arms-control order should not erase its traditional push for disarmament.
The pronouncements at the Rajiv Gandhi anniversary were clearly inspired by the American “gang of four”, and the Munich speech, likewise, by President Obama’s disarmament vision.
The new United States policies have enabled India to revert to its pro-disarmament stance.
To be fully recognised as an NWS, it plays on its disarmament credentials to curry favour both with the Western powers and with NAM countries.
One possibility, therefore, would be to wait for this commitment to come forward before extending de jure recognition to it, and let this be the standard that Pakistan must live up to in order to be treated the same way.
Pakistan is far from that standard today, but for the sake of disarmament and non-proliferation NPT parties should encourage and assist Pakistan to get there.
The prospect of an agreement similar to the Indian one could help it walk the last mile.
It could build on the elements that were highlighted by the NSG when the exemption was made for India.
In addition, a disarmament commitment equivalent to Article VI; signature, if not accession, to the CTBT; limitations on fissile material production while waiting for a cut-off treaty to be negotiated, if not a moratorium; and, possibly, a stronger separation line between civilian and military activities may be required.
For Pakistan, which faces the same hurdles, it also remains to meet some of the criteria listed above, the export control requirement in particular.
For India, signature and ratification of the CTBT presupposes that the United States and China do so first.
For an FMCT to be concluded, more will be required of the leading NWS, such as restrictions on ballistic-missile defence and militarisation of outer space.
This may win enough time for India and Pakistan to acquire the fissile material stocks they deem adequate.
India is unlikely to compromise on its ambition to build a minimum deterrent, and Pakistan will be no different.
There is hardly any short-cut to nuclear arms control and disarmament in South Asia.
Israel has signed the CTBT and may have enough fissile materials to agree to a cut-off.
It probably finds it harder to accept the necessary verification arrangements.
As long as it does not admit to being an NWS, there is no separation line to discuss and no recognition to consider.
However, its declaratory policy of opacity/ambiguity does not prevent it from making an “as if’ commitment.
For Israel, such a commitment would entail no significant sacrifice and no significant gain.
If they are to be involved in nuclear disarmament negotiations with a view to ambitious agreements affecting the arsenals of all NWS, de jure recognition of them is a sine qua non.
The requirements for a new consensus on non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses show that much more than Articles I, IIL2 and VI is involved.
There are fundamental modes of behaviour to be respected (unit of account, negotiations, commitment to international law); a proper balance between the pillars to be re-established; a delicate co-existence between non-proliferation and counter-proliferation to be managed; and a leadership role to be filled.
Among the outliers, India is closest to the requirements for a new consensus, while Pakistan and Israel, in particular, are at a great distance from it.
When the US-India agreement entered into force, there was no similar agreement in the making.
For India to comply with the demands of a criteria-based approach may take a long while as well, depending on where the bar is set.
For some time ahead, the best approach may therefore be a pragmatic, incremental one, sensitising and committing both parties and non-parties to the requirements for a new consensus.
Others have kept a certain preparedness for going nuclear if changing circumstances so suggest.
Yet others have rolled back and forth between different degrees of interest in the nuclear option and different degrees of material preparedness to exercise it.
Unauthorised weapon-related activities and private-sector research and development in weapon-related fields are not included in the definition.
Inadvertently or deliberately, the authorities may not have given accurate guidance, leaving a grey area that experts felt they could legitimately explore.
Some such cases were discovered when the IAEA began to implement the Additional Protocol, among them South Korea, which conducted enrichment experiments as late as 2000.
The Protocol enables the Agency to undertake a more comprehensive examination of the nuclear history of member states, inducing stricter governmental guidance of nuclear activities.
The definition includes cases where no explicit decision has been made to pursue the bomb, or where a governmental decision to acquire the bomb could not be ascertained.
Because the lead times are long, such decisions are rarely made at early stages of a nuclear programme.
It simply serves no purpose because, largely, preparations can be done under dual-use cover.
Similarly, rollback processes often begin slowly and hesitantly and proceed incrementally.
At the core of this wide definition is the distinction between states that have “done something” in the direction of the weapons option and then abandoned it, and those that have shown no interest.
Similar to the use of force in security communities, it is no longer being considered.
Rejection may or may not be combined with dismantlement of relevant infrastructure.
To roll North Korea back to stable non-nuclear status, dismantlement of most, if not all, of its nuclear facilities would be required.
Even so, given the deep distrust in the North Korean government, a credible rejectionist posture can only evolve over time, or full confidence can be obtained by a change of regime in North Korea or in the form of a reunified, non-nuclear Korean peninsula.
In highly industrialised states, on the other hand, dismantlement may not be a practical option because a variety of dual-use technologies already exist in civilian sectors.
There, the credibility of rejectionist postures rests on a national political consensus to disregard the nuclear option.
A hedging strategy may be more or less sensitive to changes in the factors that condition it.
It may be actively adapted to changing circumstances or it may be linked to a certain capability that is passively maintained irrespective of contextual changes.
Hedging is a choice of strategic posture ranging from active to passive preparedness for nuclear-weapon production.
For many years, India and Pakistan exercised various kinds of restraints.
South Korea and Taiwan have also been persuaded by the United States to exercise restraint.
In the 1960s, after having built two plutonium production reactors and after a period of slow decline in the government’s interest in the weapons option, Sweden concluded that regardless of what the NWS were doing, it would not be in Sweden’s interest to acquire nuclear weapons.
South Africa is the only state to have eliminated an indigenously developed,® ready-made nuclear arsenal.
When President de Klerk halted weapons production in 1989, seven gun-type uranium weapons had been built and number eight was under construction.
The dismantlement of them began in July 1990 and was completed by June 1991, when all HEU had been removed from the weapons and transported to Pelindaba.
South Africa signed the NPT on 10 July 1991; the safeguards agreement entered into force on 16 September; and the IAEA began its inspections in November.
South Africa provided full disclosure on a formula allowing the IAEA to go “anywhere, at any time, but for a reason” enabling the Agency to confirm beyond doubt its reversal to non-nuclear status.
Only activities unambiguously related to weapon acquisition such as work on warhead design, trigger mechanisms and other non-nuclear components of nuclear weapons are prohibited.
Advanced industrial states can cut these obstacles short, for relevant know-how exists in civilian sectors.
They may come within a few weeks of ready-made weapons without doing anything illegal.
In such cases, it is doubtful whether the safeguards system can provide any meaningful warning.
Despite its “three nuclear principles”* and the constitutional prohibition of nuclear weapons, Japanese officials have emphasised that the principles may be revisited and the constitution reinterpreted.
Other European states, as well as Canada and Australia, are in a similar position, possessing advanced nuclear industries but with no intention to mobilise them for military ends.
They are closer to Sweden than to Japan, and are usually considered rejectionist.
France Canada China Chile** Israel Egypt India Germany Pakistan Indonesia North Korea*"" Iraq Italy Japan Libya The Netherlands Nigeria Norway Rumania South Korea Spain^ Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Yugoslavia/Serbia Notes a Turkey often figures in discussions of proliferation risks in the Middle East, both in reference to Iran and to European reluctance to let Turkey into the EU, but there is no evidence of specific moves in this direction.
Also, there have been assertions, but no publicly available evidence, of nuclear aspirations in Finland and Greece.
These cases have not been listed for lack of documentation. b Uki'aine had Russian nuclear weapons in its custody, although apparently not the codes to use them.
In Belarus and Kazakhstan, the weapons remained under Russian control while being on their territories. c While it has been in the spotlight, little is known about the degree and circumstance of Algerian interests in nuclear weapons. d Chile had a significant nuclear research programme and did not accede to the NPT until Argentina did.
Muller and Schmidt nevertheless acknowledge a lack of conclusive evidence. e North Korea tested a nuclear device in the autumn of 2006 and another device in the spring of 2009.
It is not known whether it has deliverable nuclear weapons. f Levite describes Spain as an uncertain case; Jo and Gartzke do not include it in their list of reversals. active hedging.
If there is a crack in the non-proliferation dam in East Asia, more states may reconsider their current status.
In the Middle East, Egypt’s nuclear programme is rudimentary and in Saudi Arabia there is not much to build on.
Theoretical approaches to proliferation and rollback Realist assumptions The realist perspective on international affairs accounts for much of what proliferation and rollback is about.
In an international anarchy, states need to deter potential attackers, and the gold standard of deterrence is nuclear.
To turn states back from weapons pursuits, their security concerns have to be alleviated, either by reducing the threat or by enhancing deterrence in one or both of its basic modes,e. deterrence by defence and deterrence by retaliation.
During the Cold War, the superpowers threatened each other’s clients and responded by beefing up their extended deterrence postures, holding the clients under strict control and keeping proliferation at bay both in Europe and in East Asia.
However, the dominant motivation was not fear of proliferation, but fear of the other side and competition for influence worldwide.
All nuclearweapon programmes have been justified in reference to security concerns, but the realist perspective exaggerates their importance and overrates the propensity to proliferate.
Realists were quick to predict proliferation to tens of states, but although tens of states have the economic, technological and industrial potential to make weapons, there are only nine NWS to date.
In the history of nuclear proliferation, the French rationale for nuclear weapons is the arch-realist one.
De Gaulle stressed that the United States would not sacrifice Chicago for Paris.
This logic fortunately not tested, but quite possibly valid invited proliferation.
The French doctrine was therefore tons azimut,e. the weapons were in principle turned in all directions.
During the Cold War, worst-case assumptions were notorious for their influence on security policies.
In the 1990s the strongest physical manifestations of Cold War thinking were eliminated, yet worst-case assumptions remained important in the security policies of states.
This century, threat-based policies were brought to new heights in reference to state as well as non-state actors.
Even so, the pros and cons of nuclear-weapon acquisition are numerous and states are weighing the arguments.
For instance, Iran is widely considered to be a rational actor susceptible to external incentives as well as domestic interests.
Only when national existence is threatened or regime survival is at stake may it be attractive beyond doubt to possess the strongest of all weapons as an ultimate insurance premium.
However, Paul did not offer prudential realism as the key to understanding nuclear rollback, but emphasised that there is no single overarching explanation of this many-faceted phenomenon.
Realists defend their alarmism partly in reference to proliferation as a continuum, ranging from different degrees of preparedness to ready-made operative arsenals.
Even if the number of NWS remains in the one-digit range, many more states have moved closer to nuclear-weapon status.
Realists also defend themselves in reference to the NPT and the supply-side measures that they see as the core virtue of the non-proliferation regime.
Supply-side polieies have been useful, and when they have been shown to be ineffeetive and inadequate they have been heavily eritieised by realists and others for that.
However, realists are also responsible for the relative ignoranee of other parts of the regime, notably the disarmament eommitment of Artiele VI, and the combination of technology denial and failure to disarm undermines the trade-off on which the NPT is built.
Idealist perspectives The importance of ideas manifests itself at three levels.
At the international level, it is evident in the non-proliferation norm.
After a while, the Treaty got more parties than any other arms-control agreement.
Except for India, Pakistan, Israel and North Korea, it has become universal.
The NPT may have been more or less important in tilting states towards non-nuclear status, but once they have joined the Treaty they have taken a keen interest in ascertaining that other parties remain true to their Treaty obligations.
A weaker NPT means a weaker non-proliferation norm, for the Treaty is the main standardsetter in the global nuclear realm.
Even if the enforcement mechanisms are weak, states proliferate at the risk of becoming international pariahs.
Being subject to sanctions at first, India was soon forgiven for what it did in 1998, but any future proliferator will be small in comparison and much more vulnerable to international reactions.
A future proliferator would also have to violate the NPT, or withdraw in orderly fashion, whereas India never joined the Treaty and therefore broke no legal commitment.
At the national level, Etel Solingen finds a difference between proponents of openness towards the outside world and those who prefer to shut the world out.
Not surprisingly, the fonner is more likely to turn the nuclear option down, while the latter are more inclined to keep it open or even to exercise it.
The focus on “national mythmakers” does not disregard external influences and challenges, and so does not belittle the relevance of realist perspectives.
Transitions between civilian and military rule crystallise the difference between openness and isolation.
The nationalistic orientation and dubious legitimacy of military rulers tend to turn them into outcasts.
If economic, technological and industrial capacities enable them to conduct a significant nuclear programme, they may try to solidify their positions by going nuclear.
Such rulers may be favourably disposed for the nuclear option from the outset, and the negative feedback they receive from the surroundings may tempt them to exercise it.
The Swedish experience highlights the importance of military strategy in national debates.
The leading opponents of nuclear weapons Alva Myrdal and Inga Thorson deemed it particularly important to do better than the military officers in strategy discussions.
They were keenly aware that, while the listeners might not understand all of the arguments some of them too complex to be grasped by non-professionals they sensed very well who won the debates.
If they could beat the military on their home ground, the rest would be easier to manage.
They therefore prepared particularly well for debates about military strategy.
At the individual level, case studies of leaders from France, Australia, Argentina and India suggest that leaders with definite nuclear-weapon ambitions differ from the great majority of others in their conception of national identity.
Driven by fear and pride -e. a combination of security and status motives oppositional nationalists go for nuclear weapons not merely as a matter of calculation, but as a matter of self-expression.
Unlike most of their peers, who find it hard to make a rational assessment of the pros and cons of weapons acquisition given all the uncertainties about the consequences, for oppositional nationalists the choice of nuclear weapons is neither a close call nor a possible last resort, but a matter of necessity.
On the rollback list, de Klerk was the right man at the right time in South Africa.
The December 1988 agreement which provided for the withdrawal of 50,000 Cuban troops from Southern Africa presented an opportunity to place South Africa’s identity anchor in the Western community of nations.
Colonel Gaddafi of Libya made a similar choice, burying all efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and earning goodwill from the US, the UK and the rest of the Western world.
In South Africa, scientists demonstrated the feasibility of building nuclear weapons at a time when the country felt increasingly threatened by enemies both in the region and internationally.
Security concerns merged with the practical feasibility of a focused, costeffective programme that produced half-a-dozen bombs.
In North Korea, an indigenous programme developed with Soviet assistance reached the point where it could produce significant amounts of plutonium right at the time the Cold War came to the end and the Soviet Union and the security guarantees it had issued disappeared.
From then on, the nuclear programme became the lifeline of the communist regime in Pyongyang, leading to a first nuclear test in 2006.
Colonel Gaddafi tried and failed to purchase nuclear weapons from China and bomb production materials from India, Pakistan, the Soviet Union, Argentina, Brazil and Belgium during the 1970s and 1980s and from the Khan network in the 1990s and 2000s, but gave up in favour of integration into the existing Western economic and political order.
Quantitative analysis In a quantitative analysis of the 36 cases listed above, Muller and Schmidt examine existing propositions in the field, adding to our understanding of proliferation/de-proliferation dynamics.
Comparing the building of research reactors with the conduct of weaponrelated activities, they find no support for the hypothesis that proliferation is technology driven.
A growing number of states have such reactors, but a decreasing number are using them for nuclear-weapon activities.
The hypothesis is further refuted by the fact that more states started nuclear-weapon activities before they acquired research reactors, and more finished them after they did so.
Neither do they find support for the hypothesis that an alliance with an NWS prevents NNWS from embarking on weapon activities.If anything, there is a tendency in the opposite direction.
This is not to deny that, in single cases, alliances have played a key role in the renunciation of nuclear-weapon options.
Another realpolitik assumption that states do not dare to proliferate if the big powers are strong enough and flex their muscles; the “high posture” hypothesis is refuted as well.
Distinguishing between states that were independent before 1960 and states that gained their independenee later, the emerging norm had a distinet impaet on the way the new states eoneeived of proper behaviour in the seeurity field.
The signifieanee of the NPT is borne out by the following table showing initiation and termination of nuelear-weapon aetivity before and after the eonelusion of the Treaty:^"" Not surprisingly, the authors also find that democraeies are more sensitive to the non-proliferation norm than other forms of government, and that demoeratisation the transition from authoritarian to demoeratie systems eontributes to norm eonformity.
Finally, little support is found for the hypothesis that governments that open up to the outside world are less proliferation prone than those that shut the world out.
The liberalisation thesis advaneed by Etel Solingen is not refuted, but eaeh ease must be examined on its own merits.
Shortly after the first Gulf War in 1991, elimination of the seeret Iraqi nuelear-weapons programme of the 1980s had been aeeomplished.
The baekground for the UN disarmament mission in Iraq was very speeial.
Except for a brief period of time immediately after the Second World War, this was the first and only time in the history of the UN that the Security Council functioned more or less the way the authors of the UN Charter had hoped.
It did not last long by the mid-1990s, big power cooperation was once again on the decline but the liberation of Kuwait and the constraints on Saddam happened in the cooperative spirit of that period.
When the nuclear-weapon programme of the 1980s came to the fore in the aftermath of the war the IAEA had failed to discover it this became the impetus to the Model Additional Protocol to the standard NPT safeguards agreement.
In the years that followed, UNSCOM and UNMOVIC became rich sources of verification experience, inspiring new ideas of how effective verification could best be organised and implemented.
After the second Gulf War in 2003, the inspectors were proven successful.
They had been right and United States and other national intelligence agencies woefully wrong.
Obviously, big power disinformation campaigns had not disappeared with the Cold War, giving a major boost to the standing of international inspections.
To the extent that reliable information is important for the progressive conduct of nonproliferation policies, international inspections are vital.
They must be allowed to run their course, however lengthy and tiresome the process must be, and international institutions should be used and empowered, not bypassed by unilateral action.
Rollback did not occur by a major change in the Libyan political system, as was the case in South Africa, Brazil, Argentina, South Korea and Taiwan.
Nor was it the result of public diplomatic campaigns and economic assistance, as was the case with Belarus, Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
Sanctions seem not to have done the trick either, as the turnaround came in a period when the peak of sanctions had already passed.
Rather, it seems that the turnaround was part of a major reconsideration of the utility of military-based power politics.
Libya shifted from power to economic growth and welfare as the best way to keep the regime in power.
Colonel Gaddafi seems to have been under the influence of a younger generation of leaders, notably one of his own sons.
The end result was a complete, supervised dismantling of WMD stocks and facilities.
Like de Klerk, Gaddafi gave priority to normalisation with the West, abandoning his nuclear programme and aligning himself with the existing international order.
Also like South Africa, Libya opened its nuclear programme for international verification, full-scale.
It skipped its weapons programme in return for normalisation with the United States and the rest of the world similar to what North Korea says it would be willing to, on and off, without any change of government.
Five years later, the Libyan political system remains much the same, while in North Korea it is commonly assumed that far-reaching normalisation will trigger major changes in the system of government.
Syria In the night of 6 September 2007, Israeli fighler jets bombed a building complex at A1 Kibar, Syria, next to the Euphrates river.
Israeli and American intelligence had concluded that the target was a camouflaged nuclear reactor under construction, built in cooperation with North Korea.
A photograph released by the intelligence agencies showed the head of the Syrian Atomic Energy Commission and a senior official of the North Korean nuclear programme standing together at the site.
Later, the IAEA confirmed thal the complex bore features resembling those of a nuclear reactor;^^ that the imagery of the site showed similarities with the graphite reactor building at Yongbyon; and that traces of uranium and graphite had been found on the site despite the fact that Syria had removed the debris from the bombed facility and covered the entire site with concrete.
The Syrians said the complex was a conventional military factory, arguing that the uranium traces were of Israeli origin and that no foreigners had been involved at A1 Kibar.
By the turn of 2009/2010, much remained to be understood regarding the relationship to other nuclear activities in and out of Syria and about the procurement activities and the financial aspects of it all, but in essence, national intelligence seems to have had it right on this occasion.
The agreemeni obliged il to notify the Agency as soon as construction of new nuclear facilities starts.
Israel in effect reiterated that it does not tolerate other nuclear-weapon states in the Middle East, but in so doing violated international law.
The IAEA emphasised thal as soon as the Israelis and the Americans had information about an illegal nuclear facility coming up, they should have notified the Agency.
Instead, the IAEA learned about the bombing from the media, and was asked to search for evidence in the rubble.
To maintain its nuclear monopoly in the Middle East, Israel seems determined to take preventive action.
This is the so-called Begin doctrine, named after Prime Minister Menachem Begin, who authorised the 1981 strike on the Frenchsupplied reactors in Iraq.
The nonproliferation regime is weak when it comes to enforcement, and Israel has no confidence in it.
The following is a list of propositions -e. hypotheses for which there is some evidence that are all qualified in various ways.
The qualifications, discussed at some length above, are only hinted at here.
Alleviate security concerns All proliferators have invoked security concerns to justify their weapons acquisitions even if, in reality, other factors may have been as or more important.
Sometimes, threat perceptions have been alleviated through alliances, extended nuclear deterrence, other kinds of security assurances and improved conflict management.
South Africa traded its nuclear programme for normalisation with the West and bona fide status in international affairs.
First, it tried to become a legitimate member of both the Arab and the African community of nations, but felt rejected and sought a stronger platform for itself by embarking on a nuclear-weapon programme.
When that did not pay off, it dropped the nuclear programme altogether in return for acceptance by the Western world.
In the South African case, regime change was another condition for universal acceptance, whereas in the case of Libya, state security was solidified without any change in the system of government.
If Myanmar is doing something in the direction of a weapons option, these experiences may be useful in crafting policies to roll it back.
During the Cold War, the superpowers threatened each other’s clients and responded by tying them closer to their own camps, thereby suppressing inclinations to proliferate.
These non-proliferation gains were spin-offs of Cold War dynamics in essence, non-proliferation for free.
Presumably, the United States is willing to enhance the defences of South Korea and Taiwan over again if this is what it takes to prevent them from building nuclear weapons.
However, as illustrated by Iran and North Korea, today it is unclear how much the big powers are able and willing to do to prevent proliferation.
For small and medium-sized states, strong security concerns can make status considerations next to irrelevant.
However, for the majority of NWS, the status gains have been quite important.
The best way to reduce the status value of nuclear weapons is to scale the arsenals down and introduce doctrines that limit their functions.
Unqualified assurances not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against NNWS are significant steps in that direction.
In Iran, the national consensus on nuclear issues is built around an allegedly civilian high-technology prestige programme.
Playing status substitutes up applying imagination to such options across technological sectors, nuclear and non-nuclear, and in the structuring of international affairs is therefore another, complementary approach to playing the status value of nuclear weapons down.
It may go on for years, waiting for external and/or internal constellations to offer special opportunities for diplomatic breakthroughs.
In the case of North Korea, China and others have played for time and still do, hoping for propitious moments to appear.
The first steps away from the nuclear brink tend to be slow and incremental and sometimes non-linear.
Continuous engagement and patience watching the relative strength of different points of view and assessing the direction in which national debates are moving is critically important in any diplomatic effort to influence the outcome.
By then, nuclear technologies would be too widely spread for supply restraints to have much effect.
Even if proliferation cannot be stopped by technology denial, valuable time can still be bought this way.
Over the years, technology transfers have been tightened and export controls enhanced.
In particular cases, denials have been extended into broader sanctions regimes.
Beyond winning time, however, the effectiveness of such measures is questionable.
They may as well isolate the state of concern and harden its will to carry the weapons ambition through.
When the Cold War ended and the Cubans withdrew from Angola, de Klerk seized the opportunity to take South Africa back from nuclear to non-nuclear-weapon status.
Pro-nuclear mythmakers tend to argue the case for nuclear-weapon acquisition irrespective of changes in their environment.
Egypt’s Nasser and South Africa’s Vorster were also carriers of strong beliefs.
Mythmakers cannot be expected to change their minds, so they can only be stopped by technical, economic and political obstacles, or by removing them from power.
At any given time and in any given country, multiple strategic myths may co-exist and compete with each other, widening the potential leverage of external actors.
Beware of nationalistic governments Countries that abandoned nuclear-weapon programmes in the past, but maintain some significant capability, are cases of continued concern.
These countries remain sensitive to changes in the international security environment, and their policies may change with changes in their ruling elites.
In Argentina and Brazil, nationalist governments that claim a stronger role for themselves in international affairs may once again turn their countries towards the nuclear option.
When leaders fear for the security of their nation and/or their own regime while thinking at least as highly of themselves as of their opponents, the temptation to correct this anomaly by launching a nuclear-weapons programme may be strong.
Effective measures may be needed both to alleviate the security concerns and to satisfy national and personal pride.
Iran is under threat, first of all from Israel and the US; in the nuclear field, the rich Persian civilisation is inferior to the young and shaky Pakistani neighbour, which is an NWS; and in the shia-sunni context the large Iranian nation represents the traditional underdog.
In Taiwan, Argentina and Brazil, the transition from military to civilian rule was crucial in steering their nuclear programmes away from weapons acquisition.
Encourage openness to the outside world Statistical support for the liberalisation thesis is meagre, but qualitative analyses of specific cases suggest that proponents of openness are less likely to seek nuclear weapons than governments wanting to shut the world out.
One explanation may be that in a globalised environment where everything moves easily across borders, closed societies stand out as an aberration.
The governments of such countries risk being beleaguered and may turn to nuclear options in response.
Knowing that the United States and its Western partners may be willing to buy wouldbe proliferators off, nuclear aspirants have sometimes played their ambitions up in order to maximise the compensation they might receive for pulling back.
North Korea is famous for this tactic, demanding compensation for crises of its own making.
Apply the Additional Protocol Nuclear programmes are made up of hundreds of decisions, some of which may escape political control.
If for no other reason, scientists and engineers may be tempted to take their research in new directions out of curiosity, without any long-term objective in mind.
Application of the Additional Protocol, which goes beyond fissile materials to cover a wider set of fissile material-re/atec/ activities, can help to institute a stricter non-nuclear-weapon culture.
Nuclear disarmament During the Cold War, there were indications that big power detente and arms control were conducive to non-proliferation.
Today, disarmament is high on the agenda along with arms control, but single steps towards disarmament may have little or no impact if there is nothing more on the cards.
For instance, states of proliferation concern would hardly be impressed by further reductions in United States and Russian arsenals as long as three-digit numbers remain, other NWS are caving in and modernising their systems, and the Chinese, Indians and Pakistanis are expanding their arsenals.
The non-proliferation norm The non-proliferation norm anchored in the NPT is essential for the cause of non-proliferation.
Ensuring the viability of the NPT may be the single most important way to stem proliferation.
Better and more balanced implementation of the Treaty is therefore of cardinal importance.
The non-proliferation norm is upheld by the nuclear-weapon-free zones as well.
They may withdraw from the Treaty, protesting the imbalanced implementation of rights and obligations, and do so with relative impunity, for they would still be under an international legal obligation to stay non-nuclear and be subject to NPT-type safeguards.
If a number of NWFZ members were to do that, others may follow suit and the NPT unravel.
The probability that this would happen may be low, but should US-Russian disarmament negotiations get stuck and the United States disarmament ambition falter, it is worth watching.
The crucial role of the United States The United States has been effective in its rollback endeavours when it has been in a position to offset security threats facing potential proliferators.
In Europe, alliance commitments contained and marginalised proliferation interests.
In East Asia, enhanced security assurances rolled South Korea and Taiwan back.
When the objective has been to overthrow another regime, that regime has had little incentive to negotiate.
For an international regime to function properly, somebody has to exercise leadership.
While the Bush administration took a selective view of the NPT, the Obama administration is mindful of the totality of the regime and has assumed a high-profile leadership role.
In addition, Israel is known to have a nuclear arsenal without any confinued testing.
North Korea acceded to the NPT in 1985, but left the Treaty in 2003 as the only country to have done so.
Some non-nuclear-weapon states can build such weapons in a matter of weeks or a few months if they decide to do so.
While the number of states possessing ready-made weapons has increased only slowly, there is concern that “virtual arsenals” may now be growing faster, nurtured and legitimised by the growing interest in nuclear power.
The key to virtual capabilities is national fuel-cycle facilities and fissile materials on stock.
Iranian leaders have indicated that they may seek such a status, similar to that of Japan.
However, while “creeping in” under the testing criterion may be legal under the NPT, it is not necessarily legitimate.
Rollback is a process in the opposite direction, reversing intentions and/or capabilities to acquire nuclear arms.
Throughout the nuclear age, more than 20 states have “done something” in the direction of a weapons option and then abandoned it.
Virtual arsenals have a destabilising effect, especially in regions of conflict such as the Middle East, calling for transparency and constraints on such capabilities.
Verification One such measure is implementation of the Additional Protocol to the standard NPT safeguards agreement.
Without it, the Agency can only verify the non-diversion of declared nuclear material and activities.
Application of the Protocol may deter states from developing weaponoriented capabilities in secret, and make others more confldent that they know what is going on.
It limits the scope of uncertainty and the potential for suspicions and misunderstandings.
From November 2003 to February 2006, Iran allowed the IAEA to apply the Additional Protocol.
In that period, there were more comprehensive inspections in Iran than in any other country in the world.
Also, it no longer provides early design information of upcoming facilities.
Recurrent demands that Iran agrees to the Additional Protocol, provides early design information and offers voluntary transparency measures are made with the knowledge that nobody can prove a negative and in the hope that incriminating evidence will be found.
Ostensibly requested in order to enable Iran “to come clean”, they enhance suspicions as much as they build confidence.
As long as Iran is widely suspected of having weapons intentions, and as long as it is under threat of military attack, there is not much hope of changing this predicament.
The situation is increasingly untenable, because the closer Iran comes to a nuclear-weapon capability, the more important it is to place those capabilities under the best possible safeguards.
Multinational fuel-cycle facilities Another possible restraint is multinationalisation of fuel-cycle facilities.
On his first visit to the UN, President Ahmadinejad mentioned the possibility of multinational fuel-cycle facilities in Iran.
However, such proposals raise complex technological, organisational, financial and political questions and may lead to long and arduous negotiations.
Far from being any quick fix, they can be excellent vehicles for buying time.
Internationalisation of the fuel cycle From a regime point of view, internationalisation of all fuel-cycle facilifies, existing ones included, would be better than occasional, multilateral ones.
Special treatment of special cases may be warranted, but equal treatment is the regime norm.
If backed by the big powers, which have such facilities themselves, other states would find it hard to resist.
However attractive, this is another long-term proposition that may consolidate a solution to the Iranian problem, but hardly something that can be implemented in time to help create it.
Supply assurances to forego national facilities Yet another possibility is assurances of fuel supply, solid enough to convince states to forego national fuel-cycle facilities.
This is objectionable on political grounds, and for states that have big deposits of uranium on their territories, enrichment may also be an attractive business proposition.
The Framework for a Long-term Agreement offered by the E3/EU on 5 August 2005 contained fuel assurances fo Iran in return for halting all fuel-cycle activities there.
The Europeans committed themselves to assist in the establishment of a buffer store of fuel, sufficient to maintain supplies for a period of five years.
While international supply arrangements can never be as reliable as domestic sources of supply, and the buffer store would be located outside Iran, the credibility of these assurances were high.
They were made by a group of states and communicated to all interested parties through an international organisation , and so could not be withdrawn by any single government.
Limiting the scale of fuel-cycle activities Finally, a broader separation of civilian and military applications could be established by limiting the scale of fuel-cycle activities to a level below that required for weapons production.
A compromise of this kind would allow for research and development on enrichment and/or reprocessing, and provide a mobilisation base for rapid construction of national industrial plants in case fuel supplies were interrupted.
Believing that Iran would buckle under pressure, the Western demand was always that Iran should give up any and all fuel-cycle activities.
Iran insists on exercising its sovereign rights under the NPT and has made mastery of the entire fuel-cycle a matter of national pride.
For Iran, the right to enrich on its own territory is a red line in any forthcoming negotiation.
An opinion poll shows that 89 per cent of the population believe that Iran should master the uranium-enrichment process.
The politics of rollback Rollback is a process reversing intentions and/or capabilities to acquire nuclear arms.
From a longer list of lessons from rollback experiences,"" the following appear relevant to the Iranian case.
Alleviation of security concerns All proliferators have invoked security concerns.
Other factors may have been more important, but security considerations have always been used to legitimise nuclear-weapon ambitions.
Non-nuclear Iran is surrounded by NWS Israel, Pakistan, Russia and the United States and therefore very conscious of the imbalances that this creates.
At various points in their histories, the leaders of Israel and Pakistan became convinced that the possession of nuclear weapons would deter attacks on them, or limit how far an attacker would dare to go.
The Iranian programme was restarted in the midst of the Iran-lraq war, when the country suffered very high casualties and was attacked with chemical weapons.
Whether Iran knew of Saddam’s secret nuclear-weapon programme is unclear, but if it did, this would have been another reason to bring the programme back up to speed.
There is little doubt that it was the security arguments that made Ayatollah Khomeini who originally turned his back on the Shah’s nuclear ambitions change his attitude in favour of resuming the programme.
These arguments were reinforced by the first Gulf War, which demonstrated that nobody could match United States high-tech conventional power.
Iraq was believed to possess chemical and biological weapons but had no nuclear arms and was occupied, while North Korea had nuclear weapons and was not attacked.
In recent years, the strong United States military presence on Iran’s doorstep and the cascade of security-related developments in the aftermath of 9/11 have accentuated the relevance of nuclear weapons.
The United States Navy has extensive support and logistical facilities in Qatar, Bahrain, the UAE and Oman, and there is a major American airbase in Qatar.
There are a large number of well-supported United States troops in Iraq and Afghanistan; there is a close partnership, however problematic, between the United States and Pakistan and a minor United States foothold in Azerbaijan; and Israel, the only resident NWS in the Middle East, enjoys staunch United States support and cooperates with Turkey and India.
Iranian perceptions of encirclement are therefore based on stark realities.
In periods of dire threat such as in the aftermath of the occupation of Iraq, when it was feared that Iran would be next, and under the impact of recurrent United States and Israeli bombing threats, security concerns cannot but strengthen the interest in nuclear weapons.
There is no doubt that Iranian security concerns bring the nuclear-weapon option to mind, and that alleviation of threats and fonual security assurances are important to put it to rest.
For some analysts, this is the primary motivation for Iran’s nuclear drive.Others argue that status ambitions are more important.
Resolve status concerns Karl Marx said that the most effective power is the structural one that functions without being used.
In international affairs, this is military force, nuclear weapons being the ultimate expression of destructive power.
States have a fine eye for who is more and who is less powerful and tend to adjust, consciously or subconsciously, to the perceived distribution of power in their surroundings.
In this way, nuclear weapons are important in order to gain political influence and higher infemational standing.
In the Middle East, it has gained greatly from United States actions in Iraq and Afghanistan, and in the Arab streets its opposition to Israel and the United States has paid off Egypt is intensely aware that Iran is undermining its traditional political leadership role in the region.
Nuclear capabilities are signs of technological advancement and potential nuclear-weapon status, and may be used to this avail, although it is no simple way of projecting power.
In response to Iran’s ascendancy, members of the Gulf Cooperation Council are launching their own nuclear programmes while seeking military partnerships with the United States and other Western countries.
Saudi Arabia and others are trying to counter Iranian influence in Lebanon, Palestine and Syria.
In the wider Asian context, Iran’s economic power base is unimpressive, but its oil and gas deposits make it attractive for rapidly expanding Asian economies.
Traditionally, Iran has been oriented at least as much to the North and East as to the West and has developed its relations to a great many Asian states.
Single reductions of United States and Russian nuclear arsenals to, say, 1,000 deployed strategic weapons for each with no promise of further cuts will hardly impress Iran or any other potential proliferator.
But if disarmament becomes a trend encompassing both weapons systems and doctrinal limitations on their use, and involving other NWS in addition to the leading ones, the costs of contravening it will be higher.
Status gains accrue not only from military applications of nuclear energy.
Civilian programmes can also be powerful expressions of technological sophistication and yield significant status benefits, especially if they cover the entire fuel cycle.
In Iran, the national consensus on nuclear issues is built around an allegedly civilian high-tech prestige programme.
Today, the enrichment works in Natanz and the constmction of a big research reactor in Arak have reached such an advanced stage and enjoy so much support all across the political spectrum that it will be hard to reverse them.
However, the stability of such decision points, stopping just a little short of weaponisation, is doubtful.
To reassure others that the nuclear-weapon option is not being pursued, constraints are necessary.
When leaders fear for the security of their nation and/or their regime, while thinking at least as highly of themselves as of their neighbours and opponents, there is an asymmetry that cries out for correction.
Pakistan is a nuclear-weapon state while Iran is not, yet Pakistan is a young and unstable state while Iran represents a distinguished age-old civilisation.
Teheran’s most oft-repeated demand is that the United States must change the way it sees and treats Iran, its regional role and aspirations.
To help constrain the nuclear programme, the status asymmetries must be alleviated as a matter of priority.
Over and over again, Iran has asked to be treated with fairness and respect.
For Iran that kind of dialogue symbolizes the unequal relationship the United States has sought to impose under cover of mutual respect.
For instance, annoyed by questions about what it is doing in Iraq, it claims respect for its intrinsic religious, economic, cultural, political and historical presence and influence there.
The fax that the Swiss caretaker of United States interests sent to Washington in May 2003 also offered to stop material support to Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hezbollah and to help turn them into political organisations, along with acceptance of a two-state solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.This is a prerequisite for full normalisation of US-Iranian relations.
A high level of overall confidence would make tight constraints beyond international regime standards superfluous.
However, unwavering United States support for Israel, and Iranian aspirations to lead the Muslim world in its fight against Israel and in support of the Palestinians, make this a distant prospect.
The West does not accept Iran becoming an NWS, and political reconciliation is unlikely to evolve fast enough to make it live comfortably with an advanced Iranian virtual arsenal.
Attend to the activities of nuclear mythmakers Myths grow out of strong convictions and are therefore hard to change.
In the public domain, there are few mythmakers of any significance no Iranian Ali Bhutto who said he would push for nuclear weapons even if the Pakistanis had to eat grass.
Still, it is not far-fetched to assume that in the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps and among second-generation revolutionaries, pro-nuclear mythmakers do exist, but that they do not find it opportune to go public or are not allowed to do so.
Also, the role of religion and of the religious mythmakers is debatable.
One interpretation holds that it is no different from the role that religion has played in so many other countries in human history,e. that of legitimising political interests.
The United States National Intelligence Estimate of November 2007 also emphasised the rationality of the system and that Iran is susceptible to foreign influence.
The government of Iran was willing to and capable of adapting to changes in its environment and to being a partner in real negotiations.
However, after the presidential elections in the summer of 2009, the leadership group got embroiled in internal conflicts and fell apart.
Reduce the role of the military One of the most solid theses in organisation theory is that big organisations try to maintain and expand their own status and influence.
In Iran, the military organisation to be watched is primarily the IRGC/ Pasdaran.
The Army and the Iranian Atomic Energy Organisation were inherited from the shah and play more modest roles.
The election of Ahmadinejad brought people from the Pasdaran into high government offices so much so that to refer to the leadership in Teheran as “the priesthood” is inaccurate.
It is commonly assumed that the interests in military applications of nuclear energy reside first and foremost with the Pasdaran, and that the closer the nuclear programme comes to a weapon capability, the greater the influence of the Pasdaran will be.
To make Iran refrain from weapons pursuits, it is therefore important to constrain the influence of this organisation and the second-generation revolutionaries who liaise with it.
The ups and downs of Pasdaran are, however, first and foremost a function of domestic political dynamics.
There is not much that external actors can do to change it, except indirectly.
The Iranian regime has had few problems living with United States sanctions.
Using United States hostility to legitimise and enhance its own position, it has even turned them to its own benefit.
UN sanctions have been harder to swallow, not because they have been biting they have actually been modest but because Iran seeks recognition as a regional power and legitimate partner in international affairs and that ambition does not square with international condemnation.
Policies that allow it to become a bona fide partner in international cooperation provided that the non-proliferation norm is respected may therefore be instrumental in keeping it away from nuclear weapons.
Openness to the outside world is positively correlated with degree of democratic practice.
Countries undergoing democratisation often find it particularly important to be seen as norm-abiding.
Iran is in many ways more democratic than most other countries in the Middle East, although the chaos following the 2009 elections significantly curtailed civil liberties.
Factions compete for influence and their relative importance is changing back and forth.
There is nothing unidirectional about it no signs of a well-functioning democracy at the end of any tunnel.
Deeper involvement in international economic, cultural, scientific and political affairs therefore has to be stimulated in other ways.
Sanctions are standing in the way, whereas membership in the WTO and other organisations may turn it into a stakeholder in organised international cooperation.
Enhance the non-proliferation norm A strong non-proliferation norm may be among the most important factors in stemming proliferation and inducing rollback.Better and more balanced implementation of the NPT is therefore fundamentally important.
Implementation of Article VI of the Treaty the disarmament article is of vital importance in this connection.
If a dynamic interplay evolves between the vision of an NWFW and specific measures towards that end, drawing all NWS into systematic and progressive reductions, the original bargain between nonproliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses will be much healthier.
If this were to happen, potential proliferators will find it harder to go ahead and be more easily targeted for countervailing action.
It is more costly to work against an established trend in the international system, especially if it is jointly developed by the big powers.
Calling for an NWFW, President Obama easily wins the war of words over big power hypocrisy and discrimination charges.
He acknowledges the protests of double standards and wants to eliminate all nuclear weapons.
To make a real difference, however, declaratory policies must be followed by action.
Buy time Diplomatic involvement to buy time has been an important element in many rollback campaigns.
It may be applied for years, waiting for external and/or internal changes to offer special opportunities for breakthrough.
In the case of Iran, the talks with the EU3/EU bought time in so far as Iran suspended its enrichment works between 2003 and 2005.
Beyond that, however, making suspension a condition for negotiations meant time lost.
When Obama entered the White House he put it straight, offering negotiations without preconditions.
The timelines were critical, for the risk was that the nuclear programme would be racing ahead of progress in the negotiations.
At that juncture, a formula for buying time was a double freeze,e. a halt to further enrichment and to further sanctions while new opportunities were explored.
United States and Iranian strategies for conflict management United States strategy In the spring of 2009, the contours of the new United States strategy were coming into focus.
The United States was ready to participate in multilateral nuclear talks in the P5+1 framework and to initiate a dialogue with Iran without preconditions.
The sanctions would be maintained, and efforts were made to build broad coalitions with a view to increasing the pressure on Iran if the negotiations were to fail.
No “artificial” deadlines for progress were set, but a review would be made by the turn of 2009/2010.
The coalition-building aimed at making Russia more cooperative and at mobilising Arab support for United States policies.
The message to Russia was that if it joined the United States in a successful attempt to keep Iran non-nuclear, there might be no need for a missile shield on its borders in Eastern Europe.
Originally understood to be an exercise in linkage politics, this was later said to be a statement of fact.
Cancellation of the missile shield plans for Poland and the Czech Republic would in turn facilitate disarmament negotiations between the United States and Russia, possibly leading in due course to multilateral disarmament talks.
If successful, it would put broader, concerted pressure on Iran not to rock the boat by acting in contravention to the joint US-Russian efforts.
The plans for Poland and the Czech Republic were subsequently abandoned, paving the way for another disarmament agreement to replace START I, but Russian cooperation on Iran remained open to doubt.
Ten years ago when Russia had to swallow a series of humiliating political defeats at the hands of the United States and the West its relationship to Tehran became a litmus test of the continued existence of an independent Russian foreign policy.
Russia was selling weapons to Iran; cooperated with Iran on peaceful uses of nuclear energy; and wanted to cooperate with Iran on issues of petroleum policy.
A closer Iranian alliance with the West could jeopardise its role as the main gas supplier to Europe.
Russia does not want Iran to fall back into the Western sphere of interest.
Asia’s rapid economic development and growing political influence provide an impetus in that direction.
Therefore, United States cooperation with Russia on Iran will not come easily.
To get the Arabs on board, the United States was leaning on Israel to be more forthcoming towards the Palestinians.
President Obama’s insistence that Israel stop building new settlements, natural expansion of existing settlements included, was another go at something previous presidents failed to achieve.
The United States took care to brief moderate Arab states about its policies and diplomacy towards Iran, and extended a hand to Syria, Iran’s only ally in the Middle East.
Israeli politics had moved distinctly to the right, and Obama failed to stop the expansion of settlements.
Iran’s vocal opposition to Israeli and United States policies and material support for Hamas, Islamic Jihad, Hezbollah and other groups fighting Israel had earned it much support on the Arab streets.
The nearer one came to Iran, the more the Arab states feared the consequences of a war with it.
However, Egyptian, Saudi and other Arab leaderships were deeply worried about the bomb potential of the Iranian nuclear programme, and many Arab states were launching programmes for civilian applications of nuclear energy.
Generally, United States efforts to gain Arab, Russian and other countries’ support for more severe sanctions in case engagement with Iran does not yield satisfactory results will therefore be hard-won.
However, President Obama is in a better position to rally support for his policies than George W Bush was.
The single most biting sanction would be a cut-off of refined petroleum products, for which Iran still depended on import to almost 40 per cent of its total consumption.
The United States might go far in the direction of accepting the nuclear programme, some degree and form of enrichment on Iranian soil included, in return for full transparency.
As for the negotiating procedure, there was a choice between a step-by-step approach and a comprehensive bargain, both with shortcomings and dangers.
Iranian strategy Iranian leaders were not content with United States respect for Iran’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and for its Islamic regime.
Iran wants a negotiating framework that is conducive to recognition of its wider role in the Middle East.
Negotiation of the nuclear issues and parallel talks about Iraq, Afghanistan and other problems, under a cloud of penalties if agreement is not reached within relatively tight time frames, do not meet that desire.
The Iranians want to have an overarching strategic framework that enables them to discuss regional issues with the American superpower across the board.
Iran has learnt much about how to manage isolation and how to split big and small powers in their conduct of Iranian affairs, but it has little experience dealing with international openings.
However, while the demands are vague, they are nevertheless central to the management of the Iranian problem in general and the nuclear issue in particular.
It has many functions beyond providing nuclear power and a nuclear-weapon option.
It symbolises what the Iranian civilisation can achieve; it can be used to offset domestic discontent, for the leaders can always count on widespread nationalism in support of their defiance towards the West; and it is one of Iran’s main levers for being treated with respect and justice.
Enrichment is first and foremost a national undertaking, although there is a crack in the door for multilateral/intemational organisation of fuel-cycle operations.
Multinational and international solutions are attractive, but timeconsuming to implement.
A possible compromise may include comprehensive verification, solid supply assurances, constraints on the fuel-cycle programme, and exploration of multilateral/international options for the long term.
In the face of military threats from the United States and Israel, it stands to reason that it has hidden materials, technology and equipment at many different locations.
It is hard to imagine a solution in the narrow framework of nuclear issues.
It probably takes a degree of normalisation of US-Iranian affairs and acknowledgement of Iran’s regional role to do it.
If Iran is serious about developing a weapon capability, it probably plans for enrichment somewhere other than Natanz, out of reach of the safeguards system.
To turn Natanz to the production of highly enriched uranium, or divert material from there for upgrading at another site, will make alarm bells ring everywhere.
That would mean publicity before consumption and more trouble than is, strictly speaking, necessary.
Later, this was changed to notification as soon as a decision to build a new facility had been made.
Naturally, a state that is under threat of being bombed would do so and distribute valuable equipment throughout its territory.
To date, there is no proof that Iran is trying to build bombs, only plenty of suspicions.
In the run-up to the Geneva meeting, the United States made it clear that, at that juncture, there would be no talk of sanctions.
More comprehensive sanctions would come later, if the negotiations did not bring satisfactory results.
Nearly all the fuel that Argentina provided in the 1990s had been spent.
The United States and Iranian chief negotiators met in between the plenary sessions the first such meeting in 30 years.
The bar is high in this respect and the problems run deep, for even if Iran does not plan for production of nuclear weapons, it would obviously not like to provide information that may help Israel and the United States to update their target lists.
The Israelis are well known to prefer bombing, and the Americans have not written that option off In a comment.
The same standards should apply for all members of the international nonproliferation regime.
His vision of an NWFW, and the UN Security Council summit meeting on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation that he convened in September 2009, enabled him to refute assertions of double standards.
Iranian leaders reacted differently to the proposal and openly criticised each other, in a reflection of the chaotic governance situation in Tehran.
The common denominator was a concern that they would not receive fuel for the TRR after fulfilling their end of the deal, so they put forward their own alternatives exporting the LEU in batches or arranging swaps of LEU and fresh fuel on Iranian soil.
In effect, the TRR fuel issue was turned into a “take it or leave it” proposition.
The announcement of negotiations without preconditions and the promising first meeting between Iran and the 5+1 boiled down to stalemate over a modest measure to improve the atmosphere for substantive talks.
Facing prolonged impasse over the issue, the United States, France and other Western countries geared up for another round of sanctions, some of them in the belief that the domestic unrest had made Iran more vulnerable to external pressure.
In Washington, Congress was ready for tougher application of United States secondary sanctions on European and other companies doing business with Iran, while the administration seemed to prefer the UN route.
Germany and other European countries warned against additional United States sanctions because it might simply let Chinese companies replace European ones.
The emphasis was on targeted sanctions, primarily against the IRGC:^' Israel demanded crippling sanctions as soon as possible.
In February 2010, Iran started enrichment tests to 20 per cent with a view to producing the TRR fuel itself At that juncture, the headline was renewed focus on sanctions.
Assessment President Obama’s coalition building is a new twist to long-standing United States policies to contain Iran, running counter to Iranian efforts to correct prevailing status asymmetries.
However, continued attempts to bring them on board did not augur well for settlement of the US-Iranian dispute.
To the extent that the purpose is to elicit broader support for stronger pressures on the Islamic Republic Hillary Clinton and Dennis Ross have advocated such an approach the immediate consequence will be conflict escalation, not conflict settlement.
For as long as Obama’s conciliatory words do not translate into real prospects of being acknowledged as a regional actor in the wider Middle East, Iran is unlikely to yield very much on the nuclear issue.
A high-level Israeli-American working group was set up to identify more coercive options if Iran does not meet United States conditions.
Hundreds of millions of dollars were invested to destabilise the Islamic Republic.
When Richard Nixon started his triangle diplomacy with the Soviet Union and China, he stopped the CIA’s covert operations in Tibet.
The new declaratory policy, substituting respect for the Islamic republic for regime change, suggests that the covert programmes have been cancelled.
Covert operations have, moreover, also been conducted by other states, and may still be.
To the extent that Iran is aware of them, it may be hard to determine who is responsible.
President Obama reached out to the governments of the Middle East and competed for sympathy among ordinary citizens.
In response, the 2009 Iranian presidential candidates were keen to present themselves as best suited to handle the new challenges and opportunities.
When the United States offered unconditional negotiations both multilaterally and bilaterally, Iran was in no position to decline.
However, because of the leverage that Obama tried to build and use in case Iran was not forthcoming enough, the new opportunities were fraught with great risks for the government in Tehran.
Not only would Obama be more effective than his predecessor in gaining support for severe sanctions, but Democratic administrations also have a stronger interventionist record than Republican ones, George W Bush aside.
All the time, the Israelis can be counted on to lean on the United States to take military action or to give a green light for Israeli bombing.
Since they do not believe in diplomacy, they will try to limit the diplomatic window of opportunity as much as possible.
Israel is convinced that Iran is going for the bomb; Iranian nuclear weapons are unacceptable both to Israel and to the US; domestic United States pressure in support of Israel is known to be very strong; so, to avoid more severe sanctions or being bombed, Iran will have to go out of its way to provide credible assurances of non-nuclear status.
It will be hard enough to convince the United States, even if the 2007 NIE concluded with a high level of confidence that the Iranians stopped the military parts of the programme by the end of 2003.
Even if Iran were to meet the transparency requirements of the IAEA, the concerns about a virtual Iranian arsenal are such that restrictions on the fuel-cycle capabilities would be necessary to lay the security concerns to rest.
Its officials are hardliners limiting the scope of conflict settlement.
However, the more advanced the virtual arsenal becomes, the greater its influence is likely to be.
Much hinges on whether the discrepancies between Iranian self-perceptions and the way others see and treat them can be alleviated.
Iran’s security concerns should certainly not be underestimated either.
What is more important in its nuclear drive to negate the threats to its security or to overcome the frustration over not being properly treated may be the wrong question to ask.
Like apples and oranges, they are hard to compare, but they both translate into the nuclear programme as a favoured vehicle of change.
To be more forthcoming to Iran without jeopardising the interests of Arab states is in large measure a matter of exploiting the potential for win-win arrangements.
Another example might be a free-trade arrangement comprising all the countries around the Persian Gulf A third example is a Conference on Security and Cooperation in the Middle East, an idea that was discussed during the Madrid process of the early 1990s and that is inspired by the Helsinki Final Act and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In effect, Obama’s speech in Cairo on 4 June 2009 had important components in common with the Helsinki Final Act.
Washington has not outlined its strategic goals, and Tehran is even less capable than before of explaining its overarching objectives in the Middle East.
By the beginning of 2010, another opportunity for a political solution therefore seemed to be lost.
Implications for the NPT Should Iran become an NWS, proliferation pressures would grow throughout the Middle East in Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Turkey first of all although contrary to widespread beliefs, there is no automaticity to it.
If the development of an Iranian virtual arsenal is not corrected, the effect will be much the same, tempting others to go down the same road.
The impact of a successful resolution of the conflict may also go much beyond Iran.
If a multilateral fuel-cycle venture is set up, it would be the first of its kind in a region of proliferation pressure.
The Iranian problem, which highlights the untenable division of the world into haves and have-nots and the double standards that have been applied by the NWS, can also be invoked in support of nuclear disarmament, the way President Obama set out to do.
The outcome of the Iran confiict is therefore rich on consequences for the non-proliferation regime for better or worse.
North Korea had announced its intention to withdraw once before, on 12 March 1993, but went back on that notice on 11 June, one day before it would have taken effect.
On 9 January 2003, it stated that it would leave the Treaty the next day in reference to the 89 days’ notice ten years earlier, which had merely been suspended.
Once Pyongyang linked its withdrawal to the earlier notice, the legal basis for the final withdrawal arguably rested on the original grounds.
However, while the withdrawal was put before the UN Security Council, the Council failed to take any action because of disagreements among the P5, notably China and the United States.
In October 2006 it tested a nuclear explosive device, followed by another test in May 2009.
Some take the view that North Korea is determined to be a nuclear-weapon state and that, in the time ahead, it will seek international acceptance of it.
Yet others believe limitations can be negotiated, but that elimination is out of reach or at least unlikely any time soon.
In large measure, the differences and uncertainties of interpretation stem from the fact that North Korea is a closed society more so than any other country in the world.
China and South Korea may have better intelligence on the internal workings of the North Korean regime than other states, but they, too, seem to have very limited access.
North Korea’s attitudes and intentions must therefore be judged on the basis of its conduct of external affairs.
Efforts to link them to domestic factors like leadership changes, the effects of economic sanctions, food shortages and changes of economic policy may be interesting, but highly speculative.
Leon Sigal has pointed out that those who believe North Korea was always headed for nuclear weapons fail to explain significant anomalies in its nuclear efforts over the past two decades.
North Korea stopped reprocessing in 1991 and did not resume until 2003.
It fabricated a limited amount of fuel rods before 1994 and has yet to make more.
It has therefore produced significantly less plutonium than it could have done so far.
Instead it has enough plutonium for four to eight weapons and is currently not producing more.
Plutonium from the 5 MWe reactor in Yongbyon remains the only source of fissile material, but by 2009/2010 it had been shut down for a while.
To get Washington’s attention, to get negotiations going and to speed up implementation of accords that have been struck, missile and nuclear tests have been conducted and threats issued.
North Korea had no better choice, for absent dramatic actions the reclusive regime is off the radar screen, and its only means of alerting others to its needs and objectives are the nuclear and missile programmes.
In contrast to Iran, which may have seen negotiations as a way of buying time for the nuclear programme to materialise,'' North Korea has taken action when implementation of agreements has been slow or absent.
It has accepted agreements that have brought significant nuclear activities to a halt, and it has been angered when they have not been complied with.
North Korea has practised tit-for-tat cooperating when Washington cooperates and retaliating when Washington reneges.
In game theory, such a strategy is known for its ability to turn conflict into cooperation.
Whether it applies all the way back to non-nuclear status is uncertain, however.
It follows that the North Korean challenge is different from the three-state problem.
Sinee in praetice they eannot beeome members of the NPT, they are long-term outliers, awaiting eomprehensive nuelear disarmament.
North Korea, on the other hand, is a separate ease that may be persuaded to limit its nuelear aetivities and even go back into the non-nuclear fold more or less irrespective of big power readiness to disarm.
Since we are unable to look inside North Korean politics, there is always the possibility that Pyongyang has given up on that option in favour of nuclear-weapon status for the foreseeable future, and that with some delay this will be clear.
The foreign policies of the United States and others are not constant, and the domestic politics of the DPRK may certainly also be shifting.
When the Security Council issued a presidential statement condemning the long-range missile test in the spring of 2009 and imposing sanctions on three North Korean firms involved in missile trading, a DPRK Foreign Ministry spokesman stopped short of abandoning six-party talks forever.
It called into question the commitment to “abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programs” in the September 2005 joint statement from the six-party talks in Beijing.
That statement also reconfirmed the validity of the denuclearisation agreement between the two Koreas of 1992.
The only way to find out is to probe through systematic give and take, offering North Korea a peace treaty, security assurances, normalisation of relations and economic assistance in return for denuclearisation.
The Clinton administration did so only half-heartedly, dragging its feet in implementing the Agreed Framework of 1994 and being hampered by a recalcitrant Congress.
The Bush administration closed the door at first, and when it opened it in Berlin in January 2007, it was split on how to proceed.
In 2008 if moved the verification goalposts up in contravention to the 3 October 2007 agreement on “SecondPhase Actions for the Implementation of the Joint Statemenf’,’ leaving the Obama administration with a process that had veered off course.
It remains, therefore, to undertake a thorough and systematic probe, true to the letter and spirit of existing agreements.
However, in combination with Soviet training of North Korean scientists and engineers, it kicked off a nuclear programme that became increasingly self-sustained in line with North Korea’s Juche ideology.
In 1957, the United States deployed nuclear weapons in South Korea, and in the following years it conducted military exercises there involving nuclear-capable artillery, fighterbombers and carrier aircraft.
In the early 1970s, enhanced North Korean nuclear efforts coincided with South Korean interests in nuclear weapons.
To keep the South non-nuclear and to thwart competition between the two Koreas, the United States intervened to stop deliveries of a reprocessing facility from France, a “Cirus line” reactor from Canada^ and a fuel fabrication plant from Belgium, and induced Seoul to ratify the NPT in 1975.
In 1977, the Soviet Union persuaded North Korea to join the NPT in order to be in a position to receive lightwater reactors , only to have South Korea resume its nuclear programme.
Once again, the United States persuaded the South to stop, but the North did not.
In the early 1980s, North Korea began constructing a 5 MWe gas-graphite reactor in Yongbyon, well-suited for plutonium production, along with facilities for uranium fabrication and conversion.
At this time, the South was outpacing the North economically and militarily, and the North had growing doubts about the reliability of its allies,e. the USSR and China.
Towards the end of the decade, the building of a reprocessing facility near the 5 MWe reactor became public knowledge.
In 1989 the reactor was shut down and the first load of fuel rods removed.
When the safeguards agreement with the IAEA took effect in 1992, the Agency found that spent fuel had been reprocessed not only in gram quantities in 1990 ostensibly from damaged reactor fuel as part of an experiment but in 1989 and 1991 as well.
North Korea seemed unaware that by collecting dust from the remote control rods at the reprocessing plant and analysing the isotopic decay, the Agency could prove this beyond doubt.
North Korea may have had enough plutonium for one or two nuclear-explosive devices.
When the Soviet Union fell apart and China improved its relations with South Korea, the United States and Russia, North Korea was left on its own.
China could be relied upon only if North Korea was attacked; Russia not even then.
In the end of the 1980s, Kim-Il-Sung therefore reached out to North Korea’s enemies the United States, Japan and South Korea in an effort to turn conflict into cooperation and reduce the dependence on China.
International affairs were in such a state of flux that hedging against further Chinese moves to Pyongyang’s detriment seemed appropriate.
In 1991, the United States withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons from South Korea encouraged the adoption of a broader security strategy that emphasised threat reduction as well as military preparedness.
In a move similar to the Argentina-Brazil Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials , the Declaration called for a Joint Nuclear Control Commission to verify the denuclearisation.
It is not unusual that negotiating parties beef up their bargaining positions in the run-up to negotiations.
South Korea announced that full North-South economic cooperation would not be possible without resolution of the North Korean nuclear issue, and on that score there was little movement.
The South Korean demand concerning the sequence in which cooperative steps should be taken accentuated a point that was properly addressed only much later.
As the Cold War drew to an end and international constellations shifted and traditional allies were lost, North Korea was quick to conduct the first reprocessing campaigns.
It is not known how much plutonium those campaigns yielded, nor is it known when the programme was weaponised if indeed it has been.
However, the international community had to entertain the possibility that North Korea was acquiring one or two nuclear devices.
What North Korea may have said and done in the name of deterrence, surrounding states have often perceived as threats of aggression.
Being shrouded in secrecy more than any other nation, the scope for misperceptions is exceptionally great.
Under conditions of opacity, worst-case assumptions are well-known to be thriving.
The debate between those who see a consistent North Korean pattern of tit-for-tat, cooperation when the United States cooperates and retaliation when it reneges, and those who believe that North Korea has long been determined to become an NWS, remains unresolved.
However, deterrence has not reigned supreme in North Korean security policy.
Following the adoption of Kim II Sung’s comprehensive security strategy, repeated attempts to trade nuclear and missile capabilities for security assurances, nomialisation and economic assistance were made without any addition to the plutonium stock.
It was not until the Bush administration terminated the Agreed Framework in reference to North Korea’s alleged enrichment programme and declared North Korea a member of the axis of evil that another load of spent fuel was reprocessed.
Bargaining leverage for normalisation and economic assistance North Korea’s refusal to allow special inspections and lack of progress on the implementation of the North-South denuclearisation accord, triggered actions on both sides that led North Korea to announce its withdrawal from the NPT on 12 March 1993.
The United States responded by inviting high-level talks, which led North Korea to call off the threat of withdrawal.
However, as Seoul resisted and Washington deferred to its ally, those talks were slow in materialising.
North Korea shut down the plutonium-production reactor and removed the fuel.
When the United States turned to the Security Council for sanctions, the parties came close to war.
His mission was a breakthrough that turned confrontation into cooperation.
A skeleton agreement was outlined and fleshed out in the course of four months to become the October 1994 Agreed Framework.
In return, it would receive two 1,000 MWe light-water reactors and an interim supply of 500,000 tons of heavy fuel oil per year.
At the time, the LWR were estimated to cost about $4 billion, later revised to more than $5 billion.
The value of the heavy fuel oil to be supplied while waiting for the LWR to become operational was of the order of $150 million per year.
In comparison, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine received less than one-tenth of this offer for giving up the nuclear weapons that were left on their soil when the Soviet Union fell apart.
Ever since, economic compensation has been an important, integral part of the disarmament talks.
In the spring of 2009, when North Korea said it would never go back to the six-party talks in Beijing, it may have had the Agreed Framework in mind, preferring bilateral talks with the United States and an update of the 1994 agreement.
Compensation for crises of their own making Implementation of the Framework Agreement quickly ran into South Korean criticism as well as opposition from the United States Congress after the Republican victory in the 1994 elections.
Congress interrupted fuel oil deliveries by holding back money for them.
Also, the Clinton administration and other members of the Korean Energy Development Organisation were slow in implementing the LWR part of the deal.
The problems lay in United States domestic politics and alliance relations.
Some officials may also have waited for the North Korean regime to disappear.
In the wake of the Cold War, many regimes that had been in the Soviet sphere of influence collapsed or were expected to fall apart.
Historical experiences showing that full-fledged dictatorships can be managed for very long periods of time were ignored.
Delays in the implementation of the Agreed Framework were also caused by special North Korean demands such as its initial refusal to accept South Korean-designed LWR models’** and its salary demands for North Korean workers.
Over and over again, it has tried to sell the bargaining cards at its disposal,e. the nuclear and missile programmes.
The prelude was the notification of withdrawal from the NPT in 1993, which led to the agreement on basic principles for continued dialogue and preliminary discussions of L WR for North Korea.
One year later the Agreed Framework promised ample remuneration for Pyongyang’s willingness to help defuse the crisis it had created by removing another batch of fuel rods, threatening to produce more plutonium and heightening military tension.
Later examples are the testing of a long-range Taepodong missile in 1998 in an effort to speed up delivery of the goods that the Agreed Framework offered, and the nuclear and missile tests in 2006, which made the Bush administration do what it had said it would never contemplate sitting down with the North Koreans in Berlin to negotiate what became the sixparty agreements of 2007.
When North Korea resumed its plutonium programme in 2003, it made no effort to trade cancellation for compensation in the belief that the Bush administration was not available for deals of any sort.
In all likelihood the North Koreans considered the Agreed Framework to be a big diplomatic success, much as the disarmament part of it was a big step ahead from the American point of view.
Later, they have therefore tried to use the assistance provisions of this agreement as standards for new deals.
The main part of the 1994 offer was the LWR, which North Korea kept asking for in the six-party talks, and the 2005 South Korean offer of 2,000 MWe from the South Korean grid was tailored to the provision of two 1,000 MWe LWR in the Agreed Framework.
North Korea pursued its nuclear and missile programmes in order to achieve remuneration of the magnitude envisaged by the Agreed Framework.
Sources of hard currency The nuclear and missile programmes have also been sources of much-needed hard currency.
Missile technology has been sold to Pakistan, Myanmar and countries in the Middle East, and nuclear assistance has probably been rendered to Syria and possibly Libya and Myanmar.
Except for minerals and some other items that North Korea is selling to China and South Korea, these are the only commodities of interest to others.
Efforts to obtain much-needed hard currency by selling nuclear and missile technologies to potential proliferators tap very well into the bargaining strategy, especially after 9/11 and the exposure of the Qadeer Khan network.
Benazir Bhutto also paid a visit to North Korea in what may have been a missile-for-nuclear-technology barter deal.
Other “liebhabers” of North Korean technology are Iran and possibly terrorist networks wanting to harm the United States.
A regime lighting for survival, with its back against the wall, hardly shies away from providing mass-destruction technologies to others if the price is right.
Had the third stage functioned properly, it would have had intercontinental range.
They were reminders that North Korea has interesting technologies to offer potential proliferators.
For Washington, North Korea’s own capabilities are worrisome, but proliferation of nuclear and missile technologies to other states and non-state actors that may use them to attack United States assets is of even greater concern.
Assessment None of these theses can be written off To a smaller or larger extent, they may all help explain North Korean behaviour.
Nuclear weapons are deterrents as well as bargaining chips for normalisation and security assurances.
A related motive is bargaining leverage for elimination of sanctions and economic assistance.
The nuclear and missile programmes are invoked across the board for economic and political goals as well as for security purposes.
North Korea has no other instruments of significance in the conduct of its foreign policy.
In the joint six-party statement of 2007 that paved the way for disablement of the Yongbyon facilities.
North Korea reaffirmed its commitment not to transfer nuclear materials, technology and know-how, but went back on that and other commitments when the Security Council condemned the 5 April 2009 missile test.
In the first half of 2009, its moves had the character of diplomatic posturing with a view to forthcoming talks with President Obama, who in principal terms had underlined his readiness to talk with United States adversaries.
Compensation for crises of its own making is a controversial proposition.
When cycles of crises and cooperation evolve repeatedly over the years and decades, it matters less and less when and how it all started.
Confiict manifestations degenerate into incessant disputes about the distribution of responsibility and blame, like in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The impression that North Korea actively creates crises in order subsequently to claim remuneration for helping to defuse them starts from provocative North Korean behaviour ousting of inspectors, withdrawal from the NPT, nuclear explosives tests and missile tests, threatening statements etc.
The other side of the coin that sometimes United States failure to live up to commitments, insertion of new demands, inaction where action has been promised, military exercises and threatening statements instigated the provocations is often ignored.
It is all too easy to get away with partisan narratives because in the media world.
Its foreign policy tends to be seen in the same perspective of repugnant behaviour, confirmed and highlighted by the special brand of provocative language that the regime uses.
There is a distinct tendency to blame North Korea for each new crisis that occurs, also when it its opponents fail to comply with agreements that have been entered into.
A comprehensive analysis of North Korean foreign policy from the early 1990s until today puts the “compensation for crisis” proposition into a different perspective.
In the autumn of 2008, when the United States announced that it had delayed delisting of the DPRK as a state sponsor of terrorism until there was agreement on an intrusive verification protocol.
Seen in this perspective, “compensation for crisis” is not something North Korea has been initiating from scratch, but rather a spin it has given to retaliatory measures when the United States failed to cooperate.
Its brinkmanship diplomacy seems based on the assumption that the more serious the crisis, the higher the price for defusing it.
The sequence of cooperation and conflict that unfolded in 2008/2009 is as good an illustration as any.
In accordance with the six-party agreement of September 2007, North Korea set out to disable its plutonium facilities in Yongbyon under international supervision^^ and submitted a declaration of its plutonium programme.In a side agreement, it committed to disclose its uraniumenrichment and proliferation activities.
That same day, the United States announced its intention to cut back on the sanctions and remove North Korea from the list of states sponsoring terrorism, but with the proviso that the declaration would have to be verified.
President Bush yielded to hardliners in Japan, South Korea and Washington who wanted to have the commitment in writing.
On 11 December 2008, they threatened to cut off energy aid unless North Korea accepted a formal six-party verification protocol.
North Korea stopped disabling and began preparations for another Taepodong-2 missile test.
The test was made in contravention of Security Council Resolution 1718, issued after the nuclear test in 2006, which prohibited further testing of long-range missiles.
The prohibition was tailor-made for North Korea, for there are no strong international norms in this field and some 20 states have been launching long-range missiles, among them Japan and South Korea.
From mid-2009, in a repeat of previous cycles of crisis and cooperation, North Korea once again signalled interest in resumption of negotiations while the Obama administration, reacting to events without any comprehensive policy review, stuck to the sanctions and played for time.
Current status Nuclear profile On 14 April 2009, one day after the Security Council condemnation.
North Korea expelled the United States technical experts and the IAEA inspectors.
The United States specialists had then lived on the site in Yongbyon for 18 months to monitor the disablement, and the IAEA had had three inspectors on site full-time.
North Korea said it would restore the facilities to their original state for normal operation and that the spent fuel rods that had been removed from the reactor in the disablement process would be reprocessed.
In addition, it said it would actively examine the construction of an LWR on its own.
The North Koreans have told the Americans that they had a pilot uraniumenrichment programme in the beginning of the 1990s, but that it was terminated.
It seems to have been brought back to life around 1998, drawing on the Qadeer Khan network.
Some significant undeclared enrichment activities have obviously been going on and may still do, most likely outside Yongbyon.
The alleged export of hexafluoride to Libya, and possibly also uranium products to Syria, points to the existence of a uranium programme, though none has ever been located in North Korea.
When the inspectors left, past plutonium production had not been verified, for North Korea had neither allowed sampling of the reactor’s graphite core nor of the reprocessing facility and waste sites.
There are significant discrepancies between Pyongyang’s declaration and United States estimates.
In 2008, North Korea declared that it had separated and weaponised 26 kg.
United States estimates of the plutonium inventory were higher, but Siegfried Hecker did not exclude that the declared amount could be correct.
No progress had been made on the declaration of weaponisation facilities outside of Yongbyon, the nature of the uranium programme or the extent of nuclear exports.
Nearly all of the actions specified by the disablement agreement were completed.
However, the 5MWe reactor, the reprocessing facility and the fuelfabrication plant can all be restored and returned to plutonium production.
On 24 April 2009, North Korea announced that it had restarted the reprocessing facility.
However, beyond the fuel rods that were removed during the disablement process and then reprocessed, it would take at least three years before another load of reactor fuel would be ready for reprocessing once the reactor is refuelled and restarted.
Japan and South Korea were pressing for it, while China and Russia were opposed.
China believed another round of condemnation and sanctions would prompt retaliation by Pyongyang and endanger the six-party talks, but it was not ready to block Security Council action.
Obama, who had stressed the need to repair America’s alliances in the election campaign, lent an ear to his Asian partners, but did not want to confront China.
The result was a presidential statement condemning the launch in reference to Resolution 1718, and sanctions on three North Korean firms involved in missile trading.
North Korea backed out of the six-party talks and the agreements reached in that forum.
The rejection may have been caused by the hardliners in Japan and South Korea.
They had been the ones to insist on a written verification protocol in phase two of the denuclearisation agreement, and they had been holding back on previous occasions as well.
Japan was the only six-party participant not to provide fuel oil, pending a satisfactory conclusion of the abductions issue.
Lingering dissatisfaction with the terms of the 2007 agreements may have led to the same conclusion.
The South Korean equivalent of 2,000 MWe from the South Korean grid did not have the same attraction, because it would make the North dependent on the good will of the South.
The Juche ideology deprives the United States and its allies of the leverage to press it to do what they want and, in the view of the North, the lessons from the crises in 1998, 2003 and 2006 corroborate it.
Its economic interactions with other countries are so modest that there is little that others can do to punish it for its transgressions.
At the fourth round of six-party talks in 2005, North Korea asserted that it would not agree to dismantle its nuclear-weapons programme unless the LWR project was re-established.
Clearly, in the 2005 joint statement of principles, the commitment to supply LWR is weaker than in the Agreed Framework.
However, there is no way that DPRK-US negotiations can be segregated from the interests and influence of DPRK’s neighbours.
South Korea’s economic contribution is crucial in any deal with North Korea.
Throughout 2009, Bill Clinton’s successful visit to Pyongyang, the North Korean visit to New Mexico to see Governor Richardson, the invitation to Obama’s point man on North Korea Ambassador Stephen Bosworth to visit Pyongyang and conciliatory gestures to South Korea signalled North Korea’s interest in new talks.
The North Korean nuclear negotiator Kim Kye-gwan was dispatched to Beijing to discuss the resumption of talks and Kim Jong-Il was invited to China.
The six-party talks have always been a hybrid of bilateral and multilateral diplomacy, and the next round is also likely to entail a combination of both, maybe in a different mix.
They may or may not be relevant for the case of North Korea, but as long as North Korean politics is so opaque, it is difficult to tell.
Individual mindsets, the role of nuclear mythmakers and nationalistic tendencies defy assessment.
The military is known to be very influential, most probably also on nuclear and missile issues, but the relationship between the party and the military is hard to grasp in any detail.
There is always a status aspect to nuclear weapons and underdogs in the international system can improve their status by engaging top dogs, but in the case of North Korea the status motive pales in comparison with security concerns.
A dictatorship fighting for its survival does not pay much attention to the norms and provisions of global regimes and global initiatives for nuclear disarmament except selectively for its own parochial purposes.
The North Korean regime has quite enough figuring ouf how fo cope with its existential problems.
What remains from the list of rollback experiences are alleviation of security concerns; economic inducements; engagement with a view to gain leverage and encourage openness; diplomatic involvement to buy time; and the role of the United States and North Korea’s neighbours.
Militarily, it fears attack by conventional forces, and it has been the object of nuclear threats several times over.
Economically, it is worried about the sanctions that are levelled at it, although the policy of self-sufficiency reduces its vulnerability to a minimum.
Its insecurity relates both to the United States and to its Asian neighbours, Japan and South Korea in particular.
Since the end of the 1980s, when North Korea could no longer rely on its erstwhile allies, it has pursued a dual strategy of deterrence and threat reduction through reconciliation with its neighbours deterrence underpinned by new weapons acquisitions; threat reduction by using the same weapons as bargaining chips for normalisation with the United States and negative security assurances.
North Korean leaders have even indicated that United States forces could stay in Korea as part of a comprehensive peace agreement on the peninsula.
Yet this is what senior North Koreans have consistently said that they want, and there is no reason to disbelieve them.
During the Cold War, the United States developed special understandings with its major communist adversary , which was of about the same military rank, but to go along with North Korean attempts to trade its rudimentary nuclear and missile capabilities for a special strategic relationship with the one and only military superpower is quite another matter.
North Korea may be content with normalisation, but for the United States and others this is also hard to swallow.
Some segments of the American political system have even been against talking to the North Koreans for fear that it would legitimise an outcast.
Reconciliation means full diplomatic relations, no sanctions, security assurances and a peace agreement on the Korean peninsula, which is a demanding proposition when, at the receiving end, there is a regime with almost no commitment to international norms of political and inter-state behaviour.
In the disablement phase of the six-party denuclearisation agreement they were tiny in comparison.
In principle, the other parties to the Beijing talks held the door open for it.
Still, it seems that economic inducements matter less than a peace treaty, normalisation and security assurances.
Economic inducements are important the modest provisions of the Beijing agreement is probably among the reasons why North Korea left Beijing but less important than progress on the politico-military dimension.
Engagement, leverage and openness In relation to North Korea, which has minimum interaction with the outside world, engagement is the way to leverage.
Today, there are few items of value that the United States and others can deny to North Korea, especially as long as China is holding back on sanctions.
The more the parties get involved in interactions of value to both sides, the greater the harm if they are terminated, especially for the weaker party,e.
They draw unfavourable reactions from others and risk being beleaguered.
Even if an isolationist regime has no nuclear weapon ambitions at the outset, international hostility may bring the idea to the fore.
North Korea is a pariah state, more isolated than any other country and probably also feeling more beleaguered than any other state.
Instead of sanctions, which seldom function as intended against closed dictatorships, engagement is all the more important to break such vicious cycles.
Normalisation is bound to create some avenues into North Korean society.
It brings to attention de Tocqueville’s classical observation that when a fully-fledged dictatorship begins to open up, it is difficult to control the processes that are set in motion.
Pyongyang’s impatience with Washington and other negotiating partners indicates that it sees it that way itself This is not the same as waiting for the communist regime to implode.
Six years of inaction under the Bush administration showed the futility of that.
The relevant lesson from other cases of reversal recommends sustained diplomatic involvement in order to be in the best possible position to exploit new opportunities that may arise.
The role of the United States United States administrations have been split on how to deal with North Korea.
In the Clinton administration, there were advocates of immediate freeze and dismantlement supporting reassurance and cooperative engagement with the DPRK, more or less in line with North Korea’s claim that the role of the IAEA was to verify compliance with the freeze provisions of the Agreed Framework.
Clearly, North Korea tried to use the safeguards issue to put pressure on the United States, emphasising that implementation of IAEA safeguards would depend on United States implementation of the Agreed Framework.
Others wanted North Korea to go by the NPT book, accepting NPT safeguards and allowing the Agency to reconstruct North Korea’s nuclear history.
Some held that North Korea was bent on getting nuclear weapons and that it would never abandon that objective, arguing that the United States should carry a big stick and wait for the regime to collapse.
Others believed it was possible to negotiate a reversal of Pyongyang’s nuclear programme at an acceptable cost, offering carrots while carrying a big stick.
The 2005 Declaration of Principles was signed in that spirit, but only to be followed immediately thereafter by new sanctions that had been prepared by the proponents of confrontational policies.
The Obama administration has been torn between its preference for negotiations and Japan’s and South Korea’s desire to punish Pyongyang if it went ahead to test another long-range missile which it did.
After the launch, the administration deferred to Japan and South Korea and went for punitive Security Council actions, triggering another full-blown crisis in relations with North Korea.
It left a gap between declaratory policy and action policy, between principle and practice, between engagement with North Korea and allegiance to Japan and South Korea.
The uncompromising Bush administration policy carrying a big stick while waiting for the dictatorship to collapse proved self-defeating.
While Bush waited, Pyongyang used the time well to produce another half-adozen nuclear bombs.
Sustained engagement with a view to gradual change has a better chance of succeeding, and it may be the only chance to get rid of North Korea’s nuclearweapon capabilities.
Confrontational policies have proved counterproductive and nobody wants to go to war.
If the Obama administration can unite behind a consistent policy of “cooperation for cooperation”, sticking rigorously to the agreements that are made, it will do something that has not been done before.
Abroad, it has to be compatible with the alliance bonds to Japan and South Korea.
Those bonds are too important to be jeopardised by splits over North Korea.
Negotiating strategies and objectives Clearly, the negotiating modalities have to be agreed anew.
The principles from 2005 and the experiences from the Agreed Framework and the six-party talks left much to build on, but similar to the Oslo agreements on the Middle East, time-consuming action-for-action strategies have proven vulnerable to misunderstandings, unforeseen circumstances and foul play.
In the Middle East, the lesson drawn was that it would be better to go straight to a comprehensive, final settlement.
A comprehensive package deal might also be better in the case of North Korea.
The parties may therefore want to move faster than before to reduce the time and opportunity for spoilers.
Nevertheless, given that both sides are seeking reassurances about the other side’s intentions, and that complete and verifiable disarmament cannot happen overnight, there would have to be an element of gradualism.
The only way to find out is to engage them to see how far disarmament can go.
If the answer is no, there may still be scope for significant partial agreements to limit North Korea’s nuclear activities.
For the United States, horizontal proliferation out of North Korea is at least as dangerous as further vertical proliferation in North Korea.
North Korea may still be dissuaded to bring all exports of nuclear and missile technologies to a halt.
If the answer is yes, the price will no doubt be high, but may be worth paying.
Special attention is paid to the distinction between disarmament as a process and disarmament as a state of affairs, and to the concept of rank disequilibrium, which appears to have great explanatory power in cases like Iran and India.
But the responsibility does not stop there, for Article VI of the NPT commits all parties to the Treaty to work for nuclear disarmament.
For one thing, they can lean on the NWS to do more, in the name of international security and in reference to international norms.
In the face of arms-racing during the Cold War, and of modernisation and widening of the roles assigned to nuclear weapons in this century, this is first of all what they have been doing.
Beyond urging the NWS to enhance their disarmament efforts, they may facilitate disarmament by deepening their own commitments to stay non-nuclear.
The more convincingly non-nuclear they become, the easier it will be for the NWS to go to zero.
All the time, there has been bitter disagreement about the precise contents of the obligations and how well they have been fulfilled.
In the following, the focus is not on the legal-political issues of rights and obligations, but on the political and military dimensions of the disarmament non-proliferation relationship.
General observations From time to time, it has been argued that acquisition of nuclear weapons by more states is a regional matter, driven by regional conflicts and security concerns.
The claim absolves the NWS of responsibility for nuclear proliferation.
The policies of the NWS affect proliferation/non-proliferation in many ways.
Recently, the main antagonists of the Cold War have geared their military policies less to each other and more to regional settings, notably to the Middle East, Central Asia and East Asia.
This century, all P5 except China changed their doctrines to enhance the utility of nuclear weapons in regional contexts.
The focus has first of all been on the Middle East, where Israel had acquired nuclear weapons by the end of the 1960s in response to Arab threats.
There, the nuclear proliferation issue has been embedded in regional-conflict dynamics ever since, and it has become increasingly intertwined with big power politics.
Also in other parts of Asia, there is an international as well as a regional dimension to the proliferation problem.
The NWS have it in their power to twist the proliferation problems for better or worse.
The same powers influence the political environment of potential proliferators by projecting the status value that they attach to nuclear weapons.
They have done so by maintaining and modernising big nuclear arsenals and by underlining the importance of nuclear weapons in their doctrines and statements.
This century, their policies endangered the entire non-proliferation regime.
Whatever happens to the call for a nuclear-weapon-ffee world , the thesis that proliferation is driven by regional conflicts and has little or nothing to do with the nuclear policies of the big powers is wrong.
It was wrong in the past, and the growing focus on regional politics has made it even more so in recent years.
Making disarmament credible Both governments and non-governmental actors are waiting to see what comes of Obama’s disarmament initiatives.
There are concerns that it will boil down to a non-proliferation tool stopping well short of elimination of nuclear weapons, and that to the extent that it succeeds and the NPT is strengthened, more restraints on peaceful utilisation of nuclear energy will follow.
Modest single steps with no convincing promise of follow-on action may leave that impression, and the broken expectations of the 1990s are close enough in time to be remembered.
If this reading takes hold, the cooperation of many NNWS will be half-hearted at best.
Similar to integration theory, which distinguishes between integration as a process and integration as a state of affairs, disarmament may also be viewed as a process where one step leads to the next, or it may be seen in a static perspective where measures are introduced without any particular promise or expectation of further steps.
Later studies have questioned this, emphasising the importance of govermnental decisions for successive deepening of integration.
Still, the question is whether the governments will be willing to commit themselves from one step to the next, and whether a disarmament process can develop some momentum of its own.
Single steps towards nuclear disarmament may have little or no impact on governments contemplating going nuclear.
For instance, if the United States and Russia were to reduce the number of deployed strategic nuclear weapons to 1,000 each with no commitments to further reductions while all NWS modernise their weapon systems, the non-proliferation impact would at best be uncertain.
This would be different if expectations were created that more would follow.
Then, proliferators would be singled out as exceptions to a trend of improved compliance with Treaty obligations.
Article VI included, and it is always more difficult to act against an existing trend, especially if it enjoys broad support from both nuclearand non-nuclear-weapon states.
If such a trend takes hold, the non-proliferation norm would be enhanced; the states that have rolled back would find it harder to roll forward again; and the international enviromuent for management of critical contemporary cases of proliferation concern would be more benign.
In the UN Security Council, decision-making in support of the trend would be easier.
The opposite of single steps in a static perspective is a convention with a timeline for nuclear disarmament to zero.
Big powers are less willing to tie their hands to international rules, norms and standards than smaller ones.
Precisely because they are powerful, there is much to gain from being free to exercise the power.
So far, the convention proposals have therefore met consistent opposition from the P5.
There is, furthermore, something simplistic about reducing the complexities of nuclear disarmament to a timeline.
Reintroducing the declaratory policy of the 1990s commitments to systematic and progressive efforts is not enough.
However, it is widely assumed that a START follow-on agreement will be followed by negotiations for deep cuts, although Obama and Medvedev have not been explicit about it.
Commitments to follow up on one disarmament measure by negotiating another is a first step towards a dependable disarmament trend.
For almost 50 years ever since nuclear arms control was introduced in the early 1960s disarmament measures have been discussed back and forth in great detail.
Technically, virtually all stones may have been turned except perhaps for how to make disarmament a reliable prospect short of using the calendar.
The NPT is a framework for disarmament to zero, but if and when the world approaches that point, a much more detailed description of the final steps and of what kind of NWFW one should go for must be agreed.
The parameters of that discussion will most certainly be different from the ones that apply at present, so the question of timelines may also look quite different.
The bottom line is that as long as some states possess nuclear weapons, others will seek them too.
The best way to prevent proliferation is therefore to reduce existing arsenals to zero.
The best, and quite possibly the only, way to avoid it is to do away with them all.
First, a credible movement in the direction of nuclear disarmament would facilitate the management of the non-proliferation regime.
Second, it would affect the nuclear decision-making of states in a non-nuclear-weapon direction.
Disarmament and regime management Failure to implement Article VI of the NPT has been a chronic source of friction in the regime.
The NPT review conferences have been blighted by disputes over the disarmament obligation; the willingness of NNWS to support and participate in NWS calls for stricter enforcement of the Treaty has been undermined as the NWS have been widely viewed as ignoring their own NPT obligations; and NNWS willingness to support and accept measures to strengthen the regime which often require them to accept additional obligations and constraints has been weakened for the same reason.
Credible nuclear disarmament promotes the cause of non-proliferation because it is a key to improved regime management.
A similar situation exists at the regional level in the Middle East, where armscontrol and disarmament policies are conditioned by deep-seated regional conflict formations.
As long as the Israeli arsenal is untouched, Egypt and other Arab states are generally unwilling to undertake more arms-control obligations.
As no progress has been made in implementing the Resolution, Arab states feel that their NPT commitments have been met by broken promises.
They are therefore holding back on additional arms-control commitments.
The Iranian challenge reinforces this attitude and inspires hedging policies.
It follows, conversely, that if the NWS move to disarm and if Israel’s nuclear capabilities are effectively addressed and constrained, global and regional frictions within the regime will be reduced, the review process will be more constructive, and the opportunities to strengthen the regime and enforce its provisions will be improved.
The nuclear war-fighting doctrines of the Cold War were also spins on deterrence.
Nuclear history may be read as a political struggle over the utility of nuclear weapons for the security of states, and over the viability of nuclear deterrence in particular.
On the other hand, vested interests and believers in the utility of nuclear arms have made recurrent efforts to stem that norm.
New weapons were developed that would be more thinkable to use, and that would therefore also more likely be used.
Ships and other nuclear-weapon platforms were sent to hot spots around the world in shows of force instilling respect and awe.
When these options were curtailed by the moratoria on nuclearweapon tests, which made it hard to introduce new types of weapons, and by the US-Soviet/Russian presidential initiatives that removed tactical nuclear weapons from ships and other platforms, the doctrines were expanded to include a wider range of situations in which nuclear weapons might have a role.
More than 20 times, the United States has issued nuclear threats in some shape or form, apparently in the belief that they might function as intended, and all the time the importance of nuclear weapons has been emphasised in speech acts by state leaders.
From a non-proliferation point of view, the problem with these efforts to sustain the credibility of nuclear deterrence is that they have kept telling others how important nuclear weapons are.
In upholding the utility of nuclear weapons for themselves, the NWS have been teaching others the same lesson.
The problem is also that, in trying to show what nuclear weapons can do, their utility has been much inflated.
Realistic reviews of nuclear history in these respects, deleting the propagandistic arguments to uphold deterrence and justify investments in huge arsenals, therefore reduce the attractiveness of nuclear weapons and so contribute to non-proliferation.
One such situation concerns the use of nuclear weapons where national survival is at stake.
In its Advisory Opinion of 1996, the International Court of Justice was split on this issue.
China’s no-first-use policy may not apply if its own territory, or territories that it claims as its own , are under threat.
The fear in these huge state conglomerations is that dismemberment, even on a small scale, might be the beginning of national breakdown.
The treaties prohibiting chemical and biological weapons were preceded by the Geneva Protocol of 1925 which prohibited the use of these weapons.
First, the use of the weapons was delegitimised and outlawed, and then they were banned.
The Court found it hard to contemplate a use of nuclear weapons that would be compatible with international humanitarian law.
Certainly, nuclear weapons are no less inhumane than chemical and biological weapons.
In effect, the Geneva Protocol was a no-first-use agreement, and an agreement banning the use of nuclear weapons would also allow for nuclear retaliation.
Such doctrines adopted unilaterally or agreed bilaterally or multilaterally with a view to codification in an international convention would go a long way to devalue nuclear arms and send an important message to decision-makers of other countries that have not closed the nuclear-weapons option.
Genuine moves towards disarmament will be rooted in the premise that nuclear weapons are unnecessary and undesirable.
To the extent that it happens, the international context of national decision-making will change and become more benign for non-proliferation.
Disarmament and the three-state problem India has not undertaken any Article VI obligation.
It has not acceded to the CTBT; its support for an FMCT is an act of cynicism undertaken in the expectation that it will take a long time to bring negotiations to a conclusion, if it is possible at all; and since it is not formally recognised as an NWS, it is not a bona fide provider of security assurances to others.
The second part of it the commitment to disarm is contradicted by Indian rearmament.
In important respects, the impact of disarmament comes down to the timeline for US-Russian arms reductions versus the timeline for the establishment of an Indian minimum-deterrence force.
Subsequent to the START I follow-on agreement, the next round of US-Russian negotiations is supposed to take a long time a number of years.
If it is successfully completed before the Indian deterrent is ready, and invitations for multilateral disarmament talks are issued, it is conceivable that the size of the Indian force will be affected.
Then, the build-up might stop at a lower level than would otherwise have been the case.
However, the basic assumption is that India is unlikely to be ready for cessation of its arms build-up and for nuclear disarmament talks until a minimum deterrent force somehow defined has been fully established.
More and more, the impression is also that US-Russian negotiations will be very demanding and time-consuming.
That would open up an opportunity for an extension of Indian security assurances to NWFZ and, in principle, for Indian participation in any multilateral arms-control and disarmament undertaking.
Pakistan and Israel have a longer way to go in order to meet such criteria.
India wants to become a big power on the global scene, and its nuclearweapon programme has global ramifications.
If it comes to multilateral talks, it wants to be in a position to take part.
Its nuclear arsenal is part and parcel of the conflict fomiations of the Middle East.
Generally, the more threatened an NWS feels, the more difficult it is to make it disarm; and the more intractable the conflict formations that gave rise to the nuclear weapons are, the harder it is to eliminate them.
On both counts, Israel stands out as a formidable obstacle to the worldwide elimination of nuclear weapons.
For them, it would take revolutionary world-order changes and a radically enhanced role for nuclear weapons in international affairs to reconsider this stance.
Australia, Canada, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland are in this category.
Being highly industrialised states, they have much of the knowledge and technical-industrial capacity to build nuclear weapons on short notice, but their non-nuclear status rests on a solid national political consensus.
These states are therefore insensitive to questions of disarmament/rearmament, for they already decided to disconnect themselves from what the NWS are doing.
Much the same goes for Romania and Serbia, which are technologically less advanced, and for the four states that possessed nuclear weapons but gave them up Belarus, Kazakhstan, South Africa and Ukraine.
However, some of them are politically less stable than the countries listed above.
Disarmament arguably begins to matter in relation to states that are passively hedging, such as Argentina and Brazil.
Disarmament may confirm and reinforce their decisions to stay non-nuclear and broaden national support for that stance.
No progress in disarmament affairs may work the other way around, reminding them of the utility that others continue to assign to nuclear weapons and strengthening factions that prefer a response in kind such as active hedging or, possibly, weapons acquisition.
Their security concerns have been offset by the US, which has kept them nonnuclear by extending security guarantees and providing weapons, and which continues to do so.
In both countries, transitions from military to civilian rule, democratisation and growing sensitivity to international norms were helpful in rolling them back.
South Korea’s and Taiwan’s policies remain sensitive to changes in the regional security environment and in their ruling elites, but they are not directly affected by the disarmament policies of the leading nuclear powers.
The pertinent question is therefore whether the United States and Russia can encourage the regional powers to go for arms control and disarmament by taking the lead and setting good examples.
For the leaders in Pyongyang, nuclear weapons are the primary means of regime survival.
The price for giving them up is not written in terms of global disarmament.
China’s nuclear posture depends on the overall size of United States nuclear forces; the future of the United States ballistic missile defence programme; whatever conclusions it draws from the United States global conventional strike programme; and its overall assessment of United States policies for the long term.
If at some stage it is seen to be the first, the impact will be significant.
If the second is judged more likely, a rapidly growing China has the resources to take precautionary measures.
Some significant probability not necessarily a high one may be enough to make it act defensively and keep the guard up.
It will not be possible to convince all others that what is good for the existing NWS does not serve the interests of anybody else.
A third view centres on the non-proliferation norm as an intermediate variable.
By complying with the norm, states can build an image of being a nonthreatening member of the international community, and in that sense become a nation in good standing.
By breaking the norm, proliferators risk being sanctioned against and turned into pariahs in international affairs.
North Korea says it aims at reconciliation and normalisation with the United States and other countries, and if a stronger non-proliferation norm evolves, reversal to non-nuclear status would be all the more important to make it happen.
A strong non-proliferation norm therefore matters, and nuclear disarmament is crucial to achieve it.
The NPT has more members than any other multilateral arms control treaty, but this is not to say that it was the Treaty that shaped the non-nuclear policies of its prospective members.
In many cases, it may have played little or no role in foreclosing the nuclear-weapon option.
But once new members came on board, they have taken a distinct interest in other members’ compliance with the Treaty.
However, a record number of members notwithstanding, the viability of the NPT and the strength of the nonproliferation norm have suffered from the NWS failure to honour their disarmament obligations.
The end of the Cold War raised expectations that the numbers and roles of nuclear weapons would be radically reduced and limited, but while the arsenals were cut, the NWS did not abandon their long-term intention to retain nuclear weapons, and they widened the roles assigned to them.
It was not until 2009, when the United States revived the vision of an NWFW, US-Russian disarmament talks started again, and SC Resolution 1887 was adopted that trends began to turn for the benefit of the non-proliferation regime.
In principle, it was on negotiating terms with the P5+1 to find a solution to the nuclear issue and associated economic, political and security problems, although the obstacles loomed high and new sanctions were underway.
The government in Tehran was, moreover, hampered by internal conflicts.
It was not alien to questions of global disarmament, but faced more urgent problems in relation to the Western powers and its immediate surroundings.
There was no prospect for US-Russian disarmament negotiations to have any direct impact on it.
Even if, in principle, deep cuts and subsequent invitations for multilateral talks would have mattered, the timelines do not match.
Deep cuts can hardly be achieved in time to affect the outcome of the Iranian nuclear problem.
However, resolution of underlying political problems between the United States and Russia, which is a prerequisite for progress in the nuclear negotiations, may also bring the parties closer together on matters pertaining to Iran.
An indirect impact via the NPT could not be ruled out either, especially if Treaty implementation is seen to become more just and withdrawal becomes more difficult.
Non-proliferation as a prerequisite for disarmament At the Reykjavik summit of 1986, it hardly occurred to Reagan and Gorbachev that nuclear disarmament was more than a two-state problem.
As the bipolar world became history and the unipolar moment receded, no single state or dyad of states can trump the others.
In the multi-centric world of this century, many states will weigh in on the politics of disarmament.
The four states that are not members of the NPT are all NWS, so another proliferator would come from the ranks of NPT members.
After all, it was in the aftermath of the Indian, Pakistani and North Korean tests, and of enhanced worries about nuclear terrorism after 9/11, that the vision of an NWFW was revived.
It is virtually inconceivable that a process of nuclear disarmament will prosper in a world where nuclear weapons are spreading.
The existing nuclear powers are very unlikely to push for nuclear disarmament under those circumstances.
Hence, a more robust, reliable and effective non-proliferation regime is indispensable for the cause of disarmament.
If each NWS is left, say, with some tens of weapons, the break-out risks could be too big for comfort.
As a result, bickering and nervousness over small numbers may increase the risk of surprise attack and inadvertent escalation when decision-makers begin to believe that war can no longer be avoided.
Therefore, the closer disarmament comes to zero, the more important nonproliferation becomes.
The distinction between civilian and military applications of nuclear energy inscribed in the NPT and the current safeguard agreements will certainly not be good enough.
This is a world where a mobilisation base for rapid reintroduction of nuclear weapons is maintained.
In such a world, the possibility of nuclear war might still be entertained.
Many states may think that hedging is prudent, leading to hedging races to be able to turn capabilities faster and faster from virtual to real.
Virtual arsenals also need arsenal keepers, and they are never neutral experts, but socio-economic actors with a vested interest in what they are doing.
They would quite possibly push for stronger capabilities and even the reintroduction of weapons.
In break-oul scenarios, firsl-strike capabilities are more likely to emerge than in current nuclear constellations.
It follows that minimum deterrence levels in the low hundreds may have been chosen for good reason.
They provide a greater degree of stability than arsenals in the low tens.
In Chapler 10, il is therefore argued that it would be wise to stay at such levels until nuclear-weapons infrastructure and weapons-grade materials have been eliminated, and then go straight to a world below zero.
The path dependency of nuclear disarmament must always be kept in mind.
It may be assumed that when disarmament approaches zero, the weapons have been devalued to such an extent that issues that appear important by today’s standards have become of little significance.
Still, it may take only one state to rock the boat, so a robust non-proliferation regime would probably have to be in place.
Regional proliferation as a threat to global disarmament The consequences of break-outs are not uniform.
They depend on who the proliferator is and on the circumstances in which it happens.
A vulnerable regime fighting with its back against the wall, acquiring nuclear weapons in the belief that this would improve their chances of survival, does not necessarily trigger proliferation.
In Japan, some political factions stressed that in response to North Korea’s acquisitions, the policies of extended deterrence and first-use would have to be maintained, and the question of Japanese nuclear weapons was brought into the public domain for discussion.
Recently, however, the Hatoyama government has been working with the United States to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in the defence of Japan.
If Iran were lo break oul of the non-proliferation regime and establish itself as an NWS, the consequences would be more far-reaching.
If it had not been going for nuclear weapons before being bombed, it would be most likely to do so afterwards.
In terms of size, the next in line are Japan, Brazil, Nigeria and other regional big powers followed by smaller states that are almost certain to be confined to regional politics.
Further proliferation, if it happens, will therefore be embedded in regional-conflict formations.
For some time, leading NWS have oriented their foreign policies and military preparations more and more towards regional affairs, their nuclear policies included.
The introduction of more NWS would therefore interact with regional and global affairs in new and complex ways that defy prediction.
In East Asia, the wars of the twentieth century still cast long shadows on international relations; the Taiwan problem has not been solved; and in the South China Sea there are many unresolved territorial issues.
The negative impact of further proliferation must therefore be seen through regional lenses.
If Iran weaponises its programme, more states will invest more in nuclear technologies, and ballisticmissile defence will get another boost, generating its own problems for nuclear disarmament.
Then, regional-conflict dynamics in the Middle East would pose formidable obstacles in the way of nuclear disarmament.
For good reason, the Iranian problem has come to drive a wide range of policies and debates about the non-proliferation regime.
Status ambitions are difficult to pin down because, for obvious reasons, governments are loath to talk about them.
There is something illegitimate and even bizarre about seeking prestige through acquisition of the most destructive of weapons.
For scarcity of empirical references to capture the importance of it, some theoretical reflections may be in order.
All NWS have justified their nuclear-weapon acquisitions in reference to national security.
States need to deter potential attackers, and the gold standard of deterrence is nuclear weapons.
In France and India, status considerations were important, and such ambitions played a role in Britain, too.
For France, the nuclear-weapon programme was instrumental in raising its international status and reviving an independent French foreign policy.
For Iran, the nuclear programme is a status item that can be invoked to become recognised as an important power in the Middle East.
Its influence in the region has increased after the invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan, but far from recognising it as a legitimate regional player, the United States and other countries are doing their best to contain it.
Rank disequilibrium is an untenable state to be in, calling for corrective action.
Invariably, the answer is to try to raise one’s rank on dimensions where it is low.
The preferred solution is never to equilibrate by moving in the opposite direction, from high to low across the dimensions that matter.
High rank being in the upper echelons of international hierarchies is an important source of power.
Karl Marx noted that the most effective power is the structural one that functions without being actively used.
States have a fine eye for who is more and who is less powerful and accommodate consciously or not to the strongest ones.
By instilling respect and awe, military force can have an impact just by being there and being seen.
Of course, the possibility that the weapons may be used must always be there.
If not, there would be nothing to fear and nothing to gain for the possessors.
The impression that nuclear weapons may be used can, however, be maintained in a variety of ways short of war.
The measures that have been taken throughout the nuclear age to stem the creeping norm of non-use amply illustrate this.
For a long while, India was in a state of disequilibrium ranking high on many dimensions, but without enjoying nuclear-weapon status.
It took steps to become a more generalised top dog in 1998, when it conducted a series of weapon tests, and took another step in that direction in 2008 when the US-India agreement confirmed its de facto possession of nuclear weapons and made it a bona fide partner in international nuclear commerce.
Compared with neighbouring Pakistan, it is in a domestic disequilibrium, a bit like India.
Pakistan is poorer than Iran and a young and fragile state, while Iran is an old power with a glorious past.
Yet Pakistan has nuclear weapons, an imbalance that Iran may remedy through its nuclear programme, be it a civilian prestige programme or, in the end, a military one.
It may be overcome by giving Iran a regional role in the Middle East that comes closer to the role it feels entitled to.
This is a delicate matter, however, for it takes nothing less than a new political equilibrium in the region at the cost of some Arab states.
To avert the most imminent break-out threat must therefore be a shared responsibility, for a new equilibrium can only be worked out in cooperation between the P5+1 and regional states.
If not, Iran may try to do what India did, only on a smaller scale tailored to its capabilities.
If the first approach is blocked, it is more likely that the second will be tried.
In theory, disarmament eliminating the very dimension on which it scored low was a way to achieve rank equilibrium.
It tested a nuclear device in 1974, but waited another 24 years before testing weapons.
In the meantime, it argued for example for a nuclear-weapon convention with a timeline to zero.
In this and other ways, the Indians exercised moral leadership, but the realism and sincerity of their disarmament efforts were open to doubt both in their own minds and in the eyes of others.
In the mid-1990s, when the period of opportunity after the Cold War was closing, there could no longer be any illusion that this approach would succeed.
Still, the diplomatic efforts were useful in building legitimacy for exercising the nuclear-weapon option.
By 1998 India was, moreover, set on a path of solid economic growth, so it was in a better position to invest in the nuclear-weapon programme.
The self-righteousness was there as well, meaning that it was determined to equilibrate upwards.
Compensation in the form of a bonus in some other field for staying non-nuclear was out of the question.
If Iran’s status aspirations can be met and its security concerns alleviated, the incentives for going nuclear would be much reduced.
Full transparency and growing confidence in a nonnuclear future are keys to it.
If, on the other hand, the road to regional status is blocked, Iran may turn to nuclear weapons as a means of rank equilibration like India did.
What the Treaty actually says in this respect has been under-communicated, if not completely ignored, for the usual way of describing the grand bargain from the second half of the 1960s has been to emphasise what the two categories of states nuclear and non-nuclear are obliged to do, each more or less on their own.
Preventing the spread offuel-cycle facilities The fuel-cycle issues are of immediate as well as long-term concern.
Today, they are at the heart of the Iranian issue, and unless new arrangements to forego national fuel-cycle facilities are introduced, they will become a vexing problem as nuclear power spreads.
The NNWS should therefore see it as part of their disarmament obligations to promote multinational and/or international arrangements that draw a clearer distinction between civilian and military applications of nuclear energy.
This is, in a nutshell, the philosophy behind military confidence-building measures, first introduced in the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe in the 1970s.
In view of the importance of nuclear weapons and the modest degrees of trust in inter-state affairs, transparency is particularly important in this field.
Obviously, both nuclear and non-nuclear-weapon states have a responsibility to promote transparency on behalf of nuclear disarmament.
One such area of shared responsibility concerns improvement of the safeguards system of the non-proliferation regime the non-nuclear states for accepting upgraded safeguards and the nuclear ones for accepting such safeguards on all of their civilian activities.
At the end of the disarmament road, the NWS would also become NNWS, so safeguards on all civilian activities can be seen as a step on the way to a world without nuclear arms.
For the NNWS, acceptance of upgraded safeguards the Additional Protocol and further improvements to come is another way of enhancing the credibility of their non-nuclear status, adding to what an international fuel-cycle regime can do to facilitate disarmament.
In the beginning, acceptance of safeguards was not linked to implementation of other Treaty obligations.
What was agreed when the NPT was negotiated was the need to reassure the parties that the non-proliferation obligations were kept.
There was agreement, in principle, on the need for adequate safeguards.
To be taken seriously, arms-control agreements must be verified, and the safeguards system that was adopted in the early 1970s was an advanced one for its time.
However, while linkage arguments are not justified in the light of negotiating history, the linkage politics of a number of NNWS is a political fact that has to be attended to.
They are holding back on their arms-control commitments as long as the implementation of rights and obligations under the NPT is deemed to be imbalanced.
In the Middle East, many states are doing so as long as the Israeli arsenal is unrestrained.
Cutting back on extended deterrence In Europe and East Asia, extended deterrence postures that are supposed to deter conventional as well chemical, biological and nuclear attack still exist.
However, many NATO allies do not want nuclear weapons on their soil any longer, and the first-use doctrine is questioned both in Japan and Europe.
To pretend to be willing to defend Europe by inviting an act of mutual suicide was never credible.
The best that could be said in support of it is that, since the doctrine has been consistently repeated over the years by all alliance partners, the adversaries may have assessed the likelihood of its implementation to be a figure above zero.
During the Cold War, the non-nuclear allies often worked with the United States to reinforce extended deterrence postures based on first-use doctrines.
Practitioners of threat-based policies fed on each other, cooperating to beef up threat perceptions and justify requests for more weapons.
Referring to each other as “the Europeans” and “the Americans”, they often monopolised the debates.
Such interactions have also been at work in US-Japan relations recently.
The 2009 report of the United States Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture refers to private discussions with unnamed Japanese officials urging the United States to maintain its nuclear presence in the Pacific, the nuclear-tipped Tomahawk eruise missile included.
In a letter to Hillary Clinton, Foreign Minister Okada noted that neither the former government nor his own had expressed any views concerning weapon systems such as the TLAM/N or a robust nuclear earth penetrator.
Instead, he reiterated his interest in discussing “suggestions that the role of nuclear weapons be restricted to deterrence of the use of nuclear weapons”,e. transition to a no-first-use doctrine.
NATO is conventionally superior the United States accounts for 45 per cent of world military expenditure and Russia for 3 per cent so for NATO there is no military need to maintain the first-use option.
There is no need to keep United States nuclear weapons in Europe either.
They serve no purpose, and if NATO functions democratically, they will soon be removed.
If so, all the world’s nuclear weapons will be back with their possessors.
Both in Europe and in East Asia, the governments of NNWS can now cooperate with the United States government to move the nuclear postures in this direction, and some of them are actively doing so.
To prevent a fail-back to forward stationing, no nuclear weapons in the territories of others may be turned into a new, universal principle.
Nevertheless, the principles have been important in reassuring other countries, as well as the Japanese public, that Japan will stay non-nuclear.
In 1988, in a prelude to its accession to the Treaty of Tlatelolco and to the NPT, Brazil wrote a non-nuclear-weapon commitment into the constitution.
Other NNWS may consider doing the same not non-proliferation stalwarts like Sweden and New Zealand, where it would be superfluous, and not countries like Egypt and Turkey, which would And it untimely under the current circumstances in the Middle East.
However, countries that are less geared towards trading stronger non-proliferation commitments for something else like Indonesia and South Africa may consider some version of it.
In the rollback terminology of Chapter 6, it may be of interest first of all for countries in a state of passive hedging.
This way, NNWS may facilitate disarmament by tying themselves more strongly to the non-proliferation pole.
In addition to transparency measures and inspections that are agreed in intergovernmental accords, this idea gives citizens the right and obligation to inform appropriate international authorities if they discover activities that are at odds with international commitments undertaken by their governments.
To work, those who sound the alann must be assured that they can do so without being punished.
The international agreements to be verified should therefore contain a clause requiring that the parties adopt national laws that guarantee the right and require the duty to inform.
In practice, the effectiveness of such legal assurances would be a matter of degree.
However, the stronger the legal protection, the more legitimate the reporting and the more likely it is that it would make a difference.
Societal verification has not been instituted so far, but is worth pursuing in pragmatic fashion as disarmament proceeds and national conditions become ripe for it.
At low levels of arms, it may be much needed as a supplement to international means of verification.
The bottom line is that, in order to be broadly accepted, the NWS must be willing to disarm.
One cannot have disarmament without verification and equally obvious one cannot have societal verification without disarmament.
Reserving the benefits of NPT membership Article X provides a nearly unconditional legal option to withdraw.
All that is required is three months’ notification and an explanation of the reasons for withdrawal.
There is no body with authority to pronounce on withdrawal decisions by member states, and there is nothing in the Treaty and its negotiating history to indicate that exercising the legal right to withdraw gives ground for sanctions or reprisals.
When the NPT was negotiated, the typical case of withdrawal was seen to be a response by a Treaty member in good standing to a security threat coming from some other state.
From the beginning, it was also clear that a withdrawing state should not expect to enjoy the benefits of membership.
Article IV reserves access to nuclear material, equipment and technology for NPT members although for a long while, it was not practised with any systematicity, and in 2008 the NSG made an exemption for India.
Withdrawal could also mean restrictions on the right to use or keep sensitive technologies that have been acquired under the Treaty regime.
For instance, it has been emphasised that such items must be restricted to peaceful uses and remain under safeguards; that suppliers should have the right to request an immediate “return to sender”; and that there should be a provision for shutdown of relevant facilities to prevent their misuse.
Flowever, the problem with most of these proposals is how to enforce them.
In accordance with international law, a withdrawing state remains responsible for violations committed while it was a party to the Treaty and continues to be subject to decisions made by the IAEA and the Security Council.
The IAEA is entitled to apply sanctions in response to non-compliance with safeguards agreements.
The measures that may be taken include suspension of assistance provided by the Agency or member states; return of materials and equipment that have been made available to the withdrawing state; and suspension of IAEA membership.
Suspension of IAEA membership puts a pariah stamp on the state, which may hurt but, apart from the modest measures just mentioned, it is of no automatic material consequence.
The Council may pass decisions on sanctions and mandate the use of force, but sanctions usually do not work as intended and use of force is even less likely to prove instrumental.
Diplomatic approaches therefore seem indispensable, and for that purpose bilateral talks and small-size negotiating frameworks are needed.
Seven-power talks are conducted in the case of Iran and six-power talks in the case of North Korea, involving the P5 plus Germany and the big neighbouring states respectively.
The role of the Council will usually be to back the negotiations and provide incentives to stay non-nuclear.
Many NNWS members of the non-aligned movement in particular are generally opposed to referring withdrawal matters to the Security Council.
Another reason is that the Security Council has become less and less representative of the international community of states, and the veto institute adds to its in-built bias in favour of the West and the veto powers.
On the one hand, if the NWS irreversibly disarm with a view to freeing the world of nuclear arms, it will be easier for the NNWS to agree to restrict the withdrawal option.
On the other hand, the NWS will find it easier to take the final steps towards zero if withdrawal becomes less likely.
Other measures such as foregoing fuel-cycle facilifies and insfifuting more effecfive safeguards may be more reassuring, but clarification of the right to withdraw from the NPT may also help.
North Korea had violated its commitments, but the Security Council failed to act and the 2005 NPT Review Conference did not even record that one party had left the Treaty.
The options may be limited to voluntarily giving up the right to withdraw, and establishing better procedures for assessing the reasons for withdrawal and what can be done to alleviate them and maintain the integrity of the Treaty.
The Tlatelolco Treaty had strict requirements for entry into force, but gave the signatories the option to waive them, bringing the Treaty into force in gradual fashion.
The NPT has a significant waiver potential too -e. for waiving the right to withdraw first of all among those who followed the so-called Swedish example.
In the 1960s, Sweden concluded that regardless of what the NWS were doing, it would not be in Sweden’s interest to acquire nuclear weapons.
States that have a strong commitment to the NPT and wish to exercise leadership in building a stronger regime might consider this possibility.
As for the second option, three months is too short a time to seriously address the questions raised by a notification to withdraw.
In view of the serious consequences that withdrawal might have for regional and international security, the statement of “the extraordinary events” that the withdrawing state “regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests” should be detailed and unambiguous.
The Vienna Convention is helpful in determining what may reasonably be invoked.
It says that changing circumstances cannot be used as a ground for withdrawal, unless the existence of those circumstances constituted an essential basis of the consent of the parties to be bound by the treaty, and the effect of the change is radically to transform the extent of the obligations still to be performed under the treaty.
By this criterion, the North Korean reference to US-South Korean military exercises, which had been conducted routinely for years, and to the IAEA request for special inspections, clearly did not constitute a bona fide reason for withdrawal.
A list of criteria might be developed, explaining what the “extraordinary event, related to the subject matter of the Treaty”, might be about.
Much of this is controversial, with little chance of being agreed in the near future.
NAM members stress that the right to withdraw is a sovereign right to be upheld.
This does not mean that NAM states turn all proposals to improve the operationalisation of Article X down.
For instance, there is a body of agreement among NPT members on the need for a consultation mechanism, in the Treaty framework, when faced with a notification to withdraw.
However, agreement on more substantial measures to tighten the right of withdrawal will have to wait for better and balanced implementation of the NPT, of Article VI in particular.
Having made a series of strong proposals in the immediate aftermath of the North Korean withdrawal.
Western states seem to have realised this and are now going more carefully and realistically about the issue.
The term is used in a variety of ways, some of which appear more stable and satisfactory than others.
Certain principles, prerequisites and transitional issues, as well as political order requirements, must be considered on the way to such a world.
On the whole, growing international interdependence is helpful, but for nuclear disarmament to succeed, interdependence must be turned into cooperative security practices between the big powers, with a view to more effective collective security mechanisms.
To achieve a dynamic, interactive relationship between vision and measures, one has to be serious about both.
To be serious about the vision means that a convincing rationale for a NWFW has to be spelt out; that the broadest possible agreement must be sought; and that the advantages of such a world should weigh in the assessment of specific steps to be taken.
The weapons themselves may be in solid custody in nearly all NWS, but there is no guarantee that treacherous elements in a weak state like Pakistan would not be willing and able to leak a weapon or two to alQaeda or Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, the group behind the December 2008 commando raid in Mumbai.
After the Cold War, a variety of measures have been instituted to reduce the amount of weapon-grade materials and secure what remains, but as more states pursue weapons programmes, new potential sources emerge.
Sooner or later, catastrophic terrorism may therefore be a reality unless weapons and fissile maferials are eliminated and subject to stricter controls.
In an increasingly mulfi-centric world with more NWS, nuclear weapons are likely to interact with inter-state conflicts in more regions and in new ways.
New NWS do not have the benefit of warning, control and communications arrangements of the kind that were developed, step-by-step, during the Cold War, and the cold warriors are widely recognised to have benefited from good luck.
Control mechanisms to prevent war by human error, accident or technical malfunction will, moreover, be more difficult to institute and practise in a multi-polar world than in the static, bi-polar configuration of the Cold War.
There is a growing sentiment that nuclear weapons are too dangerous in an international system which is partly anarchic, partly chaotic.
This is not among the major factors in the case for such a world the overriding objective is to prevent nuclear weapons from being used but for proponents of nuclear power it is another attraction.
If and when a NWFW comes into being, the energy situation will certainly be a lot different from what it is today, but this is what full implementation of the Treaty implies.
Rationales that are phrased in international security and world-order terms will not be sufficient, however.
To avoid these pitfalls, the frame of discourse must be broadened to include normative, moral and legal considerations.
In addition to their inherent merit, the normative arguments have the benefit of being universally relevant and applicable both to governments and to civil society.
They widen an elitist process conducted in power and security terms to encompass popular movements as well.
Zia Mian wants them to be at the centre of the debate, not at the margins.
No yardstick can determine which line of argument is more important a rationale based on security gains or one that sees nuclear weapons as a crime against humanity.
The NWS would, for obvious reasons, concentrate on the security gains and reject the view that nuclear weapons are immoral and illegal.
Many NNWS argue both ways, as do popular campaigns to rid the world of nuclear arms.
Without raising the legality or illegality of nuclear-weapon possession and use, NWS may also call for abolition out of ethical considerations as well as security gains.
In the years that followed, some NWS returned to guarded, conditional statements.
The four horsemen and the leaders of other countries who followed suit broke that silence.
In commemorating Rajiv Gandhi’s speech on nuclear disarmament before the UN General Assembly in 1988, Indian officials also reiterated the call for abolition , and the Security Council followed suit.
In other regions, nuclearand non-nuclear-weapon states are waiting to see what comes of it.
For a while, disarmament opponents have been on the defensive, but they may hit back with greater political clout both in the United States and elsewhere.
The legacy of threat-based security policies remains a formidable obstacle in the way of a NWFW, and arms control and disarmament are still seen by many as part and parcel of an ongoing quest for unilateral advantage, not as a global common good.
Sceptics noted, furthermore, that both the title and the measures advocated in the second WSJ article of 15 January 2008 by the same American horsemen seemed more modest than those of the first,'* and that SC Resolution 1887 of 24 September 2009 is mostly about non-proliferation.
Abolition has been proposed three times before the Baruch plan in 1946, the McCloy-Zorin proposal of 1961 and the Reagan-Gorbachev attempt in 1986 and they were all shortlived.
They are concerned that the call is part of a double agenda, the real purpose of which is to sustain and enhance Western unilateral advantage.
The synergies of disarmament and non-proliferation may stop smaller and weaker states from acquiring “the great equaliser” nuclear weapons thus minimising those states’ ability to counter the vast United States conventional superiority.
The United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty to be free to pursue ballistic-missile defence.
Starting with Ronald Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative , the United States is unrivalled in this field.
Outer space is a related arena where the United States is the leading nation and so objects to arms control.
The United States will ratify the CTBT, critics surmise, when it can do without testing, while less-sophisticated NWS will be restrained by it.
Having conducted 1,000 tests and having a sophisticated nuclear-stewardship programme, a CTBT could help maintain and even enhance its unilateral advantage in weapons design.
Proponents of United States ratification have actually argued that way.
Production of sophisticated aircraft, on the other hand, are beyond the capabilities of smaller and less-industrialised countries, so the advanced powers see no similar need for arms control in that sector.
To various degrees, the big powers have twisted the implementation of rights and obligations under the NPT so much in their own favour that by the time George W Bush left, the Treaty may have been on the verge of crumbling.
Ever since the first Gulf War of 1991, it has been argued that nuclear disarmament would make the United States even more superior because nobody can match its conventional forces.
Last but not least, the United States is about to reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons by preparing for some of their functions to be exercised with long-range high-precision conventional weapons that others do not have.
In the NWS, there are various objections to the elimination of nuclear weapons.
During the Cold War, deep-seated superpower concerns about upper edges turned into sterile obsessions with parity in order to block perceived attempts by the other side to gain unilateral advantages so much so that parity became part of the problem, making agreements more difficult.
In the most fundamental of senses, this was a common interest because their own survival and that of human civilisation was at stake.
Reagan and Gorbachev took it further, stating that a nuclear war cannot be won and must therefore never be fought.
In a mulfi-centric world, it is critically important to convince states nuclear and non-nuclear that disarmament will be pursued neither as a matter of unilateral advantage nor of national sacrifice, buf as a common, public good.
If the key players cannot be convinced that the initiative is no ploy for unilateral advantage, it will go nowhere.
Also for this reason, the call for abolition must be phrased both in terms of international peace and security and in terms of moral leadership.
Universal moral considerations preventing mass slaughter; preserving human civilisation must be turned into realpolitik.
National interests will not be abandoned, but elimination must be seen as being in the best interest of states.
All parties to the NPT are legally obliged to work for nuclear disarmament, but the NWS have a special responsibility.
Declaratory policies putting the rationale in universal terms while eschewing all talk about unilateral advantage are of the essence.
In many cases, the crux of the matter will be to reduce the security concerns of states that currently rely on nuclear weapons by alleviating conflicts and adjusting conventional force constellations so that their nationalsecurity affairs can be managed without nuclear arms.
This applies to states that are under the United States nuclear umbrella; to states that are conventionally inferior in relation to neighbours that may use their military might for political gains; and to states that see nuclear weapons as insurance premiums of last resort.
To get going, United States leadership is a must and Russian cooperation is vitally important.
If Russia is not ready for major cuts, the disarmament ambition will not go far.
Next in the line of importance is China, because of its geopolitical significance.
Together, these are the states that most affect the security dynamics in regions of proliferation concern,e. in Northeast Asia, South Asia and the Middle East.
If they cannot stabilise their strategic relationships and put the nuclear order on the path of disarmament, the international non-proliferation regime will be on shaky ground.
As the international distribution of power shifts towards the East and South, more attention must be paid to the priorities of the emerging powers.
If the process seems designed to contain and subdue their rise to prominence, they will not cooperate.
To get them on board, there has to be a significant element of equity in the disarmament strategy as well as in single steps, and the sooner they are drawn into strategic dialogues on how to proceed, the better.
A strategy of co-option starting with the United States and United States allies, continuing with NNWS that always made a case for abolition, and successively building pressure on the recalcitrant ones would be to ask for trouble.
The goal is not just to disarm the armed but to create a world order free of nuclear weapons comprising all.
NNWS always played an important role in keeping the big powers honest, and in reaching out for an NWFW, they will be much needed in that role.
Words like “zero”, “elimination” and “abolition” all have in common the idea of no nuclear weapons.
However, “zero” can be conceived of in a variety of ways, and not everyone means the same when referring to it.
Beyond the various meanings of zero, the vision of an NWFW also comes in several other forms, one of which imagines a world where all ready-made weapons have been eliminated, but where many states maintain a mobilisation base for the rapid reintroduction of them.
It might include fissile materials in stock, able nuclear-weapon engineers and manufacturing equipiuent on hand, and delivery vehicles ready for use.
For the NWS, this would be a forni of deep de-alerting, approaching the status of Japan today.
The purpose of such a base is to deter others from breaking out of the agreement and to confront violators if deterrence breaks down.
First, because they sustain the mentality that nuclear war is possible at any time.
Second, virtual arsenals need arsenalkeepers, and they are never disinterested experts, but socio-political actors legitimising their activities in terms of threats to be met and demanding more resources to counter them.
In effect, the arsenal-keepers are likely to push for a hedging race, and would quite possibly prefer a return from virtual arsenals to real ones.
Such an end state would therefore contain the seeds of its own destruction.
Third, it is a particularly bad idea because in the break-out scenarios, firststrike capabilities are more likely to emerge than in current nuclear constellations.
It would therefore be better to go “below zero” to eliminate the fissile materials that have been dedicated to nuclear-explosive uses; to institute strict international control of all remaining materials; to dismantle the nuclear-weapons infrastructure; and to redirect the workforce to other sectors.
Even more, nuclear materials that can be used to build weapons should be banned from civilian use as well.
HEU is not the big issue here there is little HEU left in the civilian sector and what remains is being phased out but plutonium continues to pose a problem.
Dual-capable production facilities for civilian use would remain, possibly based on proliferation-resistant technologies and certainly subject to international control.
This would be a more stable NWFW, building trust in a non-nuclear future.
However, going below zero is a matter of more or less, so this image of a NWFW comes in several variations.
A third version relies on joint capabilities to intercept a nuclear attack before the weapons reach their targets the idea that Reagan presented to Gorbachev in Reykjavik.
Reagan offered to share his SDI technologies with the Soviet Union in order to erect a common shield against break-out attempts.
Furthermore, to convert the programme into a global asset to the benefit of all may not be possible, for it takes a much more cooperative world to overcome the formidable political problems involved.
In Reykjavik, it was a matter of course for Reagan and Gorbachev that what they agreed to do would set the rules for all others.
In the multicentric world taking shape today, the technology would have to be shared by a consortium of big powers, not just two of them, making implementation much more complex.
Still, in a world that has come close to elimination, missile defence is likely to be seen through other lenses.
The pathdependence of the disarmament process must always be kept in mind, so the option should not be ruled out.
A world that allows the disarmament process to proceed to the point where the end station is in sight defies description.
Today, it would therefore be premature and presumptuous to select some version of the end state and discard others.
In classical nuclear terminology, this would be a world of many threshold states, and the risk is great that it would be unstable.
A version that does away with fissile maferial stocks and dedicated nuclear infrastructure, with or without a shield against ballistic missiles and other means of delivery, appears preferable.
However, removing the remnants of weapons programmes is a matter of degree it can be more or less complete so such a version can take many different forms.
If a global shield becomes part of the overall arrangement, the requirements of build down “below zero” might be less stringent.
The principle of equity It is hard to imagine a NWFW with different ground rules for different categories of states.
Some 40 years of discontent with the NPT’s division of the world into nuclearand non-nuclear-weapon states, and persistent complaints over the slow implementation of Article VI, which was supposed to end it, have led many NNWS to insist on equal mles for all.
In general terms, Obama’s Prague and Cairo speeches alluded to the same.
New measures must therefore be equitable and capability differences reduced, more and more as the process unfolds.
If it is compromised by moves for unilateral advantage, the emerging powers of Asia, in particular, are unlikely to be cooperative.
The NPT was meant to be a regulatory mechanism for non-proliferation, disarmament and peaceful uses all the way to zero.
The parties may wish to reinterpret some of its provisions, but they will probably see fit to keep it until it has been implemented,e. until all weapons have been eliminated.
The NPT goes to zero, but says nothing about the precise meaning of zero.
Therefore, a new convention outlining the ground rules of an NWFW has to be written before reaching that point.
The NPT is, moreover, no more than a skeleton agreement, so new rules guiding the final approaches to an NWFW will be needed in any case.
To be agreeable, those rules must be informed by the principle of equity and lead to a NWFW where the rules are the same for all.
Elimination of fissile materials The importance of fissile material controls was universally recognised during the NPT negotiations in the 1960s, and became the central element of NPT safeguards in the early 1970s.
The main hurdle on the way to a nuclear bomb is acquisition of weapons-grade materials.
The first requirement in going “below zero” would therefore be to eliminate all stocks of fissile materials dedicated to military use.
Given the vast amounts of fissile materials that exist, more steps in this direction had better be taken right away.
Such a treaty should be conceived not only as an arms-control measure banning all activities at dedicated military production facilities which would freeze the advantages of the big and advanced nuclear powers but also as a measure limiting the size of existing stocks.
The equity principle means that single steps should be designed to incrementally reduce the capability differences on the way to a NWFW setting the same rules for all.
The safeguards reassuring the international community that all military production facilities are effectively shut down would also have to be equitable.
NNWS are unlikely to accept another differential deal such as safeguards limited to declared, dedicated facilities, which means selective safeguards for NWS and full-scope safeguards for all the others.
In France, the UK and India, the civilian sectors are safeguarded in the UK and France by EURATOM/IAEA and in India by the IAEA pursuant to the US-India agreement but in the other NWS civilian activities are not fully covered.
Under an FMCT, NWS may want to mothball their production facilities at first, leaving dismantlement for consideration later on.
So far, limitations and reductions of existing stocks has been a NNWS demand.
The NWS have been more or less unwilling to include them in FMCT negotiations.
Logically, both categories of states should then take an interest in the vertical as well as the horizontal dimension of the issue.
This way, the vision could impact on the negotiability of an FMCT, illustrating what a dynamic interactive relationship between vision and measures might be about.
Elimination of nuclear-weapon infrastructure In a world where virtual arsenals remain, nuclear infrastructure would be kept.
The theoretical end point of that argument is zero operative weapons in return for a comprehensive capability to bring them swiftly back to operative status, maybe in a time span not much different from the time it takes to ready de-mated systems for use.
From other versions, dismantlement of nuclear weapon infrastructure follows.
Of course, the nuclear-weapon infrastructure has many more components than fissile materials and their production facilities.
For instance, if it became known that a state was testing triggering mechanisms for nuclear devices, or was engaged in studies of weapons designs, the message would be unnerving.
Under the NPT, such activities are already banned among the non-nuclear parties to the Treaty, for they constitute unambiguous signs of weapons intent.
A NWFW allowing current NWS to stay engaged in weapon-oriented activities while prohibiting them for all others would be inequitable and therefore unacceptable.
However, knowing that the main bottleneck in weapons acquisition is access to fissile materials, elimination of other components might be a lower priority.
For some of them, effective safeguards are, moreover, a bigger challenge than safeguarding nuclear materials.
Today, non-nuclear components of nuclear weapons are beyond the reach of IAEA safeguards, and given the constraints on transparency in some NWS, more intrusive means must be pushed gradually as new opportunities emerge.
Overambitious attempts may backlash and do more harm than good, especially in states in the East and South that go by the principles of state sovereignty and non-interference.
For instance, universal acceptance of societal verification will be out of the question for some more time, even on the most optimistic of assumptions.
For China, secrecy remains, moreover, a significant part of its nuclear posture.
Proliferation resistance This leaves a big set of issues of how to make peaceful uses of nuclear energy more proliferation-resistant.
Today, the promoters of proliferation resistance are mostly suppliers; with some important exceptions, the recipients tend to be naysayers.
NNWS have put their feet down, objecting to any limitation of Article IV rights as well as stricter Article III safeguards as long as the NWS do not do more to meet their disarmament obligations.
In this respect, declaratory policies conveying big power seriousness about a NWFW are helpful, although the great majority of NPT parties consider this to have been a legal obligation under the NPT all along, unequivocally confirmed by the 2000 NPT Review Conference.
While welcoming recent statements in support of a NWFW, NNWS therefore hesitate to take anything for granted until the words are supported by facts.
Deep cuts and measures blocking qualitative developments of nuclear arsenals would create a benign context for radical approaches to proliferation resistance.
In turn, enhanced proliferation resistance would make a NWFW more sustainable.
In any scenario-writing tracing the implications of a NWFW back to the present, proliferation-resistant modes of nuclear energy appear desirable, regardless of which version one chooses.
Today, the incentives to acquire nuclear capabilities and nuclear weapons are in some cases strong, while the mechanisms to enforce the non-nuclear commitments of the NPT and of NWFZ are generally recognised to be weak.
In a NWFW, on the other hand, the further below zero one goes, the stronger the assurances against re-militarisation and the less concerns there are about the shape of the civilian sector.
Therefore, when it comes to the proliferation resistance of peaceful uses, the vision is not a particularly powerful guide to action.
Deep cuts If the United States and Russia can agree on radical overall reductions of their nuclear forces, more is likely to follow.
A breakthrough presupposes resolution of at least some of the controversial political issues mentioned above, and of what to do about the tactical nuclear weapons.
There is a strong case for including them, but Russia always dragged its feet when that question was raised.
Other matters of contention are the United States missile-defence programme and the emerging United States conventional Prompt Global Strike capabilities.
Russia would certainly like to bring both of them into the next round of negotiations.
A deep cut succeeding New Start and including all categories of nuclear weapons tactical as well as strategic weapons, reserves as well as operative ones would obviously be a major achievement.
The build-down should be guided by the principles of transparency, implemented step-by-step; verification of agreed limitations on weapon holdings; and irreversibility to prevent weapons and materials that have been withdrawn from being redirected to operational status and military applications.
It is conceivable that such an agreement would lead to multilateral talks involving all the P5 as well as other nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states.
The three used to say that the superpowers would have to come down to their level,e. to the low hundreds, although recently, the UK has shown flexibility in this respect.
Maybe, the United States and Russia need not come down to the same level as the smaller P5 powers before multilateral negotiations can begin.
If they agree to cut their forces to three-digit figures while stating their readiness to go for common P5 ceilings at about the current level of the UK, France and China, this may suffice.
But if they were to invite the others with proportional reductions in mind, so that the United States and Russia would retain significantly larger arsenals than the others in the three-digit range, it might go nowhere.
Presumably, tactical nuclear weapons also play a role in Russian considerations of how best to defend Siberia.
However, inclusion of them would be an increasingly legitimate United States demand, for the lower the level of strategic arms, the higher the stock of unregulated tactical weapons would loom.
Agreed reductions of operationally deployed strategic weapons to the level of 1,000 or below while leaving 2,000 Russian sub-strategic weapons aside are virtually impossible to imagine.
Freedom to mix strategic and tactical weapons under common ceilings might also facilitate inclusion of them.
However, the main approach to inclusion and reduction of them is alleviation of threat perceptions.
The United States holds about 2,500 weapons in reserve for strategic and tactical use.
Not to leave the United States and Russia with much larger break-out potentials than the others, all reserve warheads should therefore be included in the calculations at some stage, especially if there were to be few or no limits on the capabilities for delivery.
In the United States Congress, the bipartisan McGovem-Lungren resolution brings reserves into the deep-cut framework, proposing to limit United States and Russian arsenals to no more than 1,000 weapons deployed and no more than 3,000 weapons in all, reserves included, and with a freedom to mix.
During the Cold War, arms-control limitations centred on delivery vehicles.
But the United States government was quick to underline that “New START protects the United States ability to develop and deploy a CPGS capability.
Such systems may be physically separated from strategic nuclear weapons to facilitate verification.
New methods to count nuclear weapons without revealing sensitive information may also help, and will be needed anyhow in order to take stock of tactical nuclear weapons and reserves.
For tactical applications of nuclear weapons, a variety of dual-use vehicles may be used, and reserves may not be specifically assigned to particular delivery systems.
Nuclear deterrence of pin-point conventional attacks where the objective is not to conquer another nation but to destroy specific objects may not be credible, and protective measures may be very costly or unfeasible.
The Russians and the Chinese are concerned about it, and the concerns are by no means confined fo them.
Reductions of total numbers, reserves included, mean that more weapons will be slated for dismantlement.
Therefore, stronger dismantlement capabilities, and codification of the principle of irreversibility, become all the more important in order to remove these weapons from hedging speculations and limit the mobilisation base for renewed arms build up.
To build trust between the United States and Russia; to convince others about the seriousness of the disarmament ambition; and to sustain the impression that there is no way back to arms racing, systematic application of the principles of transparency, verification and irreversibility emphasised in the 13 steps for nuclear disarmament adopted by the 2000 NPT RevCon, but disregarded by the Bush administration and ignored by SORT is of the essence.
However, these plans were only a small part of the overall United States ballistic-missile defence programme and, thus, only a small part of the problem.
For deep cuts to be agreed, some clarification and modification of the missiledefence programme will undoubtedly be needed.
Russia cannot but be concerned about the viability of its nuclear deterrent if the programme continuous unrestrained in the face of far-reaching nuclear disarmament.
In other words, if offensive systems are built down and defensive systems built up, there comes a point where the owner of the defensive systems might deny the other NWS a second-strike capability.
The United States BMD deployments in Alaska and California, allegedly to defend against North Korea, may be improved and expanded and directed against China as well.
Mutually assured destruction is far from being an ideal basis for international security.
It is counterintuitive at that, because it says that we are best protected when we are naked.
However, ballisticmissile defence makes an untenable situation even worse; for, by stimulating competitive acquisitions of offensive and defensive capabilities, it stands in the way of nuclear disarmament.
His idea was theoretically attractive, but in practice hard to implement.
Like the Baruch-Lilienthal plans for global control of nuclear weapons after the Second World War, the technology developer could be left with an advantage.
This was the way the Soviets saw it in 1946, and this was the way they looked at it in Reykjavik 40 years later.
That year, the successful conclusion of the Stockholm conference on confidence and securitybuilding measures and the Reykjavik summit were the first signs of different times to come.
What appeared practically impossible then may therefore tell little or nothing about the cooperative ventures that may be possible if and when the world approaches zero nuclear weapons.
The trust that will still be missing during another round of deep US-Russian cuts, and the suspicions that would continue to burden disarmament negotiations well into the multilateral phase, may no longer be there or be there, but in a much different way when the goal is in sight.
It is conceivable that research and development of defensive technologies could continue if deployment limitations are agreed upon.
China and other states are not only concerned about the specific missile-defence applications of the United States programme, but are also worried that someday there may be a technological breakthrough in another related area that leave them at a disadvantage.
The trust-consuming effect of such an R&D programme should therefore not be underestimated.
Scaling down missile defence is another way to reduce the overall concerns surrounding it.
In the years ahead, the United States is likely to do so, as missile defence was always more of a Republican programme than a Democratic one.
Such a joint venture could be seen as a pilot project illuminating technical problems and cooperative requirements that have to be solved and met on the way to a global shield.
It may facilitate negotiations towards deep cuts, but would send a dubious signal not only to countries in the Middle East, but to China as well.
Combined with the sword of overwhelming offensive weapons, it puts them on the spot.
This builds up to an argument for deployment limitations on a slimmer United States missile-defence programme.
Deployment limitations mean reinstating the AntiBallistic Missile Treaty or negotiating an updated version of it; a slimmer programme is the likely outcome of United States politics anyhow.
Whether the stability of a NWFW would best be enhanced by erecting a shield will be a matter for consideration in a world much different than ours now.
Doctrines Article VI was always about hardware and software both about the weapons and the roles assigned to them.
For half a century, calls have been made to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in international affairs.
Ever since the NPT was negotiated, assurances not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear parties have been sought.
The United States keeps roughly 1,000 nuclear warheads on alert atop ICBMs and SLBMs ready to be fired abouf 3-4 minufes and 12 minutes respectively after a presidential order has been issued.
Russia retains approximately 1,200 warheads at top readiness, nearly all of them on ICBMs.
De-alerting and de-mating are therefore primarily for the United States and Russia to do.
Flowever, neither New START nor the new United States Nuclear Posture Review introduce any change in existing alert postures.
Except for the Chinese assurances, they are all qualified in ways fhat limif their value.
The NPT review conferences have therefore urged the NWS to be more forthcoming.
It does not go as far as no-first-use , but promises to work in that direction.
In deep cuts and eliiuination scenarios, this proposition is therefore more relevant than extension of non-use assurances to NNWS, which are primarily a part of the non-proliferation bargain.
The Geneva Protocol of 1925 prohibited the use of chemical and biological weapons.
The CWC set a timeline for destruction of the arsenals, and agreement was reached on a comprehensive verification system.
In the 1990s, a verification protocol was negotiated for the BWC as well, but the Bush administration turned it down.
Stressing that any use of nuclear weapons must be compatible with international humanitarian law, the ICJ Advisory Opinion of 1996 came close to a non-use position also for these weapons.
The effects of nuclear arms are such that it is hard to imagine circumstances in which they could be used without colliding with humanitarian law.
The Court did not rule out the use of nuclear weapons in such circumstances.
An international legal instrument declaring their use to be a crime against humanity would send an even stronger message and be a better deterrent against use.
An agreement banning the use of nuclear weapons would siiuilarly allow for nuclear retaliation; that is, it would be a no-first-use agreement, ft may include provisions branding the use of nuclear weapons a crime against huiuanity.
Alternatively, the Security Council could be invited to issue such a declaration.
Given its conventional preponderance, the United States could more easily convert to no-first-use than could Russia.
However, if the United States seizes the initiative and progress is made in reassuring Russia to the point where it would be willing to generalise the bilateral Russia-China no-first-use commitment, the P5 would end up with such a doctrine, for it is hard to imagine that the UK and France would not follow the United States lead, especially when reinforced by Russia.
The United States alliance commitments and nuclear umbrellas would have to be changed accordingly, reassuring its allies in other ways.
Dealing with the break-out potentials Two disarmament scenarios both of them outlined above illustrate how differently the break-out concerns can be addressed.
One says that the more advanced the nuclear infrastructure, the further down one may go.
The logical end point being zero weapons in return for a capability to reintroduce them on short notice.
The other says that such a world would be dangerously unstable because of its trust-consuming break-out potentials, and therefore recommends moving “below zero” to eliminate the mobilisation bases and the nuclear-weapon mentalities that they sustain.
These very different worlds have very different implications for the structure of the disarmament processes to be pursued.
The weight of the argument is in favour of a disarmament process that builds up to a world significantly below zero.
In both cases, the starting point is a world of limited confidence between the big powers, where fail-back positions will be maintained in case disarmament agreements break down or new demanding security challenges emerge.
Foremost among those precautionary measures are weapons held in reserve; surplus stocks of weapon-grade materials; and a scientific-technical mobilisation base, including production facilities in a state of preparedness to be switched on again.
In both cases, the reserves must be eliminated along with the operational weapons, although the philosophy behind the hedging scenario means greater caution in doing away with the weapons than that leading below zero.
More than others, hedging proponents read international affairs in terms of threats and confiicts, partly as a continuation of Cold War mentality and partly reinvigorated by 9/11, so it takes more to convince them that the time is ripe for elimination.
At best, hedging proponents may want to move more slowly and cautiously.
Two measures from the classical arms-control agenda aim to prevent renewed arms build up.
The more universal these and other armscontrol measures become, and the more effectively they can be verified and enforced, the more difficult it will be to break out and return to arms racing.
The United States and China have not ratified the CTBT while the other members of the P5 have done so.
The United States has conducted 1,000 tests and Russia 700; the others, far fewer.
There is concern, moreover, that sooner or later, simulation techniques will allow the United States to make new types of weapons without live testing.
To stem these inequalities and avoid qualitative improvements in the face of a test ban, the P5 should be asked to join the CTBT and undertake not to develop and deploy qualitatively new types of weapons.
This is also primarily up to the most advanced NWS,e. the United States and Russia.
China appears ready to ratify the CTBT, provided the United States goes first.
The simplest would be to go for a ban on further production, leaving the stocks aside, but on the way to an NWFW, much if not all weapon-grade materials have to be eliminated, step-by-step, and a cut-off negotiation presents an opportunity to move in that direction.
At least, implementation of the Trilateral Initiative concerning permanent removal and verification of nuclear materials from the military stockpiles should be set in motion as a supplementary measure.
Still, if and when it comes to multilateral negotiations, the participants would have very different fissile material stocks at hand.
Those differences cannot be erased overnight, but reductions can be carried out in such a way that, gradually, the differences will be reduced.
Like the other P5, China seems to have stopped production of fissile materials for weapons, but unlike the others it has made no statement or formal commitment in this respect.
In view of the uncertainties surrounding missile defence and the future of United States forces, it is not confident that it has enough fissile materials in stock.
India and Pakistan, which are building up their forces, are far from being ready for a cut-off.
A CTBT and an FMCT are also important because nuclear infrastructures would be shut down or dismantled, notably nuclear test sites and fissile material production facilities.
The treaties would signal that there will be less of a future for nuclear-weapon works, which may lead experts in other directions, unless they are absorbed by expanding stewardship programmes for the weapons that remain and for what may become virtual arsenals in the future.
In the United States, where the stewardship programme has been a middle ground between weapon supporters and disarmers, the administration has increased the funding of it in order to build support for CTBT ratification.
For status and security reasons, respectively, groups and will find it hard to abandon their weapons.
China’s nuclear weapons were not acquired to make up for conventional weakness.
Neither does it need nuclear weapons to bolster its international status.
Surely, these weapons also have a status value for China, but its international leverage rests primarily on its size, economic performance and ability to concentrate and exercise political power.
The status tag attached to its modest nuclear arsenal matters less and less.
However, China is not ready to say what would be required of the United States and Russia for it to join multilateral disarmament negotiations.
If the principle of enhanced security at lower levels of armaments is applied, it should be less difficult for China than for the UK and France to join the United States and Russia in multilateral talks.
Parity may not be attained until all the weapons have been eliminated and not necessarily then, either, depending on how the end state is defined but the closer one comes to a NWFW, the more the configuration would resemble a relationship between equals.
Russia would be left somewhere in-between the US/China and the UK/France, being bigger in terms of population and enormous in terms of territory, but modest in terms of economic strength.
To cut the P5 short by taking China out would therefore seem artificial.
Neither would it make sense to embark on multilateral negotiations without the UK and France.
Loss of status is a real concern for both of them, but it is not a legitimate concern in the view of others.
All parties to the NPT have committed themselves to work for nuclear disarmament, but to hold the five and only de jure NWS accountable, in particular, is straightforward common sense.
Involving the outliers Whether the multilateral phase should be limited to the P5 at first and widened to include the outliers thereafter, or include all NWS right away, is open to question.
The NPT defines a NWS as a state that had tested a nuclear explosive device before 1 January 1967.
North Korea, may or may not be disarmed irrespective of what the other nuclear powers are willing to do about their arsenals.
There remains the possibility that Pyongyang will trade its nuclear programme for economic assistance and normalisation with the United States and others.
In 1992 the two Korean states signed a “Joint Declaration on the Denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula” which ruled out fuel-cycle facilities as well.
In 2008, a denuclearisation agreement was reached in the framework of the six-power talks, although it did not explicitly provide for elimination of the weapons that have been produced.
The Obama administration will probably be in a better position to deal with North Korea than the Bush administration, which was split on what do to.
The other three India, Pakistan and Israel, sometimes referred to as “the outliers” have come to stay.
There is nothing to suggest that they will give up their nuclear weapons any sooner than any of the P5.
From this point of view, it seems appropriate to include them from the beginning, together with the P5.
For all we know, Israel’s arsenal may be of a size not much different from those of the UK, France and China.
India and Pakistan are at lower levels, but seem to be on their way to similar numbers of weapons.
An agreement limiting the arsenals to the low hundreds would allow the South Asians to meet their minimum deterrence objectives, and by the time a multilateral negotiation gets started, they may be there.
In principle, acceptance of such a deal should therefore be no problem for them.
At the moment, accession to the CTBT is a problem for India and Pakistan.
However, if the United States and Russia continue to cut their arsenals and all P5 ratify the CTBT, they may no longer be in a position to resist, even if it would leave Pakistan, and maybe India too, without fusion weapons.
A fissile material cut-off will hardly be agreeable until they have produced enough material to meet their minimum deterrence-force targets.
They are unlikely to let an international agreement compromise that objective.
In a proeess perspective in the expectation that disarmament will continue and all nuclear weapons be eliminated the differences may not matter much.
The parties may accept them in anticipation of equal rales at the end of the process.
In a static perspective, where the continuation is open to question and the parties may choose to stay where they are, different break-out potentials are likely to be more controversial.
The South Asians are less sensitive to the United States missile-defence programme than China.
To the extent that India cooperates with the United States on missile defence, it is actually a beneficiary of the programme.
On the one hand, there is no formal basis on which to address its arsenal; on the other hand, everybody has to assume that the weapons exist, so the deterrent effect is there.
It is all the harder because unless Israel goes public with its nuclear weapon possession, it cannot be drawn into multilateral disarmament talks, and as long as there is no regional peace arrangement in sight, Israel is not ready to participate in such talks.
Israel argues that, first, regional affairs have to be normalised and a just and comprehensive peace established.
Only then can a zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction be implemented, shoring up what has been achieved.
South Asia comes closest, but India’s foreign-policy reach goes beyond the subcontinent.
India has global ambitions and no doubt considers it natural to take part in global, multilateral disarmament talks, time and circumstances permitting.
Pakistan is a function of India in this respect and can hardly hold back if India enters the ring.
Israel is therefore left to be treated separately, in the regional Middle Eastern context.
The name of that game is a zone free of weapons of mass destruction or, specifically, a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
The proposal for a Middle Eastern zone was first made in 1974, and calls for the establishment of it have been made repeatedly over the years but often for purposes other than progress towards a zone.
Therefore, two of the four outliers Israel and North Korea ean best be addressed separately.
For the other two India and Pakistan the ambition must be to draw them into global negotiations together with the P5.
If a eriteria-based approach is adopted in relation to the outliers, asking all three to abide by the commitments that India has undertaken and raising the bar for de jure recognition by demanding, say, accession to the CTBT and a moratorium on fissile material production, only India may be able to live up to these requirements.
NNWS should also be invited to the table,g. states with advanced civilian nuclear programmes, and with a view to regional representation.
One or more NWS may find that they can go no further unless their security concerns have been much alleviated and the military and political role of nuclear weapons has been much diminished.
China to follow up on its no-first-use posture; India to push its long-standing proposal for a nuclearweapon convention; NNWS to press their case for a NWFW whether they are brought into the negotiations or not.
Most importantly, the United States may remain committed to the course initiated by President Obama.
Ceilings in the low hundreds will presumably be drawn on the basis of some notion of minimum deterrence.
In terms of hardware, minimum deterrence is a function of the vulnerability of the weapons, their ability to penetrate enemy defences, and the possibility that some of them will malfunction and fail to arrive on target for that reason.
In terms of software, it is a function of the efficiency of the C3I system and the perceived political will to follow through on the deterrence doctrines.
India and Pakistan may be going for forces in about the same range, and Israel may already be there.
It may be assumed that multilateral negotiations will be heading for ceilings in the lower end of this range, compatible with notions of minimum deterrence, but not allowing significant increases in any of the forces.
Substantial additions would run against the declared aim of the exercise, which will be framed in disarmament terms.
This is the point at which the continuation is hard to foresee, for the world will look much different.
However, political-order issues aside, some force constellations are known to be more unstable and dangerous than others.
A few parameters may therefore be laid down to steer the process away from the greatest risks in the final approach to the goal.
This pertains, in particular, to the worlds immediately above and immediately below zero.
At the level of, say, 30 nuclear weapons, the retaliatory capabilities may be in doubt.
Some weapons may be destroyed by an attacker, others may be intercepted, and yet others may not function as planned.
It may lead to surprise attack, hitting an enemy when its guard is down, or to inadvertent escalation when decision-makers begin to think that war can no longer be avoided.
However flexible the notion of minimum deterrence is, force levels in the low hundreds may have been chosen for good reason.
It may therefore be wise to skip those transitional phases immediately above and immediately below zero and go from the low hundreds directly to an NWFW significantly below zero.
That can be done by eliminating weapon-grade materials, dismantling dedicated nuclear infrastructure and redirecting nuclear-weapon expertise before eliminating the remaining weapons.
In other words, the stability of minimum-deterrence postures would be maintained until the stability of an NWFW has been ensured.
Then, and only then, would it be time to move from the one state to the other.
Still, their capabilities will remain different in many respects, especially qualitative ones.
If the commitments to an NWFW are firm and the expectations that it will be achieved are strong, equal or unequal terms some steps earlier will not necessarily matter very much.
In a process perspective, there would be more leeway in the negotiation of transitional steps than in a static perspective where each stage stands on its own and the future is open-ended.
For instance, if a multilateral deal is struck in a static perspective this far, but no promise of going further the NWS are likely to be more sensitive to competitive edges and seek unilateral advantages.
More than in a process perspective pursued in the name of global public goods, the name of the game would be old-fashioned power politics.
In the European Union, which has inspired integration theory more than any other empirical setting, there is the recurrent question of whether integration can stop and stay at some point without unravelling.
Clearly, proliferation is more likely in a static context, where the NWS continue to demonstrate the significance that they attach to nuclear arms, than in a process perspective where proliferators would confront a big majority of states set on the course of continued disarmament.
Stagnation may therefore lead to proliferation, which in turn may lead NWS to rearm.
They expect that the Obama administration will rely on overwhelming United States power, nuclear weapons included, while making rhetorical and substantial commitments to disarmament, however vaguely defined.
It means retention of slimmer arsenals, bringing disarmament to a halt at a level compatible with United States national interest in continued military superiority.
The President has declared higher aims for nuclear disarmament and so have many of his collaborators, but in the face of domestic and international opposition, he may have to strike a national compromise of this kind.
Like the disarmament agreements by the end of the Cold War, which were not followed by new agreements, but by revived national interests in nuclear arms instead, stagnation may be the beginning of reversal.
In SC Resolution 1887, the P5 declared themselves in favour of a world without nuclear weapons.
Still, when it comes to specific measures, they tend to take one step at a time without making any further promises.
To reduce the complexities of nuclear disarmament to a timeline is arguably reductionism beyond reason.
However, at some stage of the process it will be necessary to supplement the NPT, which is but a skeleton agreement to zero, and to define what kind of NWFW to aim for.
A convention defining the rules of the road towards nuclear-weapon freedom can also reduce the action space for spoilers and for unforeseen developments to take the process off-track.
The lessons from the Oslo process on the Middle East and from negotiations with North Korea point in the same direction.
If at all possible, a compressed, comprehensive approach to the final objective has distinct advantages.
Two arguments in support of the process perspective carry particular weight.
First, 60 years of no use does not guarantee another 60 years without the use of nuclear arms.
Second, the threat of mass destruction is morally unacceptable and should be made unambiguously illegal.
Since the effects of nuclear weapons are stronger, more indiscriminate and longerlasting than those of any other weapon, there is all the more reason to ban them.
From both angles, MAD is an appropriate acronym for continued reliance on nuclear deterrence.
Political-order requirements The first stages of the disarmament process US-Russian cuts leading to multilateral talks do not presuppose any change of world order, but imply a distinct shift from antagonistic to cooperative behaviour.
Subsequent stages require more of the same, gradually transforming the current security system based on nuclear deterrence into a system based on cooperation and mutual restraint.
Arms control and disarmament can assume the role of catalyst and amplifier of such a change.
Confidence must be built, confiicts must be alleviated and solved, conventional force relationships must be adjusted and international politics better institutionalised as the process unfolds.
The first test of disarmament as an organising principle was Obama’s use of the re-set button, inviting Russia to follow-up on START 1.
For deeper cuts to be achieved, controversial military problems regarding tactical nuclear weapons, missile defence and new long-range conventional weapons must be solved.
This in turn presupposes that contentious political questions like NATO’s role and reach and other sensitive issues along Russia’s southern borders and towards Iran are better managed to the satisfaction of all concerned.
When multilateral reductions to the low hundreds have been agreed, further steps will depend on fundamental world order changes, for it is from then on that the question of how to live without nuclear deterrence becomes pressing.
Contemplating what world-order changes may be needed to enhance international security and sustain disarmament, references have been made to the socalled “European concert” after the Napoleonic wars, when the European powers undertook to respect each other’s vital interests and exercise restraint in a system characterised by balance of power.
Power emerges from a sense of community and is exercised by an allocation of responsibilities related to a country’s resources.
It is a kind of world order either without a dominating power or in which the potentially dominating power leads through selfrestraint.
A big power concert may be predicated on equilibrium between the participating states or it may be based on consensus.
Generally, the former has been considered less demanding than the latter, although there are few examples of sustained operation of any version of power concerts.
Today, however, when power is shifting so rapidly, a lasting equilibrium is dead on arrival.
Better, then, to focus on norms norms of mutual respect and self-restraint embedded in a growing body of international law,a. with a view to building a platform for effective enforcement action.
The NPT suffers very much from lack of well-functioning enforcement mechanisms.
Not only is it difficult to forge consensus between the P5, but the Security Council is increasingly out of tune with the distribution of power in the international system.
Progress towards a NWFW requires cooperative security between the big powers with a view to more effective collective security mechanisms in the hands of a reformed world organisation.
Interdependence is growing by the day and necessitates broad-based international cooperation on regulatory measures.
However, globalisation is far from portraying a golden age for international norms in general.
Protectionism is back on stage, and liberal internationalism is pitted against state sovereignty, territorial integrity and nonintervention in internal affairs.
In East Asia, rapidly growing economic interdependence is a brake on conflict dynamics in the region.
However, economic cooperation and security policies are conducted along different trajectories.
Starting from the interdependence of the Coal and Steel Union, integration has been going on for more than 50 years.
When the Cold War ended, the European Union and Russia named each other as strategic partners.
Still, Russia and the European nuclear powers threaten to be the first to use nuclear weapons against each other.
There is no reasonable connection between the political sphere and existing nuclear doctrines.
In particular, extended deterrence in the form of forward basing of nuclear weapons and first-use doctrines are deemed increasingly dysfunctional both in Europe and in East Asia.
The EU is based on international rules, norms and standards, and is committed to follow up on them in its external affairs.
The United States is less predictable in this respect because of the likely fluctuations of unilateralism.
Where the United States emphasises military strength and application of military means in international affairs, Europeans emphasise non-military solutions to problems out of conviction as well as necessity, having cut their military investments to the bone after the Cold War.
As for relations with Russia, there are different cultures at work in Eastern Europe, Western Europe, the United States and in Russia itself (see Chapter 1), but there is more to suggest that Russia will be better integrated into European affairs than that it will be kept out.
The danger of nuclear-weapon-use may be highest in South Asia and the Middle East.
These are volatile areas that call for combinations of regional measures and global initiatives.
In the Middle East, the name of the game is a zone free of nuclear weapons or of chemical and biological weapons as well.
These proposals are inextricably linked to the management of the conflict formations in the region.
The 1995 review and extension conference adopted a resolution on the matter, but no progress has been made in implementing it.
Hence, Egypt has not acceded to the CBC, the BWC, the CTBT, the Additional Protocol on safeguards and the Pelindaba Treaty on Africa as a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
The emergence of the Iranian nuclear programme reinforces this attitude and inspires hedging.
Thinking beyond multilateral talks and nuclear arsenals in the low hundreds, the path-dependence of nuclear disarmament blurs the picture.
That far ahead in political time, the nature of world politics defies prediction.
For political leaders to act on complex realities, the realities have to be simplified.
Heuristic assumptions to that effect may be flawed, but by making the move towards a NWFW more thinkable, realisation of it becomes more likely.
Notes I Power shifts and nuclear weapons 1 The term “security dilemma” was coined by John H Herz in Political Realism and Political Idealism.
The British historian Herbert Butterfield described the same situation in History and Human Relations.
Recently, China has begun to exert a reverse pull, investing more in R&D and playing on patriotism.
II “Asians welcomed the United States presence and role as their region’s security and prosperity guarantor not because they loved America the most but because they feared America the least.
A total of 24 IRBM warheads of half-a-megaton yield, slated to be deployed on the IRBMs that never arrived, remained aboard the Alexandrovsk in the port of La Isabella and were not available to Pliyev.
The perceived existence of such a force would constrain and deter the enemy.
We have the right to consider it as a response even without being under actual missile attack.
In Europe, successive reductions brought the number of United States nuclear weapons down to the low hundreds.
Iraq and Iran were viewed as revisionist states wanting to control much of the Middle East, with potentially severe effects on the flow of petroleum to the West.
While it had been United States policy to contain and deter these states, it seems that the original ambition of the Bush administration was to push all anti-status-quo states in the Middle East into obedience by regime change and use of military force if need be.
The B-61-11 bunker-buster bomb was further developed without nuclear testing during the 1990s.
It also lowered the bar for nuclear-weapon use by replacing “war” with “conflict”, a change proposed by the Strategic Command.
Clearly, the emphasis was moved from war between the major powers to regional contingencies, where the nuclear planners anticipated that nuclear weapons might be used in lessintense conflicts than previously envisioned.
The United States reaffirms that it will not use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear-weapon state-parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, except in the case of an invasion or any other attack on the United States, its territories, its armed forces or other troops, its allies, or on a state toward which it has a security commitment carried out, or sustained by such a non-nuclear-weapon state in association or alliance with a nuclear-weapon state.
We have the right to consider it a response even without being under actual missile attack.
The number of nuclear-capable land-based aircraft will be reduced from 60 to 40.
The Obama administration has requested $239. million for prompt global-strike research and development across the military services in fiscal year 2011.
Budget documents indicate that by the end of fiscal year 2015, $2 billion may have been spent on the PGS programme.
PNEs have been found to be of little or no utility, so the article is commonly considered to be a “dead” one.
The reasoning, furthermore, was that the meeting might be convened in the autumn of 2009 midway between the inauguration of a new United States president and the 2010 review conference of the NPT not in the belief that policies of exceptionalism, unilateralism and coalitions of the willing would suddenly be abandoned, but in the hope that they would soon be significantly modified in favour of multilaterally negotiated international agreements, of which the NPT occupies the centre-stage.
I want to remind you that in my first meeting with President Obama in Washington I received from him, and I asked to receive from him, an itemised list of the strategic understandings that have existed for many years between Israel and the United States on this issue.
Terns like “about to attack” and “seeing the attack coming” leave much to interpretation, however.
The downside of it is that pre-emption may trigger inadvertent escalation leading to war.
For instance, during the Cold War, the offensive capabilities along the dividing line in Central Europe were commonly recognised to outweigh the defensive capabilities on the other side, so the temptation to pre-empt would have been strong had one or the other side begun to believe that an attack was coming.
It legitimises certain actions that would otherwise be unlawful, in response to an illegal act by or under the aegis of another state.
Reprisals, too, are subject to the general requirements of necessity and proportionality.
Non-coercive means should be considered before a reprisal is carried out.
There is a substantial body of legal opinion holding that pennissible reprisals are limited to measures other than armed force.
Had a natural uranium blanket been put around the core, some plutonium could have been produced, but without major reconstruction of the reactor it would not have been enough for weapon production.
The HEU that had been stored at the reactor site was not hit by the bombs and stayed there until shortly before the 1991 war, when Saddam Hussein ordered it removed in a futile, last-minute effort to get a bomb.
Had the Iraqis begun to adapt the reactor to make it a better source of plutonium, or removed the HEU it was designed to use, the alarm bell would have rung immediately, for the reactor complex was under IAEA safeguards.
In a much-noted article published in the autumn of 2003, Mohamed ElBaradei proposed a sequence of measures that formed a constructive agenda for further inquiry and action.
The High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change of the United Nations supported many of these measures.
As noted below, the negotiating history sheds light on a number of other measures.
Unqualified non-use assurances to non-nuclear parties to the NPT cover such contingencies, while no-first-use doctrines do not.
If somebody breaks the doctrine, the other NWS would be freed from their obligations.
The prime objective, however, is to prevent a nuclear war from breaking out.
Should it nevertheless occur, self-imposed restraints to spare NNWS of the horrors of nuclear warfare can realistically not be expected in any case, regardless of what kind of assurances that have been given in time of peace.
Paragraph 17 of S/Res/1887 notes ongoing discussions on how the NPT parties could collectively respond to notifications of withdrawal and affirms that a state remains responsible under international law for violations of the NPT committed prior to its withdrawal.
First, we must stop the spread of nuclear weapons, and seek the goal of a world without them.
Richard Lugar said the agreement was one of the most important strategic diplomatic initiatives undertaken in the last decade.
The NSG gave its consent on 6 September, and the bill was introduced to Congress on 10 September.
In order to conclude the deal before the Congressional recess, the Hyde Act of 2006 which required that Congress be in 30 days of continuous session to consider the deal had to be sidestepped.
Subramaniam is head of Prime Minister Singh’s Global Strategic Development Task Force.
After the Agreement was concluded, India made a deal with Russia to import 2,000 metric tons of uranium, and made an agreement with Kazakhstan that includes provisions for natural uranium deliveries to India.
On the one hand, there would be the NNWS, required to put all their activities under safeguards, and on the other, the NWS which should be trusted not to divert nuclear material from their unsafeguarded civilian reactors, fuel-fabrication plants, etc.
To avoid yet another differential treatment in favour of the NWS, all civilian activities should also be placed under safeguards in these countries.
The NPT mandates that safeguards agreements be concluded within 18 months of the Treaty’s entry into force, so failure to do so is a violation of the Treaty.
Reinforcing the Global Nuclear Order for Peace and Prosperity, Report prepared by an independent commission at the request of the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, May 2008.
No international legal instrument obliging the parties to stay non-nuclear had been established, and the safeguards that were introduced in the second decade had limited coverage.
In this period, the P5 did not conduct their nuclear-weapons programmes under the guise of dual-use facilities.
The existence of the programmes could not be hidden given the size of gaseous diffusion facilities.
The dual-use option became attractive later on when there were more technologies and facilities to hide behind and when non-proliferation nomis, obligations and safeguards had begun to take hold.
India and Pakistan were the last ones not to violate any such commitment.
Waldo Stumpf, former Chief Executive Officer of the Nuclear Energy Corporation of South Africa, appointed by Frederik de Klerk to lead the dismantlement of the weapons programme, in a 1995 lecture entitled, “The Birth and Death of the South African Nuclear Weapons Programme”, delivered in Castiglioncello in Italy.
It was not until 24 March 1993 that President de Klerk publicly revealed to the Parliament and to the world that South Africa had built nuclear weapons.
It was never turned into law, but have been repeated by Japanese leaders ever since.
In the 1960s, the number was fast increasing because of the decolonisation wave.
A favoured way out is multinational or international solutions to the fuelcycle problems.
These are complex propositions, however, and they have yet to be applied in any region of proliferation concern.
Prohibited under the NPT are activities unambiguously related to nuclear-weapon production, such as weapon-design studies and development of implosion mechanisms.
They were insurance, it seemed, against losing the whole program at once.
The SCO consists of China, Russia and the Central Asian states except Turkmenistan.
While Hymans suggests that such leaders are rare, in Iran this is a common state of mind.
Whether it was a genuine offer, a means of alleviating a dire threat to Iranian security at that point in time, a matter of buying time for its nuclear programme, or a combination of these factors, remains unclear.
It is one of the pre-emptive measures aimed at protecting our nuclear technology and human work force_This site ... was selected on purpose in a place that would be protected against aerial attack.
Thomas Erdbrink, “Ahmadinejad vows dramatic expansion of Iran’s nuclear program”, Washington Post Foreign Service, 30 November 2009.
However, when levelled in the name of nonproliferation, the sympathisers would be fewer.
The NIE also concluded, with a lower level of confidence, that the weapons-oriented activities have not been resumed.
In Europe, respect for other countries’ systems of government was a confidence-building measure that facilitated agreement on human rights and political freedoms.
In due course, however, the promotion of those rights and freedoms tend to translate into systemic change.
This way, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe ) became a precursor to regime-change in Eastern Europe in the wake of the Cold War.
In 2003, it said it withdrew because it was designated by the United States as part of the “Axis of Evil” and targeted by the United States pre-emptive strike policy.
The 2005 NPT Review Conference failed even to note what North Korea had done.
See “Joint Declaration on the Denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula”, 1992.
The October 2007 Accord did not say that the weapons that North Korea has produced should be eliminated.
On 13 February 2007, the parties had reached agreement on “Initial Actions for the Implementation of the Joint Statement”, in which North Korea undertook to close down and seal the facilities in Yongbyon and invite the IAEA back to monitor and verify these actions.
The core concept of Juche is the ability to act independently without regard to outside interference.
Originally described as a creative application of Marxism-Leninism in the national context, Juche is a malleable philosophy reinterpreted from time to time by the regime as its ideological needs change.
It was a Canadian reactor of this kind that produced plutonium for India’s explosion in 1974, and Israel got the same type of reactor in the early 1960s.
Had the Agency also asked for special inspections in other, less-sensitive settings than the North Korean one, the reaction may have been different.
North Korea was not ready to make its nuclear programme fully transparent.
The United States indicated that it would support the introduction of lightwater reactors in the DPRK, and Pyongyang suggested that it would invite the IAEA to implement safeguards to the Agency’s satisfaction.
Later, that willingness abated, as became obvious in connection with the occupation of Iraq in 2003.
KEDO selected the South Korean designed Ulchin 3^ LWR as the reference model for the project and a South Korean finn to be the prime contractor.
South Korea undertook to cover most of the costs, of the order of $3 billion.
In the view of Christopher Hill, the United States negotiator, it meant that in the event North Korea wanted to restart its facilities in Yongbyon, it would take approximately a year to do so.
After the breakdown of the Agreed Framework, the North Koreans resumed construction of the 50MWe reactor, but the progress was slow.
Chinese observers emphasise that the Soviet Union should never have let Estonia and the other Baltic states go.
France also looked at the British Empire, which was considered to be stronger than the French, and saw it was declining.
For France, it was therefore important not to be sliding on a downward slope.
By comparison, Iran’s influence in the Middle East has been growing in recent years.
The challenge for Iran is that its influence is stiffly contested by the US, Arab states and others, which are building the broadest possible coalitions against it.
Okada released the Japanese version of the letter at a press conference in Tokyo on 22 January 2010.
These and other statements by a great many leaders, individually and jointly, show that the interest in reviving the objective of a NWFW has also spread to the political mainstream in countries that had not been very vocal on this matter in the past.
A third article by the “four horsemen” in the Wall Street Journal of 19 January 2010 advocates increased support for the stewardship programme in order to maintain the safety, security and reliability of the nuclear arsenal.
On 29 January, Vice President Biden announced that the administration’s FY 2011 budget proposed an increase of $600 million, and $5 billion more for the next five years.
Kant warns that by following narrow prudential interests, leaders of victorious states undermine the possibility of constructing a durable peace, which is the ultimate aim of warfare.
The same warning applies to arms control as a tool of unilateral advantage.
During the United States unipolar moment, the web of arms-control agreements broke up under the pressure of aggressive United States unilateralism, and the most important remaining treaty the NPT was used to promote United States non-proliferation interests while neglecting those parts that constrain United States freedom of action.
This was done at the expense of trust between nations, casting a shadow of suspicion into the future that jeopardises the prospects for anus control and disanuament.
We have conducted more than 1,000 nuclear tests hundreds more than anyone else.
Would-be proliferators or modernisers, however, must test if they are to develop the kind of advanced, compact nuclear weapons that are the most threatening.
The United Kingdom and Norway are doing a joint project, the first of its kind between a nuclearand a non-nuclear-weapon state.
The proposition is very attractive, and by a Board of Governors’ decision of 1992, the IAEA is already in a position to make use of information stemming from non-governmental sources.
However, Russia and China are far from ready to institutionalise a verification system that recognises nongovernmental actors.
As long as this is the case, it is better not to burden the process with ideas that are incompatible with their traditions and political systems.
Unqualified non-use assurances to non-nuclear parties to the NPT would cover such contingencies, while no-first-use doctrines do not.
However, the prime objective is to prevent a nuclear war from breaking out; and, should it nevertheless happen, self-imposed restraints to spare NNWS of the horrors of nuclear warfare can realistically not be expected in any case, regardless of what kind of assurances have been given in time of peace.
Bar, S “Iranian Nuclear Decision Making Under Ahmadinejad”, paper submitted to the fourth Herzliya Conference, Tel Aviv.
Barma, N., Ratner, E and Weber, S “A World Without the Wesf’, The National Interest, The Nixon Center.
Bedjaoui, M “Address from Mohammed Bedjaoui, Fornier President of the International Court of Justice and Foreign Ministry of Algeria”, at the Conference on Trident and International Law.
Center for Nonproliferation Studies, the Monterey Institute of International Studies, forthcoming.
Bobo, L “Medvedev and the New European Security Architecture”, policy brief.
Bond-Graham, D and Parish, W “Anti-Nuclear Nuclearism”, Foreign Policy in Focus.
Borger, J “Burma Suspected of Forming Nuclear Link with North Korea”, guardian.co.uk.
China and Southeast Asia in the New Century, Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.
Consequences of Preventive Military Action Against Iran”, Agenda: Iran, The Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
Goldblat, J “Should the Right to Withdraw from the NPT be Withdrawn?”, paper commissioned by the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
Goldschmidt, P “Strengthening the Non-Proliferation Regime”, paper for the Seventh ROK-UN Joint Conference on Disamiament.
Hecker, S “Lessons Learned from the North Korea Nuclear Crises”, Daedalus.
IAEA Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement in the Syrian Republic, GOV/2008/60, 19 November.
IAEA “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and Relevant Provisions of Security Council Resolutions 1737 , 1747 , 1803 , and 1835 in the Islamic Republic of Iran”, report by the Director General.
International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disannament Eliminating Nuclear Threats, Canberra/Tokyo.
Joshi, S “China to Accept Arunachal Pradesh as Indian and India to Accept Aksai Chin as Chinese a Secret Agreement in the Making”, India Daily.
Kajita, T “ United States Concerned By Japan’s Changes in Foreign Policy”, The Japan Times.
Lake, E “Obama Agrees to Keep Israel’s Nukes Secret”, Washington Times.
The Center for Contemporary Conflict, United States Naval Postgraduate School.
Conversations avec Dulles, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Rusk, 1958-1964, Paris, Flammarion.
Leverett, F and Leverett, H “When Will the Obama Administration Try Actually Engaging Iran?”, The Race for Iran.
Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation Immediate Tasks of Development of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
Hype or Reality?”, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.
Nicholas Burns, R “Briefing on the Bilateral Agreement for Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation ”, United States Department of State, 27 July.
Nielsen, Jenny “Engaging India, Israel and Pakistan in Non-Proliferation”, Disarmament Diplomacy, Autumn.
NPT/CONF .2000/PC .11/8 NPT/CONF2.2010/PCIIIAVP.7, paragraphs 11 and 12.
Obama, B Remarks by the President “On a New Beginning” , The White House, Office of the Press Secretary.
Office of the Secretary of Defense “Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2007”, Annual Report to United States Congress.
Why Not Outlaw Them First?”, in G Perkovich and J Acton Abolishing Nuclear Weapons: a Debate, Carnegie Endowment for Peace.
A Strategy for Nuclear Security, Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Price, R “Nuclear Weapons Don’t Kill People, Rogues Do”, International Politics, Vol., Nos 2-3.
US-China-India relations in eclectic perspective”, paper presented at the annual conference of the American Political Science Association.
Rumsfeld, D Foreword to the new Nuclear Posture Review, submitted to Congress on 8 January 2002.
Arms Limitations and Security Policies to Minimize Nuclear Proliferation, London: Taylor and Francis.
Steps Toward a World Free of Nuclear Weapons , Hoover Institution Press.
W.J., Kissinger, H.A. and Nunn, S “A World Free of Nuclear Weapons”, Wall Street Journal, A15.
W.J., Kissinger, FI.A. and Nunn, S “Toward a Nuclear-Free World”, Wall Street Journal.
Shultz, P., Perry, W.J., Kissinger, FI.A. and Nunn, S “Flow to Protect our Nuclear Deterrenf’, Wall Street Journal.
KW Publishers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi, in association with Centre for Air Power Studies.
Sokov, N “Russian Academy of Military Sciences Debates Role of Nuclear Weapons in Conference on New Military Doctrine”, WMD Insights.
Towards Development, Security and Human Rights For All”, report of the Secretary General.
Our Shared Responsibility”, the report of The High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change of the United Nations.
United States Department of Defense “Military Power of the People’s Republic of China”, Annual Report to Congress.
Steps Towards Theory-Building”, occasional paper #18 from the Joan B Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies.
Selections from the Writings of Rear Admiral Alfred T Mahan, Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.
White House The National Security Strategy of the United States of America.
White House President Bush’s speech on non-proliferation issues, 11 February.
Yan, X “The Rise of China and its Power Status”, Chinese Journal of International Politics, Vol., Nos 5-33.
