A year earlier the United States and the Soviet Union had already stood 'eyeball to eyeball' over Berlin.
Only recently have we begun to learn something about what happened, but we still do not have an accurate and comprehensive account of the diplomatic and military action taken by the British government.
This article draws upon recent British and American literature to pose some questions about the British government's attitude and behaviour during the crisis in advance of the release of the official papers.
These should be of interest and concern both to historians and to the general public.
On the evening of Monday 22 October 1962 President John F Kennedy appeared on national television to announce the verified discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
A naval blockade or 'quarantine' was imposed around Cuba and American strategic forces were placed on Defence Condition 3 , just short of full readiness for war.
Squadrons of B-52 nuclear bombers lifted off from their bases to join the Strategic Air Command 's airborne alert as a precaution against surprise attack.
Recent studies of the crisis have benefited from access to American archive material and personal recollection.
The twenty-fifth anniversary provoked considerable interest from scholars and participants and there have been a number of significant revelations since that to cast new light on events.
This was only possible because so many of the senior officials of the Kennedy administration at the time of the crisis had still been in their thirties or early forties.
Fascinatingly the debates between the policy-makers yielded rather more questions than answers, and there remain criticisms of oral history as a reliable technique of inquiry.
But the received wisdom is being challenged by information newly available from conferences, interviews and correspondence and from previously classified transcripts, cables, memos and reports.
There is still disagreement on how close the world was to nuclear war; on the significance of American nuclear superiority; on Khrushchev's objectives in putting the missiles into Cuba; on whether Kennedy would have used force against Cuba or 'gone the extra mile for peace' if Khrushchev had not backed down when he did.
Some of these questions require consideration of evidence from the Soviet side.
Oral evidence has emerged particularly through conferences organised under Harvard auspices, but access to Soviet archives is only now beginning and many fundamental questions about Soviet decision-making and behaviour remain unanswered.
The story of the British side of the Cuban missile crisis is as yet untold.
British archives are not due to be opened until 1993 and many of the British participants are dead.
Remarkable, even by American standards oiglasnost, is the fact that US nuclear targeting plans for 1962 have been declassified.
At the political level the minutes of the British Cabinet and its relevant committees are unlikely to compare with the transcripts of the Executive Committee of the National Security Committee President Kennedy's defacto cabinet during the crisis.
Whitehall's craft of minutetaking is of importance in charting policy-making but limits the value of the record in assessing the nature of debates or the views of individuals.
This is all the more so where the participants are unaware that their words are being recorded as members of Ex Comm were.
So far, the Ex Comm meetings of 16 and 27 October have been transcribed and declassified.
So too have the transatlantic phone conversations between Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan on Monday 22 October, Wednesday 24 and Friday 26 October.
Macmillan's biographer, Alistair Horne, made clear that these provide invaluable insights into the nature and extent of British-American discussions during the public week of the crisis.
Likewise, Macmillan's diary made at the time should be of value in assessing British perspectives and the British role.
Some recent disclosures have very important implications for the British dimension of the Cuban missile crisis.
In addition to American revelations there have also been some memoirs and recollections on the British side, most notably by Air Vice-Marshal Menaul.
According to the account of Air Vice-Marshal 'Paddy' Menaul during the week of the Cuban missile crisis British strategic nuclear forces were placed on a high state of alert and readiness.
The bases of Bomber Command were sealed, their perimeters secured by armed patrols and the V-bombers with their thermo-nuclear bombs and Blue Steel airlaunched nuclear missiles made ready.
It is somewhat surprising that the actions of the Royal Air Force have not been scrutinised or publicly debated.
On 24 October the United States' Strategic Air Command was placed on DEFCON2, a state of alert denoting readiness for combat.
At that time Bomber Command was engaged in a regular alert and readiness exercise.
The Commander-in-Chief of Bomber Command, Air Marshal Sir Kenneth Cross, ordered the training alert to be extended.
Then on 27 October, the day known as 'Black Saturday', when an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba, the British state of alert was strengthened.
The RAF's 170180 V-bombers and 60 Thor Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles were prepared for action.
Menaul states that both the bombers and the missiles were at 15 minutes readiness.
He appears to indicate that all the decisions were taken by the Commander-inChief of Bomber Command, rather than by the Chiefs of Staff or indeed by ministers.
His view is that actions taken were within guidelines for training exercises, and this presumably precluded the need for ministerial involvement.
Some of these questions are speculative, but there are substantive issues involved which should yield to investigation of the official record and further public enquiry.
Prima facie evidence suggests that the actions of the RAF were not taken at ministerial behest.
Alistair Home recounts that on 22 October the Prime Minister was urged by General Norstad, the Supreme Allied Commander Europe , to place British forces on a higher state of readiness.
The Prime Minister refused and told Norstad that mobilisation sometimes led to war.
Macmillan did agree to 'certain precautionary measures affecting the RAF""6 although he appears to have been unaware of the extent of the air force's preparations as the crisis reached its climax.
Apparently, the Foreign Secretary, Alec Douglas-Home, was completely unaware of the measures which Menaul describes.
Aspects of the role of the British Ambassador have been known for some time.
When he was briefed on the impending naval blockade on 23 October, the Ambassador suggested that the plan for intercepting the ships be amended to give Khrushchev more time to change his mind.
He is also credited with having persuaded Kennedy to accept Macmillan's advice and publish the photographic evidence of the missiles to sway world and European public opinion.
So far, little archive material has been uncovered that sheds light on the British diplomatic role in the crisis.
Home's account confirms the view that the British first began to suspect what was happening before they were told.
On Saturday the President invited the British Ambassador for Sunday lunch to tell him what had been discovered.
At noon on Monday David Bruce, the American Ambassador in London, met Macmillan to convey a personal message from the President and show him the photographs.
I have found it absolutely essential, in the interest of security and speed, to make my first decision on my own responsibility, but now on I expect that we can and should be in the closest touch, and I know that together with our friends we shall resolutely meet this challenge .. .21 Later that night Kennedy phoned for the first of their transatlantic conversations.
The scale and extent of British-American consultation will only become clear with careful examination of the relevant archives.
How far the British were consulted and how far this entailed influence are key issues.
Ormsby-Gore commented 'I can't honestly think of anything said from London that changed the United States action it was chiefly reassurance to JFK ...m Yet there were important reasons why British and other European governments had cause to be consulted.
First, October 1962 was the anniversary of the occasion when the streets of Berlin saw Soviet and American tanks face each other across Checkpoint Charlie.
For over 16 hours on 27 October 1961 the tanks stood only 75 yards apart, the Americans with their gun racks loaded and made ready for firing.
Both Kennedy and Macmillan believed that Soviet actions in the Caribbean were part of a strategy for resolving the Berlin situation in the Soviet Union's favour.
Second, while the myths of the missile and bomber gaps had by then been dispelled, Soviet theatre nuclear forces were considerable.
There were those including the former commander of SAC, General Curtis LeMay who believed that a strategic nuclear war could have been fought at the time with 'normal expectable' American losses.
Europe however remained very much in the front line of a prospective nuclear war.
Third, NATO had deployed land-based missiles and aircraft in Europe capable of reaching the Soviet Union, notably the Thor IRBMs in Britain and Jupiter IRBMs in Italy and Turkey.
Khrushchev's own account emphasises the importance of the Turkish Jupiters in his decision to install the missiles in Cuba.
In addition the role of these Jupiters in the eventual solution of the crisis remains a subject for debate.
In his foreword to Robert Kennedy's posthumous account Macmillan proclaimed that his own position was one of 'complete support for the President at every stage' including for 'his most difficult decision ... the refusal, against the advice of weaker brethren in America and elsewhere,. to yielding to the specious Russian offers of a face-saving accommodation at the expense of America's allies' a reference to the proposal for a trade on the Turkish Jupiters.
Anatoly Dobrynin has also testified to the existence of this arrangement.
In the context of the 'special relationship' the degree to which the United States consulted or even informed its closest ally on this issue of crucial importance to European security and the NATO alliance is of great interest.
Either he did and was an accomplice or he was kept in the dark, like all the other European governments.
Careful scrutiny of the official record may or may not yield answers to this fascinating question.
A fourth consideration is that Britain provided bases for SAC and other American nuclear forces.
During the 1973 Middle-East crisis American F-lll nuclear fighter bombers and other United States forces in Britain were placed on DEFCON-3.35 This caused an outcry in Britain when it became known that the British government had not been consulted or informed.
SAC did have B-47 nuclear bombers operating from British bases at this time and SAC units in Britain were placed on alert.
However, at the suggestion of General Norstad, American forces in Europe moved to a less complete alert than forces based in the United States for fear of undermining Western European political support.
According to Menaul, Bomber Command was informed by SAC that the Americans had gone to DEFCON-2, although he says they were told on 25 October, the day after the United States Air Force was moved to the higher state of alert.
Moreover his account suggests that the lines of communication were at the military, rather than the political level.
These issues assume a greater significance when an extraordinary fact about the American DEFCON-2 alert is considered.
American strategic nuclear forces have only been ready for combat on this one occasion.
The decision to place American bombers and missiles on a war footing was taken by President Kennedy on 24 October, as the naval quarantine around Cuba came into force.
Soviet intelligence would presumably have heard USAFB-52s flying toward the Soviet Union, receiving orders to prepare for war.
If the Soviet leadership had misinterpreted the signals it is conceivable that they could have considered pre-emptive action, given the nature of Soviet strategic doctrine at the time, including attacks against SAC bombers in Britain, as well as against RAF bombers and missiles.
We do not know what General Powers told his colleagues in Bomber Command about this extraordinary piece of military initiative.
One specific issue arises in the context of British-American relations the Thor IRBMs.
These were armed with one megaton warheads and were less than 25 minutes flying time from targets in the Soviet Union.
They had been deployed in Britain since 1958, at the request of President Eisenhower.
They were dual-key systemsthe RAF owned the missiles, the USAF owned the warheads and the active consent of both countries was therefore necessary to fire them.
The United States had been keen to deploy IRBMs in Europe at this time to compensate for perceived weaknesses in its ICBM strength.
This raises important questions about dual key control and the military and political consultations between the British and American governments.
Any launch order simulated or otherwise had to be authenticated by both RAF and USAF officers at Bomber Command in High Wycombe and it took several hours to prepare the missiles.
Therefore, with or without the warheads, for the Thors to have been at 15 minutes readiness, USAF involvement was necessary.
However, by that stage in the launch procedure the USAF might not have been needed at all.
According to an RAF officer, who attended simulated launches of Thors, at one such test, and with zero hour approaching, the American officer who had the necessary key had not appeared.
An RAF officer produced a screwdriver and by inserting it in the other key-hole enabled the simulated launch to take place.
According to a visiting American Congressman the RAF missile control officers possessed both keys necessary to arm the warhead.
In his memoirs Harold Macmillan refers to the fact that 'some rather devious approaches had been made to the Foreign Office, alleged to come from a member of the Russian Mission'.45 During the debate on the Profumo affair Macmillan referred to the role of Dr Stephen Ward and Captain I vano v, the Soviet Naval Attache, in the Cuban crisis.
On 24 October Captain Ivanov, known to British Intelligence as an officer of Soviet Military Intelligence , visited Ward to ask him to pass a message to the British government.
The message was that if Macmillan called a summit conference, Khrushchev would accept the invitation, turn his ships around and discuss the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba.
Ward passed the suggestion on and it reached the Permanent Secretary of the Foreign Office, Sir Harold Caccia.
Ivanov also used a back-bench Conservative MP, Sir Godfrey Nicholson, a friend of Ward, to communicate with the Foreign Office.
Nicholson delivered Ivanov's message to Caccia, and apparently the Head of the Joint Intelligence Committee, Sir Hugh Stephenson, was also briefed.
Macmillan and Home discussed the approaches but the Prime Minister suspected Soviet attempts to drive wedges between Britain and the United States and the bait was refused.1 Macmillan clearly believed that he was dealing with a genuine message from Khrushchev.
However, it has recently been suggested that a corresponding approach in Washington was made independently of Moscow.
The Soviet diplomat, Aleksandr Fomin, whose real name was apparently Aleksandr Feklisov, was the KGB Station Chief in Washington.
Hours later a letter from Khrushchev arrived, including a similar deal.
The crisis did not abate until the 28 October, but the events of the Friday were the beginning of the end, and it has frequently been assumed that Fomin's actions were carefully coordinated with Khrushchev.
Doubt has now been cast on this, and it has been suggested that the KGB officer, acting in consultation with Ambassador Dobrynin, acted independently of Moscow.
What is not in doubt is that Fomin's actions had a material influence on how Kennedy and his advisers read Khrushchev's first letter.
The KGB may well have played a quite crucial role in the peaceful resolution of the crisis.
Whether the approach in London was likewise independent is open to question.
The implications of this may well require further exploration in the archives in both London and Moscow.
Conclusion We do not know the British Government's views on the unfolding of the Cuban missiles crisis.
We do not know how it assessed the risks involved and in particular the risk of war in Europe.
We do not know how the British Cabinet viewed American policy and in particular the implications of the withdrwal of the Turkish Jupiters.
We do know something about the consultation at heads of government level and at the military level.
But it is yet unclear whether these were part of a coherent pattern of relations or reflected a degree of military independence from political control.
The Kennedys both quoted Barbara Tuchman's book, The Guns of August, on the outbreak of the Great War.
Yet the President initiated a comparable mobilisation of America's nuclear forces.
We know Macmillan opposed the idea of similar steps in Britain at the start of the crisis.
We do not know whether he agreed or was aware of the various preparations of British and British-based American nuclear forces.
We do not know if Britain exercised any influence in Washington and there is nothing in the Ex Comm transcripts to challenge Ormsby-Gore's assessment of Britain's influence, or Alistair Home's conclusion that the principal British role was to provide support for the United States in particular by stiffening the resolve of Europe and the Commonwealth.
Perhaps most intriguingly in the light of the debate about the British 'independent nuclear deterrent' we do not know what part Britain played in Soviet calculations.
If as McGeorge Bundy argues (in the context of the Soviet nuclear arsenal at the time) 'a little nuclear deterrence goes a long way', what role did the British nuclear force with or without the Thors play in Soviet thinking.
With the opening of the PRO files, the continuing march of glasnost and the American Freedom of Information Act answers to these questions may soon become possible.
James Blight and David Welch, On the Brink provides accounts and analyses of various conferences and interviews in 1987.
Anthony Summers and Stephen Dorril, Honeytrap The Secret Worlds of Stephen Ward ,129.
