After a cold start, the mercury hit 71 degrees, six degrees above normal.
Successes and Failures International efforts, such as the Paris Agreement, aim to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
But experts say countries aren’t doing enough to limit dangerous global warming.
Backgrounder by Lindsay Maizland January 31, 2022 Americas Asia Europe & Eurasia Global Commons Middle East & North Africa Oceania Sub-Saharan Africa Explainers Featured Pharmaceuticals and Vaccines A Guide to Global COVID-19 Vaccine Efforts The swift development of effective vaccines against COVID-19 was an unprecedented scientific achievement.
But production challenges, vaccine nationalism, and omicron and other variants have all presented hurdles.
Backgrounder by Claire Felter April 1, 2022 Backgrounders In Briefs Podcasts Videos Timelines Special Projects InfoGuides Research & Analysis Featured Climate Change Reflecting Sunlight to Reduce Climate Risk Reflecting sunlight should be considered a potential stopgap for rising global temperatures, argues Stewart M Patrick.
We are delighted to have Natasha Warikoo with us to talk about diversity, equity, and inclusion in college and university admissions.
And Other Dilemmas of Race, Admissions, and Meritocracy at Elite Universities.
I thought you could just take us through the current diversity, equity, and inclusion strategies in college and university admissions, and what you’ve seen over the course of your career, and where you see this going.
So what I thought I would do, as I thought about this question about DEI and admissions, is sort of to take us—to zoom out a little bit.
So I’ll talk about affirmative action because I think when we think about DEI in the context of admissions that’s sort of what immediately comes to mind.
But I want to take us broader and think also just about admissions more broadly.
So I want to start by saying that I think we need to move away from this idea that there is one best, most fair way of admitting students to college.
You work—the narrative is that you work hard, and you can get—you show your grit, and you show your achievements, and you can get in.
And then in that context, affirmative action becomes one small kind of fix to ensure that the system is fair to everyone, along with things like increasing financial aid and recruiting around the country so students are aware of the university.
And I found this in my interviews with Ivy League students in Diversity Bargain, I found that students—they thought that admissions worked, and it was because affirmative action kind of corrected underrepresentation.
And they were satisfied with how admissions were done, despite the fact that multiple groups, including working-class students, Black students, and Latinx students, continue to be underrepresented.
A recent study of college mission statements found that these three goals endure.
Most college mission statements express commitments to teaching, as well as the public good, inculcating civic values.
And in general, United States universities see themselves as much more kind of embedded in the fabric of society compared to expressing the goal of bettering society, making it more equitable, commitments to diversity, much more so than universities in Europe and Britain.
And many Americans also imagine higher education to be a kind of engine for social mobility.
We think about, you know, since the 1950s the expansion of higher education.
We sort of look to higher education as a mechanism for bettering ourselves and our futures.
So what colleges do—when they admit students, then, should be in pursuit of these goals, not—again, not an individual certification of merit, or who’s deserving.
And I think that colleges really need to make this goal to prospective and current students explicit.
So rather than talking about, oh, this year we have the best class ever, the lowest admit rate ever.
We should be really sort of talking about admissions in the context of what we’re trying to do as a university and embedded in society.
So the late Lani Guinier in her book The Tyranny of Merit argued that we should consider college admissions as a mechanism to a more robust democracy.
And when we do that, Guinier argued that it should lead us to discard standardized testing as a part of the application process in favor of broad, inclusive representation.
And I want to argue, if we consider the goal of social mobility, it becomes even more unclear why certain kinds of measures of academic achievement in general have become the central focus for college admissions.
In fact, one might even make the case that academics should play the opposite role to what it plays.
If colleges want to promote social mobility, perhaps admissions should be akin to means-tested social supports, provided to those who need it most whether because of their financial—the financial hardships that their families endure, racial exclusion, or weak academic skills.
Families of a majority of students at top colleges pay more per year—you know, are not on financial aid, pay more per year than the median household income in the United States.
And a 4. grade point average, of course, seems increasingly to be a prerequisite to even be considered for admissions at top colleges, especially if you’re not a child of an alum or a donor—a high-profile donor.
So, I think it’s hard to shake the belief that selective colleges should foreground achievement in admissions and that there’s one best way to do this.
Unlike the labor market, for which we understand that applicants are chosen for jobs on the basis of what a company needs not a reward for the kind of best applicant, you know, we understand that the marketing job would go to a different person than the head of engineering job, and that would be a different person from the head of finance job.
But in higher education, we describe admissions as a reward for hard work and dedication.
But seeing admissions as a competition to decide who’s the most deserving reinforces ideas about who’s deserving and undeserving.
Again, given the outcomes of admissions, it says that people who are economically advantaged, who are White, who are Asian American, are more worthy and deserving, because those groups tend to be who are the ones that are rewarded in the admissions process.
So this tension between an individualist, winner-takes-all meritocracy and a process of selection that seeks to fulfill multiple missions of research, teaching, and the public good, and social mobility, is what lies, to me, at the heart of controversies over affirmative action.
I see it less as a kind of fix to this individual meritocracy, but rather as a critical policy, an important policy, that promotes four important organizational goals.
This is the argument that the United States Supreme Court, starting in the 1978 Bakke decision has said is allowable under the law.
Well, as long as you have a narrowly tailored version of attention to race, then, you know, if you are looking at race in order to fulfill a university mission of having a diverse learning environment in which everyone flourishes, then that is allowed.
And since then, there’s been decades of research from social scientists showing all of the benefits from these diverse environments in terms of cognitive capacity, racial attitudes, civic participation in the future.
Now, I highlight in my book, The Diversity Bargain, the problem with solely talking about this kind of diverse learning environment argument is that it ignores inequality.
And colleges, I think, need to do a lot better job of talking about racial inequality, the racial inequality that is really the root of—and the history of affirmative action.
And when we think about the goal of promoting social mobility and opportunity, we have to take into consideration race in admissions.
I won’t go through all of this, but just to say that, sometimes people say, well, it’s related to class and not race.
But even within the same social class, we see racially different opportunities.
So working-class Whites tend to live in more advantaged neighborhoods than working-class Blacks.
And a recent study found that Black—upper middle-class Black adults—excuse me.
Black adults who grew up in upper middle-class families are much more likely to experience downward mobility than are White adults who grew up in upper middle-class families.
And so we see this kind of intergenerational differences in terms of the transmission of privilege.
And reparations not just from the harms of slavery, but also from United States intervention in foreign wars abroad.
And, again, if we think about these organizational goals of playing a civic role, and these universities as wanting to be kind of bastions of racial equity, we know that many elite colleges have benefitted from the slave trade, from slave labor, from—you know, have had faculty who have sort of been part of the foreign policies that led to poverty in other countries.
And so reparations is another way that I think—another institutional goal that can be met through affirmative action.
President Obama talked about how he thinks he benefitted from affirmative action, just as Sotomayor talks about how she was an affirmative action baby.
If we think that that symbolic representation matters—and it matters in order for leadership to be seen as legitimate, to be—for people to be seen—to see leadership that looks like them is increasingly important.
And so, again, thinking about the contribution to society, this is one small way that higher education—a role that higher education can play.
So the last thing I want to say about this is that any way you admit students, there are winners and there are losers.
When I talk to British students, they—Britain has a very different way of admitting students, but they think their way is the best.
And even within the U.S., we’ve changed the way we define merit and admit students over time as well.
And so history suggests that reasonable people and selective colleges will disagree about how to admit students.
So overall, I want to—I think we need to change our typical vision for college admissions as an individualist, meritocratic competition.
When we consider affirmative action within a broader consideration of the purposes of selective higher education in the U.S., we can see its true worth.
College admission is not and should not be an evaluation of the worthiness or deservingness of individuals.
And, you know, we need greater representation to make sure our future leaders are exposed to diverse perspectives and lived experiences, that our future leadership is seen as legitimate.
Colleges in the United States are embedded in a society plagued by rampant inequality, including racial inequality, and one in which we often turn to education as a mechanism to address that inequality.
And so, I think the lack of clarity sometimes on university purposes allowed families to map their own meanings onto selection.
And I think that universities need to correct these misunderstandings explicitly.
So, of course, affirmative action is enough to fully address the diverse roles of our universities.
And its impact might be paltry compared to increasing financial aid, increasing funding for state and community colleges, increasing funding for Historically Black Colleges and Universities, social supports for working-class and poor families.
We should pursue all of them, alongside affirmative action, and not as a replacement.
And so, supporting affirmative action doesn’t preclude supporting an expansion of all these other provisions to increase equity, either within higher education or beyond.
And now we are going to go to all of you for your questions and comments.
I have a few comments, but I also then want to raise a question on something that was not covered.
As you probably know, Manuel Justiz and I wrote the book in 2001 on The Quest for Equity in Higher Education.
And you probably know a number of my colleagues, like Roger Geiger, dealing with historical aspects.
For example, of how testing came into place, because there were too many Jewish students at elite universities like Yale and Harvard.
I should tell you also that I am still a professor of higher education and international policy studies.
And what we often see is there’s these changes that occur that don’t necessarily reflect what is done in the actual admissions office.
The second really critical issue, and you’re welcome to read my book that’s just coming out—it actually came out this past month, about three days ago, on higher education policy in developing and Western countries.
Parents are doing everything to be in that higher education university, whether it’s a public Ivy like Berkeley, or Texas, or Wisconsin, or Virginia.
And no one is raising—or, very few people are raising these questions about second-tier.
And the United States News and World Report, of course, is one that many American parents will look at, but internationally it’s the Times Higher Education and QS, for example.
Because historically and currently, many of the people who are in DEI are people of color.
So they’re really not involved in the admission process, whether at the undergraduate or the graduate level.
Well, I didn’t know that your book was out, so I’m super excited to read it.
It’s clear that the rankings are just—have this terrible influence in higher education.
I don’t know if you’ve seen that book by Wendy Espeland and Michael Sauder, I forgot the title of it, but they basically did this study of—they looked at law schools and how law schools seem to respond to rankings and how it’s sort of changing the organizations.
When you rank people—we’re so obsessed with selection and ranking in the United States that when you have this system people are always looking up.
Like, oh, OK, well, if there’s a ranking and I’m number ten, I want to be number nine, and then I want to be number eight.
And then they’re trying to figure out ways to sort of increase their standing.
And they are doing things like rather than more financial aid for—based on what your family needs, merit-based financial aid, which is their way of bringing in students with higher SAT scores to bump their average SAT score, so that they can get a bump in the rankings.
And I think the most elite colleges maybe can get away with not participating, but I think the lower-status colleges say, well, if we don’t participate then, they look for the data and then just put us lower than we should be.
I think it will take an organized effort to sort of move away from those rankings.
And they—ultimately, they hurt students who are—who don’t have the educational opportunities as much as privileged students do.
In terms of DEI, I think that this is a problem not just in higher education.
I think in the corporate sector, all over we see, on the one hand this promising increase in chief diversity officers, heads of diversity in a lot of different kinds of organizations.
And on the other hand, the extent to which they have power to impact change varies tremendously.
And, if that person being—a solo voice, and it really depends on how much they are backed by the administration, by leadership.
And they—I had a lot of former students who were admissions officers when I was teaching students who were getting their master’s degrees in higher education.
And they really—they talked about how they thought that being in this role they could help shape the student body of a selective college in a way that would increase opportunity.
And then they would—a lot of them talked about then what they would find is that there are all of these things that don’t allow them to really do that to the extent that they would like—and I think even heads of admissions would like—because, you know, they have to—they can only give out a certain number of—amount of financial aid.
And even in a place like Harvard, right, with this crazy endowment, is admitting students that almost half of them can pay full price—which is, again, higher than median household income in this country.
And so their whole financial model is based on the assumption that you’re not going to be a representative group of students.
And so I think—I think it’s going to take a much broader shift in the culture of higher education to expand admissions.
At Emory, I’m very proud because we rank right near the top of the top twenty or top twenty-two universities in terms of social mobility.
But living in Georgia, we got two Democratic senators, we voted for President Biden, very close margins, as you know, because a lot of White traditional Republicans voted——Democratic.
But you sense a backlash as you listen to people whisper that, for instance, it sounds like—you may not use the word—but it sounds like quotas.
You know, there’s 14 percent Hispanics persons in the United States We want 14 percent of Harvard to be Hispanic.
Well, we shouldn’t have 50 percent from that group, even if it’s two Black doctors or their parents.
You know, I think part of the problem is that we don’t—I don’t think most people, myself included until probably I was in college or maybe even later, understand the reality of racial inequality and the history of racial exclusion in the United States.
So, we all learn about slavery, the heinous history of slavery and segregation and the Civil Rights Movement.
And I think that—I don’t think many people really understand that, because we’re never taught it and we don’t talk about it.
And I think—I actually think that is—rather than too much attention to it, I think not enough understanding of that history is part of the problem.
Just to sort of say, well, when we see these massive differences, it should say—it should make us go, hmm.
When you talk to most people in the country, they—young people, they want to go to college, they think it’s important.
I’m certainly not saying that there should be—that college student bodies should explicitly mirror the population around them.
So just to take the examples that you gave, the—the Atlanta elite colleges, like Black colleges and then historically predominantly White colleges like Emory—there’s a great book by Adam Harris called The State Must Provide, which is about the history of Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
And their endowment is built at a time from times when there was legal segregation.
And so these donations to these HBCUs is great, but it’s not—it’s not even coming close to making the resources for those colleges comparable to the resources that the historically—the predominantly White universities.
And so, I think we have a long way to go to sort of truly equalize those colleges, even though I think there has been more attention.
I mean, the population has been steadily growing since—I mean, with fits and starts.
But they have not kept up with the increasing population and increasing interest in elite higher education over the last half-century.
And so I do think one thing we could do is expand enrollment at these places.
I mean, there’s so many amazing young people, these colleges reject so many applicants.
I think part of the problem is you have declining admit rates making it feel like you’re kind of constantly in competition with each other.
So, Eric, why don’t you just unmute and identify yourself and ask it yourself.
And we’re focused on, in the last two years, on a very strong DEI effort here to increase the number of Black and African American students.
We are a Hispanic-serving and minority-serving institute, but our number of Black and African Americans aren’t the numbers we’d like it to be.
Because it sounds easy, we put together mandates, put together programs.
But at the end of the day, we’re working with people on these admissions committee, and they’re not always—there’s a little reluctance at times to change.
So how do—what kind of evidence, what kind of strategies can we use to kind of move people along the continuum to get—to understand that we really need to examine and admit students, sometimes more holistically.
Well——not to expose too much—but it seems to be a similar refrain as it relates to let’s really focus on standardized scores as opposed to GPA and other holistic factors, when we know GPA is a five-times better predictor of college success than the standardized scores.
But some individuals are so used to using sort of this metric of standardized scores, it’s hard to move them away from that, saying, you know, this isn’t really the best measure, most valid measure, of being successful in college.
So, here’s the data on the predictive power of GPA, here’s the data on the predictive power of standardized test scores, here’s what the standardized test score adds, here’s what the racial difference is that we see in these scores.
I think when you understand that it’s, like, oh, OK, so this is the history of this.
Like, just profiles of students who maybe didn’t have that high SAT score and did well, and were able to sort of have—your college made a positive impact in their lives.
And helping people see that either through someone coming to a meeting, or a profile, so that they—sometimes people need that story of—to sort of have this image in their head.
Because I think sometimes there are these—there might be this sort of stereotype in their minds of, this is what these students are, they’re not going to be successful or take advantage, or what have you.
But if they can see kind of what we call counter-stereotypic examples, that can sort of combat those stereotypes.
But I do a lot of things related to DEI work, and I do read applications at the admissions level for our honors program.
But admission on the level of admitting for mission, I’m totally on board with that.
I believe our universities should look and be more like a cross-section, as you said, of teenagers in our country right now.
And so one of the downstream consequences of admitting for mission is that mission is often—I think this relates to the previous question too—mission’s often out ahead of culture where inclusion is concerned.
Our institutions change very slowly, because that’s what institutions do, unfortunately.
And so what I find sometimes is that a disproportionate amount of the emotional labor of institutional change winds up falling to the students who come and then clamor for the reality that their admission would suggests would meet them when they get to schools that are not historically—have not historically been as committed to this as possible.
So the problem then becomes an unintended consequence of admitting for diversity as a mission value—which, again, I’m totally on board for—is that that gap between the ideal and the real then exacerbates the sense of exclusion that students come with, because our culture has—we’re still an exclusive culture, not a sufficiently just culture—that the benefit of diversity in admissions was after in the first place.
And I don’t want this to be an argument against admitting for this reason or on this model, but just sort of a request for how to think about this.
So, part of my—when people say, well, the—I’m sorry—Eric, when you talk about, well, people are worried about are these students going to be successful, or they’re looking at test scores and maybe they’re thinking are these students going to be successful.
We need to make sure there are a quorum of peers who have similar lived experiences.
We need—and I think higher education—some colleges have done better than others in these.
And so having an institutional space I think is one, academic supports for students who haven’t had the same educational opportunities, who may have been a good student but did not have the same rigorous curriculum as some of their peers, I think those are incredibly important and to do those in ways that are not stigmatizing I think is incredibly important., And so absolutely there have to be these simultaneous—if the student body is changing and we’re expanding access, we need to change the culture and change—and the institutions can do this and be very deliberate about how they do it.
And I think the reality is that it will be a harder lift for students who haven’t had those educational experiences.
But that doesn’t mean that they shouldn’t be there, right, that we need to work hard just to meet their needs and prioritize those as well, so.
And it really is a drain, especially during the pandemic, which just multiplies everything.
So that’s part of where I’m worried—not so much the academic lift, but—although those supports are absolutely important.
But, they want more of the change for which they were admitted, to highlight that this is a very important value.
I’m also a member of our diversity, equity, and inclusion leadership team.
We are a very high-quality institution, but we would not be considered in an elite.
We are in the unfortunate position of most years receiving fewer applications than we have spaces available.
I’m curious what your research would say to us about how we might work at increasing diversity, equity, and inclusion when we’re not kind of selecting between individuals.
So I didn’t hear where you’re teaching and where your college is located.
So I think there’s a lot that is important to think about in terms of DEI for White students as well as students of color.
I think that’s what students need to—we need to find ways for them to think and feel in order for them to see a particular college as a viable option.
Because then there’s a quorum of people, and then they—and then there’s a network, and then it doesn’t feel as exclusive of a place, and students start to sort of see a place differently as well.
My concern is with mental health and anxiety in the students once they get here.
But 25 percent of them, by the math, are going to be in the bottom quarter of the class.
Fifty years ago a then-dean of admissions at Harvard said, well, we deal—you know, this is before all of the equity, all of the diversity.
I don’t—I don’t know if kind of—there’s not a lot of emphasis on ranking within a college, like once students arrive.
Especially on elite colleges, there seems to be a considerable grade inflation.
And so I think no one—I mean, students—I think students who aren’t academically prepared may struggle, but for the most part I think that’s become less—I don’t know that that’s the driver of some of the increasing concerns about mental health for college-age students.
I think there are other sort of drivers of that, like, social media—obviously, the pandemic is probably number one right now.
And I think those are some of the things that I think are driving some of the mental health issues.
I mean, what drives kind of mental health issues may be slightly different for different young people.
But we really see that certainly at the high school level as well across the board, across lines of race and class.
It was just a comment about—that the gentleman made about mental health.
And having been a dean at two different types of universities, we can’t really consider a lot of individual-type mental health unless it’s been in the public sphere.
However, once the student enters, there is a considerable amount of resources for students to deal with mental health.
But I taught a unit, for example, after the very sad situation at VPI, Virginia Polytech, over a decade ago.
And unfortunately, that student had mental health issues, but we were not able—not “we”—the university was not able to have access to that.
So there are two types of kinds of dimensions to the mental health issues.
I wanted to go back to the comment that was made earlier from the gentleman from Emory in Georgia about backlash.
I mean, we know that there are political constituencies out there who really want to fight this.
And it makes it extremely difficult for universities to advance these agendas when they know that the cost of lawsuits, even when they’re right—when they’re doing the right thing and they’re doing something that is legal—but the cost of lawsuits becomes prohibitive.
So I wondered if you encountered that or you addressed that at all in your research, and what advice you would have related to that.
But—and it’s K-12 education, as we see with this sort of supposed anti-CRT—critical race theory—stuff.
My only response to that is I don’t know what the solution is besides just keep doing what we’re doing.
Because you can’t back down in the face of these impending lawsuits because I feel like—I feel like the right is so organized in their attacks on anything related—any acknowledgment of racial inequality in American society that, OK, if we don’t talk about DEI, then there’s talk about admissions.
If we don’t talk admissions—if we look at the K-12 level, there’s this new attack on selective high schools, where most recently a judge—there was a lawsuit towards a selective high school in Virginia that went from exam-based admissions to holistic admissions.
So I think you can sort of back off and you’re still going to get sued.
So I think the solution can’t be to back off because we don’t want to be paralyzed.
I mean, some of the research on affirmative action shows that there seems to be a sort of backing away from affirmative action because of these fears of lawsuits.
Not at the very elite places, but the kind of second-tier kinds of colleges.
But, again, I’m not sure—obviously colleges have to protect themselves and are going to be thinking strategically about their finances, the likelihood of being sued.
But I don’t think—I’m not sure what to do about that threat besides saying, I don’t think it’s a reason to not do this work.
Well, no one’s doing a lottery, but I have written a little bit about it.
So, one of the things that I—as I’ve been talking, I’ve been saying we have to stop thinking of this as an individual certification of merit, is that part of the way to do that is to change the meaning of selection.
It’s funny, I’ll tell you a story, my husband was just on jury duty for the first time yesterday, because he’s a naturalized citizen.
So he came home and said, “You know, I didn’t really want to be put on this trial because it would mean—they said it was going to be, like, a long trial.
And then he said, “When they said, OK, you’re dismissed at the end I felt a sense of disappointment.
I never wanted to be—I mean, obviously if you’re selected, you’re selected.
Or did you get to sign up for—did your parents pay for you to sign up—in my latest research in a high school, kids are—they have, like, a private pitching coach.
Let’s put all the potential people, all the names in a hat, and let’s just have a lottery.
And, we can think about, like, do we want to have—and then make clear, like, we want to have a quorum of full fee-paying students.
People who, athletes or whatever it is that that college is sort of looking at.
I think that—and we can think about diversity holistic—I think we can’t have kind of set metrics like, you get extra points or anything like that for being underrepresented, but we can think about it holistically, and being put into this lottery.
And it would acknowledge the fact that there are a lot of amazing young people in this country who could thrive at most of these selective colleges.
And I think it would change the meaning in a way that I think is very productive for society.
I don’t know if anybody has other questions or comments, but I will ask one more.
In your research you found that White students and students of color perceive the benefits of diversity differently.
Well, if diversity is all about improving my own educational experience, and I can see how I have benefited from those diverse voices in the classroom, then why—like then—and some of them would get annoyed when they saw, like, a table of Black students in the cafeteria.
And of course, they didn’t notice all those other tables of White students in the cafeteria, but they would say, well, if they’re here to enlighten me, then they should be kind of integrating into these White spaces.
And of course, that student wouldn’t then go and sit at that table of Black students, but they’re expecting the Black students to integrate into these predominantly White spaces.
And so I think there are all these unfair expectations on the underrepresented students of color.
And of course, they’re all assumed to have benefitted from affirmative action, and we know that’s not the case.
So I had a student admitted to Harvard say, well, if I hadn’t gotten into Harvard, I would have felt that I experienced racial discrimination, right, if, you know, the student of color at my high school had gotten in and I hadn’t.
And even with affirmative action, it’s just there to benefit themselves.
And I think we need to get away from that and really focus in on racial equity and, again, the history of racial exclusion in this country.
And the way that even these institutions themselves have benefitted from—again, from slave labor, from the slave trade, from building their endowments at a time of racial segregation, at a time where there were very few, if any, students of color on their campuses.
And then, legacy benefits that sort of continue that sort of intergenerational racial exclusion.
And Beverly Lindsay has suggested Beverly Daniel Tatum’s book, Why Do All the Black Kids Sit Together in the Cafeteria.
We are at the end of time, if you want to just make any final remarks before we close.
I mean, I guess I’ll just say that I think it’s important to pay attention to admissions, but I also have started to think much more broadly about DEI and higher education.
And I think we need to also look well-beyond these, sort of, selective colleges.
And, we need to—when we look at the endowment per pupil at some of these selective colleges, compared to—and what they’re doing for social mobility compared to, I’m sure, like the college in Miami, community colleges, open access state colleges.
I think we just need a lot more supports for those colleges that are engines of social mobility.
And, again, if we think about the mission of higher education and how we, as Americans, see how we want to—sort of, what kind of society we want to be, I think it’s incredibly important to look also beyond admissions.
And to everybody taking the time to participate and for your great questions and comments.
So our next higher education webinar will be on Tuesday, April 19, at 3:00m.
And in the meantime, I encourage you to follow us at @CFR_academic, visit CFR.org, ForeignAffairs.com, and ThinkGlobalHealth.org for more resources.
The weather was in many ways a metaphor for the mood in the White House.
After twelve stress-filled days, the thirteenth day of the Cuban missile crisis brought a deal between President John F Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
Defense and Security Diplomacy and International Institutions Kennedy decided immediately to take yes for an answer.
Kennedy also directed the ExCom to prepare a separate, formal response to Khrushchev even before the official version of the Radio Moscow address reached the White House.
JFK was not going to let a wayward U-2 derail a resolution of the crisis.
The Water's Edge James M Lindsay analyzes the politics shaping United States foreign policy and the sustainability of American power. 2-4 times weekly.
Url Email Address View all newsletters > Daily News Brief A summary of global news developments with CFR analysis delivered to your inbox each morning.
The World This Week A weekly digest of the latest from CFR on the biggest foreign policy stories of the week, featuring briefs, opinions, and explainers.
Think Global Health A curation of original analyses, data visualizations, and commentaries, examining the debates and efforts to improve health worldwide.
By entering your email and clicking subscribe, you're agreeing to receive announcements from CFR about our products and services, as well as invitations to CFR events.
View all newsletters > Confident that the crisis was headed to a peaceful and satisfactory conclusion, Kennedy called former presidents Herbert Hoover, Harry Truman, and Dwight Eisenhower.
He didn’t tell them about the secret promise he had made to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The former presidents not surprisingly applauded Kennedy’s skill in forcing Khrushchev to capitulate.
Not everyone one was pleased that the missile crisis had been resolved peacefully.
After calling presidents Truman and Eisenhower, he turned to his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and invoked the memory of Abraham Lincoln.
Logo About Member Programs Contact Support For Media Newsletters Membership Careers ©2022 Council on Foreign Relations.
