This was the closest we came to WW3By Rachel Segal 2022 Central Press/Hulton Archive/Getty Images homepage subjective timeline politics the cuban missile crisis How the Americans See it TheEvent How the Soviets See it 1 January 1, 1959 Fidel Castro Overthrows General Batista America watches in dismay as young Cuban nationalist Fidel Castro and his guerilla army overthrow Cuba’s American-backed president, General Fulgencio Batista.
Though Batista is a corrupt and repressive dictator, America values his anti-Communist views, especially as it is embarks on protecting the world from the spread of the evils of Communism during the Cold War.
Batista can be depended on to neutralize any Communist movements from growing in Cuba and to prevent any Communist takeover.
Also, given his pro-business interests, he is certainly the lesser of the two evils.
The Soviet government welcomes the Castro-led Cuban revolution, especially as he fights against the evils and corruption of Western capitalism.
Soviet support for Castro grows in tandem with America’s increasing hostility toward him.
While Cuba has never before been an obedient ally or proxy of Moscow, the Soviets foresee that the country will increasingly depend on them for both military and economic aid.
As America prohibits the importation of Cuban sugar and turns its back on Cuba, the Soviets happily gain a new, strategically located partner through whom they can challenge United States hegemony.
In response to him nationalizing industries that Americans had cultivated over many years and calling on other Latin American governments to act with more nationalist autonomy, which is a clear danger to American investments in the region, the CIA is left with no choice but to remove Castro from power.
At the orders of President Kennedy, who fears that Castro is a Soviet agent trying to subvert the rest of Latin America, the CIA launches the Bay of Pigs invasion by 1,400 American-trained Cuban exiles who had fled their homes when Castro took over.
Unfortunately, after less than 24 hours of fighting, the badly outnumbered exiles surrender in failure.
America’s embarrassing and disastrous Bay of Pigs operation could not have worked out better for the Soviets.
It was fortunate for the Soviets that President Kennedy’s paranoia about Castro being a Soviet agent led him to approve the operation.
While Kennedy’s fear had been wrong, it was nevertheless prescient, as after the Bay of Pigs, Castro declares his commitment to Communism for the first time.
As time goes on, there is growing conviction in both Moscow and Havana that Kennedy is preparing for another invasion of Cuba, but this time with the American military, which Soviet President Nikita Krushchev cannot allow.
To make sure Castro doesn’t underestimate American resolve, the CIA engages in strategies to sabotage and wreck Cuba’s economy, including assassinating Castro supporters and bribing foreign suppliers to send faulty goods to Cuba, etc.
America also does a large-scale military exercise in the Caribbean, which includes a mock invasion of an unnamed island and overthrow of its dictator, all to warn Castro.
While the Kennedy administration is busy wasting their time on Operation Mongoose, President Khrushchev is one step ahead, cunningly and secretly introducing medium-range nuclear missiles into Cuba.
Given that America turned Cuba into the battleground of the Cold War, Khrushchev is sure an American invasion is imminent, especially after the United States mock island invasion as part of Operation Mongoose.
He therefore feels compelled to place the missiles in Cuba as a defensive tactic.
As chances would be slim against defending Cuba from a conventional American attack, the Soviets know that their only chance to win is to fight back with missiles that contain nuclear warheads.
President Kennedy swiftly calls together 18 of his closest advisers to try to resolve this perilous U.S.-Soviet confrontation, the most dangerous of the entire Cold War.
Unlike the Soviets, who have a long history of enduring threats and invasion, for the Americans, this dangerous crisis is the first time they realize that they could all be killed on their soil.
Amid the dangerous poker game of nuclear “one-upmanship” between America and the Soviet Union, the Soviets know that they can never catch up to the Americans.
However, having missiles in Cuba significantly rectifies their disadvantage and strengthens their strategic position by providing a vital psychological boost.
It gives the impression of a parity, especially considering the presence of American missiles in Turkey.
This not only gives the Americans a taste of their own medicine but shows the Soviets that their president is tough and aggressive on foreign policy.
Neither does he let on that he knows Gromyko is blatantly lying after he states that the only help the Soviet Union is giving to Cuba is assistance in growing crops and defense.
Cunningly trying to shift the burden of escalation onto the Americans, he tells Kennedy that the Soviet Union favors peaceful coexistence and that it opposes countries like the United States interfering in the domestic affairs of others.
As such, the Soviets have no choice but to react firmly to America’s global nuclear presence.
On October 19, ExComm suggests sending United States ships to Cuba to prevent Soviet ships from reaching the island.
Doing their utmost to avoid escalation, they call it a quarantine instead of a blockade, since the latter is considered an act of war.
On Oct 20, Robert Kennedy tells his brother, President Kennedy, about the quarantine recommendation.
The president, who is in Chicago, lies about having a cold so he can return to Washington to deal with the escalating crisis.
Still unaware that their missiles have been discovered, the Soviets continue to deny their presence and intention in Cuba.
However, President Khrushchev is getting increasingly aware of the massive number of both Soviet and American ships northeast of Cuba.
Feeling pressure that his strategy of denial may be exposed at any moment, the Soviet leader is increasingly nervous about the possibility of having an actual military crisis on his hands.
Defending “American citizens who have become adjusted to living on the bullseye of soviet missiles,” Kennedy sternly states that he has ordered a Navy quarantine around Cuba and has ordered the Soviets to remove their missiles.
Anxiety is high in Moscow upon hearing about Kennedy’s impending speech, alerting them to the fact that the Americans have discovered their missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev’s fears are confirmed after hearing the speech, but he is also relieved that Kennedy’s first response is the quarantine of Cuba, as opposed to war.
Worried that America will act impulsively and aggressively, Khrushchev hastens the completion of the missile site and puts Soviet forces into combat readiness.
To prevent the United States from capturing strategic technology aboard Soviet ships, he orders those farthest from Cuba to turn back and halts others.
The Americas view this threat as empty bluster but are nevertheless taking into account the gravity of the situation.
Affronted by United States efforts to try to intimidate the Soviet Union, Khrushchev, in his first public admission that the Soviet missiles do exist, refuses to remove them from Cuba.
Since they are there purely for defense, he assuredly accuses Kennedy of putting the world at risk of a nuclear war by ordering the United States quarantine of Cuba.
Khrushchev is confident in sending his message because the Americans don’t yet know that nuclear cruise missiles were being deployed to pre-launch positions in Cuba while Khrushchev and Knox were meeting.
Meanwhile, tensions are growing at the UN, as an impassioned United States ambassador, Adlai Stevenson, confronts the uncooperative and defensive Soviet Ambassador, Valerian Zorin, about the existence of Soviet missiles and produces the U-2 photos for Zorin and the world to see, rightfully humiliating Zorin and the Soviet Union.
After a Soviet tanker accidentally reaches the quarantine line, a nearby American destroyer challenges it with flashing lights in an anxiety-ridden moment.
Thankfully, President Kennedy lets it continue toward Cuba, showing his weakness in deferring to Khrushchev.
However, acutely aware of how precarious the situation has grown, and convinced by his intelligence sources that Kennedy will not accept the missiles in Cuba and is actively preparing for an attack, Khrushchev has no other choice but to compromise.
He regretfully sends a letter to Kennedy gallantly proposing that Soviet missiles could be removed if Kennedy will not invade Cuba.
As Americans wait with baited breath, an American jet rescues him just in time, before the Soviets react in an aggressive manner that would escalate to war, such as shooting down his plane.
Unknown to the Americans at that time, each sub is carrying a nuclear-tipped torpedo.
The Soviet commander of the surfaced sub, Commander Savitsky, had not been able to communicate with Moscow for the last 48 hours and believed that war had already started.
Under almost unbearable physical conditions, emotional strain and stress, he was understandably prepared to fire.
Fortunately, authorization from all three other officers on board was first needed, and while two were in favor, one was not.
This one reluctant Soviet officer, Vasili Arkhipov, saved the world from nuclear war.
The president also secretly agrees to remove United States missiles from Turkey as long as it remains a secret.
The world goes to sleep that night waiting to see if Khrushchev will agree to the arrangement and finally end this nerve-wracking crisis.
That evening, after one last vital meeting between the Americans and the USSR, the Soviets agree to the terms of the agreement to end the crisis.
The next morning, Khrushchev announces that the missiles are being dismantled and removed from Cuba.
Despite the United States quarantine remaining in effect during missile removal, an uncooperative Castro refuses to allow inspections, forcing the United States to maintain low-flying U-2 flights for photographic surveillance.
Castro considers this an invasion of Cuban territorial rights and threatens to shoot down the U-2 planes.
He even fires at some of them, making America more resolute in its anti-Castro and anti-Cuba stance.
Knowing they ignored Castro throughout the October crisis, the USSR sends Soviet leader Anastas Mikoyan to Cuba to soothe a livid Castro.
It’s a deal with the devil, as Castro proves he cannot be trusted with them or to keep their existence a secret from America.
Fearing Cuban irresponsibility with the nuclear weapons, the Soviets, once again forced to play the role of responsible adult, pass a law preventing the placement of nuclear weapons outside of the USSR, and finally remove the weapons from Cuba.
Despite initial hard feelings, relations remain good between the Soviets and Castro, who admits his dictatorship could not exist without Soviet help.
SHOW IMAGE CREDITS Cuban revolutionary Fidel Castro during an address in Cuba after Batista was forced to flee.
Cuban prime minister Fidel Castro talking with parents of some of the American prisoners held hostage for food and supplies by the Cuban government after the abortive emigre invasion at the Bay of Pigs.
Former Russian and United States officials attending a conference commemorating the 40th anniversary of the missile crisis October 2002 in Cuba said that the world was closer to a nuclear conflict during the 1962 standoff between Cuba and the U.S., than governments were aware of.
American Democrat politician Adlai Stevenson , leader of the United States delegation to the United Nations.
Soviet cargo ship ‘Fizik Kurchatov’ leaving Cuba en route for Russia after the Cuban missile crisis.
