The Development of the United Nations, 1945–1991 You must answer Question 1.
THE UNITED NATIONS AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 1 Read the Sources and then answer the question.
When answering Question 1, candidates are advised to pay particular attention to the interpretation and evaluation of the Sources both individually and as a group.
Source A On 16 October 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviet Union was building nuclear missile installations in Cuba.
He announced a ‘naval quarantine’ of Cuba, pushing the world closer to nuclear war than ever before.
In the deepening crisis, UN Secretary-General U Thant was to play a significant role in de-escalating and then resolving the nuclear standoff between the superpowers.
He sent appeals and messages, relayed proposals, offered reassurances, advanced the ‘non-invasion for missiles’ formula that formed the basis of the final agreement, shuttled to Cuba to mollify Castro, and helped secure a verification agreement.
It is unfortunate that the role of the Secretary-General has gone unsung in the history of the crisis.
In fact, the UN and U Thant enjoyed enormous public prominence during the crisis.
Headlines in American and Russian newspapers hailed U Thant for his part in de-escalating the crisis.
It was only later, as history was being written, that the UN was edged out.
Source B Regarding your conciliatory efforts, we repeat to you our refusal of unilateral inspection on the part of any organisation, national or international, of Cuban territory.
It is an inalienable right of a sovereign nation to resolve, within its territory, all the problems in agreement with the will of its government and its people.
Each day the incursions of war planes over our territory grow more alarming.
No sovereign state can allow its air space to be violated in this manner.
We believe in the right to defend liberty, sovereignty, and the dignity of this nation and we will exercise it up to the last man, woman or child capable of holding a weapon.
Fidel Castro, Prime Minister of the Cuban Revolutionary Government, in a letter to UN Secretary-General U Thant, 16 November 1962.
The prompt and successful implementation of the naval quarantine around Cuba, the rapid securance of NATO support, the speed of the American conventional military build up and the alert measures taken by American strategic forces around the world, must all in varying degrees have impressed the Soviet leader.
American preparation doubtless had persuaded Khrushchev that he had to act quickly in order to limit his losses.
From a book entitled ‘Strategic Power and Soviet Foreign Policy’, 1966.
Source D U Thant can hardly be said to have left the office of United Nations Secretary-General in a blaze of glory.
In many quarters the dominant emotion aroused by the prospect of his departure was relief, accompanied by something approaching elation at the thought of a new man in the job.
In his address to the Security Council on 24 October 1962, U Thant underlined that what was at stake was the very fate of mankind.
He called for urgent negotiations between the parties directly involved, and sent appeals to President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev.
For the USSR it would entail a voluntary suspension of all arms shipments to Cuba.
For the USA it would entail a voluntary suspension of the quarantine, especially the searching of ships bound for Cuba.
After the American and Soviet acceptances of this appeal, U Thant travelled to Cuba for conversations with Cuban leaders.
U Thant’s visit was of importance since it gave the Cuban leaders an opportunity to let off steam.
Question 1 Source D © A James; U Thant and His Critics; Stevens and Sons; 1972.
