History offers no parallel to those thirteen days of October 1962, when the USA and the Soviet Union paused at the nuclear precipice.
Never before had there been such a high probability that so many lives would end suddenly.
Other catastrophes and inhumanities of history would have faded into insignificance.
Having peered over the edge of the nuclear precipice, both nations edged backwards towards détente.
Never again was the risk of war between them as great as it was during the last two weeks of October 1962.
Thus an understanding of this crisis is essential for every serious student of foreign affairs.
Operation Anadyr American sources and newly available material from the Soviet Union now permit us to reconstruct the Soviet arms build-up that culminated in the conversion of Cuba into a major strategic missile base.
The Soviets and Cubans negotiated the next phase of military assistance in early 1962.
The Soviet Presidium approved Cuban requests for additional weapons in April 1962, and the Soviets resumed arms shipments at a markedly increased pace in late July.
By 1 September, Soviet arms in Cuba included surface-to-air missiles, coastal defence Sopka cruise missiles, patrol boats armed with anti-ship missiles, and more than 5000 Soviet technicians and military personnel.
The first Soviet nuclear ballistic missiles reached Cuban soil on 8 September.
The medium range ballistic missiles were secretly transported to Cuba beneath the decks of Soviet ships.
Additional MRBMs, missile trailers, fuelling trucks, special radar vans, missile erectors, and nuclear warhead storage bunkers arrived and were rushed to construction sites.
Similar equipment to set up longer-range intermediate range ballistic missiles soon followed.
Unknown to the USA, Cuba received nuclear warheads for the MRBMs on 4 October, along with dozens of nuclear warheads for the Sopka coastal defence cruise missiles, six nuclear bombs for IL-28 medium jet bombers, and twelve nuclear warheads for short-range tactical nuclear rockets.
The final decision to put missiles in Cuba was made in the Soviet Presidium, but the details of the operation—that is, the path from the general decision to the actual appearance of operational missiles in Cuba—were delegated to appropriate Soviet organizations.
Standard Soviet operations, particularly where nuclear weapons were involved, imposed secrecy beyond anything approached in the American government.
Secrecy deprived each organization of information about other organizations and made it impossible to keep the whole operation in view.
The clandestine shipping, unloading, and delivery of the missiles to the construction sites was a major organizational success, eluding all methods of detection until missiles were deployed in the field.
This part of Operation Anadyr was planned by a specially created subunit of the operations branch of the Soviet General Staff, working closely with Soviet intelligence agencies.
But once the weapons and equipment arrived in Cuba, the Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba took over.
At the sites, each team did what it knew how to—emplace missiles—literally according to the book.
They had never installed MRBMs or IRBMs outside the Soviet Union before Cuba.
Reprinted by permission of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston, MA. in the Soviet Union.
Camouflage would have created extreme discomfort for people working under the netting or plastic covers in the tropical heat.
Working stealthily at night would have slowed the pace of construction and put the work even further behind schedule.
An intelligence agency would probably have made a different choice, but a field organization in the business of deploying missiles could be expected to focus first on completion of preparation for possible combat, particularly when that directive came with a deadline.
A U-2 had flown over the areas where the missiles were deployed on 14 October.
There had been more overflights on 15 and 17 October, which presumably were observed too.
But, Gribkov recalled, ‘Moscow had sent them to Cuba to defend against air attack, not actual espionage.
Standing orders to air defence units told them to fire only if attacked, perhaps to avoid provoking any incident or unwanted attention before everything was ready.
The standing orders were undoubtedly written by someone who was not present when Khrushchev expressed his concerns, so the Soviet leader’s intentions never entered the operational directives to the relevant implementing organizations.
There is evidence that, on 14 October, Pliyev suspected that the missiles had been discovered.
But there is no evidence that the ‘Soviet government’ learned of these suspicions.
On 22 October, worried that Kennedy was about to announce an invasion of Cuba, the Presidium actually drafted an instruction authorizing Pliyev to use tactical nuclear weapons to repel it.
On 26 October, acting on his own authority, Pliyev ordered the movement of a number of nuclear warheads closer to the missiles that would carry them.
Unsettled, they sharply reminded him that he must wait for central authorization before using any weapons.
But there were no technical safeguards to physically prevent nuclear use by field units.
The Americans did not even know that Soviet forces in Cuba had tactical nuclear weapons until late in the crisis.
What Kennedy called ‘this secret, swift, and extraordinary build-up of communist missiles’ posed troubling questions indeed.
Kennedy’s senior advisers considered these questions when they convened at 11:50m. on Tuesday, 16 October.
Cuban defence An analyst who knew nothing about the Soviet Union, except that it was a powerful country and that one of its important allies, Cuba, was at risk of attack by a large threatening neighbour, might infer that the powerful country would come to the aid of its weak friend.
Although the 1961 effort to invade Cuba with a force of CIA-trained Cuban exiles had failed disastrously, the Soviet Union had substantial reason to believe that the USA might return to do the job right.
In support of the Cuban defence hypothesis, it is clear that Cuba was surely on Khrushchev’s mind.
Although persuasive, attempts to explain Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba with the Cuban defence hypothesis will not withstand careful examination.
If deterrence, meaning the prevention of a major attack, had been the objective, the presence of a sizeable contingent of Soviet troops would have been a better solution.
In the end, Castro did accept longer-range missiles, but he worried that the deployment could provoke an intense crisis.
So a final problem with the Cuban defence hypothesis is that the move actually made Cuba’s position more, not less, perilous.
Cold War politics The defining feature of the Cold War was the global competition between American and Soviet values and interests.
Whenever one side lost, the other gained—and was seen to do so by others around the world.
A rival might seize the opportunity to display the extent of its global power, especially so near its enemy’s shores.
If the USA accepted the build-up, it would lose the confidence of its allies in Latin America and around the world.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk concluded that ‘the hard line boys have moved into the ascendancy.
On 21 October, Arthur Schlesinger Jr asked Kennedy why the Soviets had put missiles in Cuba.
First, the Soviet Union would demonstrate that it was capable of bold action in support of a communist revolution, impressing China and healing a split between Moscow and Beijing that had widened since 1959.
Second, the Soviets would radically redefine the context of the Berlin The Cuban leader Fidel Castro giving a speech.
Despite the persuasiveness of Cold War arguments, this hypothesis ignores five key aspects of the situation.
Second, the size and character of the Soviet deployment went well beyond a mere political probe.
To challenge American intentions and firmness, even a few MRBMs threatening the entire southeastern USA should suffice.
Third, the deployment of MRBMs and IRBMs, plus plans for a nuclear submarine base, jeopardized the essential requirement for a successful move on the Cold War chessboard, namely that it be a fait accompli.
A small tailored nuclear deployment that became operational before it was discovered could have given the Soviet Union a Cuban enclave no less defensible than the Western enclave in Berlin.
If the Soviet probe provoked a forceful American riposte, a vivid Soviet defeat would make the whole venture counterproductive.
In 1962 the Soviet government found itself with only twenty intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of launching nuclear weapons that could reach American territory from bases inside the Soviet Union.
The Soviets also had well-founded doubts about the technical reliability and accuracy of these missiles.
A clear-eyed strategic analyst could quite reasonably conclude that in 1962 the Soviet Union had a problem.
Moving their existing nuclear weapons to locations from which they could reach American targets was one option.
Khrushchev would use the missiles to solve the Berlin problem—on his terms.
As a prelude to a confrontation over Berlin, Khrushchev’s manoeuvre made sense.
If the Americans did nothing, Khrushchev would force the West out of Berlin, confident that the missiles in Cuba would deter the Americans from starting a war.
If the Americans tried to bargain, the terms would be a trade of Cuba and Berlin.
Since Berlin was immeasurably more important than Cuba, that trade would also be a win for Khrushchev.
If the Americans blockaded or attacked Cuba, Khrushchev could then use this as the excuse for an equivalent blockade or attack on Berlin.
Worse yet, Kennedy thought, America’s European allies would then blame the loss of Berlin on the USA, since they would not understand why America felt the need to attack Cuba.
Khrushchev would gain a quick and relatively cheap boost to Soviet missile power, and the Berlin crisis might be pressed to a successful conclusion.
Foreign policy triumph in hand, Khrushchev could return to his hopes for Soviet domestic renewal, now better able to move resources from defence and heavy industry to the needs of his people.
But it must be acknowledged that the missile power and Berlin hypotheses, as well as the others considered above, fail to account for many other features of what the Soviets actually did.
It appeared to the Americans that the MRBMs were installed before the cover of SAMs was in place.
We now know that in fact the Soviet Union did install the air defence cover on time, before the missiles were put in place, in order to shield the missiles from being discovered.
Khrushchev’s grand plan for unveiling his fait accompli presents a second difficulty.
He planned to visit the USA and announce the true situation in the second half of November.
But even on the round-the-clock construction schedule adopted after the United States announcement that the missiles had been discovered, only the MRBMs would be in place.
A third puzzle arises over the Soviet omission of camouflage at the missile sites.
But a Soviet desire to be found out hardly squares with the extensive and effective camouflage and deception that shielded the transport of the missiles to Cuba and then from the docks to the sites.
Khrushchev did not ask his ambassador in Washington or any other known experts on the USA for a considered analysis of their judgement.
According to Gromyko’s account, Khrushchev was simply unmoved by this advice.
Ambassador Dobrynin later complained that Khrushchev ‘grossly misunderstood the psychology of his opponents.
Had he asked the embassy beforehand, we could have predicted the violent American reaction to his adventure once it ­became known.
The men advising President Kennedy differed sharply about what should be done.
This process assumed a more regular formal quality in successive meetings of the National Security Council on 20, 21, and 22 October.
Because of the centrality of this crisis to the presidency of John F Kennedy, evidence about what members of the United States government were seeing, doing, and even thinking is much greater than for most events.
With the publication of the secret tapes and most of the classified documents of the crisis, one can follow the perceptions and preferences of individual players with more confidence than usual.
Unfortunately, even with the new evidence about the Soviet side of the equation, the Soviet decisionmaking process remains more opaque.
On Monday, 15 October, just as he finished delivering a speech to the National Press Club addressing the Soviet activity in Cuba and arguing that the build-up was ‘basically defensive in character’, Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin received a phone call.
The caller informed Martin that offensive missiles had been discovered in Cuba.
The U-2 photographs presented conclusive evidence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
To fail to act forcibly could produce a number of undesirable outcomes.
First, it would undermine the confidence of the members of his administration, especially those who in previous weeks had so firmly defended his policy towards Cuba.
Second, it would convince the rest of the government that the administration had no leader, encouraging others to challenge his policies and destroying his reputation in Congress.
Weakness in the face of the crisis would cut the ground from under fellow Democrats who were standing for re-election on Kennedy’s Cuban policy.
Failing to act forcibly would also drive the public to doubt Kennedy’s word and his will, deepen dismay over the Bay of Pigs, and shake Kennedy’s confidence in his own leadership.
The entire circle of pressures to which Kennedy as a president had to be responsive pushed him in a single direction—vigorous action.
For Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State, the initial issues were diplomatic.
His main suggestion was to try to get Castro himself to push the Soviets out.
Rusk wanted to warn the Cuban leader that the Soviets were putting his regime in mortal danger and would in the end happily sell him out for a victory in Berlin.
Kennedy thought that the proposal had no prospect, and no one outside the State Department spoke up for it.
For Secretary of Defense McNamara, the missiles were principally a political problem.
In his view, the overall nuclear balance would not be significantly affected by the Soviet deployment.
Therefore, at the start, McNamara was sceptical about the need for military action.
McGeorge Bundy, the National Security Adviser, was uncharacteristically reticent.
Two days later, on 18 October, he advocated taking no action, fearing that the Soviets would retaliate in kind against Berlin.
Then the next day, after agonizing further over the question, Bundy changed his mind again and supported an air strike against the missiles.
UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson joined McNamara in the ranks of the sceptics.
New overflights revealed for the first time that IRBMs had also been shipped to Cuba.
This news tipped Taylor to join his JCS colleagues in support of an invasion to follow up the air strikes.
Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson supported an air strike, but called for a narrow strike against the missile sites only, ignoring the Soviet bombers, fighter-bombers, and anti-aircraft units.
Robert Kennedy and Rusk objected that any American surprise attack would be immoral, comparing it to Pearl Harbor.
But the most telling argument for President Kennedy, which he repeated in days to come, was the one he outlined for his subordinates on 18 October.
An attack on Cuba would cause a retaliatory attack on Berlin which in return would instantly present Kennedy with no meaningful military option but nuclear retaliation.
This left the intermediate option of the blockade originally broached by McNamara.
On the morning of 19 October President Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and found them adamant in support of an immediate air attack against Cuba that would retain the military advantages of surprise.
Air Force chief of staff Curtis LeMay, confident of his own political base of support on Capitol Hill, was boldest in confronting the President.
Opinion was still generally divided between a blockade and an immediate air strike, with McNamara emerging as the chief advocate of a blockade–negotiate option.
President Kennedy returned for a decisive White House meeting on 20 October, where McNamara presented the blockade–negotiate approach.
Following the blockade, he said, the USA would negotiate for the removal of missiles from Turkey and Italy and talk about closing the United States base at Guantanamo in Cuba.
Taylor, supported by Bundy, presented the case for an air strike to begin two days later on Monday, 22 October.
Robert Kennedy agreed with Taylor that the present moment was the last chance to destroy Castro and the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Sorensen, who was sympathetic to the blockade– negotiation approach, disagreed.
If the Russians did not comply, the USA would proceed with an air strike.
That, he explained, would get away from the Pearl Harbor surprise attack problem.
Instead of an ultimatum or an offer to trade United States assets, the objective could simply be to freeze the situation.
The Soviet missile installations in Cuba would be monitored by UN observation teams.
President Kennedy first sharply ruled out the blockade–negotiation variant, feeling that such action would convey to the world that the USA had been frightened into abandoning its positions.
He then ruled in favour of the blockade–ultimatum option, urging that any air strike be limited only to the missile sites.
The group also agreed that the blockade would be narrowly focused on Soviet arms deliveries, not on all shipments of vital supplies such as oil.
In the speech draft the next day, Kennedy sided further with the blockade–ultimatum faction.
He removed an invitation to Khrushchev to come to a summit meeting to talk about the crisis.
First, it was a middle course between inaction and attack—aggressive enough to communicate firmness of intention, but not as precipitous as a strike.
Indeed, no possible military confrontation could be more acceptable to the USA than a naval engagement in the Caribbean.
By flexing its conventional muscles, a blockade also permitted the USA to exploit the threat of subsequent non-nuclear steps in which the it would enjoy significant local superiority.
Lastly, a blockade placed on Khrushchev the burden of choice for the next step.
He could avoid a direct military clash simply by keeping his ships away.
At 7m. on 22 October 1962, President Kennedy delivered the major foreign policy address of his career.
The first Soviet ships approached the quarantine line on Wednesday 24 October, but halted and turned around just before challenging it.
Why Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba President Kennedy’s announcement of the blockade emphasized that it was an initial step in a series of moves that threatened air strikes or invasion.
No attempt was made to disguise the massive build-up of more than 200,000 invasion troops in Florida.
Photograph by Abbie Rowe in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, MA. boX 14.1 excerpt from JFK’s address to the american people, 22 october 1962 My fellow citizens, let no one doubt that this is a difficult and dangerous effort on which we have set out.
On 27 October, McNamara called twenty-four troop-carrier squadrons of the Air Force Reserve to active duty—approximately 14,000 men.
After hearing Kennedy’s plans to address the American people, the Kremlin plunged into its own crisis deliberations.
When a formal decision was needed, Khrushchev convened the full Presidium.
Not yet knowing what Kennedy would say, Khrushchev feared the worst, namely that the Americans would simply attack Cuba.
Therefore Kennedy’s blockade announcement was greeted not with fear, but with relief by the Soviet leadership which considered it a weaker response that left room for political manoeuvre.
The next day they issued a flat unyielding response to Kennedy’s demands.
By the morning of 25 October, the Soviet leadership had received a tough terse reply to Khrushchev’s defiant pronouncement of the previous day.
Khrushchev promptly sent instructions to accept UN Secretary-General U Thant’s proposal for avoiding a confrontation at the quarantine line, promising to keep Soviet ships away from this line.
He also dictated a long personal letter to Kennedy suggesting a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
For reasons that are still obscure, Khrushchev came to a judgement on 27 October that the Americans could be pushed harder.
Perhaps he misjudged United States resolve because of the way that the Americans were failing to enforce the quarantine.
Khrushchev convened the Presidium and explained that he thought that the Americans would no longer dare attack Cuba.
Khrushchev would send another letter on Saturday, making a more concrete offer that acknowledged the presence of missiles in Cuba but which demanded that the USA withdraw its missiles in Turkey into the bargain.
The lengthy discursive personal ‘Friday letter’ suggesting the withdrawal of Soviet missiles for a non-invasion pledge was sent secretly and was considered by the ExComm in secret.
The ‘Saturday letter’ not only changed the terms of the deal, adding a new demand—the withdrawal of Turkish missiles as well—but it did so in a public message, making it politically impossible for Khrushchev’s American counterparts to accept this compromise.
The first, not made public, apparently took the ‘soft’ line that Russia would remove its missiles from Cuba in return for ending the United States quarantine and assurances that the USA would not invade Cuba.
The second took a harder line in seeking the removal of United States missiles in Turkey in return for taking Russian missiles out of Cuba. proposal to trade NATO missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba—that was the problem.
As Bundy argued, a trade would make it ‘clear that we were trying to sell out our allies for our interests.
The struggle to avoid being impaled on one horn or the other of this dilemma made Saturday’s deliberation the most intense and difficult of the crisis.
Before the USA had to make the final decisions about military action, Khrushchev moved.
Warning signs of imminent combat in Cuba arrived in Moscow during the day of 27 October, waking Khrushchev from his apparent complacency.
In it, Castro asserted that an American attack in the next twenty-four to seventy-two hours was ‘almost inevitable’—probably a massive air strike but possibly an invasion.
If the Americans did invade, Castro urged Khrushchev to consider the ‘elimination of such a danger’, plainly referring to the use of Soviet nuclear weapons against the Americans.
Air defences in Cuba then began shooting at American reconnaissance aircraft, and an American U-2 was shot down by Soviet SAMs in Cuba and its pilot was killed.
Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen to compose a response to Khrushchev.
At 8m., the public message to Khrushchev was simultaneously transmitted to Moscow and released to the press.
Kennedy then invited a small group to join him in the Oval Office to discuss the message that Robert Kennedy would convey personally to Ambassador Dobrynin.
One part of the oral message we discussed was simple, stern, and quickly decided—that the time had come to agree on the basis set out in the President’s new letter: no Soviet missiles in Cuba, and no United States invasion.
Robert Kennedy left immediately to meet Dobrynin at the Justice Department and deliver the private message.
We had to have a commitment by at least tomorrow that those bases would be moved.
He then asked me about Khrushchev’s other proposal dealing with removal of the missiles from Turkey.
I mentioned four or five months—I said I was sure that these matters could be resolved satisfactorily.
A public message from Kennedy to Khrushchev arrived late on Saturday evening, 27 October, in Moscow.
It laid out the deal that would entail the verified withdrawal of Soviet ‘offensive weapons’ in exchange for the non-invasion pledge.
Khrushchev opened the Presidium session on the morning of Sunday, 28 October, with yet another about-face in his assessment of the American danger.
On the morning of Sunday, 28 October, Soviet leaders broadcast an urgent message over the radio, announcing that they would withdraw their missiles from Cuba.
Only when coupled with the threat of further action in the form of alternatives did it succeed in forcing Soviet withdrawal of the missiles.
Without the threat of air strike or invasion, the blockade alone would not have forced the removal of the missiles.
The middle road,e. the blockade, may have provided time for Soviets to adjust to American determination to withdraw the missiles.
But it also left room for the Soviet Union to bring the missiles to operational readiness.
What narrowed that room was Khrushchev’s belief that he faced a clear, urgent threat that America was about to move up the ladder of escalation.
President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev confer at the Soviet Embassy, Vienna, Austria.
Kennedy, in Sorensen 1963) In thinking about problems of foreign affairs, professional analysts as well as ordinary citizens proceed in a straightforward non-theoretical fashion.
However, careful examination of explanations of events like the Soviet installation of missiles in Cuba, reveals a more complex conceptual substructure.
The concluding section of this chapter revolves around three central propositions.
Professional analysts and ordinary citizens think about problems of foreign policy in terms of largely implicit conceptual models that have significant consequences for the content of their thought.
Explanations show regular and predictable characteristics that reflect unrecognized assumptions about the character of puzzles, the categories in which problems should be considered, the types of evidence that are relevant, and the determinants of occurrences.
Assumptions like these are central to the activities of explanation and prediction.
In attempting to explain a particular event, the analyst cannot simply describe the full state of the world leading up to that event.
The logic of explanation requires conceptual models to single out the relevant critical determinants of the occurrence—the junctures at which particular factors produced one state of the world rather than another.
Moreover, as the logic of prediction underscores, the analyst must summarize the various factors as they bear on the occurrence.
Conceptual models not only fix the mesh of the nets that the analyst drags through the material in order to explain a particular action, but they also direct the analyst to cast nets in selected ponds, at certain depths, in order to catch the fish he/she is after.
In what is, in effect, the default posture, events in foreign affairs are understood as purposive acts of unified national governments.
He/she focuses attention on the goals and objectives of the government.
The analyst has explained this event when he/ she can show how placing missiles in Cuba was a reasonable action, given Soviet strategic objectives.
Predictions about what a nation will do are produced by calculating what a rational action in this certain situation would do, given specified objectives.
Although Model I has proved useful for many purposes, it is clear that it must be supplemented by frames of reference that disaggregate the government, focusing on the organizations and political actors involved in the policy process.
If I know an actor’s objective, I have a major clue to his likely action.
By observing behaviour and considering what the actor’s objective might be, when I identify an objective that is advanced effectively by the action, I have a strong hypothesis about why he/she did whatever he/she did.
The full RAM includes not only objectives but also calculations about the situation in which the actor finds him/herself.
This context presents threats and opportunities that the agent packages as options with pros and cons.
The actor chooses the alternative that best advances his/ her interests.
Thus in explaining what an agent did, or in making bets about what he/she is likely to do, an analyst must consider not only the actor’s objectives but also the options identified, the costs and the benefits estimated to follow from each option, and the actor’s readiness or reluctance to take risks.
The core questions a Model I analyst seeks to answer in explaining a government action or estimating the likelihood of an action can be summarized succinctly.
Two alternative conceptual models, the Organizational Behaviour Model (Model II) and the Governmental Politics Model , provide a base for improved explanation and predictions.
According to the Organizational Behaviour Model, what Model I analysts characterize as ‘acts’ and ‘choices’ are thought of instead as outputs of existing organizations functioning according to regular patterns of behaviour.
Faced with the fact of Soviet missiles in Cuba, a Model II analyst focuses on the existing organizations and their standard operating procedures for acquiring information, defining feasible options, and implementing a programme.
A Model II analyst has explained the event when he has identified the relevant Soviet organizations and displayed the patterns of organizational behaviour from which the action emerged.
Predictions identify trends that reflect existing organizations and their fixed procedures and programmes.
It is a vast conglomerate of loosely allied organizations, each with a substantial life of its own.
Governments define alternatives and estimate consequences as their component organizations process information; governments act as these organizations enact routines.
Therefore governmental behaviour can be understood, according to the second conceptual model, less as deliberate choices and more as outputs of large organizations functioning according to standard patterns of behaviour.
At any given time, a government consists of existing organizations, each with a fixed set of standard operating procedures and programmes.
The behaviour of these organizations—and consequently of the government—in any particular instance is determined primarily by routines established prior to that instance.
Dramatic organizational change can occur in response to major disasters.
Both learning and change are influenced by existing organizational capabilities and procedures.
The characterization of government action as organizational behaviour differs sharply from Model I Attempts to understand problems of foreign affairs in this frame of reference produce quite different explanations.
About the Missile Crisis, the Model I analyst asks why ‘Khrushchev’ deployed missiles to Cuba, or why the ‘USA’ responded with a blockade and ultimatum.
Governments are anthropomorphized as if they were an individual person, animated by particular purposes.
In Model II explanations, the subjects are never named individuals or entire governments.
Instead, the subjects in Model II explanations are organizations; their behaviour accounted for in terms of organizational purposes and practices common to the members of the organization, not those peculiar to one or another individual.
According to this model, events in foreign affairs are characterized neither as unitary choice nor as organizational outputs.
What happens is understood instead as a resultant of bargaining games among players in the national government.
The analyst focuses on the players whose interests and actions impact the issue in question, the factors that shape each player’s perceptions and stands, the established ‘action channel’ for aggregating competing preferences, and the performance of the players.
A Model III analyst has explained this event when he/she has discovered who did what to whom that yielded the action in question.
Predictions are generated by identifying the game in which an issue will arise, the relevant players, and their relative power and bargaining skill.
But beyond the Model II analysis lies a further, more refined, level of investigation.
Rather, each individual in this group is, in his/her own right, a player in a central competitive game.
Thus government behaviour can be understood according to a third conceptual model, not as organizational outputs but as the results of bargaining games.
In contrast with Model I, the Governmental Politics Model sees no unitary actor but rather many actors as players—players who make government decisions not by a single rational choice but by the pushing and pulling that is politics.
Most players represent a department or agency along with the interests and constituencies that their organization serves.
Because players’ preferences and beliefs are related to the different organizations they represent, their analyses yield conflicting recommendations.
Separate responsibilities laid on the shoulders of distinct individuals encourage differences in what each sees and judges to be important.
Model III analysis begins with the proposition that knowledge of the leader’s initial preferences is, by itself, rarely a sufficient guide for explanation or prediction.
The proposition reflects the fact that authoritative power is most often shared.
The Rational Actor, Model II: Organizational Behaviour, and Model III: Governmental Politics—simply describes events.
In attempting to explain what happened, each distinguishes certain features as the relevant determinants.
Each combs out the numerous details in a limited number of causal strands that are woven into the most important reasons for what happened.
Moreover, each emphasizes quite different factors in explaining the central puzzles of the crisis.
The outline of a partial ad hoc working synthesis of analysis using these three models begins to emerge as one considers the core questions each model leads one to ask in pursuing explanations or prediction.
Model I fixes the broader context, the larger national patterns, and the shared images.
Within this context, Model II illuminates the organizational routines that produce the information, options, and actions.
Model III focuses in greater detail on the individuals who constitute a government and the politics and procedures by which their competing perceptions and preferences are combined.
Each, in effect, serves as a search engine in the larger effort to identify all the significant causal factors without which the decision or action would not have occurred.
The best analysts of foreign policy manage to weave strands from each of the three conceptual models into their explanations.
By integrating factors identified under each model, explanations can be significantly strengthened.
The story of the missile crisis provides many opportunities for one to use the alternative lenses in re-analysing questions that members of the United States government, and the Soviet government, answered at that time.
For example, in preparing for President Kennedy’s meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko on Thursday, 18 October, the question arose whether Gromyko and his colleagues in the Soviet central circle expected the USA to discover missiles being installed in Cuba before they became operational.
Evidence of what the Soviets had actually done in constructing missiles in Cuba, including the standardized features of ballistic missiles at each of the sites, the absence of camouflage at the sites, and the near certainty that U-2s flying over these areas would take photographs of the missiles , led some in the United States government to conclude that the Soviet government must have expected the USA to discover the missiles.
Indeed, the extraordinary and effective disguise of the missiles during shipment from the Soviet Union to sites in Cuba, on the one hand, and the absence of any equivalent camouflage at the sites, on the other, suggested to some that the Soviet government expected the USA to discover the missiles at about this time.
If the administration had accepted that judgement, it might have developed a different script for the conversation with Gromyko.
Here, Model II competes directly with Model I and yields precisely contrary conclusions.
The Missile Crisis maintains its special claim on policy makers and citizens alike because no other event so clearly demonstrates the awesome crack between the unlikelihood and the impossibility of nuclear war.
The further one gets from the event, the harder it becomes to believe—existentially—that nuclear war could really have happened.
USA responds affirmatively to first Khrushchev letter but says that, first, missiles now in Cuba must be rendered inoperable and urges quick agreement.
Consider, however, one obvious scenario for nuclear war beginning with steps 1–7 above but then proceeding hypothetically as follows.
Soviet and/or Cuban forces fire upon United States surveillance aircraft over Cuba on 28 October.
At this point, if not a step or two earlier, the Soviet government would be intensively considering possible pre-emptive nuclear strikes against the USA, especially command and control centres like Washington, in order to limit the damage inflicted by the overwhelming first strike they fear could come at any moment.
If the Soviets preferred to place the burden of first use of nuclear weapons on the Americans, Moscow could use its conventional military forces to seize all of Berlin, thus forcing the Americans to decide whether they would indeed keep their promise to use nuclear weapons first to defend their allies.
Use of Model II and Model III would greatly enlarge the menu of nightmarish possibilities, adding misinformation, false warnings, accidents, and inadvertent clashes to the mix.
Other paths from what occurred to nuclear weapons exploding in the USA and Soviet Union start with unauthorized actions by individuals or units of both governments making choices that they clearly had the technical capability to make.
This order violated the Air Force’s ‘buddy system’ doctrine, which required at least two officers to be in physical control of a nuclear weapon at all times.
One nuclear safety officer observed that ‘by an inadvertent act’, a single pilot carrying out this order ‘would have been able to achieve the full nuclear detonation of the weapon’.9 ● The United States Navy had been using electronic eavesdroppers to monitor four Foxtrot class submarines that had slipped out of the Soviet submarine base at Gadzhievo on Kola Peninsula on the night of 1 October.
On the morning of 24 October, Nikolai Shumkov, commander of one of the four Soviet submarines, realized that a United States destroyer was closing in on his vessel—not to sink the submarine, as it turns out, but simply to force it to the surface.
Unknown to the destroyer’s commander, there was a 10-kiloton nuclear torpedo stacked in the B-130’s bow.
With the push of a button, Shumkov could have unleashed the weapon, which had over half the destructive force of a Hiroshima-style nuclear bomb.
Model II and Model III analysts caution against confidence in the impossibility of nations stumbling, irrationally in Model I terms, into the use of nuclear weapons, in the manageability of nuclear crises, or in understanding the recipe for successful crisis management.
Through Model II lenses, the USA’ success included crucial organizational rigidities and even mistakes.
Except for the organizational and political factors that delayed an immediate military attack on Cuba, the probability of war would have been much higher.
Except for the organizational and political dynamics that produced sufficiently persistent displays of American resolve to tilt Khrushchev’s wildly oscillating estimates of American determination, Khrushchev might have proceeded with his plan to stage a nuclear confrontation in Berlin that could have proved even more dangerous.
Only barely did the leaders of both governments manage to control organizational programmes that threatened to drag both countries over the cliff.
In several instances, both Americans and Soviets were just plain lucky.
The information and estimates available to leaders about the situation reflect organizational capacities and routines as well as facts.
The options presented to the leaders are much narrower than the menu that analysts might consider desirable.
Coordination among organizations is much less finely tuned than leaders demand or expect.
In a crisis, the overwhelming problem will be that of control and coordination of large organizations.
Given insurmountable limits to control and added dangers that can be created or compounded by the interacting plethora of the safety routines themselves, such crises must be avoided.
Lessons that emerge from Model III provide even less reason to be sanguine about our understanding of nuclear crises or about the impossibility of nuclear war.
Actions advocated by leaders of the United States government covered a spectrum—from doing nothing, to seeking a diplomatic bargain with Khrushchev at a summit meeting, to an invasion of Cuba.
The process by which the blockade emerged included many uncertain factors.
Had McNamara been less forceful, the air strike could well have been chosen in the first day or two.
Had Kennedy proved his mettle domestically in a previous confrontation, perhaps the diplomatic track would have prevailed and a major Berlin crisis could have erupted in November and December of 1962.
If a president and his/her associates have to manage a nuclear crisis, the informal machinery, free-wheeling discussions, and devil’s advocacy exemplied by ExCom have many advantages.
But the mix of personality, expertise, influence, and temperament that allows such a group to clarify alternatives, even while it bargains over separate preferences, must be better understood.
This book addresses modern-day nuclear threats from a variety of sources.
This volume brings to light either significant re-evaluations of the crisis, or in some cases, truly startling challenges to the conventional wisdom surrounding much of the crisis.
This book offers an insightful look into the executive power of American presidents, therefore accounting for the ‘agency’ around foreign policy decisions.
