Three sources of overconfidence in the manageability of nuclear crises Benoît Pelopidas* Junior Chair of Excellence in Security Studies, Sciences Po Abstract Overconﬁdence in the controllability of nuclear weapons creates danger.
In this context, this article reviews the scholarly literature about the limits of predictability and controllability of nuclear crises and investigates three failures of learning from them.
Given that France displays in particularly acute form some of the sources of overconﬁdence in the controllability of nuclear crises that can been found in other nuclear armed states, this article offers the ﬁrst study of the French experience and evolving interpretation of the Cuban missile crisis in comparative perspective, based on untapped primary material.
First, the publication and interpretation of primary sources is a contribution in itself given the frequent misconceptions about nuclear dynamics due to theory-driven extrapolations.
Second, it challenges a widespread assumption of automaticity linking a fear-induced deterrent effect and the presence of nuclear weapons.
Third, empirically, this article studies part of a regime of valuation of nuclear weapons.
It ﬁnally outlines a research agenda to take luck seriously in security studies.
He was the last surviving elite participant in the 1962 nuclear crisis, widely regarded as the closest humanity ever came to nuclear war.
With his passing we have lost a direct link with the experience of very intense fear of imminent nuclear war, and with the learning of the crucial role of luck in preserving the world from nuclear devastation.
From now on, our interpretation of the danger of the most dangerous crisis in the history of the nuclear age is radically detached from direct experience at the highest levels of decision-making.
At the same time, all nuclear weapons states are developing vast programmes to enhance their nuclear weapons capabilities, tensions between Russia and the West remain high, and the current US president is suspected by some to be more prone to using nuclear weapons in anger than any of his predecessors.
Benoît Pelopidas, Junior Chair of Excellence in Security Studies, CERI / Sciences Po, 56 rue Jacob, 75006 Paris, France.
This crisis, which today is widely considered to be the closest mankind has ever come to nuclear war, is an essential case study for assessing the fear-inducing effects of nuclear weapons and understanding the possibility of nuclear learning.
First, I accept the assumption that national experience is a major source of learning.
Second, I accept the ﬁnding of the literature portraying overconﬁdence as a source of increased risks.
Third, I assume that shared international learning about the limits of controllability of nuclear weapons is an important precondition for more informed nuclear decision-making and public deliberations on the subject.
As a consequence of these three premises, I regard the absence of learning, or forms of memory that systematically deny the role of luck and promote overconﬁdence, as contributing to nuclear danger.
The fact that learning is rare does not make its absence any less problematic or puzzling.
However, not all policy and scholarly communities have judgment, restraint and diplomatic skill.
Paul Nitze considered the Berlin crisis as even more dangerous and Ray S Cline is one of those in the United States who maintains that the danger of the Cuban missile crisis was overestimated and, overall, quite minimal.
Both of those judgements were formulated before the key discoveries of the 1990s reviewed in Section 1.
This notion has been applied to nuclear weapons by Eric Schlosser in Command and Control , 313.
The unbearable lightness of luck seems constantly to escape the learning process.
This article explores three reasons for this failure to learn, focusing on ideational factors.
I do not deny the role of institutional and bureaucratic dynamics in the entrenchment of representations related to nuclear weapons, which will be explored in a subsequent essay, but I do not analyse them here.
Staying at the level of ideas emphasises the responsibility of scholars and analysts to work in the name of avoiding overconﬁdence without waiting for structural or institutional change.
Forms of learning that promote overconﬁdence have been documented across national cases.
Drawing on unexploited primary sources to illuminate this less-known case, the following article identiﬁes and explains the limits to French nuclear learning.
If ofﬁcial representatives of all nuclear weapons states tend to portray themselves as responsible custodians of their nuclear arsenals, the French stand out for their public display of conﬁdence in the perfect safety record of their nuclear arsenal.
Two weeks before, he had given a tour of the Luxeuil Air Force base and its former weapons storage facilities.
He added that the visitors ‘will have seen for themselves’.13 This article treats such public conﬁdence in control over nuclear weapons as part of a puzzle, and analyses how such a statement has become possible and acceptable.
Overall, little has been written on the memory of key episodes in the nuclear age in France and their impact on French thinking about nuclear safety, security and possible nuclear futures.
In addressing the puzzle of how the discoveries about the role of luck in the outcome of the Crisis, never adequately refuted, have not been integrated in the accepted body of knowledge about nuclear history and policy, this article makes three contributions.
First, the focus on new French primary sources is relevant to security studies as well as policymaking circles given frequent misconceptions about nuclear dynamics.
Nuclear security studies scholars too often make unwarranted theory-driven extrapolations based on few or no primary sources, and latent assumptions about a common narrative of the danger, causes and consequences of the ‘most dangerous crisis of the nuclear age’ are widespread in Western nuclear policy circles.
Second, and consequently, the article tackles a widespread assumption of automaticity linking the presence of nuclear weapons to a fear-induced deterrent effect.
Vipin Narang labelled this as ‘an existential bias’ in the literature on deterrence, focused on the acquisition of nuclear weapons as the only meaningful threshold, a bias that Daniel Deudney locates in the tradition of focused on the United States and a second one including a Soviet and Cuban perspective.
New evidence from behind the Iron, Bamboo, and Sugarcane Curtains, and beyond’, Cold War International History Project Bulletin, 17/18 , 7.
However, publications around the 50th anniversary of the Crisis show that the ‘ﬁrst wave’ remains hegemonic.
Indeed, this assumption crosses the policy divide over the desirability of nuclear disarmament.
In their case, the weapons do not even need to be assembled in order to deter, their existence and the fear that they trigger need only exist in the mind of the deterred.
In other words, whether it is for deterrence or disarmament, the mere presence of nuclear weapons (physical or virtual) is expected to inspire fear on account of their destructive capacity; such a dynamic, if granted, would clearly constrain the scope for re-evaluation of these weapons.
In other words, the value of nuclear weapons would be irreducibly determined by the physics of nuclear devastation and unaffected by social and political factors.
Given the position of France in the middle of the expected European battleﬁeld for the coming nuclear war of the 1960s, if it turns out that the French experience and memory of the Crisis were largely unmarked by fear, this widely-held assumption of the automaticity of the effect of the presence of nuclear weapons will be opened to further challenge.
As a consequence, the valuation of nuclear weapons will be reassessed as a socially and historically constructed process, irreducible to destructive capacity alone.
Third, empirically, this study of the French case responds to Nick Ritchie’s invitation to study ‘regimes of value’ of nuclear weapons beyond his foundational case study of the UK.23 It also contributes to a growing literature on nuclear fear and atomic anxiety that has not documented the French experience in detail or consulted French-language primary sources.
I ﬁrst review the most recent literature on the Crisis, with evidence showing that the situation was indeed extremely dangerous and that its peaceful outcome cannot be reduced to successful, fully informed crisis-management.
Nuclear weapons use was avoided in the autumn of 1962 not through restraint on the part of President Kennedy and the Soviet leadership only, but as a result of decisions made by individual nuclear operators, under conditions of incomplete or incorrect information.
As a 2015 literature review concluded, ‘had everyone stopped researching … the crisis in the 1980s our awareness of the risks of nuclear war would be greatly diminished.
For example, the Kennedy administration massively underestimated the number of Soviet troops in Cuba, ignored that they arguably could ﬁre tactical weapons based in Cuba, and that Castro was actively pushing the Soviets to be more aggressive.
Excomm members, we now know, were not informed when the head of Strategic Air Command , General Thomas Power, took the unprecedented decision to place American nuclear forces on Defense Condition 2.
One of those missiles was even launched for a test ﬂight from Vandenberg Air Force base, in California, on 26 October 1962 at 4 am, as planned before the Crisis, without the president knowing about it.
Second, and consequently, command and control problems also have to be taken into account, so that complete presidential control cannot be taken for granted.
Many serious safety problems, which could have resulted in an accidental or unauthorized detonation or a serious provocation to the Soviet government, occurred during the crisis.
None of these incidents led to inadvertent escalation or an accidental war.
He did not, however, have unchallenged ﬁnal control over United States nuclear weapons.
Therefore, he sent a cable to Khrushchev asking for a Soviet nuclear strike if the United States attacked Cuba.
Soviet ﬁghter jets scrambled to intercept the U-2 while F-102 interceptors were sent to escort it home and prevent the Soviet MIGs from freely entering US airspace.
On the Soviet side, a similar problem of the delegation of the authority to use nuclear weapons occurred.
However, ﬁnding conﬁdence in the president’s consistency is in itself problematic.
It neglects, for instance, Kennedy’s severe illness, dependence on steroids, and reliance on competing medical opinions and treatments from doctors with whom he did not share what the others were prescribing him, which might have affected his judgement.
Third, the most recent research shows that weapons safety was very rudimentary at the time.
For instance, in the early 1960s NATO weapon handlers pulled the arming wires out of a Mark 7 nuclear warhead while they were unloading it from a plane.
Whether or not Kennedy’s judgement was actually impaired or not, the point remains that betting on the consistency of a man who relies on large quantities of medication with potential psychotropic side effects and on competing treatments by doctors who do not know what the other treatments are is a very risky bet.
Dr Eugene Cohen, Kennedy’s long-term endocrinologist, warned JFK against the dubious practices of one of his doctors, Dr Jacobson, nicknamed Dr Feelgood, who would in 1975 be denied his authorisation to practice medicine, as early as November 1961.
So, beyond the command and control problem outlined above, the safety of the weapons was very problematic at the time and accidental detonation of NATO weapons could have happened during the Crisis.
As a result, one can reasonably claim that the danger of war was higher than leaders thought at the time.
In 1994, Len Scott and Steve Smith already observed, there is now ample evidence that the fact that the crisis did not lead to nuclear war was due, in large part, to good luck.
In our view this is a most important ﬁnding since it undermines the claims of those who think that nuclear crises can be safely managed and that command and control systems will work as they are meant to work.
He attributed the outcome of the Crisis to ‘plain dumb luck’, and other key participants would come to share this view after a handful of oral history conferences conducted by James Blight and his colleagues.
Among them were 35 Schlosser, Command and Control, 261, based on interviews with weapon designer Harold Agnew.
Melvyn Laffer, ‘What do we “now know” ?’, The American History Review, 104:2 , 501.
Twenty years later, Campbell Craig raises important objections against Sagan’s work, but still fundamentally agrees with this point.
Problems of limited or false information, misperceptions, limits of safety and presidential command and control over nuclear weapons as well as accidents susceptible to create the impression that war was imminent, could all have led to inadvertent escalation.
A narrative of control cannot fully account for the peaceful outcome of the Crisis and the part played by luck.
In the ﬁrst case, which I characterise as an epistemic inconsistency, the risk frame makes it impossible to account for the limits of control and safety identiﬁed above or for the role of luck, in particular if luck is deﬁned as an effect of unquantiﬁable uncertainty.
In the second case, which I characterise as a practical inconsistency, the role of luck and the limits of controllability will be denied in practice so that acknowledging them will not lead to a questioning of managerialism as an approach of nuclear crises on epistemological, ethical, or political grounds.
John Lewis Gaddis is perhaps the most explicit practitioner of the epistemic inconsistency view in English-language literature.
Hawks found it inconceivable that Khrushchev would have used nuclear weapons to defend Cuba in the face of such overwhelming American superiority.
Leonov, see Thomas S Blanton and James G Blight, ‘A conversation in Havana’, Arms Control Today, 32:9 , 7.
As this quote suggests, this is not only the place where Gaddis’s analysis starts but also where it ends, even though he claims otherwise.
In focusing on the two leaders, Gaddis renders the ﬁndings about the limits of leaders’ controls about the weapons, the possibility of pre-delegation of use as well as accidental explosions due to the limits of safety, invisible.
By emphasising calculable risks and probabilities, he cannot account for unquantiﬁable pathways to disaster, also called possibilities.
This intellectual move illustrates that, as Mary Douglas aptly wrote, ‘risk is not a thing, it’s a way of thinking’.53 Most important, this way of thinking is oriented towards a desire for control and faith in that control.
This implication of risk thinking is most obvious in a research memorandum for RAND, published in 1960 in which the founding father of risk-based nuclear strategy, Thomas Schelling, writes about ‘a controlled loss of control’.55 As I have argued elsewhere, Schelling’s legacy of conﬂating uncertainty and risk in Strategy of Conﬂict has produced the illusion that risk thinking was able to capture uncertainty and luck.
In most other cases, the role of luck is acknowledged in theory but its implications and the questions it would raise are immediately denied at the same time, via its reincorporation in a narrative of control.
This conclusion obviously ignores the episodes mentioned above in which the peaceful outcome of the Crisis is not reducible to a success of deterrence, notably because it resulted from a decision taken out of false information or because the exact cause of the behaviour is not well established.
Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow’s 1999 revised edition of the classic but highly criticised Essence of Decision exempliﬁes this tendency.
They ostensibly accept normal accident theory, that is, the idea that tightly coupled and interactively complex systems like nuclear weapons will inevitably lead to accidents, yet they conclude with a recommendation in terms of manageability which is at odds with the theory or would at best assume that another disaster will happen before the nuclear one, which would make it less signiﬁcant.
They conclude that ‘the potential for dysfunctionality exists and must be managed’,60 when the key insight of normal accident theory is that systemic accidents in complex and tightly coupled systems cannot be managed away.
Nuclear crises have to remain manageable, so he starts his short analysis of the risk of nuclear escalation in history by deliberately setting aside the case of the Crisis.
Given that she recognises Cuba as ‘the most dangerous nuclear crisis so far’ and accepts the widest variety of dangers, it is very revealing that she ends up hedging her acknowledgement of the role of luck in the outcome of the Crisis.
She also recognises the lack of information and existence of misperceptions on both sides, and acknowledges that the short-range atomic weapons in Cuba could have been ﬁred.
This rejection of counterfactual thinking seems to be a disciplinary limitation of diplomatic history, which has had a particularly strong inﬂuence on scholars of the Crisis in France.
The Relevance, Morality and Cost-Effectiveness of Nuclear Weapons’ , 27.
This is interesting given that the most complete study in French makes the exact opposite assumption.
This study has been translated into French and published by Odile Jacob in 2013.
In his ‘elements pour une théorie de la crise’, he fully acknowledges contingency and improvisations in crisis management, warns against the dangers of systematisation and notes how issues of accidents are left aside but ends up inviting continuous progress towards a ‘science’ that has to be possible.
This hostility is one of the reasons why French analysts, strongly inﬂuenced by the tradition of diplomatic history, do not adequately engage with the dangers of the Crisis.
As Ned Lebow notes, the rejection of counterfactual thinking leads analysts to a historical teleology that retrospectively neglects the role of luck and the validity of other possible worlds that come with it.
He observed that prevailing accounts treated the actual outcome of the Crisis as necessary and were unable to grasp the Crisis itself as an event in the philosophical sense of the term.
His contrast between French accounts that assume that the Crisis has settled the matter and the American accounts focusing on surprise, accidents, and pathways to escalation is still valid ﬁve decades later.
The lack of legitimacy of counterfactual reasoning and the study of other possible worlds in French IR circles is such that it is not a matter of debate.
He displays an interesting form of conﬁdence which cannot be reduced to control and treats the possibility of accidents as conditions of possibility of a fate that prevents disaster, but acknowledges that this cannot last forever.
State and costs of a disciplinary variety’, Review of International Studies, 40:4 , 809.
In all fairness, Renouvin’s methodological intervention came out of a frustration with diplomatic explanations for the origins of the First World War.
He wanted to move beyond the ‘narrow horizons’ of diplomatic history, from the relations between diplomats to the relations between peoples.
Quite tellingly, Renouvin’s direct successor interprets the outcome of the Crisis as resulting from ‘tacit bargaining’ between the two actors.
His denial is justiﬁed on the grounds of disciplinary boundaries and the impossibility of testing alternative outcomes; to him counterfactual thinking is illegitimate in political science.
Reasserting control by remembering an idiosyncratic experience of the Crisis exempt of fear Contrary to the latent assumptions of a common narrative of the danger, causes and consequences of the ‘most dangerous crisis of the nuclear age’, the French experience of the Crisis is idiosyncratically deprived of fear, and this interpretation has been relatively stable over time.
The contrast with other nuclear-armed NATO allies and permanent members of Security Council is striking.
The next generation blamed him for not being entirely consistent with this agenda though.
On the contrary, French President Charles De Gaulle did not voice any particular fear at the time and the French military and intelligentsia do not seem to have felt such a threat, except in press reports for a few days after Kennedy’s speech on 22 October.
A biographer of de Gaulle, for instance, assumes that ‘because no American missiles were based in France, … she would not be an early target, even if it came to a nuclear exchange’,86 which is evidence for the ‘great calmness’ of France during the Crisis.
Macmillan conﬁrms this impression when he writes that, faced with the threat of imminent nuclear war, ‘the French were … contemptuous’88 while other British Cabinet ministers worried that war was imminent.
On the evening of 28 October 1962, Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone, Lord President of the Council, whose wife had just given birth, considered whether to baptise the child himself.
On the contrary, Etienne Burin des Roziers, general secretary of the Elysee Palace, makes fun of the fear of disaster in his diary, which was not meant to be made public before decades.
Prime Minister and after 1957–1966, ed. and introduction Peter Catterall , 508.
On the 24th, the editorial in Le Monde questions the validity of American evidence, but two days later, after Sherman Kent came to show some photographs to the journalists, another piece was published to conﬁrm the validity of this information.
National mobilisations against the force de frappe did not take place before 1963.
Joelle Beurier’s study of the year 1962 as represented in the French popular photo-journalistic outlet Paris-Match shows that in its pages the violence of the world was dramatised during the ﬁrst half of the year but euphemised during the second, when the events this article engages with took place.
Indeed, the only French source suggesting serious fears of nuclear war came from the French Embassy in Washington, which expressed in a telegram deep worries associated with not having an anti-nuclear shelter.
On balance, however, none of this conveyed a signiﬁcant level of fear or awareness of the danger in the context of the time.
A study of the world news segment broadcast in French movie theaters at the time, Regards sur le monde, suggests this absence of fear very strongly.
Similarly, the main outlet on military issues in France, the Revue de Défense Nationale, carried a few columns worrying about the increasing arms trade between Cuba and the Soviet Union, but prior to 1963 it published nothing in particular on the Crisis itself.
This is all the more surprising as two articles published earlier in 1962 in this same journal discuss the risk of inadvertent escalation.
The Crisis beneﬁts from a longer article than other events including a few titles mentioning the possibility of a war but she notes that the lexicon as well as the iconography are downplaying the danger.
This is evidence that for the French at the time, this is an Americano-Soviet crisis and that they are not involved in it.
Algeria, which had been a French department since 1830, had become independent a few months before, on 18 March 1962 and, on 28 October, in the middle of the Crisis, a referendum took place, deciding that for the ﬁrst time the French President will be elected directly by the citizens.
A failure to win this referendum would have meant the end of the Presidency of Charles de Gaulle, after four years in power under a new Constitution and only a few months after he survived an assassination attempt.
As a consequence, the speech of United States Secretary of Defense McNamara on the shift to ﬂexible response has more impact on the French conversation than the Crisis.
This mostly reﬂects a fear of conventional war in Europe and a fear centered on Berlin.
While many French intellectuals, in particular Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre, had taken an early stance on nuclear weapons after Hiroshima, the French intelligentsia was conspicuously silent during the Crisis.
Of course, one needs to keep in mind that Camus passed away before the Crisis, in January 1960.
But Sartre, André Malraux, Simone de Beauvoir, and prominent Catholic intellectual Francois Mauriac seem to have been completely silent about the Crisis.
But this statement made no mention of the nuclear threat.3 Given the intimate connection with Charles de Gaulle cultivated by a part of the French population, which wrote to the president to share their hopes and fears, it is also quite telling that a search accidents, to be avoided all the more as they are more serious, more deﬁnitive.
The volume of published letters by Simone de Beauvoir that covers the years 1940–63 does not include any letter for the year 1962.
Her biographers Claude Francis and Fernande Gontier mention her visits to Havana with Sartre and comment on her impressions on Castro but do not make any mention of the missile crisis.
His correspondence with fellow writer Jean Paulhan at the time interestingly mentions the OAS – Organisation of the Secret Army or Secret Armed Organization, an armed group opposed to the independence of Algeria – but not the Crisis, in the middle of a theological conversation, suggesting the primacy of domestic politics in French intellectual life at the time.
In ‘Esprit’, there is an article by Stanley Hoffmann about the Franco-American relationship but it is about the post-Second World War period.
The only writing by Sartre I found that related to issues of nuclear security was also published a year before the Crisis, at the time of the Bay of Pigs.
Similarly, none of the cards of best wishes for the year 1963 which have been kept mentioned the favourable conclusion of a very risky and scary crisis.
In short, an in-depth study of French sources suggests that the French experience of the Crisis ignored the risk of nuclear war or nuclear weapons accidents and did not display the level of fear expected by security studies scholars who deduce a deterrent effect from the destructive potential of nuclear weapons.
This absence of fear persists in more recent statements by the few French public ﬁgures who have expressed an interpretation of the Crisis.
However, he continued by saying that this was ‘not his business’ since he was in charge of economic relations and it did not disturb his daily work.
However, the presence of aggressive letters to De Gaulle blaming him for the outcome of the Algerian war suggests that no purposeful sanitation has taken place.
Moreover, the presence of correspondence with private citizens and with the mayors of France which did not call for or receive an answer suggests that expressions of fears would not have been removed simply because no one replied to them.
In any case, the kind of letter I was looking for would not have been either particularly offensive or easy to single out.
Sudhir Hazareesingh had already noted that major events like May 1968 had generated a surprisingly small amount of correspondence from the French population.
Therefore, the silence of the available correspondence can plausibly conﬁrm my argument.
Gabriel Robin offered a revisionist interpretation of the causes of the Crisis and its resolution but his book was ignored by scholars as well as policymakers.2 Raymond Aron did not live to see the major revelations of the 1990s, but he lent his authority to a persisting narrative of control and underestimation of the danger of the Crisis.
For him, the evolution and outcome of the Crisis were just additional evidence that nuclear weapons created a shared rationality – even when dealing with enemies like the Soviet Union.
Gallois felt that the Crisis was not threatening because its progressive evolution led to the ofﬁcial alerting of strategic nuclear forces that in turn forced the two great powers to negotiate.
Gabriel Robin told the author that the ideas of his book were either ignored or quickly disregarded among his colleagues in the French foreign service.
In his memoirs, he treats the Crisis with no more than the reproduction of a paragraph of a letter he received from Carl Schmitt congratulating him for his analysis.
We were not able to do so with much smaller means such as the pistol, the machine gun, or even the canon.
We are working with something which is inﬁnitely calculable and we know ahead of time what the results will be.
Teaching the Crisis is no longer mentioned in the ofﬁcial guidelines the years for which school is still mandatory.
It has disappeared from the guidelines for ages 11 to 15 since 2013 and the Crisis does not appear in the list of 43 landmark dates from the third millennium BC to today that French students have to master at the end of mandatory schooling.
For the rest of high school, the recommendations suggest that the Crisis allows the missile crisis in conversations with his family.
This might have happened had he thought there was a serious risk of nuclear war.
Archives of Pierre-Marie Gallois, 30Z 37602/1, Services Historiques de la Défense, Vincennes.
I regard it as telling that Gallois chose to cut it out of a newspaper and kept it in his records.
This relative fearlessness contrasts both with implicit assumptions in policy circles of a common understanding of the Crisis and with security studies scholars’ conviction in the dread induced by the destructive capability of nuclear weapons.
Conclusion Full awareness of the limits of knowledge of and control over nuclear weapons is crucial for historical accuracy, for nuclear learning, and as a starting for a fruitful nuclear weapons policy debate that would include strategic, ethical, and political concerns.
This awareness is all the more important as overconﬁdence has been shown to be a cause of increased danger.
In order to understand the construction of such overconﬁdence, I have accepted the idea that learning occurred mostly at the national level and focused on the French case, in comparative perspective.
I have ﬁrst shown how those scholarly ﬁndings have not been adequately refuted and argued that those who do not take these elements seriously have done so via epistemological or practical inconsistencies.
The rejection of counterfactual thinking as a legitimate scholarly practice is another way of rendering these ﬁndings invisible without having to refute them.
Finally, I have used the French example to show that an experience and ofﬁcial memory of the Crisis that is not based on fear does over time fuel overconﬁdence in the safety, controllability, and predictability of nuclear crises.
American and British elites and populations did not grasp the full extent of the dangers at the time but, unlike the French, they certainly experienced fear.
First, social scientists cannot let Fidel Castro take the unbearable lightness of luck with him to the grave.
Following from the efforts of cognitive psychologists to uncover our tendencies to deny luck retrospectively, further exploration of the politics of luck and how the distinction between risk and uncertainty has been blurred would be a ﬁrst critical step towards a reconceptualisation of nuclear controllability, a reconceptualisation that would place luck at the heart of political and ethical action, power and responsibility over time.
The exact same instructions were there in 2010 and can be found for series L and ES in 2015.
Second, cases of near-nuclear use need to be requaliﬁed as events worth investigating.
Diplomatic historians and security studies scholars could fruitfully join forces independently of their views on the value of counterfactuals.
Indeed, we need further investigations into the history of nuclear-armed states both to unearth primary documentation about the past security and safety record of nuclear arsenals and to allow for rigorous counterfactual thinking, going beyond risk thinking.
Comparative critical oral histories of nuclear close calls would likewise help recover the limits of control over nuclear weapons as a legitimate object of scholarly interest.
Such an approach would also tackle directly the scholarly problem of uncritical reliance on accounts from former ofﬁcials, while at the same time addressing the policy problems that result from misguided assumptions of a shared experience and interpretation of events like the Crisis.
The empirical dimension of this article is only a ﬁrst step in this direction.
This research programme allows analysts to start working against overconﬁdence without waiting for structural or institutional reforms and suggests that they have a responsibility to do so.
Third, in security studies, it is crucial to reassert the socially and historically constructed process of valuation of nuclear weapons instead of perpetuating the widespread assumption that the destructive capability of nuclear weapons triggers adequate fear, which in turn initiates a learning process that is sufﬁcient for existential deterrence to work everywhere.
Identifying the effects of rejecting counterfactual thinking and documenting the diverse experiences and memorialisations of nuclear danger as components of a process of valuation of nuclear weapons are ways to understand and counter overconﬁdence in their controllability.
II of the law 2008-696 about archives passed on 15 July 2008 constraints communication of archives related to nuclear history.
Grey Anderson, Barton Bernstein, Sebastien Philippe, and Jutta Weldes deserve special thanks for their scrupulous and precious feedback over several drafts … over several years.
I am grateful to Georges Le Guelte who has been supportive of my work since 2009.
Finally, the three anonymous reviewers of EJIS deserve special thanks for helping me improve the article signiﬁcantly.
Biographical information Benoît Pelopidas holds the junior chair of excellence in security studies at Sciences Po.
Pour une critique de la cinétique politique (Paris: Christian Bourgeois, 2000), 108, my translation.
