Read the following passage carefully and answer the questions that follow:In April 1961, the leaders of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics were worried that the United States of America would invade communist-ruled Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro, the president of the small island nation off the coast of the United States.
Cuba was an ally of the Soviet Union and received both diplomatic and financial aid from it.
Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union, decided to convert Cuba into a Russian base.
Three weeks after the Soviet Union had placed the nuclear weapons in Cuba, the Americans became aware of it.
The United States President, John F Kennedy, and his advisers were reluctant to do anything that might lead to full-scale nuclear war between the two countries, but they were determined to get Khrushchev to remove the missiles and nuclear weapons from Cuba.
Kennedy ordered American warships to intercept any Soviet ships heading to Cuba as a way of warning the USSR of his seriousness.
The prospects of this clash made the whole world nervous, for it would have been no ordinary war.
Eventually, to the world&rsquo;s great relief, both sides decided to avoid war.
Sign Up × Create your account now Continue with Google Signup with Email OR GenderMaleFemaleOthers I accept the Terms & Conditions.
Syllabus Humanities/Arts Question Read the following passage carefully and answer the questions that follow:In April 1961, the leaders of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics were worried that the United States of America would invade communist-ruled Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro, the president of the small island nation off the coast of the United States.
Eventually, to the world’s great relief, both sides decided to avoid war.
Cold War Era and Non–aligned MovementCase Based Type Questions Attach Answer to Question Answers Upsc Rank Holders Oct 22, 2021 In response to the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, and the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba’s request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter a future invasion.
Upvote Reply Share Report Share Attach Reply to Upsc Rank Holders Answer this doubt In response to the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, and the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev agreed to Cuba’s request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter a future invasion.
