I recalled those days of fear while staring at a rusting Soviet medium-ranged SS-4 missile displayed outside La Cabana fortress Nuclear-armed Soviet SS-4’s, secretly brought into Cuba, were ready to destroy Washington and the entire United States East Coast.
President John Kennedy backed down, pledging the United States would never invade Cuba.
United States missiles in Italy and Turkey targeted on the USSR were removed.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev won his goal of saving Cuba and Fidel Castro’s Marxist regime from a United States invasion.
But it was such a terrifying gamble the Soviet Politburo deposed Khrushchev shortly after.
In the early 1960’s, Communist Cuba was the vanguard of revolution in Latin America, then Africa.
Fidel Castro and Che Guevara’s Cuba was the only Communist regime outside Mao’s China that had romantic appeal to western youth.
Fidel’s vows to promote education, health care and land distribution sounded revolutionary when Latin America was mostly ruled by US-backed oligarchs and generals.
The combined pressure of crushing United States trade and financial sanctions and the inherent failures of the Marxist economic system left Cuba isolated, trapped in the past.
Today, once picturesque colonial Havana is a Caribbean Pompeii, a museum of the 1950’s with its crumbling buildings and magnificent vintage American cars.
Half a century later, Latin America has rid itself of inept military dictators and achieved dramatic social and economic development.
The United States no longer treats Latin America with the paternalism and frequent contempt it did fifty years ago.
Ironically, Cuba, with a living standard not far from that of the United States in the early 50’s, was left behind in a time warp.
Castro’s Cuba does have a high standard of health care and education, but the rest of the economy and society are battered beyond belief.
Still, the Castro dictatorship, now run by brother Raul, has been honest and genuinely concerned for its people.
My parents used to meet Ernest Hemingway for daiquiri cocktails at the famed La Floridita Bar, today, sadly an over-priced tourist trap.
Contrary to expectations, no big changes occurred after Raul Castro assumed leadership from the ailing Fidel.
Yet I have observed many small but significant developments on my regular trips to Cuba.
Thanks to Raul’s recent reforms, small private enterprise is bubbling up everywhere.
People are more outspoken, less wary of the secret police and informers.
With its beautiful buildings, friendly, attractive people, and little music bars with their superb salsa bands, Havana is poised to resume its role of 50 years ago as the most fun – and perhaps wickedest city – in the world.
America’s Great Satan, Fidel Castro, is sidelined by age and illness, but Cubans still love their national papa figure.
Either a power grab by the military and old guard, or the half million Miami-based Cubans will return and rebuild Cuba.
A tsunami of United States money will swamp Cuba, washing it into the modern world.
Many friends of Cuba do not look forward to this change, though Cubans desperately need relief from their threadbare existence.
Fidel Castro was admired across Latin America for proudly defying the mighty United States and refusing to follow Washington’s direction.
Latin America 37 Responses to “CUBA STARTS TO COME ALIVE” thetsar says: September 10, 2012 at 5:22 pm Cuba might do well to ask the BRICS Alliance over for a chat.
The “B” – Brazil – may be able to offer Cuba good advice and assistance if necessary.
But I think that it will become more important as United States and her lackies decline.
Also as I remember it, and as many Cubans remember it, the Soviets did not prevail.
April 20, 2012 at 5:34 am This is quite a solid and interesting article, but I don’t share the bleak fatalism with which you look at what will likely happen after the departure of Raul.
In the 1990s it was commonly believed that after Fidel’s departure the system would collapse rapidly because Raul – the obvious successor –would not have the moral authority of Fidel.
But the transition to Raul was very smooth – there was never a moment of panic or uncertainty.
I am just pointing out that those who anticipated a cataclysm were wrong before and may be wrong again.
Although the affluent people Eric Margolis’s parents likely socialized with in Cuba might have been almost as well off as Americans back in the 1950s, I don’t for a second believe that was the case for most Cuban people aty that time.
If they had been as well off as Margolis suggests, Communism would not have been so tempting to the poor tenant farmers and urban working people who initially supported Fidel Castro so strongly.
Marx envisioned his system for Britain, not massive countries like Russia or China.
Perhaps without the external pressures his theories might have fared better in Cuba.
The official United States attitude is medieval & obviously needs to change.
I’m looking forward to expanding upon that next winter when The GF & I visit.
I was barely into kindergarden during the crisis, but do remember the tense atmosphere around the house.
My dad was a freshly-retired Clunk driver in the OLD RCAF & his late 1950’s postings in Europe had convinced him of American hypocrisy on this issue.
Anyway, like the new forums; great look & a lot more visually friendly.
For now, as a regular Platelet donator, I can visit the United States and Western Europe, but can be temporarily suspended by the Canadian Blood Services if I stray to far afield.
April 15, 2012 at 6:40 pm One thing I’d like to note about Cuba that Eric didn’t appear to have mentioned is that this particular country is often portrayed as an exceptional showcase of environmentalism where its ecological footprint is among the lowest in the world and that it actually has a sustainable economic plan that permits self-sufficiency and environmental conservation.
April 20, 2012 at 2:40 pm People carelessly assume that once the so-called “embargo” – which in many ways is a blockade – ends Cuba will be at the mercy of the whims of United States corporate interests.
The embargo/blockade is a United States policy whose intention is to force Cuba into economic isolation.
If the United States suspends this policy, Cuba would have the option of allowing United States business interests uninhibited access to Cuba.
However, we should not assume that Cuba is a nation of Brian Mulroneys, itching to be penetrated by United States capital.
Cuba might very well preserve and even strengthen current rules about foreign investment and the importation of foreign goods.
April 22, 2012 at 2:20 am Once Fidel and Raul are gone, it’s going to be a new era of politics in Cuba.
The United States had no intention of invading the island, which Kennedy made abundantly clear – and paid for direly – during the Bay of Pigs.
Invading the whole island would have made Vietnam look like a cakewalk, and Kennedy, no stranger to war, readily understood that.
What the world saw, and what invariably happened, was the Russians backed off, turned their ships away.
And the hawks in the Situation Room, and McNamara, eager for a display of strength, were curbed by Kennedy.
April 17, 2012 at 5:04 am Not to mention that the United States set a naval blockade which turned back Russian ships, and the missiles in Turkey were obsolete and due for removal anyway.
The Cuban people are NOT America’s enemy…the true enemies are alive and functioning in Washington,DC…..sadly.
There are those pseudo-state media and there are those ignorant generic public voters who think Muslims eat babies.
It is sane – a rational and also effective way of pursuing United States foreign policy issues.
It makes many items in Cuba more expensive than they would otherwise be, it seriously undermines the health care system and it deprives Cuba of the natural market for many of its exports.
The result is that Cuba suffers a deformed socialist economy, not the robust socialist economy it might otherwise have, which would be an intolerable ideological embarrassment to the United States and an irresistible temptation for the rest of Latin America.
April 20, 2012 at 5:13 pm Concerned, Point taken.But I always like to try and look at situations as they affect the ordinary citizen,who is always the one who suffers,if you want to use this term.Having said this,the embargo makes absolutely no sense to me.And to me the vast majority of politicians are highly unsensible…just self serving.Thank you for your feedback.
For the Americans to allow Cuba to show its full potential, would be suicidal for their decrepit version of capitalism.
It already is under very high strain because of megalomanic mismanagement.
April 15, 2012 at 1:37 pm It seems pretty quiet on the site this morning.
I keep reminding all of our American friends how liimited their rights and freedoms are when their supposed “great” country tells it’s citizens that they can NOT travel some where.
Anyway, I am rambling this morning as I too will feel something is missing when the Castro brothers are no more and the “ignorant” expatriots from Florida start to return and claim what was supoosedly theirs.
April 15, 2012 at 11:33 am An interesting column that I’ll be sharing with my barber, who herself is from Cuba.
As for Nikita Khrushchev, he wasn’t overthrown for another two years, in October 1964, However, his actions during the missile crisis were only a few of the reasons for that.
By their actions, they prove again and again who is running the mighty USA and for what outcome.
A society that kicked out the corporations and have no obesity problem to contain with.
A country where one can smoke in the street and not be harassed, or suffer adverse health effects.
April 14, 2012 at 11:52 pm My wife and I are frequent visitors to Cuba going back to before the Soviet withdrawal and we have witnessed the very difficult times the Cuban people have experienced.
As much as we would like to see conditions improve we fear the return of the Americans.
Maybe we are selfish but unless a strong government in Havana stands up to them the people will be no better off than they now are.
Eastern European countries had to deal with the return of expats when Communism collapsed and we hope Cubans will follow models developed there.
I think based on your phrase “a tsunami of United States money will swamp Cuba” you are concerned too.
Most likely a combination of the two… Mercosur and China, will provide the kick start Cuba really needs… Not the snobbish buyout that ex-pats and Americans would provide.
Independence and pride maintained, yet firmly on the road to the future.
Cuba’s allies in Latin America declared on Saturday that they would be boycotting future summits if the country was not invited to attend.
The bloc was set up by Venezuela and Cuba but now includes Bolivia, Ecuador, Nicaragua and the Caribbean islands of Dominica, Antigua and Barbuda, as well as St Vincent and the Grenadines.
Why do the Americans seem to veto anything they don’t like in any international group… spoiled children sometimes need a spanking and theirs is long overdue.
April 15, 2012 at 6:41 pm >spoiled children sometimes need a spanking >and theirs is long overdue.
The image brought back memories of Silver Age comic collecting and Captain George of Mystery Lane on Markham Street.
April 16, 2012 at 11:45 pm Mike Smith Mexico and Cuba just signed a non-binding memorandum that could allow Mexico to help Cuba drill for Petroleum on adjacent tracts of the Gulf of Mexico.
Mexico, Venezuela and Brazil are all that Cuba needs to increase energy self-sufficiency.
April 17, 2012 at 6:15 pm Good for Canada too I have worked for a couple of companies that had dealings with Pemex.
