Distances of major cities from Cuba from a newspaper during the crisis.
The crisis was unique in a number of ways, featuring calculations and miscalculations as well as direct and secret communications and miscommunications between the two sides.
The dramatic crisis was also characterized by the fact that it was primarily played out at the White House and the Kremlin level with relatively little input from the respective bureaucracies typically involved in the foreign policy process.
After the failed United States attempt to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba with the Bay of Pigs invasion, and while the Kennedy administration planned Operation Mongoose, in July 1962, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev reached a secret agreement with Cuban premier Fidel Castro to place Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt.
Kennedy summoned his closest advisers to consider options and direct a course of action for the United States that would resolve the crisis.
Some advisers — including all the Joint Chiefs of Staﬀ — argued for an air strike to destroy the missiles, followed by a United States invasion of Cuba; others favored stern warnings to Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The use of “quarantine” legally distinguished this action from a blockade, which assumed a state of war existed; the use of “quarantine” instead of “blockade” also enabled the United States to receive the support of the Organization of American States.
The letter was the ﬁrst in a series of direct and indirect communications between the White House and the Kremlin throughout the remainder of the crisis.
The president also went on national television that evening to inform the public of the developments in Cuba, his decision to initiate and enforce a “quarantine,” and the potential global consequences if the crisis continued to escalate.
The Joint Chiefs of Staﬀ announced a military readiness status of DEFCON 3 as United States naval forces began implementation of the quarantine and plans accelerated for a military strike on Cuba.
On October 24, Khrushchev responded to Kennedy’s message with a statement that the U.S. “blockade” was an “act of aggression” and that Soviet ships bound for Cuba would be ordered to proceed.
Nevertheless, during October 24 and 25, some ships turned back from the quarantine line; others were stopped by United States naval forces, but they contained no oﬀensive weapons and so were allowed to proceed.
Meanwhile, United States reconnaissance ﬂights over Cuba indicated the Soviet missile sites were nearing operational readiness.
With no apparent end to the crisis in sight, United States forces were placed at DEFCON 2 — meaning war involving the Strategic Air Command was imminent.
On October 26, Kennedy told his advisors it appeared that only a United States attack on Cuba would remove the missiles, but he insisted on giving the diplomatic channel a little more time.
ABC News correspondent John Scali reported to the White House that he had been approached by a Soviet agent suggesting that an agreement could be reached in which the Soviets would remove their missiles from Cuba if the United States promised not to invade the island.
While White House staﬀ scrambled to assess the validity of this “back channel” oﬀer, Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message the evening of October 26, which meant it was sent in the middle of the night Moscow time.
It was a long, emotional message that raised the specter of nuclear holocaust, and presented a proposed resolution that remarkably resembled what Scali reported earlier that day.
Although United States experts were convinced the message from Khrushchev was authentic, hope for a resolution was short-lived.
The next day, October 27, Khrushchev sent another message indicating that any proposed deal must include the removal of United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
That same day a United States U–2 reconnaissance jet was shot down over Cuba.
Kennedy and his advisers prepared for an attack on Cuba within days as they searched for any remaining diplomatic resolution.
It was determined that Kennedy would ignore the second Khrushchev message and respond to the ﬁrst one.
That night Kennedy set forth in his message to the Soviet leader proposed steps for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba under supervision of the United Nations, and a guarantee that the United States would not attack Cuba.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy then met secretly with Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, and indicated that the United States was planning to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey anyway, and that it would do so soon, but this could not be part of any public resolution of the missile crisis.
The next morning, October 28, Khrushchev issued a public statement that Soviet missiles would be dismantled and removed from Cuba.
The crisis was over but the naval quarantine continued until the Soviets agreed to remove their IL–28 bombers from Cuba and, on November 20, 1962, the United States ended its quarantine.
The Cuban missile crisis stands as a singular event during the Cold War and strengthened Kennedy’s image domestically and internationally.
It also may have helped mitigate negative world opinion regarding the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
First, despite the ﬂurry of direct and indirect communications between the White House and the Kremlin — perhaps because of it — Kennedy and Khrushchev, and their advisers, struggled throughout the crisis to clearly understand each others’ true intentions, while the world hung on the brink of possible nuclear war.
Second, having approached the brink of nuclear conﬂict, both superpowers began to reconsider the nuclear arms race and took the ﬁrst steps in agreeing to a nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
On October 26, Kennedy told his advisers it appeared that only a United States attack on Cuba would remove the missiles, but he insisted on giving the diplomatic channel a little more time.
On October 26, Kennedy told his advisers it appeared that only a U.S. attack on Cuba would remove the missiles, but he insisted on giving the diplomatic channel a little more time.
United States military forces urged the president to abandon diplomatic eﬀorts and to attack Cuba.
By relying on diplomatic channels, Kennedy maintained positive relations with the Kremlin during the Cold War.
Nuclear war was avoided because the United States and the Soviet Union came to diplomatic agreements.
It involved media correspondents in ways that had never before been seen in international conﬂicts.
It was a point when the United States and the Soviet Union came the closest to nuclear war.
It resulted in a telephone line connecting the Kremlin with the White House.
It helped Americans forget about the failed Bay of Pigs invasion and the threat posed by Fidel Castro.
