Roberto Segre Taken from vitruvius.com.br The sign is small, peeking out with a certain timidity over the balcony wall several yards above ground.
A simple “For Sale” that would go unnoticed if it weren’t that in the apartment next door you can read the same phrase painted on a window.
Two floors higher, the neighbors on the 6th floor have been more creative and have hung a piece of acrylic where they include the square feet available, to motivate possible buyers.
The building is ugly, grey, one of those built in the eighties under the “microbrigade” system.
The variety and quantity of homes for sale seems to exceed the real capabilities of Cuban wallets right now.
It’s amazing to see properties for sale for a quarter or a half million convertible pesos, in a country where the average salary doesn’t exceed 20 convertible pesos a month.
Hence, the greatest movement in buying-and-selling is taking place in the cheapest homes, which are, therefore, smaller, in worse locations, and in poor repair.
Meanwhile, in the luxury residence sector everything goes more slowly, down, at the level of a room in a tenement or an apartment without windows the movement is quite noticeable, especially for all those people in the interior of the country who are taking advantage of the opportunity to get themselves a home, even if it’s just a few square feet, in Havana.
What is also interesting is the stark and pragmatic assessment that is made of each home for sale.
The ads have become sophisticated, accompanied by photos and favorable descriptions of the house’s “good water supply,” its magnificent location in a quiet neighborhood, or the possibilities to enlarge it and build on the roof.
But there is one qualifier that no one neglects to add if their housing warrants it, and that is “capitalist construction,” if it was built before 1959.
There is a clear parting of the waters and implacable divide between that built before the Revolution and that which has risen during it.
If the apartment building is from the decades of the ‘40s or ‘50s the price soars, while those apartments built by the microbrigades*, who raised their prefabricated towers during the years of Sovietization, are relegated to an inferior level of offerings.
The housing market brings out — with all its toughness — a scale of values that is far from the official discourse and that reassigns a new amount to everything, an objective yardstick for measuring quality.
Microbrigades: “Self-help housing” through assigning groups of people from each workplace to build large apartment houses.
Yoani, her husband Reinaldo Escobar, and son Teo live in a microbrigade building erected by Reinaldo and others from his workplace.
So, post 77, just like the team “yoani” pretends to have the “truthful” information about the state of Cuban property market.
Oh, yes, surely, there’s someone who would try that as an argument in Cuba too.
But when you actually LOOK at those O L D buildings, you quickly realise what is the true meaning of the “capitalist construction” phrase.
And then compare it to the apratment of the pin-up granny nail-biter, who has confirmed to be living in a Jugoslav-designed building, although the “friendly” translator would love you to believe her lie that the dried apricot lives in a self-build building… Liar after liar.
And they fall into the holes of their own lies without even realising how st***d they make themselves to look.
Except for 1 and a half pioneers here posting under a dozen or so different nicks, no one really believes this craft you are vomiting incessantly.
I was studying for a difficult exam and wondered if I would finish university.
Estuve un estudiante de 21 anos de edad cuando el Crisis de Cohetes Cubanos occurio.
Estuve estudiando por un exam muy dificil y estuve pensando si ibo terminar la universidad.
Damir, you are now officially BOOOOOOOOOORING Anonymous on October 17, 2012 at 11:13 am said: OK, since you insist on making a fool of yourself, I’ll let you in on a little secret: other parties are on the ballot when one votes for president of the United States.
Exactly my point… that’s the joy of democracy in Eastern Europe to be soon in Cuba… USAnian style democracy!.. everybody dance now to the corruption song that plays loud from accross the pond.
In Romania, reports of vote fraud mar election Admin – Nov 25, 09 November 25, 2009 – After Romanians went to polls to help their country emerge from a political and economic crisis, the election becomes overshadowed allegations of vote fraud.
Meanwhile, certain media outlets reported instances of electoral fraud.
The reports come while the controversial presidential election failed to produce a winner and a runoff vote pitting center-right incumbent Traian Basescu against Social Democrat Mircea Geoana is scheduled to be held on December 6.
One report put Basescu’s votes at 34. percent, compared to 30. percent for Geoana while another report said Basescu won 32. percent, compared to 31. percent for Geoana.
Turnout from the 18 million eligible voters stood at 53.52 percent — lower than that of the 2004 presidential election.
In what heightened concerns about vote fraud, Romanian police arrested a number of voters who were caught attempting to photograph their marked ballot with mobile phones.
The move is common in vote buying, in which the voter later presents the photo as proof of his vote for the proper candidate.
There were also other reports of massive voter-buying operations by all three major parties in the country.
While Romanian police had set up checkpoints across the country to block buses carrying “election tourists,” many cars were stopped as they were to ferry paid-off voters to the polls.
Such reports of vote fraud come as under Romanian law people are not restricted to voting in their own home district.
Only the wannabe dictators claim to have their compatriots, the “small” people, interest in their sight.
So, the only other possibility left is the rotten tooth that just came out while the traitor terrorist was all by her own self.
But then, there’s a lot of rot in the traitor… The internet is littered with, mostly subconscious, confessions of her own delusional wet daydreaming.
There’s just WAY too much of it to have time to enjoy blowing it into the pieces.
Luckilly she doesn’t have the internet on which she hangs 24/7 somehow, otherwise she would be “posting” even more often… The rubbish and bullshift, of course.
Not that proof matter with the stars and stripes brigade that have exchange Cuba hisotry for an Americanised version of what happend.
And just to kick you in the balls one more time, here’s another L I E by the terrorist traitor team “yoani”: *Translator’s note: Microbrigades: “Self-help housing” through assigning groups of people from each workplace to build large apartment houses.
Theodore Darlymple is one self-deluded and dishonest “observer” of a P A R T of reality in Cuba.
A subjective and politically blinded liar who is falling to mention the fact that M O S T of CUBA is clean, well maintained and kept in order.
He’s failing to admit that the M A I N reason for dilapidated look of many buildings in Habana Vieja is due to the fact that these buildings were not intended to be used but to be left to fall apart on their own in the midst of the Cold War imposed on CUBA by the nazist gulag usa through assets freezing, refusal to pay for reparations and damages nazists inflicted upon Cuba and refusal to hand over Guantanamo.
And the bullshift about the salaries in Cuba I have addressed already, two weeks ago.
An inettligent person knows that the numerical comparison, such as the one above, proposed by the team “yoani” just doesn’t work.
What they are N O T telling to those who have never been in Cuba is that the government is paying many salaries at least half in CUCs.
And the minimum payable is 16 CUCs from what I have seen since the last year.
While that may sound little, and for many it is, the buying power is still quite strong and an average family can still live on it.
And let us not forget what I have already said two weeks ago, a truck driver earns on average 1000 Cuban peosos, CUPs, a nurse in a medical centre aroud 800.
No, it’s too busy paying out diresctors of failed corporations that have never been profitable in the first place and have always lived off the working and tax-paying people.
And waiters in the usa too live exclusively off the tips for their “salares are barely above the “minimum wage” limit.
But what would this “self-thaught” little ignorant from Cuba know about the world and the life in the big smoke.
Theodore Dalrymple writes of the ruins of Havana in his article about the dilapidated city falling apart: “The city is like a great set of Bach variations on the theme of urban decay.
The stucco has given way to mold; roofs have gone, replaced by corrugated iron; shutters have crumbled into sawdust; paint is a phenomenon of the past; staircases end in precipices; windows lack glass; doors are off their hinges; interior walls have collapsed; wooden props support, though not with any degree of assurance, all kinds of structures; ancient electrical wiring emerges from walls, like worms from cheese; wrought ironwork balconies crumble into rust; plaster peels as in a malignant skin disease; flagstones are mined for other purposes.
Every grand and beautifully proportioned room—visible through the windows or in some places through the walls that have crumbled away—has been subdivided by plywood partitions into smaller spaces, in which entire families now live.
Every entranceway is dark, and at night the electric lights glimmer rather than shine.
And let us talk about more of the mindless propaganda from a mindless brains: “there is one qualifier that no one neglects to add if their housing warrants it, and that is “capitalist construction,”” Firstly, there’s absolutely NO SOURCE of information for the statement.
This is plain, simple and rather st**id attempt to peddle more of propagandistic nonsense that has got nothing to do with the facts and truth.
It IS true that SOME apartments and houses will contain the “capitalist construction” description, but the number of such advertisements is M I N U T E in comparison with the total number of advertisements.
And the role is quite different to what the traitor and terrorist team “yani” would love you to believe.
Over 50 years O L D Naturally, the evil-minded criminals like the team “yoani” bandits would jump to an opportunity to claim what is not there to be claimed.
Help, We probably would not be here talking about this if the lunatic castro had had his way.
You’re right, the more I read and learn about these guys — che guevara, the castro brothers and their enablers — I realize that they are all on the same level as Charles Manson and Jim Jones, or worse.
Would love to know how the original order was given and what made castro recall that order.
The Missile Crisis had just been defused when Khrushchev, eyeball to eyeball with JFK, blinked.
I had posted these links in my article a few months back where the team “yoani” confessed to live in a “Jugosla-build” building.
Of all of the reforms brought in by Raul Castro, abolishing exit permits is potentially the one that could potentially most advance the cause of civil liberties in Cuba.
The true test will come in January when Yoani arrives at Havana Airport with only passport and airline ticket in hand to travel overseas and then attempts to return to Cuba some time thereafter after collecting her latest international award.
If all goes smoothly, this will indeed be a meaningful step forward for civil liberties in Cuba.
