At 5:00m. , he met for an hour and a half with seventeen congressional leaders from both parties and both houses.
This meeting was led by President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk and quickly became contentious as many congressional leaders called for a stronger response, voiced an opposition to the blockade, and demanded fuller involvement.
The information operation to present the United States’ case to itself and the world had begun.
Beginning at 3:00m. that afternoon, the President briefed the leadership of the country of his choice to implement a blockade of Cuba in order to encourage the Soviets to remove their missiles from bases installed in Cuba.
One hour before, Ambassador Kohler delivered his message to Chairman Khrushchev announcing the blockade and informing the Chairman of the impending speech.
At the same time, Secretary Rusk delivered the text of the speech to Ambassador Dobrynin in Washington.
Also, at that time, Kennedy instructed his ambassadors to meet with the heads of state of many non-Eastern Bloc countries to provide them advance notice.
In the span of one afternoon, President Kennedy informed the leaders of the United States and the leaders of the non-Eastern Bloc world.
Kennedy’s speech outlined the recent false statements regarding the deployment of offensive weapons to Cuba, proposed that in the nuclear age threats and deception represent “maximum peril,” and stated that the American response to this threat is one of restraint but one representing only one of the options available to the President.
Impose a quarantine on all offensive military equipment, continue and increase surveillance of Cuba, regard any nuclear launch from Cuba as an attack by the Soviet Union, reinforce the base at Guantanamo, call for a meeting of the OAS, call for a meeting of the UNSC, and call upon Khrushchev to withdraw weapons from Cuba.
Kennedy's 22 October Address to the Nation In the Soviet Union Chairman Khrushchev received word that the President was going to address the American public.
This, along with the earlier intelligence report of military forces building in the southeastern United States, served as his most clear sign that a serious crisis could be building.
Khrushchev called a meeting of the Presidium to discuss the possible implications of this address.
Khrushchev himself was confident that the focus of this speech would be Cuba although other members of the Presidium offered different opinions; none were optimistic.
An emotional Khrushchev declared to the Presidium, “he thing is we were not going to unleash war.
He continued debating how Kennedy would act and what the Kremlin could do to respond with the clear indication that Cuba would be in a position to use tactical nuclear weapons to respond to an invasion.
Malinovsky persuaded the Presidium to follow this more cautious route by convincing them that this was a less provocative move.
In Cuba, units were several thousand miles from the Soviet Union and were not sufficiently manned or supplied for combat operations.
As such, the Soviet military leaders assumed a defensive tone and posture though they were completely prepared to defend themselves with everything they had available.
In Washington, the State Department drafted the OAS resolution for the next morning’s meeting.
He conveyed the letter to Khrushchev and the text of the speech that would be given an hour later and expressed to the ambassador, “that it was incomprehensible to him how leaders in Moscow could make such gross error of judgment as to what United States can accept.
Concurrent with the President’s speech, Ambassador Stevenson relayed a letter to Soviet Ambassador the United Nations Valerian Zorin, in his capacity as the President of the UNSC, calling for “an urgent meeting of the Security Council” citing “incontrovertible evidence” of nuclear weapons in Cuba.
This letter followed the same logic and format of the President’s speech and continued to present the unified message of the United States to the international community citing the extent of the Cuban missile project, past statements of Russian officials, and the need to secure international harmony and return to the status quo ante.
Included with the letter was the draft resolution calling for the removal of the offensive weapons, a request for UN observers to monitor the withdrawal, a call for the termination of the quarantine upon completion of the withdrawal and a call for a summit between the United States and the Soviet Union.
This background conference highlighted the plans to conduct the naval quarantine, the troop movements towards Florida, the evacuation of civilians and non-combatants from Guantanamo, the rationale of quarantine, a declaration that the quarantine was not an act of war, detailed information regarding the missiles and other nuclear forces in Cuba, anticipated reaction to the quarantine, the resolution before the OAS, the concept of response escalation, reserve force mobilizations, stop-loss, the change in DEFCON, Cuban reaction to reconnaissance flights, and the possibility of nuclear strike.
The naval base at Guantanamo was ordered to evacuate all dependents and non-combatants.
The 1st Armored Division was directed to begin movement to either Fort Stewart, GA or gulf ports.
The JCS ordered DEFCON 3 for all forces worldwide effective at 7:00m. in Washington that day.
In an interesting aside, the JCS authorized CINCLANT to “expend $20,000 for the purchase of representative United States magazines and hard items such as fountain pens, cigarette lighters, etc. to be given to crew members of Russian ships boarded.
