And so, it has come to pass in the year 2022 the future of humanity — if there is to be one — hangs in the balance of a single case that weighs the relative innocence and guilt of United States President Jospeh Biden vs. that of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
The cards are stacked heavily against Russian President Putin, as Americans have near total power over the world’s media and a hundred years of anti-Russian propaganda weighing in their favor, but Lady Justice was, is and will always remain impartial and impervious to even the most perfectly orchestrated and choreographed media campaign in world media history.
The defendant, President Putin currently sits bound and gagged (at least in the western media), rather like the victim of a lynch mob, and is therefore very unlikely to get a fair trial.
Thus, this book was written to clarify issues , weigh the broadest range of information available dispassionately and present it to the world.
Never before in human history have so many people been so totally hoodwinked as this buildup to the American driven war against Russia.
It represents the perfect fusion of Hollywood “magic” and “news” production.
If it looks like a war, smells like a war and kills like a war, it’s probably a war and the war in Ukraine started in 2014 even if western mainstream media “news” does not wish to report it to conceal its own ongoing complicity in it.
For the vast majority of Americans, a foreign war is something very far away that can be enjoyed in the living room in front of the television while eating junk food and/or having a beer, or two.
Now, in 2022, the United States is provoking a war against an “adversary” that was a friend only a few years ago, and still wants to be friends, but the United States won’t allow it.
What’s different about this war is for the first time in United States history the United States is demonizing, provoking, threatening and attacking via proxy, a contrived enemy that can hit back just as hard or harder.
Gone soon, may be the living room, the television, junk food, beer, and most of what’s left of Western civilization.
The slide from proxy war to conventional war to nuclear war can happen in days or even hours.
But the only thing that matters to the corporate chiefs that orchestrated this scenario is quarterly dividends.
That they may not be alive to enjoy those dividends appears to have eluded them.
Daily “proofs” of his absolute evil are paraded before the media zombies of the world.
More media addicted than ever, frustrated and bored after the long COVID-19 lockdowns, bad economy, fears and helplessness, Americans and western Europeans need someone to lash out at and vent their anger in righteous extreme violence.
The drumbeat of war quickens the pulse, sharpens the senses, and gives some meaning to an otherwise tepid and meaningless existence.
This build-up to a war against Russia was long in the making, pervasive, perfect, and stunning beyond belief.
There isn’t any question of innocence or guilt in the minds of western “news” consumers.
President Putin is a war criminal, a monster, the personification of all that is or ever was, evil.
Daily, new atrocities are paraded before the western audiences feeding their hunger for more, for blood, for punishment of the demon in human form, Putin.
America needs a hero, a Knight in Shining Armor like President Biden to rescue them from the doldrums of all the problems in their ordinary lives.
Most of these negative results source back to some bloviating American politician, commentator, editorial writer or journalist for a major American publication.
A steady diet of anti-Putin hatred & ridicule in the west, but in Russia itself, the perception is vastly different.
Ever since his rise to power, Putin's approval rating among the Russian people has hovered between 70--80%; far higher than that of any American President or European Prime Minister.
In fact, the entire “lynch Putin mob” is a byproduct of that very same magic.
Fortunately, Lady Justice, and the writer of this book are not fooled quite so easily.
Given the following information, does your role in the attack on Iraq potentially implicate You, Mr President as a war criminal, or at minimum culpable SAP Wet CU TIMI SS 2 sacle cdr shared ns obec ce scae ccd asta nan cts gus tatesatenneedaavatle audennccdasseudeveinagedeesecteass 50 A short list of United States indisputable War Crimes since WWIL...........c:cccccccccecsssssssseeeeeeeeseeses 50 3.
Did You, Mr President and/or your son Hunter have business relations with Burisma the Ukrainian Gas COMPANY? ..........cccccccesesssssceceeeesceessnseaeeeeeesesssessaeeeeeeeens 52 5.
What year did that relationship begin? .............cecsscecessseeeeesstreeeeeseaaes 52 7.
Are You, Mr President aware that your son Hunter Biden DID help secure millions of dollars in funding for a United States contractor in Ukraine specializing in deadly Pathogenresearch 2x sesssss Gacvaveseccseveviseusseiaiaeds vhaswivatecc tesweos pea eeetea Sees wares wee ioeas 53 8.
Did any United States government funded or affiliated organization including NED and USAID give any form of material or logistic support including money, to the November 2013 “wave of large-scale protests” called “Euromaidan,” by some anda “color revolution” by others, resulting in the overthrow of former President Viktor NANUKOWY Ch Pia svevs xe zecs cedssvesxetescsees afoleacacesces das vosdatatentsacss#ovs%e ones esaven ae eat ae 54 9.
Is interfering in the domestic affairs of a foreign nation a violation of international law as enshrined in the UN Charter? ............cccssccccesssntececsesteeeesssseeeees 54 10.
Did conditions of the EU loan former President Viktor Yanukovych refused to accept contain “austerity” measures that would have been extremely unpopular with the people of Ukraine? ...........cccccesssccceceeecssssssecececeeeceesesseseseceesesseesesaeaeeeeseseeeees 54 11.
Did the loan from Russia former President Viktor Yanukovych later accepted contain equally draconian austerity MEASULES?..........cececeesessseececeeeeessesseaeeeeeeeeseeeseas 54 12.
Have You, Mr President, or any of your family members or close friends attempted to undermine Russia’s energy exports in any other Way? ...........cccc0e 54 14.
Would completion of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline project compete with American fracking oil exports and benefit Russian-EU relations?...........c.ccccccccceeees 54 15.
Do, or did You, Mr President or either Hunter or James Biden have business Cealing with JP MOrgan?...........ccccccsesssscececeeeceesesseaececeeeesseeseaeseeeeeescesseseeaeseeeeseseneees 55 16.
Se Wells cosas, sace Ncesneatesacn tin eeu Gas ua calaeuiecuina bes ehise ect aule aad aeceatapetaes enacts eames 55 18.
Given overwhelming evidence that You, Mr President did lie to then President of the United States Donald Trump, and the American public during the October 22, 2020 Presidential Debate and tried to corruptly pin the source of that lie on Russians, why should anyone believe anything You, Mr President, or anyone in your administration say ADOUt RUSSIGNS NOW? .......cccccecscececeeeseesenssaeeeceeesessnssaeeeeeeeesseesees 55 Neo-Nazis in the Ukraine GOVErNMENK........ cece ecceeseccccccsscccecesscccecsescecesseseceeauessceeuaeneeess 56 19.
Does the United States Department of State have undue influence within the government of Ukraine, while lacing the government Ne@O-NaZiS?............cccceeeeeeee 56 “News” reports about Russians attacking hospitals and SCHOOIS..............ccccesessseeceeeees 60 20.
Are You, Mr President aware that United States trained and funded neo-Nazi brigades, such as Right Sector and the Azov Battalion used hospitals, and schools as human 0) a ol 0 at greet eo A ee eee 60 Censorship of news from foreign and domestic news sources challenging government dictims onthe WKFAING Wealnccrsnehces dette rccune ties, sau scte wun cara lnene gata euatehwtten 61 21.
Wal"" savcescaseccasancdeassteedewraas ensdereereapeteeataadaawiess 74 24.
Did You, Mr President or anyone in your administration or military suggest, or encourage that rapid violent and deadly increase in killing of innocents in Donetsk and Luhansk 7 People’s Republics in the days leading up to President Putin’s humanitarian UALR VOR OTG sasc sso ic si oes achat ace sect natd es Meeus cde penca tetas ustantns Mdeu nce aacecece unas 79 26.
Was that claim another lie to cover Ukrainian intentional provocation designed to intentionally lure Russia into the humanitarian intervention it finally PUPSUCC?...........ceeceececeestececsesteeeceeseeeeeeseeaaeeeeeses 80 Deadly pathogens, biological WEAPONS ANC laW.........eeesececsssseeeceseeeececessaeeecessteeeeeseaaes 80 27.
United States WMD in Ukraine ...........cccccceeseseseeeeees 90 Robert Pope’s Admission of United States violation of BWC in Ukraine..........cccescecsssereeeeeeenees 90 28.
Did it ever occur to You, Mr President that provoking a war in a nation with 30+ United States biological “research” labs could lead to release of biological pathogens that could lead to a pandemic far worse than COVID-19?............csessececsssteceeessteeeeessteeeees 96 30.
Wintrol’s published confession quoted above makes two of the top three United States officials admitting to and confirming Russian allegations about Ukraine having biological pathogens that could be WeaPONIZed. ..........c.cccccccecessessntecececeesceesssssaeseeeeeens 97 31.
The author also argues convincingly that this Ukrainian war began with a United States financed and orchestrated coup in Ukraine in 2014, and in the February 2022 phase of this war President Putin was intentionally provoked in a legion of extreme and deadly ways with the specific goal of eliciting a military response.
This book proves beyond any shadow of a doubt those two buzz-phrases are dead wrong.
Finally, this book argues if the United States and NATO do not back off very quickly this war will probably lead to thermonuclear war and containment breeches at most or all 300+ United States BSL-3 and BSL-4 laboratories around the world quite possibly leading to the final extinction of humankind.
He essentially founded what was at that time , a noble, pluralist, unified England.
Prelude Like most people in the civilized world, | was shocked when President Putin ordered his army into Ukraine February 24, 2022.
Likewise, a great deal of relevant detail about President Putin’s motivation to launch that invasion has never been explored by western “news” media.
Those facts edged me closer to understanding President Putin’s motivation to invade Ukraine.
MSM “news” was and is instead only acting as a mouthpiece for United States government expansionism, and the United States intentionally provoked President with a massive eight year killing spree in Donbass, that hugely accelerated in the four days leading up to President Putin’s intervention.
My current occupation is | edit mostly medical research articles for doctors and medical professors in some of the Asia’s top hospitals and medical universities.
Similarly, when | approached the situation in Ukraine, | assessed news from both MSM and alt-news dispassionately, came to my own conclusions as to what 31 probably really happened, and the probable consequences of those actions for all parties concerned.
Number 1 above however is the US’ internal excuse for waging one predatory war after another in open defiance of the UN Charter.
The psychological pathologies here in my opinion stem from Wall Street’s large corporations’ leadership, CIA headquarters in Langly Virginia, Washington DC where politicians serve primarily corporate and CIA interests, not American voters or tax payers’ interests, for ultimately it is corporate and CIA leaders that decide who the faces of American leadership shall be.
Those same corporate bosses own Mainstream Media socalled news that sells all these wars to the tax paying voting public that only years later finds out all those wars were all based on lies and deceptions.
That might be problematic as there is little doubt all those who align with the United States may justifiably become targets for Russia’s thermonuclear arsenal, and the United States certainly appears willing to start a thermonuclear war in order to hang on to its Narcissistic fantasy of being the sole global superpower for the rest of time.
Hubris has never worked out well for those afflicted and it never will.
The United States isn’t the first nation to think they can conquer the entire world, and all former nations that have attempted such sick endeavors failed in horrifically spectacular and bloody ways.
The United States intentionally — using overt and covert means provoked Ukraine’s northern neighbor and friends in Russia in many, many ways, and is “only” providing weapons, money, paid mercenaries, highly sophisticated intelligence and unrivaled highly deceptive mass media support to the “friends” they betrayed in Ukraine as the violence escalates and coffers of the United States and EU “defense” industries go “kaching, kaching, kaching” swelling with blood-for-money profits.
During those years United States corporate controlled “news” covered almost none of that, and when some tiny mention was made always referred to that region as a “break-away state,” implying a certain treachery on their part for abandoning their “beloved” nation of Ukraine, even though the reality is they just couldn’t accept a foreign appointed and controlled puppet president.
In the case of Ukraine, greatly expanding that biological research had the added perk of really annoying, even terrifying the Russians who absolutely did not want large quantities of the world’s deadliest pathogens right across its border in Ukraine especially given they can pass through any border undetected making them as or more dangerous as a nuclear bomb, or many nuclear bombs.
Members of the Board of Sponsors are recruited by their peers from the world’s most accomplished science and security leaders to reinforce the importance of the Bulletin’s activities and publications.
This key event occurred 24 days before Ukraine’s President Victor Yanukovych was overthrown on February 20th, and 30 days before the new person to head 38 Ukraine’s Government, Yatsenyuk, became officially appointed to rule the now clearly fascist country.
It found various evidence of the involvement of an alliance of the far-right 40 organizations, specifically the Right Sector and Svoboda, and oligarchic parties, such as Fatherland.
However, at least before 21 February 2014, police were seized by demonstrators and at least the possibility exists that some of the Right Sector snipers were taking positions in and especially atop some of the government buildings so as to fire down into the crowd 41 and seem to be firing from Yanukovych’s side.
Furthermore, the United States regime and its Ukrainian client-state are the only two nations 42 at the United Nations who vote to back fascism, nazism and Holocaust-denial.
The capture at 23:10 the 44 same day shows “No results found” for Ukraine.
Even while the people of Lugansk and Donetsk were voting in the 2014 referendum, Ukrainian national guardsmen reportedly fired their weapons as 45 they tried to close a polling station in Krasnoarmeisk, killing an unspecified number of people... according to American news sources at that time.
And the above makes no mention of United States sponsored and armed proxy wars with the Yemen War leaping first to mind, but there were and continue to be many more of them.
The above Sputnik news article contains grisly details of that short list with references from international sources.
It is instructive reading in regards to the absolute treachery of American foreign policies and debunks any claims to the United States holding the moral high ground in any disputes regarding international conflicts.
I’ve been saying we should go in on the ground, we should announce there’s gonna be American casualties.
Hunter Biden DID help secure millions in funding for United States contractor in Ukraine specializing in deadly pathogen research, laptop emails reveal, raising more questions about the disgraced son of then vice president By Josh Boswell, 25 March 2022 Hunter Biden helped secure millions of dollars of funding for Metabiota, a Department of Defense contractor specializing in research on pandemic-causing diseases, introduce Metabiota to an allegedly corrupt Ukrainian gas firm, Burisma, for a 'science project’ involving high biosecurity level labs in Ukraine, along with colleagues 53 10.
It has been excluded from the dictionary of mainstream 56 media commentary.
The composition of the Cabinet broadly coincides with United States Assistant Secretary of State 58 Victoria Nuland “recommendations” contained in the leaked telephone call to the United States ambassador to Ukraine.
Abandoned Ammunition Depot of Neo-Nazi Azov Battalion Found in Health Complex in DPR April 17, 2022 ""The ammunition depot is located under the Yalta health complex.
Censorship of news from foreign and domestic news sources challenging government dictums on the Ukraine War 21.
For each media company is one part of a large interconnected intelligence apparatus — a system, a complex — whose purpose is power, wealth, and domination for the very few at the expense of the many.
Reduction Program e 30-year-old —— o — Ukraine's research lab | to global health.
One might wonder if that is true right now given those elected “representatives” have brought those “liberal democracies” to the brink of thermonuclear (and chemical and biological) war.
According to the UN, over 70 13,000 have been killed in the region since the Maidan coup d'etat of February 2014.
He bemoaned the fact that many Americans are unaware of 2 May 2014 ‘pogrom’ in Odessa where roughly 50 people were 71 burnt alive in the Trade Unions House by Ukrainian radical nationalists and neo-Nazis.
For example, the very common practice during the first Cold War of condemning the Soviet Union for taking over much of Eastern Europe after the 72 Second World War.
Likewise, a charge that Russia had turned to China for potential military help lacked hard 74 evidence, a European official and two United States officials said.
Russian Human Rights Commissioner Tatyana Moskalkova reported on Tuesday that over 500,000 civilians from the Donetsk People’s Republic , Lugansk People’s Republic and Ukraine have willingly relocated to Russia since the start of the military conflict. “| responsibly declare that there has never been any forceful relocation of refugees to Russia, these are all lies,” said the ombudswoman, referring to Kiev’s accusation that Moscow has 76 hi forcibly sent over 500,000 civilians to Russia to “use them as hostages” to pressure Ukraine to surrender.
Emails published by the MoD revealed she directly supervised experiments with deadly pathogens, including the UP-2 Project for “mapping highly infectious diseases in Ukraine,” including anthrax; the UP-4 Project, described as a “risk assessment of particularly dangerous pathogens transmitted by birds in Ukraine during migration”; the UP-8 Project studying “spread of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus and hantaviruses in Ukraine and the potential need for differential diagnosis of patients with suspected 85 leptospirosis.
The effort “started in 1992 to build the capacity of the states of the Former Soviet Union to reduce the threat from chemical weapons by securing and eliminating CW stockpiles, chemical research capabilities, and production facilities, while also redirecting scientists to peaceful purposes,” the agency said.
Russian Ministry of Defence 88 G Mary Guttieri With a doctorate in microbiology from UMass Amherst, Guttieri was the Executive Vice President at Metabiota from 2014 until 2019, and was previously the vice president of its Science & Technology Administration.
Thus, no doubt, corporate controlled mainstream media will censor the whole illegal biolabs story to ensure the voting public never hears about until years in the future, jf civilization as we know it survives that long.
In other words, it does not even allow other 16 “Non-alignment is self-determined by a state and isn't required to be enacted by international treaties.
As early as in 2008, statements were made at the Bucharest Summit that NATO would welcome Kiev sometime in the future violating all agreements NATO would not move east after 1991, its 17 That establishment of a unipolar global system strongly resembles Pope Boniface VIII's November 18, 1302 papal bull, Unam Sanctam , that established salvation is only available through the Church, and that the Church wields “two swords” that represent both spiritual and temporal power.
With NATO soldiers and Air Force doing the heavy lifting,g., getting killed.
Given President Biden’s very low approval ratings, it is obvious the Democrats are going to take a savage beating in the upcoming November elections.
The only way to prevent that is to keep provoking and escalating the Ukraine conflict until — they hope — NATO steps in and greatly expands the war.
That phrase was created to reframe the phrase “overthrow foreign governments” to make egregious violations of international law more palatable to American voters.
Before his plane could get off the ground, the White House was scrambling to contain the damage done by Biden’s most recent gaffe.
One of the most public aspects of this effort was the discovery by Russia of a so-called “spy rock” used by the British intelligence agency, MI6, to communicate with its agents in Moscow.
This tradition was established a couple of weeks ago by Arnold Schwarzenegger, and in recent days has been creatively used by the British media and personally by British Prime Minister Boris Johnson.
The sad, tragic and almost comical fact of the matter is it’s Americans who have no idea how much the news they receive is censored.
The United States government has acted in a collusive fashion to hide evidence and silence news critical of the United States government’s role in the 2014 coup in Ukraine and subsequent massive deadly indiscriminative violence against the innocent people of Lugansk and Donetsk.
The threats of missile bases, tanks, and other weapons was exacerbated a million-fold with the presence of potential dual use biological “research” projects and bioweapons that can pass through any nation’s borders with extreme rapidity.
Ukraine ceasefire agreement signed in Minsk, September 5, 2014, updated September 9, 2014 Negotiators representing Russia, Ukraine, anti-government rebels and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe signed a ceasefire agreement in Minsk, Belarus.
Pd by the Russian tsars in 1654-1917 Soo 8 by Viadimir Lenin in 1922 by Josef Stalin in 1939, 1945 by Nikita Khrushchev Sevastopol in 1954 These five points prove that Ukraine definitely wouldn’t “collapse” if the Minsk Accords were fully implemented but it might end up with a very different administrative structure in the most extreme scenario.
The nuance was that the Rada did not exercise any authority over most of these territories, and it soon was quarreling with the Provisional Government in Petrograd.
What it is in plain simple English is a collection of extremely provocative lies designed to incite violence against Russia, President Putin, and all Russian people.
In the Iraq War at least 2.38 million human beings have been killed thus far and has been lamented as a “mistake””° or a crime.
And now President Biden has the temerity to accuse President Putin of genocide, when in fact President Biden is well on the way to pursuing his own, second genocide.
Ukrainian Rebels Claim Huge Victory in Self-Rule Referendum by David Stout May 12, 2014 Separatists in eastern Ukraine say people there have voted overwhelmingly to secede from the state, following a Sunday referendum that Kiev and its Western supporters decried as illegitimate.
The current penalties put Venezuela in fifth place in the global rating of the most sanctioned 211m a gut-wrenching example of United States ultra-violent duplicity, Saddam Hussein was the darling of the United States political administration, CIA, and DoD during the Iran-Iraq War that began with a full-scale invasion of Iran by neighboring Iraq.
These outrageous blatantly insulting racist stereotypes of Russians echo “ ” and nu style racist stereotypes that should be held in contempt by ose who decry racism and prejudice in all its ugly forms.
THE CHINA VIRUS' anne ae President Biden has turned it again this time against Russia, vilifying all people and things Russian.
Last year, Mikhail Khodarenok, a retired Russian colonel, discussed in an RT op-ed what this system means for Russia and European security.
Nobody should think, however, that Moscow has not been busy finding ways to respond to the United States and NATO efforts at building antiballistic systems in Eastern Europe.
In fact, Moscow immediately got to work on ways to overcome the United States anti-missile systems once Washington pulled out of the ABM Treaty.
Those efforts paid off in ways that the United States may not have anticipated.
Russia might just as well be putting nuclear missile bases on the Mexican side of the United States border.
Solicitation can be a serious criminal offense Solicitation, in criminal law, the request, encouragement, or direction of one person by another to commit a serious criminal offense.
Russian Special Forces Capture Ukrainian Nationalists Who Tortured Russian Soldiers, Lawmaker Says 29.03.2022 Earlier, a video was circulated on social media in which several armed Ukrainians were seen torturing and shooting captured Russian soldiers, prompting calls for Kiev to address the issue.
Likewise with the Iraq War in which at least 2.38 million human beings have been killed thus far and has likewise been lamented as a “mistake” or a crime, as was and is the Afghanistan War.
USS7. billion e United States: $6.32 billion e Canada: $6. billion e France: $4. billion e Ukraine: $3. billion e Australia: $2. billion e Argentina: $2.12 billion e Germany: $2. billion e Kazakhstan: $1. billion e Poland: $1 billion Ukraine only comes in at 5** place with less than half of the wheat exports of Russia but is usually listed first for some odd reason on MSM these days.
Lebanon, Tunisia, Yemen, Libya, and Pakistan also rely heavily on the two 25 Often overlooked in this and other analysis of the crimes leading up to and continuing during the most recent phase of the war in Ukraine is the most willing accomplice called Canada.
How do You, Mr President feel about the fact that starvation around the world 75.
The US’ long, long history of overthrowing foreign governments will be increasingly exposed as pain from the war President Biden intentionally provoked in Ukraine is illuminated, and sinks deeper into the awareness of people around the world, and especially the majority of Euro-Americans who mostly have so little familiarity with depravations of any kind.
However, the discovery of a torture chamber in the basement of a building previously occupied by the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the village of Kryakovka, Lugansk region, tells another story.
Our Most Recent Research Latest GB Voting Intention 0 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100% ® Strongly approve Approve Neither approve nor disapprove al Disapprove Joe Biden Administration Approval Ratings and Hypothetical Voting Intention (20 March @ strongly disapprove Don't know 2022) Population Sampled: Eligible Voters in the United States Nearly twice as many people strongly disapprove of his performance as strongly approve of it.
Apparently comic book style sales pitches based on greatly amplified versions of the same old lies just aren’t selling that well.
She was President Obama’s principal foreign policy advisor that pushed for the disastrous and deadly so-called “Arab Spring revolutions” that left nothing but death and chaos behind.
The whole world is not like the United States forever fostering and fighting wars, hosting the world’s largest prison system, and promoting endless war and aggression in movies, TV shows, music, games and so on.
Most of the world is just not as media addicted as are Americans and western Europeans, and so they live more peaceful lives, and have more hope for the future.
In stunning and unsettling detail, Theaters of Command tracks the full scope of Pentagon and CIA influence on everything from Lone Survivor to The Last Ship, Marvel to MTV, and James Bond to Jack Ryan.
Western media have reported that Russia’s military deliberately attacked the Donetsk Academic Regional Drama theater in Mariupol, Ukraine, claiming that it was filled with civilians and marked with signs reading “children” on its grounds.
By instigating Western public outrage over grisly Russian war crimes, Ukraine’s government is clearly aiming to generate enough pressure to overcome the Biden administration’s reluctance to directly confront Russia’s military.
Published on Azov’s official YouTube channel and delivered in English over the sound of occasional artillery launches, Prokopenko declared that the Russian military was carrying out a “genocide” against the population of Mariupol, which happens to be 40 percent ethnic Russian.
When South China Morning Post ran the image, it removed the watermark and credited “Azov Battalion via AP.” me/polkazov 8ZOv.org.ua Among the first English language media figures to convey the Ukrainian government’s narrative of the incident to a mass audience was Illia Ponomarenko, a Kiev-based, UStrained reporter who has managed to rack up over a million Twitter followers since Russia’s invasion began.
Real reporters and journalists must be investigators, not just mindless amplifiers of government reports issued by paid servants of any government.
Chechen Leader Says NATO Arms Shipments & Mercenaries Mean ‘Dozens of States’ Fighting Russia.
That sounded interesting so | read that short article written by Wyatt Reed who | then studied.
That means he’s not a dilatant hanging out in a basement somewhere just repeating second and third source information.
He’s got “guts,” which means is willing to put his life on the line to get accurate information first hand.
On first base checking that story out | noticed he quoted a source named Ramzan Kadyrov, who | checked out.
Wikipedia paints him as the very devil himself, in charge of death squads, promoting Islamic Sharia law, etc.
Several mayors and other Ukrainian officials have been killed since the outbreak of war, many reportedly by Ukrainian state agents after engaging in de-escalation talks with Russia.
Zelensky has further exploited the atmosphere of war to outlaw an array of opposition parties and order the arrest of his leading rivals.
His authoritarian decrees have triggered the disappearance, torture and even murder of an array of human rights activists, communist and leftist organizers, journalists and government officials accused of “pro-Russian” sympathies.
The Ukrainian SBU security services has served as the enforcement arm of the officially authorized campaign of repression.
With training from the CIA and close coordination with Ukraine’s statebacked neo-Nazi paramilitaries, the SBU has spent the past weeks filling its vast archipelago of torture dungeons with political dissidents.
On the battlefield, meanwhile, the Ukrainian military has engaged ina series of atrocities against captured Russian troops and proudly exhibited its sadistic acts on social media.
Here too, the perpetrators of human rights abuses appear to have received approval from the upper echelons of Ukrainian leadership.
While Zelensky spouts bromides about the defense of democracy before worshipful Western audiences, he is using the war as a theater for enacting a blood-drenched purge of political rivals, dissidents and critics.
The passage of “decommunization” laws by the Ukrainian parliament further eased the persecution of leftist elements and the prosecution of activists for political speech.
The post-Maidan regime has focused its wrath on Ukrainians who have advocated a peace settlement with pro-Russian separatists in the country’s east, those who have documented human rights abuses by the Ukrainian military, and members of communist organizations.
Dissident elements have faced the constant threat of ultra-nationalist violence, imprisonment, and even murder.
The Ukrainian security service known as the SBU has served as the main enforcer of the post-Maidan government’s campaign of domestic political repression.
Pro-Western monitors including the United Nations Office of the High Commission and Human Rights Watch have accused the SBU of systematically torturing political opponents and Ukrainian dissidents with neartotal impunity.
The SBU “informs not only us, but also Azov, the Right Sector, and so on,” Karas boasted in a 2017 interview.
Kiev officially endorses assassinating Ukrainian mayors for negotiating with Russia Since Russia launched its military operation inside Ukraine, the SBU has hunted down local officials that decided to accept humanitarian supplies from Russia or negotiated with Russian forces to arrange corridors for civilian evacuations.
A day before his murder, Struk had reportedly urged his Ukrainian colleagues to negotiate with pro-Russian officials.
Prylipko had reportedly entered into negotiations with the Russian military to organize a humanitarian corridor for the evacuation of his city’s residents — a red line for Ukrainian ultranationalists who had long been in conflict with the mayor’s office.
Next, on March 24, Gennady Matsegora, the mayor of Kupyansk in northeastern Ukraine, released a video appealing to President Volodymyr Zelensky and his administration for the release of his daughter, who had been held hostage by agents of the Ukrainian SBU intelligence agency.
Then there was the murder of Denis Kireev, a top member of the Ukrainian negotiating team, who was killed in broad daylight in Kiev after the first round of talks with Russia.
In a March 19 executive order, Zelensky invoked martial law to ban 11 opposition parties.
The outlawed parties consisted of the entire left-wing, socialist or anti-NATO spectrum in Ukraine.
Openly fascist and pro-Nazi parties like the Azov National Corps were left untouched by the presidential decree, however.
If actions speak louder than words, perhaps Wikipedia should lighten up on Ramzan Kadyrov and throw a lot more balance in their review of the man.
Adding to the incredible complexity of this man, “Kadyrov was given the rank of major general in July 2020, through an executive order of the Russian President.
After his election, he stated that he was going to continue the current course of reviving the republic's economy and society.
One was Humayun Khan, “an officer” of unnamed rank who was killed in a car bomb in 2004, and the other Douglas Burpee was a Marine Colonel, who was a helicopter pilot for 27 years, indicating there may be a glass ceiling on Muslims in the United States military as according to ABC news there were 5,000 Muslims in the United States military in 2015.
In fact there are probably many more “Muslims” in the United States military now because of popular movies like “American Assassin” which is about an American man who becomes a perfect fake Muslim robot in order to kill Muslim terrorists.
That actually gives him a lot of credibility because he’s not a government wank in a public relations position.
He’s on the ground in Mariupol, and | found another post by him in Russian which | translated with translate.google.com.
Not one to rest on Sputnik’s interpretations, | wanted Kadyrov’s original writing.
Look at this vile hypocrisy and the lies of the Azov criminals who have settled in the buildings of Azovstal.
It was the Russian side that has always advocated organizing living corridors for civilians, providing them with protection, shelter, food, medical assistance, while the Azov fascists used them as human shields.
And now, when the boot of Russian liberators is pressing on your false fascist throat, you have decided to pretend to be saviors.
The order of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of Russia is to save the civilian population.
Written in Russian and addressed to Azov, this is a very different kind of evidence than that for example presented by Kyiv Independent newspaper in English which is funded by American NED, which is famed for overthrowing governments.
It is also worth mentioning that the Russian military is highly disciplined, something than cannot be said about Azov, and in a position where winning the hearts and minds of locals is critically important, whereas Azov is more interested in splashy headlines in western news gained by way of false flag operations that kill and hold hostage civilian populations, while using them for human shields.
In other words, the United States is making the same blunder in this Ukraine War as in the Vietnam War,g., relying on totally corrupt and ruthless political forces that divide the people instead of uniting them, and brutal military forces that alienates locals and undermines United States objectives.
It should also be mentioned in the Vietnam War the United States news constantly lied about the United States military progress in Vietnam until they lost, and quit, similar to Afghanistan, and that is clearly happening again in Ukraine now as well.
The Mariupol Theater bombing was done by Ukrainian forces and falsely attributed to Russian forces in a False Flag operation.
Social “oreconditioning” of an audience unused to critical thinking is an essential step in getting this audience to accept at face value anything that is put before it, regardless of how egregiously the facts of the story strain credulity.
The chronology of the narrative produces the first red flag that the story being peddled by Ukraine, and echoed in the West, is not what it seems.
For reasons which should beobvious toanyone’ willing to applysome critical thought.
Graphic footage from Bucha shows multiple bodies in civilian clothing lying in the middle of a street.
Doubts were cast at allegations that Russia is behind the purported ‘war crimes’ in Bucha shortly after a video posted by one of the Kiev territorial defence battalion leaders resurfaced online.
The documents in question, Putin explained, shed light on ""who and how arrived in Bucha, and using what kind of transport"" in order to ""set up the conditions"" to stage the provocation.
The key to finding the perpetrator lies in this overlooked detail, Apr. , 2022 Kiev and its Western backers immediately blamed Russia for the incident, but a proper investigation is likely to disagree / The Tochka-U operates as a simple inertially-guided ballistic missile.
Simply put, the operators, working from a known location, orient the launcher in the direction of their target, and then calculate the distance between the point of launch and point of impact.
The solid-fuel engine of the Tochka-U burns for 28 seconds, meaning that the range of the missile isn’t determined by engine burn-time alone, but rather the angle that the missile was launched — the more vertical the missile at time of launch, the shorter its range will be.
Because the missile burns to depletion, once the engine shuts down, the missile will cease its pure ballistic trajectory, and instead assume a near-vertical posture as it heads toward its target.
In the case of the Kramatorsk attack, the Tochka-U was equipped with the 9N123K cluster warhead, containing fifty submunitions, each of which has the effect of a single hand grenade in terms of explosive and lethal impact.
The flight characteristics of the Tochka-U result in a debris pattern which has the cluster munitions impacting on the ground first, followed by the depleted booster, which hits the earth some distance behind the impact of the warhead.
This creates a tell-tale signature, so to speak, of the direction from where the missile was launched, which can be crudely calculated by shooting a reverse azimuth from the point of impact of the warhead through the booster.
It is this physical reality which provides the first real clue as to who fired the Tochka-U that hit Kramatorsk.
More specifically, a forensic evaluation of the missile debris clearly shows that it was launched by the 19th Ukrainian Missile Brigade, based near Dobropolia, some 45 kilometers from Kramatorsk.
The 19th Missile Brigade is considered a strategic asset, meaning that it responds directly to the orders of the Ukrainian Ground Forces Command.
In short, if the missile was, as it appears, fired by the 19th Missile Brigade, it was doing so based on orders given from high up the chain of command.
False flag operations are particularly sinister as they target civilians and one can only hope saner minds prevail sooner rather than later and start to deal the realities here rather than the “political objectives” of the real aggressors (the usual cast of colonialists plus those Ukrainians unfortunate enough to get sucked into this proxy war) in this series of events.
There is absolutely zero motivation for Russia to fire a missile strike against a train station in Ukraine, and enormous motivation for Ukrainian forces to launch such an attack, knowing full well this will spark further outrage against Russia in the west and bring in more money, weapons and possibly ground troops.
False flags are a longstanding United States tradition, dating from the 19th century.
Nobody is counting the numbers of innocent Vietnamese that were tortured to death by American forces.
The phrase “false flag” can be used to describe an imagined threat by another nation used to justify an attack upon it as in the following quote.
Since World War II alone it is estimated that the United States has killed at least 20,000,000 people in over 37 nations.
Comparing this coverage to that of other conflicts reveals both a familiar reliance on United States officials to frame events, as well as a newfound ability to cover the impact on civilians—when those civilians are white and under attack by an official United States enemy, rather than by the United States itself.
Meanwhile, the number of United States troops deployed across Europe has soared from 60,000 to about 102,000 since October 2021.
In view of the tidal waves of disinformation (carefully crafted deceptions — fabrications — distortions, etc. produced by United States government funded sources and their Ukrainian acolytes) it seems only fair to give the Russian news agency TASS at least a moment of this reader’s time.
In 1997, 50 prominent foreign policy experts, including former senators, military leaders, and diplomats, sent an open letter to then-President Bill Clinton outlining their opposition to NATO expansion. “/t is a policy error of historic proportions,” they wrote.
The unrivaled power of the Euro-American Military-IndustrialCounter-Intelligence-Media-Academia-Think Tank complex has become an existential threat to all life on earth.
President Putin however went further, deciding the only way to secure that section of his southern border is to clear out Ukraine’s war-making capabilities once and for all.
Another woman said that the targets that were hit “were not new targets.
Among other things this article argues that President Biden and his son “Hunter” (and Devon Archer, a former John Kerry campaign manager, who also profitably sat on Burisma’s board of directors) “conflict of interest” investments in Ukraine is ultimately masking their desire to stop legitimate Russian energy export business investments in Nord Stream 2, and instead promote the American Fracking oil and gas.
President Obama’s possible motivations for launching the Ukrainian war against the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk in 2014 Potential motivations for President Obama to start a war in Ukraine in 2014 are plentiful, but speculative.
President Biden might well have had additional motivation to greatly accelerate the Ukraine War provided by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. a ed 9 j As she was certainly complicit in the so-called “Arab Spring” series of disastrous and deadly American funded “Color Revolutions” mostly started in 2011 before, during and after her stint as Secretary of State to then President Obama.
To cover up his profit and other personal motivations for his increased support to mostly neo-Nazi militias in Ukraine, President Biden cynically used “national security” justifications.
Euro-American Defense related corporate shareholders & boards of directors Defense and cybersecurity stocks climb amid Russia’s invasion of Ukraine Mon 28 Feb 2022 Raytheon Technologies, the United States defense giant and maker of the Stinger ground-to-air missile that Germany has pledged to supply to Ukrainian forces, has seen its shares price increase more than 10% since the invasion began last Wednesday.
Their children, if they survive, will not be so proud when they learn the whole truth behind, and human cost of their wealth.
Conclusions The educated world not enthralled by Euro-American “information war” falsehoods is currently holding its collective breath waiting to see if President Biden will start WWIII, as a final concluding act in the Third Red Scare potentially causing extinction of the human species.
Top United States administration officials in addition to Hunter Biden, President Zelensky and European weapons manufacturers will not like the plan (for a moratorium on weapons gifted to Ukraine) at all.
Like other United States wars the truths behind it and the key players will slowly leak out in decades to come, and it will like all the rest since WWII (with the exception perhaps of the Korean War) be labeled a “mistake,” provided humanity survives that long, which is only a 50/50 proposition*® at this time.
In order to encourage UN Secretary General Guterres to call for a moratorium on weapons shipments to Ukraine, investigation into alleged corrupt activities by President Biden, his son Hunter, and top cabinet members with “the appearance of conflict of interest” in violation of United States law and international treaties, policies and laws against corruption is essential.
Whoever makes that stuff up is creative, and knows how to inflame American audiences, however such totally unsubstituted rubbish only proves they know nothing about Russian military capabilities and protocol in this part of the world.
America’s allies in this current asymmetric war on Russia (and all Russian people everywhere) are being extremely foolish Because America’s game of international Whac-A-Mole is never ending the “friends” of the United States today will find themselves on the receiving end of that same “game” sometime in the not-too-distant future, and that is a sure and certain fact.
Along with American “help” come certain “strings” like adoption of highly conservative fiscal policies and very liberal social policies.
In other words, the UK, Germany, Japan, and so on down the list of United States allies in this most current war effort are not in any way protecting their own nations or interests, but rather ensuring their own demise sooner.
Helping to knock out the one super-power that might have — would probably have actually helped them when their turns at being the American target nation roll around again, is extremely foolish.
Referral by Gregory C Brundage United States Citizen currently living under threat of thermonuclear war caused by corruption within the United States government, and between the United States government and “defense” industries in the United States and Europe.
Russia might not be producing many amazing movies, cars or cell phones probably because their best and brightest have been brought into their own defense department, and make no mistake about it, their defense department is not an aggressive war machine like the United States so-called “Defense Department” which is designed for offensive military actions around the world.
Currently, the United States spends over $900 million per day on interest payments.
Now, banning Russia from SWIFT is very likely to accelerate that decline into a landslide.
President Putin knows this, as do |, having worked in several American (and its proxy’s) wars as a journalist and having interviewed many, many American war survivors.
Russian intelligence on the other hand can’t afford to operate that way.
Major General Charles F Bolden Jr., USMC Senator Saxby Chambliss During his tenure in the Senate, he served as a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee..., the Senate Rules Committee; and his leadership and experience on homeland security and intelligence matters earned him an appointment to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, where he served as vice chairman from 2011 to 2014, advocating for dramatically improved information sharing and humanintelligence-gathering capabilities.
Flournoy, for instance, previously served on the Pentagon’s Defense Policy Board, the President’s Intelligence Advisory Board, and the CIA director’s External Advisory Board; each of these positions gives members access to sensitive information, which in turn provides insights useful to attracting and serving corporate clients.
Those wars not only kill and maim millions of innocents and produce millions more “displaced people,” but they also produce greatly increased stock dividends for many or most of President Biden’s top cabinet members’ close friends and associates.
Avril Haines is at the axis of the revolving door between defense industries and the government’s intelligence community and provably gives at minimum the appearance of conflict of interest.
