I met him on the occasion of the first anniversary of the Sandinista Revolution at the home of Sergio Ramírez who at that time was the Vice President of that country.
When I read his book, Divine Punishment ""an excellent narrative"" I came to believe that it was a real case that had happened in Nicaragua, with that legal nuisance so common in the former Spanish colonies; he himself told me one day that it was pure fiction.Cuban President Fidel Castro.
AFP PHOTOThere I also met with Frei Betto who today is a critic, but not an enemy, of Lula, as well as with Father Ernesto Cardenal, a militant leftist Sandinista and, today, an adversary of Daniel.
The two writers were part of the Theology of Liberation, a progressive trend which we always saw as a great step towards unity between revolutionaries and the poor, beyond their philosophy and their beliefs, in accordance with the specific conditions of struggle in Latin America and the Caribbean.Nonetheless, I must confess that I perceived in Father Ernesto Cardenal, unlike others in the Nicaraguan leadership, an image of sacrifice and privations resembling that of a medieval monk.
He was never a left-wing extremist, nor did he become a revolutionary through philosophical studies but rather he came from very humble working class roots and Christian beliefs, and he worked hard creating surplus value for others.
He presents us with reasons and demonstrates this with irrefutable logic; he takes pleasure and makes fun of the cynical lies used to accuse Communists.
If the ideas of Marx were just at that time, when everything seemed to depend on the class struggle and the growth of the productive forces, science and technology, that supported the creation of essential goods to satisfy human necessities, there are absolutely new factors which say that he was right and which at the same time clash with his noble aims.New necessities have arisen which could destroy the aims of a society with neither exploiters nor exploited.
He and Engels surely knew that one day the sun would be extinguished as it consumed all of its energy.A few years after the Manifesto was written, other men were born who made inroads in science and knowledge about the laws of chemistry, physics and biology ruling the Universe and unknown then.
Although it continues in its development and even improves, and again partially denies and contradicts its own theories, new knowledge is not in the hands of the poor nations who today make up three-quarters of the world's population.
Quite a bit has been written in our press in recent weeks about different episodes of that period.
Great respect has been shown for various historical dates on the days corresponding to anniversaries that commemorate years ending in a five or a zero.
That is fair, but we must be careful, in the sum-total of so many occurrences described in each newspaper or article, according to their criteria, lest we lose sight of them in the context of the historical development of our Revolution, despite the efforts of all those excellent analysts that we have.For me, unity means sharing in the struggle, the risks, the sacrifices, the aims, ideas, concepts and strategies, assumed after discussion and analysis.
Unity means a common struggle against annexationists, quislings and corrupt individuals who have nothing in common with a militant revolutionary.
It is to this unity revolving around the idea of independence and against the empire as it advances over the peoples of the Americas that I always referred to.
A few days ago, I once again read it when Granma published it on the eve of our election day, and Juventud Rebelde reproduced a facsimile of my thoughts on the idea, in my own handwriting.The old pre-revolutionary slogan of unity has nothing to do with the concept, because in our country today we do not have political organizations seeking power.
The Communist blood of Jesús Menéndez would join that of Mella 18 years later.We, teenagers and youths, studying in private schools had not even heard of Mella.
Our class or social group, having incomes greater that those of the rest of the population, condemned us as human beings to be the selfish and the exploiters of society.I had the privilege of coming to the revolution through ideas, escaping the boring fate that life was leading me to.
He was an honest and devoted Communist, who would later make serious mistakes leading him to extremely conservative and cautious positions.If a Revolution like ours had succeeded at that time, the USSR would not have done for Cuba what the Soviet leadership did years later, liberated by then from those murky and tortuous methods, and enthused by the Socialist Revolution that burst on the scene in our country.
I understood that very well in spite of the fair criticisms I made of Khrushchev as a result of events that were well known at the time.The USSR had the most powerful army among all those contending in World War II, but unfortunately it was purged and demobilized.
From the very capital of Japan, an important and prestigious Soviet intelligence agent had communicated the imminence of the attack on June 22, 1941.
Even without their most experienced unit leaders --who were replaced-if they had been alerted and deployed, the Nazis would have clashed with powerful forces from the very first second and they wouldn't have destroyed most of the fighter planes as they sat on the ground.
Even worse than the purge, was the surprise.The Soviet soldiers did not surrender when they were told about enemy tanks in the rearguard, the way the other armies from capitalist Europe did.
Now I am going to send him some shirts because he is complaining that the collars on his shirts are too hard, and I am going to look for them in Bahía so that I can make him a present of them.He asked that I give him some of the photos I took.When he said that he was very impressed with my health, I told him that I spent my time thinking and writing.
I told him that, at the end of my visit to Córdoba, Argentina, where I had attended a meeting with many leaders, and he had been there as well, I came back, and then I took part in two ceremonies for the July 26th Anniversary.
I had thought that it would be a quick thing, like the interviews with Frei Betto and Tomás Borge.
And then I became a slave to the French writer's book, when it was at the point of being published without my going over it, with some of the answers being a bit off the cuff.
I barely slept during those days.When I fell gravely ill on the night of the 26th and in the early morning of the 27th of July, I thought that would be the end, and while the doctors were fighting for my life, the head of the Council of State Office was reading me the text, at my insistence, and I was dictating the pertinent changes.
REFLECTIONS OF PRESIDENT FIDEL CASTROLulaTranslated by ESTILULA warmly reminded me of the first time he visited our country in 1985 to take part in a meeting organized by Cuba to analyze the overwhelming problem of the foreign debt; participants representing a wide spectrum of political, religious, cultural and social tendencies presented and discussed their opinions, concerned about the asphyxiating drama.The meetings took place throughout the year.
Leaders of worker, campesino, student and other groups assembled to examine the various subjects.
He was one of these leaders, already well known to us and abroad for his direct and vibrant message, that of a young worker leader.At that time, Latin America owed $350 billion.
I told him that in that year of intense struggle I had written long letters to the President of Argentina, Raúl Alfonsín, to persuade him discontinue the payments on that debt.
I knew the position of Mexico, unmoved in the payment of its enormous debt, but not indifferent to the outcome of the battle, and the special political situation of Brazil.
The Argentine debt was sufficiently large after the disasters of the military government to justify an attempt to open up a breach in that direction.
A few years later, the debt with the interests rose to $800 billion; it had doubled and it had already been paid.Lula explained to me how that year was different.
I assumed that his country had paid enormous sums in order to comply with those institutions.
I explained to him about Nixon's colossal fraud on the world economy, when in 1971 he unilaterally suspended the gold standard that had limited the issuing of paper money.
Until then the dollar had maintained a balance in relation to its value in gold.
Thirty years earlier, the United States had almost all the reserves in that metal.
If there was a lot of gold, they bought it up; if there was a shortage, they sold.
The dollar played its part as an international exchange currency, under the privileges granted to the United States at Bretton Woods in 1944.
Japan, Germany, the USSR and the rest of Europe had barely any of this metal in their reserves.
Nevertheless, nobody wants the dollar to devaluate any further, because almost all countries accumulate dollars; that is, paper money, that devaluates constantly as a result of that unilateral decision made by the President of the United States.Presently, the currency reserves of China, Japan, Southeast Asia and Russia combined amount to three trillion dollars; an astronomical figure.
If you add the dollar reserves of Europe and the rest of the world, you will see that all that is equivalent to a mountain of money whose value depends on what the government of one country decides to do.Greenspan, who for more than 15 years was the chairman of the Federal Reserve, would have died in a panic had he been faced with such situation.
As a result of the harsh measures imposed on the defeated German state at Versailles in 1918, when a republican regime came to power, the German mark devaluated to such an extent that you needed tens of thousands of them to buy one dollar.
Such a crisis fed German nationalism and contributed extraordinarily to Hitler’s absurd ideas.
Many of the most important scientific and financial talents as well as writers were Jewish.
Among them was Einstein, the author of the theory stating that energy is equal to mass multiplied by the square of the speed of light; it made him famous.
Also Marx, who was born in Germany, and many of the Russian Communists were of Jewish descent, whether or not they actively practiced the Hebrew religion.Hitler did not lay the blame for the human drama on the capitalist system; rather he blamed the Jews.
Based on crude prejudices, what he really wanted was ""vital Russian space"" for his Teutonic master race, dreaming of building a millennial empire.In 1917, through the Balfour Declaration, the British decided to create the state of Israel within its colonial empire, located on territory inhabited by the Palestinians, who had a different religion and culture; in that part of the world, other ethnic groups coexisted for many centuries before our era, among them the Jews.
Zionism became popular among the Americans, who rightly detested the Nazis, and whose financial markets were controlled by representatives of that movement.
That state today is practicing the principles of apartheid; it has sophisticated nuclear weapons and it controls the most important financial centers in the United States.
It was used by this country and its European allies to supply nuclear weapons to that other apartheid, the one in South Africa, to use them against the Cuban internationalist combatants who were fighting the racists in the south of Angola if they crossed the Namibian border.Immediately afterwards, I spoke to Lula about Bush’s adventurous policies in the Middle East.I promised to send him the article that was to be published in Granmathe next day, on January 16.
Before he left, I would also give him the article written by one of the most influential United States intellectuals, Paul Kennedy, about the connection between food and oil prices.You are a food producer, I added, and you have just discovered important reserves of light crude.
Brazil has an area of 5,333,750 square miles and 30 percent of the world’s water reserves.
The planet’s population needs increasing amounts of food, and you are great food exporters.
If you have grains rich in proteins, oils and carbohydrates – be they fruits like the cashew nuts, almonds, or pistachio; legumes such as peanut; soybean, with more than 35% protein, and sunflower seeds; or grains like wheat and corn – you can produce all the meat or milk you want.
I didn’t mention others on a long list.I continued with my explanation saying that in Cuba, we had a cow that broke the world record in milk production, a Holstein-Zebu hybrid.
She was like a factory, but she had to have more than 40 kilograms of fodder, the most she could chew and swallow in a 24-hour period, a mixture in which soy meal, a legume that is very difficult to grow in Cuban soil and climate, is a basic ingredient.
This means that the United States has a huge external dependency which is also a weapon.
It could use all its reserves of land, but the people of that country are not ready for that.
They are producing ethanol from corn; therefore, they are taking a great amount of this caloric grain off the market, I added, continuing my argument.On the same subject, Lula tells me that Brazilian producers are already selling the 2009 corn crop.
I think that the United States cannot keep up fuel production from corn.
This, I say, confirms a reality with regards to the sudden and incontrollable rise of food prices which will affect many peoples.You, on the other hand, can rely on a favorable climate and loose soil; ours tends to be clayish and sometimes as hard as cement.
When we received tractors from the Soviets and the other Socialist countries, they would break down and we had to buy special steel in Europe to manufacture them here.
They were receiving food rations from the state and also consuming their own production.
The climate has changed in Cuba, Lula, I said.Our soil is not suitable for the large-scale commercial production of cereals, as required to meet the necessities of a population of almost 12 million people, and the cost in machinery and fuel imported by the nation, at today’s prices, would be very high.Our media prints news about oil production in Matanzas, reductions in costs and other positive aspects.
But nobody says that the prices in hard currency must be shared with foreign partners who invest in the necessary sophisticated machinery and technology.
Besides, we do not have the required labor force to intensively take part in cereal production as the Vietnamese and Chinese do, growing rice plant by plant and often reaping two or even three harvests a year.
It has to do with the location and the historical tradition of the land and its settlers.
They did not first go through the large-scale mechanization of modern harvesters.In Cuba, for quite a while now, the sugarcane cutters and the workers in the mountain coffee plantations have abandoned the fields, logically.
Also, a large number of construction workers, some from the same origins, have abandoned the work brigades and have become self-employed workers.
The first can be solved, the second has no solution – as some would believe – throwing pesos into the street without their due backing in convertible currency, which would not be dollars anymore but euros and yuans, increasingly expensive, if all together we succeed in saving international economy and peace.Meanwhile, we have been creating and we should keep on creating reserves of foods and fuel.
In case of a direct military attack, the manual work force would be multiplied.In the short time Lula and I spent together, two and a half hours, I would have liked to summarize in just a few minutes the almost 28 years that have gone by, not since the time he first visited Cuba, but since I met him in Nicaragua.
This time he was the leader of an immense nation whose fate, however, depends on many aspects that are common to all the peoples on this planet.I asked his permission to speak about our conversation freely and at the same time, discreetly.As he stands in front of me, smiling and friendly, and I listen to him speaking with pride about his country, about the things that he is doing and those he plans on doing, I think about his political instincts.
He was the man I met in the Sandinista capital, Managua; he was someone who connected closely with our Revolution.
Immediately he speaks to me with pride about what Brazil is today and its great possibilities, bearing in mind its advances in science, technology, mechanical industry, energy and other areas, bound up with its enormous agricultural potential.
Of course, he includes the high level of Brazil’s international relations, which he describes enthusiastically, and the relations he is ready to develop with Cuba.
Back then time flew by quickly, but now every year is multiplied by ten, at a rate which is difficult to follow.I wanted also to talk to him about that and about many other things.
It’s hard to tell which one of us had the greater need to communicate ideas.
As for me, I supposed that he would be leaving the next day and not early that same evening, according to the flight plan that had been scheduled before we met.
What happened was a kind of contest as to how we would be using the time.
Lula, astute and quick-witted, took his revenge at a meeting with the press, when, mischievously smiling as you can see in the photos, he told the reporters that he had only talked for half an hour and Fidel had talked for two.
Of course, with the privilege of seniority, I used up more time than he did.
Truly, he left no space for the reflection published on January 16 that I had just finished writing the day before his visit.
He took up the entire space and this is equivalent to his enormous territory, compared to the miniscule land surface of Cuba.I told him how happy I was that he had decided to visit Cuba, even without the assurance that he would be able to see me.
As soon as I knew that, I decided to sacrifice anything, like my exercises, rehab and recovery, just so I could be with him and talk extensively.At that moment, even though I knew that he would be leaving that same day, I was unaware of the urgency of his departure.
Evidently, the health condition of the vice president of Brazil, according to his own statement, urged him to take off so that he could arrive in Brasilia at around dawn the next day, in the middle of spring.
Yet another long and hectic day for our friend.A strong and persistent downpour fell on his residence while Lula waited for the photos and two other bits of material, together with my notes.
Reducing the costs of these and other products to fulfill our commitments, to satisfy our consumption, to create reserves and develop other production, is highly commendable; but not even in our wildest dreams can we find easy solutions to our problems; the solutions are not just around the corner.Among many other topics, we discussed the inauguration of the new president of Guatemala, Alvaro Colom.
I told him that I had seen the ceremony in its entirety and the social commitments made by the newly-elected president.
My conversation with Lula was just beginning, and I still have many things to relate and ideas to offer, which might perhaps be useful.Fidel Castro RuzJanuary 23, 2008Translated by ESTIReflections of President Fidel CastroLulaTHE demise of the Soviet Union was to us like there were no more sunrises; a devastating blow for the Cuban Revolution.
Not only did this translate into a total cessation of supplies of fuel, materials and foods; we lost markets and the prices that we had attained for our products in the difficult struggle for our sovereignty, integration and principles.
The empire and the traitors, full of hatred, were sharpening their daggers with those who wanted to put the revolutionaries to the sword and recover the country’s riches.The Gross Domestic Product progressively plummeted to 35 percent.
We were not defending our lives; we were defending our rights.Many left-wing parties and organizations became discouraged in the wake of the collapse of the USSR after its titanic effort to build socialism during the course of more than 70 years.The reactionaries’ criticisms coming from all platforms and mass media were ferocious.
We did not add our voices to the chorus of capitalism’s apologists, beating a dead horse.
Not one statue to the creators or followers of Marxism was demolished in Cuba.
That was what we had promised to do under such hypothetical and unbelievable circumstances.Nor had we ever practiced personality cults in our country, something that we had taken the initiative to prohibit right from the first days after the triumph.In peoples’ history, it has been subjective factors that have brought forward or delay outcomes, independently of the leaders’ worth.I spoke to Lula about Che, briefly outlining his story for him.
Che used to argue with Carlos Rafael Rodríguez about the self-financed or the budgetary method, things we didn’t consider that important then as we were involved in the struggle against the United States blockade, its aggression plans and the 1962 October Missile Crisis, a real survival issue.Che studied the budgets of the big Yankee companies whose managers lived in Cuba, not their owners.
He drew from this a clear idea about how imperialism worked and what was happening in our society and this enriched his Marxist ideas and led him to the conclusion that in Cuba we couldn’t use the same methods to build socialism.
But this didn’t mean we were dealing with a war of insults; these were open exchanges of opinions that were published in a small magazine, with no intention of creating rifts or divisions among ourselves.What happened in the USSR later would not have surprised Che.
While he held important posts and carried out his duties, he was always careful and respectful.
His language grew tougher when he collided with the horrible human reality imposed by imperialism; he became aware of this in the former Belgian colony of the Congo.He was a self-sacrificing, studious and profound man; he died in Bolivia with a handful of combatants from Cuba and other Latin American countries, fighting for the liberation of Our America.
He did not survive to experience the world of today, where problems unknown to us then have since come into play.You didn’t know him, I told him.
He was modest and selfless, and he set an example both in production centers and in combat.I think that in building socialism, the more the privileged receive, the less will go to the neediest.I repeat to Lula that time measured in years was now flying by very quickly; each one of them was multiplying.
Fresh news is published constantly, relating to the situations anticipated in my meeting with him on the 15th.With plenty of economic arguments, I explained to him that when the Revolution triumphed in 1959, the United States was paying for an important part of our sugar production with the preferential price of 5 cents per pound; for almost half a century this would be sent to that country’s traditional marketplace which was always supplied, at critical moments, by a secure supplier just off their shores.
When we proclaimed the Agrarian Reform Act, Eisenhower decided what had to be done, and we hadn’t yet nationalized their sugar mills – it would have been premature to do so – nor had we yet applied the agrarian law of May 1959 to the large estates.
Because of that hasty decision, our sugar quota was suspended in December 1960, and later redistributed among other producers in this and other regions of the world as punishment.
Our country became blockaded and isolated.Worst of all was the lack of scruples and the methods used by the empire to impose its domination over the world.
It brought viruses into the country and destroyed the best sugarcane; it attacked the coffee, potatoes and also the swine herds.
We don’t know whether they used other viruses – perhaps they didn’t because they were afraid of the proximity of Cuba.When due to these problems we couldn’t send to the USSR the sugar shipments under contract with that country, it continued sending us the goods we had agreed upon.
The agreements were planned for five years; if at the beginning of the five-year period you were sending X amount of tons of sugar in payment for goods, at the end of that period the value of their products, in international prices, was 20 percent higher.
The sugar we export, at current prices, would only suffice to import oil that would be used up in 20 days.
We would have to spend about 4 billion dollars per year to buy it.The United States subsidizes its agriculture with tens of billions every year.
It subsidizes it brutally, thus denying Brazil income for billions of dollars every year.
The wealthy countries do the same, with their production of sugar, oleaginous products and cereals for the production of ethanol.Lula analyzes figures on Brazilian agricultural products that are of great interest.
If in that country then they charged 10 cents a cup, today they charge 5 dollars or more for an aromatic cup of espresso, an Italian way of preparing coffee.
That is GDP in the United States.In Africa they cannot do what Brazil is doing.
A large part of Africa is covered by deserts and tropical and subtropical areas where it is difficult to grow soy or wheat.
Fresh news arrives constantly that demonstrates the need for that constant battle.
The worst media of our ideological enemies are bent on spreading throughout the world the opinions of some nasty gusanillos who cannot even stand to hear the term “socialism” in our heroic and generous country.
Anything new that happens in this country, whatever it is, they should give it another name,"" he declares.
For a start, Cuba is no longer a country in a bubble, like it was until the end of the 1980’s.
The insular viewpoint is changing towards a global vision and the country, especially in the capital, is living through an accelerated mutation towards modernity.
That would create limitless wealth in an idyllic world.I think of Africa and its almost one billion population, victim of the principles of that economy.
