When quizzed about his views on American President John F Kennedy that a Uthe value of International Relations theory in 2 spy plane flying on a regular reconnaissance the praxis of international relations he replied sortie over Cuba had captured photographic that it was not just theory that was essential to evidence of missile-building activities on the negotiating the vagaries of world politics but it east coast of Cuba.
Never had between Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita the two superpowers ever come so close to the Khrushchev – both operating with the brink of nuclear apocalypse before 1962 and conscious knowledge that their decisions were fortunately, since then. critical to the very survival of their two states – the two compromised and backed-off by The ICS is an interdisciplinary research institution, which has a leadership role in the promotion of Chinese and East Asian Studies in India.
The ICS Analysis aims to encourage debate and provide informed and balanced inputs for policy formulation and is based on extensive research and interactions with a wide community of scholars, experts, diplomats and military personnel in India and abroad. preempting disastrous consequences in the never off the strategic radar.
As a result the event of further escalation. stakes in comparison to the current crisis were much higher.
There are no signs that either Now fast forward to the current Doklam crisis India or China envisages a nuclear war, save between India and China.
Playing out on the some rash, tunnel-eyed war-mongers in both lines of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, here too countries.
However, any small escalation are nuclear armed adversaries in a pitched leading to a shooting match could easily end in contest of political brinkmanship.
Although the a nuclear war. current crisis has comfortably surpassed the 13-day mark of the 1962 US-Soviet crisis, International politics is a dangerous business there is little sign of either India or China and therefore, any poorly thought out move backing down to settle the dispute.
To be sure there are some critical differences Thirdly, unlike in the Cold War there is no between the two crises.
Firstly, and most significant ideological competition between importantly, the two superpowers were India and China.
It is true that one is a operating under high-pressure conditions of the democracy and the other an authoritarian state Cold War as leaders of two clearly outlined but neither sees themselves nor the other solely camps.
This meant that room for maneuver was through that lens, as was the case with the US significantly limited. and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
As pointed out above India and China share In contrast, India and China today operate extensive trade relations with each other and under considerably less pressure. both have allies that effectively are from the Notwithstanding the nature of systemic power other side of their own political inclination. politics India and China share a far closer Moreover, China has a nominally democratic relationship than the United States and Soviet Union did.
Pakistan as an all-weather friend and India has At the least there is no mention of ‘war’ to a communist Vietnam as a close ally in the describe the context of their current southwestern neighborhood of China. relationship.
Instead, they have a large trading relationship and given the economic potential Finally, both Kennedy and Khrushchev could of the two states, benefits from economic derive much needed political capital from the interdependence are only expected to grow Cuban incident.
Sensible leaders create a security risk for the United States was aimed at, on both sides of the border clearly understand among others, in symbolizing to the the adverse impact that any conflagration could Communist camp that the Soviet Union and not have on potential economic benefits.
Secondly, both the Soviet Union and the US had far more nuclear weapons than do India For Kennedy acting decisively in the face of a and China.
Moreover, given the intense blatant Soviet threat was imperative to save conditions of the Cold War, nuclear war was face in an election year when he had repeatedly 2 INSTITUTE OF CHINESE STUDIES, DELHI ● AUG 2017 reassured electorates and his vigorous s/he is left with only a binary ‘choice of either Republican opponents that the Soviet Union a humiliating retreat or a nuclear war’ (BCSIA was not involved in any ‘offensive’ military 2017c); for such a move would be a ‘collective buildup in Cuba.
Moreover, after the disastrous death-wish for the world’ . failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961, Kennedy could surely not afford yet Theodore Sorensen, one of Kennedy’s closest another foreign policy blunder.
Thinking how one’s actions would be seen by the other is Contrast this with the virtual absence of any fundamental in resolving critical crisis such external or domestic political needs for situations.
Both these leaders now have a firm grasp over domestic affairs and perhaps are the Unlike in the Cold War most popular leaders in their respective there is no significant countries.
Of course generating nationalism ideological competition through such incidents always pays political between India and dividends, but risks associated with the current China. standoff far outweigh any benefits that nationalism could derive for the leaders.
In Crisis democratic states, leaders operate in stifled decision-making corridors with immense These important distinctions between the USpressures to prove their decisiveness to the Soviet standoff in 1962 and the present Indiaelectorate and therefore, ultimatums like the China notwithstanding, the Cuban Missile one mentioned above are going to make Crisis can serve as an important ‘case’ for both compromises increasingly difficult.
Indian and Chinese leaders to reflect upon while they try to think of a way out of the Beware of non-rational factors current dispute.
Five lessons have been pointed Graham Allison in his classic book – Essence out below.
He pointed out lessons that can be drawn from the 1962 crisis that the rational actor model is an inadequate for it to be useful in thinking about a path to tool in predicting the outcome of a crisis. meet the challenges of the Doklam crisis.
Rather, two other factors, namely internal government politics and structures and Empathize with your adversary principles of organizations are equally In a crisis in which significant risks are at stake, important to the outcome of a crisis.
What may as is the case with nuclear war, it is important seem irrational from the perspective of the that leaders put themselves in the shoes of their rational actor may be outdone by either rigid adversaries.
Decision-making influenced by organizational structures or vested political rigid ideological predilections could easily lead interests. to self-defeating outcomes.
With a camouflage things would Cuban crisis was that even though both sides have turned out very differently.
Leaders of came extremely close to war, negotiations to India and China, therefore, must keep in mind resolve the crisis by finding a common ground that crisis situations can often lead to never stopped.
Given the reality of mutually unintended consequences by actions of actors assured destruction in a world with who are miles away from Delhi and Beijing. nuclear weapons, a war, even a limited one between the two states would potentially have Civilian leadership is critical been profoundly devastating.
Robert A recurrent theme during the Cuban Missile McNamara, then Secretary of Defense, noted crisis, in fact since the time Kennedy took later that ‘it is impossible to predict with a high office, was the hawkishness of his military degree of confidence what the effects of the use personnel.
The chiefs were game to go one up of military force will be because of the risk of a on the Soviets and therefore, enthusiastically miscalculation, misperception and inadvertence’ advised the president for a surprise air attack . on Cuba; confidently expecting the Soviet Union to be a mere spectator.
One critical reason that instead decided to order a blockade and 1962 conflict between India and China was a postponed an attack as the last resort. limited war was because neither India nor China was armed with nuclear weapons.
But in Adversaries should not a MAD world it is difficult if not impossible to predict the consequences of a military be left with only a escalation and therefore war-speak must be ‘choice of either a toned down. humiliating retreat or a nuclear war’ Malleability in decision-making is critical Gen.
It is absolutely imperative for leaders defeat in our history’ . on both sides of the border to not operate with binaries.
With catastrophic consequences at Civilian leadership, most crucially the heads of stake neither should shut their eyes to states, should keep these overly militaristic innovative non-militaristic alternatives. elements at bay.
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. showed that if the desire to avoid war is strong 2017d.
And the possibility that a flare up boundary-unconditionally-immediately-sayscould occur will continue to exist as long as china/751500/ . both India and China do not find a face-saving compromise.
