Aviation Graphic To see more of Mads' aviation art, CLICK: Mads Bangsø Aviation Art--Email him at: Mads Bangsø email Quick Page Navigation Selections:Webmaster: This feature helps you to quickly navigate to the section of interest to you.Click underlined text.
VMCJ-2 flew the same aircraft with the same cameras under the command of Capt.
Early Spying & Bay of Pigs Before the crisis, ""We Were Watching"" and VFP-62 & Bay of Pigs Invasion Click to go to: The Soviet Perspective Interesting links to Soviet activities and perspectives.
Tad Riley and Ken Jack on a two-month endeavor to get the details as historically accurate as is possible.
Such details of getting the Bureau Number of the lead aircraft from Riley's logbook leading to the correct side number ; getting the positions of the VMCJ-2 RF-8A wingman and the pursuing Soviet MiG-21 and the rooster-tail of dust created by the supersonic low-level jets over a Cuban field.
Dave Mueller researched the RF-8A's panels and camera bay locations and worked with Riley to get the flight control structures correct.
The high-resolution VFP-62 photography directly contributed to our national security.
The memoir was never published and has been expanded to cover all of the military intelligence assets and history of the Cold War's most serious confrontation that could have led to general nuclear war.
Ecker's death in November 2009, he asked me to co-author a revision of his original manuscript to include more of the squadron and its contribution to world peace in October 1962.
Add your comments on the book via the link above or ""Email to Webmaster"" link this page.
Although I've never flown a plane in my life, I'm a great fan of those guys who have, in combat and recon I never tire of their stories of ""wearing"" a jet fighter and high speed recon.
Whether the war was hot or cold you hung it out for us and it's never too late to say, Thank You.
Just a ""swabby"" on the deck back in '69-'71.---Julian Boone Listen to MP3 Podcasts of Ken Jack & Capt.
Introduction Podcast #1 Ken explains how the book was written from Capt.
Jim Curry's perspective of flying the RF-8A; summary of Jim's Navy career after VFP-62; Jim explains technical details of the photographic technology in the RF-8A; Jim explains what participation in the blockade aboard the USS Enterprise was like.
Podcast #3 Ken Jack describes VFP-62's culture and role in the Cuban crisis Ken gives more detail about the photographic technology in the RF-8A; He describes the leadership and opportunities in VFP-62 for a young sailor; Descriptions of what it was like working around the Crusader; descriptions of detachments sent to carriers; Ken describes reactions to Blue Moon's publication.
Longer segment from documentary DEFCON 2 The entire program is broken up into 6 different videos.
Introductory Panel DiscussionSergei Khrushchev, son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, U-2 pilot Colonel Buddy Brown and VFP-62 F8U-1P Crusader pilot Lt.
Commander Tad Riley , who overflew Cuban SA-2 missile sites during the crisis will discuss their mission objectives and recollections.
Photographic interpreter, Dino Brugioni, author of ""Eyeball to Eyeball"", who briefed President Kennedy on the photos taken over Cuba, will provide a dramatic first hand account of the behind the scene activities of the Kennedy administration during those tense thirteen days in October 1962.
YouTube video :Panel Discussion #2Sergei Khrushchev, son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and author of ""Nikita Khrushchev and the creation of a superpower"" will provide the keynote address.
Adobe 10 MB_ ""VFP-62 -Supersonic Hooligans"" Article written for the National Naval Aviation Museum's FOUNDATION Fall 2011 issue by Kenneth Jack.
Ecker's Flight Suit Flight suit worn on first mission over Cuba fifty years ago.
Contributed by Dave Johnson, former F8 pilot, a resource for the film, and webmaster of Gunfighter's Site Lt.
Dave Johnson VF-13 received the original copy of the ""Thirteen Days"" storyboard for his help on the real and animated flight scenes.
After many years, he gave the artwork to Ken Jack who contributed it to Battleship Memorial Park Mobile, AL for display alongside the VFP-62 RF-8A on display Scene from the movie depicting Capt.
What a wonderful thought it was to know that they were waiting for us at our exit from the beach.
And when we did, they would radio to say that our tails were clear. -Capt.
The U2 flew at very high altitudes and made the first discovery of the missiles.
However, there was a need for closer to the ground photographs to determine with more detail the nature of this threat.
VFP-62 flew missions over Cuba and provided the photographic evidence President Kennedy needed to confront and evenutally eliminate the threat.
VFP-62 RF-8s also flew photo missions over Russian ships coming towards Cuba to determine the nature of their cargo.
When Russia decided to pull out the missiles, RF-8s followed the ships back to Russia.
Flights of RF-8As from Navy reconnaissance squadron VFP-62, operating in several pairs of aircraft with each pair assigned a different target, left Naval Air Station Key West twice each day, to streak in over Cuba at low level, then return to NAS Jacksonville, where the film was offloaded and developed, to be rushed north to the Pentagon.
DFCs for Six VFP-62 Pilots Who Flew the First Cuban Missions Lt Cdr J Kauflin, Lt Cdr Tad Riley, Cdr.
Enlisted & Officers Celebrating the NUC ceremony at NAS Boca Chica, Key West Florida on Nov., 1962---?,?,Cdr.
W Ecker Click to see: JFK Presenting Navy Unit Commendation Color photo showing RF-8s, Squadron, Cdr.
President Kennedy's Remarks to squadron Provided by Pete Wallace Rare pictures of the Unit Commendation ceremony.
We only had 2 or 3 with the new 5 inch format Chicago Aerial Cameras installed, that worked.
I had never seen so many FLASH messages , and near instant supply response.
We got the word late Monday, and the first mission was set for the following Sunday at 8AM, for 8 camera ready birds to take off from Key West.
Sunny Jim Curry was a J.O. not yet assigned to a detachment and he flew test hops day and night, checking the latest tweek on camera systems.
Adobe VFP-62 photo shows VFP-62's superior capabilities Use browser ""back arrow"" to return to this page.
Adobe VFP-62 photo JFK presenting Unit Commendation to squadron Use browser ""back arrow"" to return to this page.
Dobbs uses the film to pinpoint the location of Soviet nuclear bunkers in Cuba and to recreate several Blue Moon missions over the missile sites.
The book, ""One Minute to Midnight"" also includes a detailed account plus photographs of the missions of Commander William Ecker and Lieutenant Gerald Coffee.
Coffee was commended by the Navy for diverting from his planned flight route on October 25, 1962 to take the first photographs of nuclear-capable Soviet FROG missiles.
As a result of Coffee's photographs, the Pentagon revised its entire invasion plan for Cuba.
It was shot on October 25 Blue Moon Mission 5010, from raw intelligence film that I discovered at the National Archives.
Photos like this were part of the pre-flight testing of cameras and became part of the mission film processed upon arrival back at NAS Jacksonville, Fleet Air Photo Lab.
Note the film roll sprockets and technical data recorded by the camera.
Photo taken on October 25, 1962, the first day for VMCJ-2 to fly photo missions.
Tim Brown, Senior Fellow, Globalsecurity.org USMC VMCJ-2 CMC AUGMENTATION DETACHMENT to VFP-62 EXTERNAL LINK--Interview with Gen.
The above photo shows VFP-62 RF-8A Bu No 145645 forward on the flightdeck.
This aircraft made two night photo missions over Guantanamo Naval Base to check on Cuban activity around the base.
Click on following links for more information Tom Cornelison, wrote this insightful article for the June 2007 Jacksonville Magazine.
Tom provides comments from former VFP-62 pilots Capt's Ed Feeks and Newby Kelt.
The Photo that Averted Nuclear War-Additional information on fighter squadron protection of the mission.
He briefed that if either went down, flight was to return to Cecil Field.
As we continued out over just south of the Bahamas I recognized that we were headed for Cuba.
Skipper had said that we would make some photo runs and they would be done on mike clicks, no voice commands.
We landed at Homestead AFB and film was removed by people I had never seen before, nor have ever known again.
Only a few years ago Lt Hyde was found still in the cockpit in the Gulf.
A few years back I authorized the VFW to look at my service jacket to verify eligibility.
It was only then that I discovered the Naval Expeditionary Medal award.
Personal accounts of the depoyment to Cuba; what life was like during the crisis; Good photos and more.
Voodoo gets most of the attention with no Russian perception of VFP-62's RF-8As doing much of the low-level fly-overs.
The 759th mine-and-torpedo aviation regiment on Cuba during the Caribbean crisis of 1962""--Translated into English this personal account of the little known deployment of the nuclear-capable Il-28 Soviet medium-range bomber and its squadron.
The presence of the Il-28 in Cuba in late 1962, after the removal of the nuclear missiles, was the last diplomatic hurdle that the Kennedy administration had to complete before the crisis was considered over.
Lots of photos, a few from Blue Moon Over Cuba makes this memoir a personal historical account.
When they were near our command post at a low altitude, someone opened automatic fire.
