After gaining support from ExComm, Kennedy announced a blockade of Cuba on October 22, 1962.
Khrushchev and Kennedy negotiated until October &nbsp;28, 1962, when a deal to remove the missiles was agreed upon.
These weapons had been shipped over by the Soviet Union, which had built a strong relationship with Cuba in the last two years, and threatened the security of the United States due to their proximity.
Kennedy responded by blockading Cuba until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles.
After negotiations, where the United States agreed to not invade Cuba and to remove their own nuclear missiles from Turkey, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles on October 28, 1962.
The deterioration of the relationship between the United States and Cuba after Fidel Castro&rsquo;s revolution led Cuba to develop stronger ties with the Soviet Union, who opposed the United States and saw Cuba as a strategic ally.
Kennedy&rsquo;s decision to invade Cuba in the failed Bay of Pigs invasion led to further deterioration of the United States relationship.
Communications improved between the two sides, they set up a Moscow-Washington hotline and a test ban treaty was introduced in 1963.
Formerly, interactions between states were predicated on the balance of power, whether military or economic.
But now a state&rsquo;s possession of nuclear weapons changed the game, allowing it to influence others.
At the beginning of the Cold War, the US&rsquo;s supply of cataclysmic nuclear weapons often meant these negotiations were skewed in their favour.
Deutsch Americas English Europe English English Find Study Materials Find Study Materials for Subjects Free & expert-verified explanations.
Create Study Materials Create Study Materials Flashcards Create and find the best flashcards.
Cuba’s proximity to the USA meant that the Soviet Union now had a strategic launch pad to attack the other superpower from.
The United States had already created their own strategic launch pad to attack the Soviet Union in 1954 by establishing a joint base with nuclear weapons, the Incirlik Air Base in Turkey.Ballistic missilesA rocket-propelled self-guided weapon that can carry high explosives as well as nuclear munitions to a target.Map showing the range of missiles being based in Cuba, Wikimedia Commons.However, the United States viewed this move as a major threat to their security when they found out.
President John F Kennedy blockaded Cuba on 22 October 1962, and sent a letter to Khrushchev, urging him to remove the missiles.
Cuba was in ‘America's backyard’ and the range of the missiles shown in the map above explains Kennedy’s concern.To blockadeTo seal off a place or country to prevent goods or people from entering or leaving.US reconnaissance photograph of a medium-range ballistic missile launch site in San Cristobal, Cuba, Wikimedia Commons.The days that followed were incredibly tense and brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Two events almost tipped the scales:On October 24, Soviet vessels approached Cuba’s blockade line but turned back.On October 27, Cubans shot down a United States reconnaissance plane.Reconnaissance planeA military aeroplane used to gain information about an enemy.Recognising the severity of the situation, Khrushchev and Kennedy came to an agreement.
Khrushchev offered to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in return for an end to the blockade and a United States pledge to not invade Cuba.
As an assurance, the United States also agreed to remove their missiles from Turkey.
Based on these agreements, Khrushchev agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba on October 28.
To understand how the two countries got to such an acute crisis, we need to look at the events leading up to it.The Cuban RevolutionThe Cuban Revolution took place in 1959 and changed the country forever.
US-Cuban RelationsCuba gained independence from Spain in 1898, helped by United States intervention.
This marked the start of the US’s long-term political dominance in the region.
From the early 1900s, the United States maintained a strong influence in Cuba, controlling its main export, sugar.
Most Cuban industry was owned by United States businesses, and many Americans had bought land in the country.
Batista From 1940-44, General Fulgencio Batista ruled as the elected President of Cuba.
After a US-backed military coup, he regained his power in 1952 and ran Cuba as a military dictatorship until 1959.
Batista was corrupt and oppressive and hated by the Cubans, but the United States profited from him being in power due to his leaning towards the United States.
During his rule, the United States established almost complete domination of Cuba’s economy and the number of American corporations in Cuba increased dramatically.
Military coupA seizure and removal of government and its powers by force, carried out by the military.RevolutionIn 1956, in retaliation against Batista’s oppressive rule, Marxist-socialists Che Guevara and Fidel Castro gathered a force of guerrilla fighters to start a revolutionary war against government forces.
Cuba entered a state of virtual civil war, with the revolutionaries staging uprisings and attacks.
In the early hours of 1 January 1959, Batista relinquished his presidency and fled the country.
Photograph of Che Guevara and Fidel Castro, Wikimedia Commons.Deteriorating US-Cuban relationsCastro resented the Americans providing aid to Batista and wanted to rid his country of United States influence.Castro’s attitude towards the USCastro wanted the Cuban economy to benefit poorer Cubans, rather than Americans and the corrupt upper classes.
Eisenhower considered banning the purchase of sugar from Cuba, which would cripple the country, as Cuba was heavily reliant on United States sales.In 1961, Castro announced that Cuba was Communist, which heightened Eisenhower’s concerns about the country.
He was motivated by the Domino Theory, which suggested if one state fell to communism, the neighbouring countries would follow.
He felt that Cuba might trigger a domino effect in the rest of Latin America.
The US, on the other hand, regarded itself as the protector of South and Central American countries due to the Monroe Doctrine, a United States policy that opposed European colonialism in the Americas.
In Eisenhower’s opinion, communism would threaten United States power and America’s economic interests.
This plan became known as the Bay of Pigs invasion due to the name of the southern coast of Cuba where they landed.
The plan was unsuccessful as Kennedy pulled out United States Air Force support at the last minute, resulting in all of the exiles being captured or killed.
Castro's knowledge of this plan inflamed American-Cuban relations further.Cuba-Soviet allianceAs relations with the United States deteriorated, Cuba looked to the Soviet Union to forge an alliance.
After the United States cut quotas on sugar, Cuba looked to set up more trade agreements with the Soviet Union on sugar and other goods.
KhrushchevAccepting Cuba’s request for help was a strategic move for Khrushchev, who was losing support at home in Russia.
He needed to be seen as supporting an endangered communist state, and Cuba offered the opportunity to spread communism in Latin America.
The Sino-Soviet split in the late 1950s meant that the USSR had lost one of its valuable allies, weakening its position on the global stage.De-StalinisationA policy pursued after 1956 of eradicating the memory or influence of Stalin and Stalinism in most Communist areas.
Khrushchev’s view of Kennedy as a weak, ineffectual leader meant he felt confident placing ballistic missiles in Cuba, believing that the American president would not intervene.Bay of Pigs invasionKennedy’s failure in handling the Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 established him as a weak and ineffective leader in the eyes of Khrushchev.
He felt that Kennedy did not have the expertise or power to resist any Soviet military build-up in Cuba.The Vienna SummitThe two leaders had met at the Vienna Summit in 1961 and formed impressions of each other from those discussions.
Whilst Kennedy had not agreed to Khrushchev’s demands on Berlin, the Soviet leader still saw the American president as weak and unable to mount effective military resistance.
His failure in the Bay of Pigs invasion was overridden in the minds of many.Khrushchev, on the other hand, emerged less than victorious.
His decisions were seen as reckless, and he was seen to have bowed down to Kennedy’s demands.
This, along with his failed domestic policies in the Soviet Union, provided evidence that he was unable to lead effectively.
This was a foreign policy practice used by Eisenhower, which forced the enemy to the threshold of conflict to gain better-negotiating power.
The word originated from a 1956 Life Magazine interview with the United States secretary of state John Foster Dulles.
Formerly, interactions between states were predicated on the balance of power, whether military or economic, but now a state’s possession of nuclear weapons changed the game, allowing it to influence others.
At the beginning of the Cold War, the US’s supply of cataclysmic nuclear weapons often meant these negotiations were skewed in their favour.
Clear communication between the two leaders had prevented the worst possible outcome.
Recognising this, Kennedy and Khrushchev established a Moscow-Washington hotline to facilitate direct communication between them.Test ban treatyIn August 1963, Great Britain, the United States, and the Soviet Union signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.Nuclear weapons tests underwater, in the atmosphere or in space were prohibited.
Khrushchev and Kennedy negotiated until October 28, 1962, when a deal to remove the missiles was agreed upon.
Although the crisis only lasted less than a week, it was a key event in the Cold War due to how close both sides were to engaging in a nuclear war.
The deterioration of the relationship between the United States and Cuba after Fidel Castro’s revolution led Cuba to develop stronger ties with the Soviet Union, who opposed the United States and saw Cuba as a strategic ally.
Kennedy’s decision to invade Cuba in the failed Bay of Pigs invasion led to further deterioration of the United States relationship.
Paranoia about future invasions prompted Castro to ask the Soviet Union for support, leading Khrushchev to send ballistic missiles to the country and build launch pads.
This prohibited some nuclear tests but did not stall the arms race.The event also contributed to the ousting of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in 1964, who was seen to have acted recklessly in Cuba.
But now a state’s possession of nuclear weapons changed the game, allowing it to influence others.
By the time of the Cuban crisis, however, the USSR had caught up in the arms race, and posed a formidable threat.
Show answer Answer A joint air base between the USA and Turkey with nuclear weapons.
It was based in Turkey and functioned as a strategic launch pad due to its proximity to the Soviet Union.
Show answer Answer He agreed to end the blockade of Cuba, pledged to not invade Cuba, and agreed to remove American missiles from Turkey.
Show answer Answer Although Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles on 28 October, the crisis continued until 20 November, when their removal was officially verified.
Show answer Answer An elected president from 1940-44, he regained power through a US-backed military coup in 1952.
Batista’s corrupt and oppressive military dictatorship was wildly unpopular with Cubans.
He allowed the United States an almost complete domination of Cuba’s economy.
Popular discontent led to Che Guevara and Fidel Castro creating a force of guerilla fighters to try and overthrow him.
Show answer Answer Eisenhower was concerned that the Cuban Revolution might lead to other states in Latin America falling to communism, like dominos.
This would weaken the position of the United States in the global power balance, and result in them being essentially surrounded by unfriendly states.
Show answer Answer Khrushchev was losing support in Russia due to his domestic policies, and had just lost a key alliance with China.
Building a relationship with Cuba would be seen as supporting an endangered communist state, and an opportunity to spread communism in Latin America.
Show answer Answer The failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion established Kennedy as a weak and ineffective leader in the eyes of Khrushchev.
He felt the United States president lacked the expertise or power to resist Soviet desires, and wouldn’t intervene in the military build-up in Cuba.
Show answer Answer Kennedy was praised for his calm and firm stance in the negotiations, whereas Khrushchev was seen as reckless and having bowed down to Kennedy’s demands.
This, along with his failed domestic policies in the Soviet Union, led to Khrushchev’s enforced early retirement.
Show answer Answer Brinkmanship is a foreign policy where one side forces the enemy to the threshold of conflict to gain negotiating power.
Kennedy and Khrushchev established a Moscow-Washington hotline to facilitate direct communication between the two.
Smart Formatting Create the most beautiful study materials using our templates.
Join millions of people in learning anywhere, anytime every day Sign up for free Sign up to highlight and take notes.
