CHRISTIAN F OSTERMANN is the national, living United States memorial honoring President GUEST-EDITOR: JAMES G HERSHBERG Woodrow Wilson.
LAURA DEAL, ALLISON LYALIKOV the worlds of ideas and public policy, the Center addresses current and emerging challenges confronting the United DESIGN: DIANA MICHELI States and the world.
The Center promotes policy-relevant research and dialogue to increase the understanding Cold War International History Project was established at the and enhance the capabilities and knowledge of leaders, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C., in 1991 with citizens, and institutions worldwide.
Created by an act of the generous support of the John D and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation.
It is Congress in 1968, the Center is a nonpartisan institution directed by Christian F Ostermann, who oversees the Wilson Center’s History and headquartered in Washington, D.C.; it is supported by Public Policy Program. both public and private funds.
The Project supports the full and prompt release of historical materials by governConclusions or opinions expressed in Center publications ments on all sides of the Cold War, and seeks to accelerate the process of integrating and programs are those of the authors and speakers.
It also seeks to organizations that provide financial support to the Center. transcend barriers of language, geography, and regional specialization to create new links among scholars interested in Cold War history.
The Center is the publisher of The Wilson Quarterly and the home of both the Woodrow Wilson Center Press and the dialogue television and radio program.
Joseph B Gildenhorn, Chairman of the Board Sander R Gerber, Vice Chairman CWIHP receives funding from the Korea Foundation , the MacArthur Foundation , the Karl and Martha Maunter Fund, the Carnegie Corporation Jane Harman, Director, President and CEO , the Leon Levy Foundation , the Blavatnik Family Foundation , and other donors.
James H Billington, Librarian of Congress Donations to the project are very welcome and, like all contributions to the Wilson Hillary R Clinton, Secretary, United States Department of State, Center, are tax-deductible.
James G Hershberg Timothy Broas; John T Casteen, III; Charles E Cobb, Jr.
CWIHP Senior Scholars Eddie and Sylvia Brown, Melva Bucksbaum and RayHope M Harrison mond Learsy, Ambassadors Sue and Chuck Cobb, Lester Chen Jian Crown, Thelma Duggin, Judi Flom, Sander R Gerber, A Ross Johnson Ambassador Joseph B Gildenhorn and Alma Gildenhorn, Harman Family Foundation, Susan Hutchison, Frank F Bernd Schaefer Islam, Willem Kooyker, Linda B and Tobia G Mercuro, David Wolff Dr.
As editor, my particular thanks go to Jim Hershberg Switzerland, and North Vietnam.
Shorter introductions and editorial notes provide Alex Barrow, Pierre Asselin, Jordan Baev, Csaba Bekes, Bastiaan first analytic cracks at the sources.
Kian Byrne, Daniel the storage, description, and searchability of our online Chardell, Chandler Grigg, Jordan Harms, Yuree Kim, David collections.
CWIHP is in the final year of a three-year Najmi, Phan Ngoc, Emily Olsen, and Benjamin Venable.
A vivid narrative deluge of new information from the “other side” has yielded a emerged, centered on the deliberations and decision-making narrative and historiography far more balanced in its depiction of John F Kennedy and his advisors around the table of the of actions and decisions of both superpowers.
Two particularly “Excomm,” from the memoirs, recollections, and leaks of important secondary works, Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy former United States officials.
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Cuba, Nikita Khrushchev mostly loomed off-stage, a mysterious, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, East and West Germany, menacing presence in Moscow, although the emergence of his Hungary, Italy Israel, Mexico, Mongolia, the Netherlands, smuggled-out memoirs at least offered a tantalizing glimpse Poland, Romania, Russia, Switzerland, and North Vietnam. into the Soviet side of the story.
And over the next five years of “critiMissile Crisis discourse, but to make the point that the scholcal oral history” conferences organized by James G Blight arship on the event—or what Soviets knew (and Russians still and janet M Lang, including gatherings in Moscow and know) as the Caribbean Crisis, and Cubans refer to as the then Havana, indeed yielded a slew of findings from Soviets October Crisis—now seems poised to go global, in multiple respects.
Woodrow Wilson Center Press; Australian, British, Canadian, Indian, and United Nations.
By the end, the discussion and Soviet claims of United States aggression (and threatened potential turned to the President’s brother Bobby as the catalyst for the Soviet missile deployment, on behalf of JFK) who said he opposed the air strike for and the defense of Cuba as the leading Soviet motivation.
At two reasons, the similarity to what the Japanese did at Pearl the least, the evidence forced the American delegation to put Harbor, and the “unpredictable” Soviet response that could themselves in Soviet and Cuban shoes.
At one of the breaks in Havana 1992, Archive subsequent invitation from the Cubans to come to Havana staff presented Castro with more than 10,000 pages of declasand hear from Fidel himself.) sified United States documents, neatly preserved on microfiche, and The other Moscow documentary highlight in 1989 feawith a two-volume index – testimony to the United States Freedom tured the interplay between documents and memory and of Information Act.
More pernicious have been the actual Review, 28 July 1963. alteration and even destruction of the historical record by 2 For an earlier overview, see Thomas Blanton, “Annals of Blinksmanship,” The Wilson Quarterly, Summer 1997.
Castro, The Missile Crisis, and the certainly enabled self-serving official spin over the years.
Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Missiles files they supposedly own.
Dean Acheson’s advocacy for an immediate and massive air 7 Blight and Lang, The Armageddon Letters, Appendix A. strike on the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The RFK quote is on 345. com/articles/news_and_politics/chatterbox/2001/04/what_if_the_ 17 Credit goes to Professor Philip Brenner of American cuban_missiles_hadnt_been_a_secret.html.
One 17 of the latest TV documentaries on the Crisis, premiering on PBS on 3. , 327.
See The Great Crises Volume gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/nukevault/ebb281/index.htm.
It was the Caribbean century but, as the documents in this volume make abundantly Crisis to the Soviets, and the October Crisis to the Cubans. clear, there are numerous untapped archives around the world But it was also a Sino-Soviet Crisis, a Sino-Indian Crisis, ready to offer up new insights and interpretations of this semia Berlin Crisis, a NATO crisis, and a crisis in which the nal global event.
Most of the clear-headed advice he general feeling in Brazil that the military blockade of Cuba, received was offered outside of its meetings by Adlai Stevenson, for the first time in the history of the Cold War, has brought Dean Rusk, and George Ball, among others.
Within 48 hours the USA and the USSR to the very verge of the war because of of being informed that the Soviets had secretly placed medium one L A country, making in that way LA and and intermediate range missiles into Cuba, the president had Brazil the center of the Cold War.
The feeling of immediate determined that an invasion entailed risks he was not willing danger mobilized all circles in order to find the way out.
They to take; it became Attorney General Robert Kennedy’s responconcluded values of their former independent polsibility to convince the more aggressive EXCOMM members icy, especially towards Cuba, enables them to influence more to support the blockade.
There remains much to learn about freely and with more authority on seeking peaceful solutions.” the president’s decision-making process.
It involved not only Brazil, but all the Latin and Central The Crisis was a global-war-in-the-making, as a summary of American members of the Organization of American States. the conversation on October 22nd, between former Secretary of The energetic effort by the United States to gain OAS support State Dean Acheson and French President Charles De Gaulle for the blockade gave the nations of South America a sense suggests.
There were also Soviet skeptics. tory didn’t happen, and how a war was prevented remains an “It’s hard to understand why we had to build a military base enduring question.
However once 19 Introduction he gets furious, he bites you hard and never leaves you even if Massive Retaliation policy and Khrushchev’s nuclear threats he loses all his teeth like an Irish bulldog.” during the Suez Crisis are relevant examples.
But the frightenThe Castro brothers rage at Khrushchev for agreeing ing realization that nuclear war could be only a stumble away, to remove the missiles without prior consultation with introduced a more cautious approach to nuclear diplomacy.
It Havana is reflected in another Japanese diplomatic report. led to a re-evaluation of limited nuclear war.
That realization led went on to speculate that “Castro might need the possibilKhrushchev to finally accept the existence of a separate West ity of the United States invasion because he wants to crack down on Berlin, with a Western military presence there. anti-government movements by stirring an excessive crisis Technology was another important feature of the Crisis. mentality among the nation.
During those “careless years,” both the United States and Soviet Crisis that took the lead in both its creation and resolution. governments had deployed its existential threat heedlessly Technology made things possible, and because they were posto presumed advantage.
The Eisenhower administration’s sible, they were attempted; it was a metaphor for modernity.
These youngsters clad in military fatigues Jiang Jieshi treated us as bacteria and wanted to destroy us.” made for For Mao, such similarities were immensely important, for a curious contrast with Mao who took his rebel army on the they suggested the applicability of the Chinese revolutionary Long March before some of his Cuban guests learned how to experience to other Third World countries.
This was not a problem for Mao, because the Cubans significant, was, after all, a small fish.
Mao, who had just witnessed disastrous results about far-flung corners of the world where the Soviet Union of his “Great Leap Forward,” spoke about Cuba but he indihad no direct security interests, Mao paid great attention to rectly criticized his own comrades-in-leadership for lacking what was happening on the other side of the globe.
In a few his guests relentlessly about the prospects for a revolution in years Mao would try to whip up this enthusiasm by unleashjust about every Latin American country, even tiny ones like ing the wrath of the “Red Guards” on the party establishment the Dominican Republic or Haiti, though he was especially during the Cultural Revolution. interested in what would happen in Brazil, the greatest potenAlthough inexperienced, the Cubans were true revolutiontial gain in that part of the world.
Che was already leaning to Mao’s side in ideologihe had all the reasons to be optimistic that Brazil would one cal matters, admiring Mao’s radicalism and his enthusiasm for day follow Cuba.
The Soviets likewise eyed the country with Latin America, where he died a martyr in 1967 at the hands great interest, and the Americans with commensurate fears. of the Bolivian government forces; Mao—in his own counJohn Kennedy’s nightmare, that Brazil would soon turn try, against his own people, amid the chaos of the so-called communist and become a “second Cuba,” was Khrushchev’s “Cultural Revolution.” dream—and also Fidel Castro’s.
Indeed, through these conversations one can trace the As observers noted at the time and the only serious scholarly evolution of Mao’s thinking on the Third World, and the study using Chinese-language sources agrees, Fidel Castro emergence of the narrative of the “Afro-Asian solidarity” that resolutely tried to maintain outward neutrality in the emergpersisted through the mid-1960s.
This thinking was premised ing Sino-Soviet split, especially given Cuba’s obvious ecoon the assumption that China’s revolution was welcomed in nomic dependency on economic aid from the Soviet Union. most quarters of the world, and that the different African, Yet it was also clear that on at least some ideological matters, Asian, and Latin American countries would follow Mao’s especially the desirability and even necessity of pursuing leadership and China’s example.
When Che made his maiden leader, unprompted, had suddenly asked whether negotiavisit to China half a year later, he asked Beijing to purchase tions were being planned to reduce or eliminate Sino-Soviet sugar from Cuba.
For instance, they could China could have indirectly yet concretely aided Cuba’s cause have occupied Quemoy and Matsu or by using force against the Nationalist Chinese-controlled offMacao without any real risk.
Instead, they were sending shore islands , which would hundreds of thousands of petitions and attacked India, have distracted the Americans, forcing them to worry about whereby they managed to turn India, at least temporarily, a potential military clash in the Far East should Washington into a country supporting the western camp, to disrupt need to defend Taiwan.
In sum, Mikoyan reported, “Raul gave an open analywar would become a world war… And we accepted this sis of the Chinese government in connection with the Cuban with full understanding of our internationalist duty.
This crisis, which coincides with ours.”39 is not resolutions, this is not cursing of imperialism, with Nevertheless, when another senior member of the leaderwhich it cannot be weakened.
As a Belorussian proverb ship, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, journeyed to Moscow a couple goes, you curse a landlord, and he only gets fatter.
This is of weeks later, he found it necessary to clarify explicitly Cuban truly so.
One can curse imperialism as much as you want, sentiments regarding China’s role in the crisis and influbut he won’t lose any weight from this, it will not be ence, if any, on Havana.
According to Rodriguez’s record weakened, and its insolence will not lessen.
Imperialism of his talk with Khrushchev in the takes into account only real force.
It does not recognize Kremlin, the Soviet leader stressed that despite making a tacanything else.
Therefore, one can call imperialism a paper tical retreat in Cuba the Soviets were not “in any way on the tiger, manure , or what not, but if imperialism defensive, I insist, not anywhere, even in Cuba,” but rather does not see that there is real force behind these words… still on the offensive.
I expressed that they knew well, and I did limited themselves to observing the crisis, started to get not wish to hide it from them, that among our leaders agitated and to pontificate on the ways in which one there were some who sympathized in concrete ways with should have acted during the crisis, criticizing those some of the positions of our Chinese comrades, but I who carried the burden of the struggle.
Havana’s criticism of China ary efforts against the enemy, they opened became particularly fire on us.
No, the imperialist forces profited from this, from Rafael Rodriguez in December 1964 and then, two months the fragmentation and dispersion of the revolutionary later, Che Guevara.
In a word, we talked a lot, approximately in this most ideologically sympathetic to the Chinese, Che ironically spirit.
We left it , then picked up again. played a key part in the final virtual break between Havana And now, it seems, all of this, of course, had a result. and Beijing.
For supporting these extensive translain the PRC, there are reasonable people who disagree with tions, we thank CWIHP director Christian Ostermann.
We this narrow nationalistic policy, whose main protagonist is would also like to thank Zhang Tengfei in Beijing and Shi Mao Zedong.
The translations posed many challenges, but factions will be more able to gain prominence. one particular problem, not completely solved, involved the double-translation/transliteration of names, places, organizaOn the other hand, he emphasized the wide and selfless tions, etc., from Spanish to Chinese and then to English.
We assistance provided by the USSR, without which the revoluhave tried to make correct identifications wherever possible, tionary and socialist Cuba could not even exist….53 and apologize for any errors.
My situation this time is better than The implication was clear: the Chinese might talk loudly, and four years ago. some Cuban revolutionaries liked at least part of what they were saying, but only the Soviets could act concretely to save Chairman Mao : Good, the revolution. have notable changes. couldn’t have a good discussion with you back in 1956, too many people that time.
If one group of people are shot down, senting it as a gift to you in the name of the Central another group comes up.
Please, Comrade Wu were expected by you. in the worst sceXiuquan, help me out on this. nario, would kill a few people, or drive you out of cities.
Your guns were not given by socialist countries, nor the name of the entire Chinese people and the Central any Latin American country.
Now imperialism and the bourgeoisie are also adopting a Being next to a huge tiger without paying the slightest two-faced policy. attention to it, you just break down the superstition.
In 1898, the United States occupied Cuba in the name of concerned, let’s set a price.
The Americans guns, rifles, mortars, light cannons, etc. to arm them [miliare rich.
The price could be set lower. paying wouldn’t be good as far as your national prestige is 33 Roca: The United States demanded 3000 Pesos for every caballeria the United States holds us in contempt.
Camaguey Province is led by a person with backward Chairman: Fidel Castro was 32 last year.
The head of Pinar del Rio has a changeable character, sometimes for us and sometimes against.
Your program does not confer much real power to Chairman: In form, this is not a communist force.
The view of paying more heed to national bourgeoisie and Latin American countries is correct.
We attach a great importance to industrialists were very happy, saying that Guevara spoke 37 particularly clearly.
Our party, the excessive demands shall not be raised so as not to cause loss 26th of July Movement, and the Revolutionary Guidance to the revolution. with revolution Committee together could reap over 80 percent of the , life will become better day by day; in order to votes.
He only worries obtain a better life, has to defend revolution and prepare that the 26th of July Movement isn’t quite an organized to sacrifice for it.
This is acknowledged in the program. party, politically unconsolidated.
Castro maintains that As far as the 8-hour workday system is concerned, there those bad elements in the revolution shall be eliminated are differences between urban and rural areas, between first.
The enemies are: imperialism, feudalism, and is that all leftist forces, including our party, the leftists of comprador capitalists. the 26th of July Movement, and the Revolution Guidance Committee, unite and establish a party.
The bourgeoisie that colluded with imperialism and Chairman: Chinese democratic parties have no masses, be the tyrant. they workers, peasants, or students.
Our larger demosector is bureaucratic capital. cratic parties have, at most, 20 or 30 thousand members, while smaller ones have only a few thousand.
You made a very good point revolution. regarding the problem of peasants.
China purchased 80 thousand tons which is very important, for no one in Latin America bought 80 thousand tons from us.
Distributing land among peasants is a practice of Roca: As far as the bourgeoisie’s profits are concerned, we bourgeois democratic revolution.
Napoleon did agree that they take a certain percentage of profits, but extra this in the 18th century and gained support from peasants. profits must go to the State.
Our views are for your reference only, and you Roca: We didn’t call the Cuban revolution a revolution of may weigh and consider the reality when putting them into bourgeois democracy.
If it were all confiscated, nickel, while still cooperating with the United States in smelting which the possibility of the intervention would be greatwon’t last though. er.
South of the Tropic of Cancer, good climate, having Shanghai that they cannot manage now, as we manage them. sea wind, neither too hot nor too cold, two crops every year.
They bully the weak and US a defeated country, like Germany, Italy, or Japan, it would fear the strong. be easy, because they were the defeated.
But towards the US, Britain, France, Belgium, and Holland, it had to be different.
At least hate us, if not fear. made ways to elbow them away, meaning that if they were unwilling to leave, they would begin losing money the Chairman: Because of your resolve, and your strategy. moment they started to produce things.
In the end, they were left no choice but to ask us to take over their factories.
It was between 1933 and 1935 that we made mistakes. it?— can’t afford it.
During the land reform, it doesn’t matter if the land made us lose base-areas in the south , caused us belonged to a Cuban, an American, or a Briton, all lands to run for 12. thousand kilometers, and cost nine-tenths of are taken and redistributed.
We made both “leftcompanies feel they are running an unprofitable business.
A ist” and rightist mistakes. representative has been sent by the government to see if they have really become unprofitable.
An even better . conclusion has been reached as to whether the business is now profitable or not.
These mistakes promote the development of the Cuban power plants which will mount pressure on American power revolution.
All land and crossties, used by American-invested railcommunist party and the Cuban people. way in Cuba, belong to Cuba, except they are registered under American names.
I shall tell Castro, after I return, that Chairman Mao invited government representatives.
Cuba is inviting the Soviet Union to help smelt the global significance.
Fujian Hall, the Great Hall of the People Present: Vice-Premier Li Xiannian: All were presented yesterday.
We want to see too many , but the time Revolutionary Government Economic Delegation is just too little.
Li Shude, Zhang Zai Premier: could do these in parallel: discussing while Premier Zhou : Welcome to you. visiting.
It should have. is also close to a tropiwe come to discuss some issues.
Because Chinese descendents in Cuba all come from Guangzhou, are very curious.
He did not feel well, because there was an epidemic Guevara: Ramos 59 is an expert, specialized in in Latin America not long ago. researching this problem.
We are now conducting research about adding other raw materials so to strengthen the paper.
Ammonia and potassic fertilizers can be produced Guevara: We can produce forty thousand tons of iron annuby us.
The Soviet Union is prepared to help us expand it to two phosphate and the other, triple superphosphate—need to be hundred thousand tons.
Other than that, are setting up imported. equipment two hundred thousand tons.
The imports of all kinds of fertilizers add up to one hundred thousand tons.
We could produce anthrato expand the fertilizer producing capacity, by consolidatcite, but coking coal needs to be imported. ing existing factories, and establish an associated company.
Now we are importing from socialist countries, because imports from Latin American countries need to be Guevara: The multi-fertilizer producing company should propaid for in United States dollars. duce two hundred thousand tons , for our population is merely 6 million.
So your machinery industry is not quite developed. the following two days.
It is said that already in Moscow. of automobiles, trucks, farming equipments, tractors, steel & iron, mining, basic chemicals, and agricultural products Guevara: When we left Moscow yesterday, hadn’t arrived processing.
Sun Zhongshan , is prepared to accept the letter of credentials from the Ambassador.
If will discuss trade issues the pioneer of Chinese democratic revolution, staged the only, then trade specialists could stay; if will discuss all Revolution in 1911, overthrew the feudalist monarchy and sorts of issues, then it will be also all right for everyone to stay. founded the Republic.
Revolution These people all could be trusted, even this journalist, who is has to go through constant failures before it succeeds.
The GMD-CCP cooperation of the Council of Eight Countries’ Economic Mutual Assistance 1924 advanced revolution, which happened during the , we were present only as an observer.
Yet we period of the First Great Revolution, also known as the New do know the content of the meeting.
Although one year and a half after the start cussed the price of sugar and the issue of socialist countries of the GMD-CCP cooperation, he died, our present deputy purchasing our sugar.
Because sugar is our main product, if head of the state, the Vice-Chairman, is his wife.
At the death sugar is not discussed, no deal could be possibly made. of Sun Zhongshan, Jiang Jieshi seized the power.
We have During the meeting, we mentioned conditions that the US fought for 22 years.
The GMD suppressed and forced some gave for purchasing our sugar, which were generous; CCP to work underground.
We learned the milinow socialist countries buy sugar at a price of four United States cents tary way to deal with him.
If we did not resist then, the heads for one pound, a price that is slightly higher than in the interof comrades present would have gone.
He was backed by the US, just like the nomic point of view, but we raised it from the political point tyrant Batista, the one you toppled.
We have already put forth this idea in the meeting, fact, our anti-imperialist sentiments are the same.
We don’t away a representative of the United States imperialists, you, too, drove know if there is a need to go through it again. away another.
Socialist countries in Eastern Europe will purchase Guevara: We have paid constant attention to learning from three hundred thousand tons , and the Soviet Union the Chinese experience.
There were not so many Chinese agrees to buy two million and seven hundred thousand tons; books in Latin America.
But not long ago, came across both prices are four United States cents for each pound.
All together two volumes of The Selected Works of Mao Zedong [Mao there are three million tons.
We carefully studied them and conducted a ment, will buy five hundred and fifty thousand tons.
The second problem is that wish the sugar price could be set at four United States cents per pound.
The questions that just discussed have already is about purchasing German equipment in complete for a facbeen discussed with you by Chairman Liu Shaoqi in Moscow. tory, which is raised based on the trade agreement established Cuba’s situation was very difficult. was of a colonial with the Vice-Minister of trade back in Havana.
Also, [there economy under complete United States control, producing sugar only; is] the issue of repaying loans.
From the US. problem lies in the Chinese people’s purchasing power and China’s foreign reserve for international trade.
For We would love to participate, if we have time, as observers. example, you need sugar when drinking tea, we don’t.
Of course, habits could is about the problem of quantity and price of sugar. be changed too.
Consuming sugar also has benefits, such The second problem is about the loan and equipment. as adding calories.
The You said that the Soviet Union has helped part [of the international market does not accept China’s Renminbi.
As to what China could provide, you are not clear. therefore have to use our foreign reserves.
After the visit, could speak of the feasibility and calculate the amount of money.
This is : when we buy your sugar, you should buy goods from us of the same value which will be Guevara: Agree.
The delivery should be made at Cuban docks, Premier: Those machines in no need of special design could because we don’t have the ability to ship sugar to China.
On our side, Vice-Minister Li Qiang is responsible. we can, and underwrite the transportation expense.
Regarding the freight also requires foreign currency, because we don’t have demands you raised for technological materials and learning our own ocean-going ships.
Let’s just temporarily leave the of technological staff, we will help as we can. matter aside.
With reference to the sugar procurement alone, When the industrial exhibition is visited, could raise i.e. million USD, the problem then is whether China is detailed demands. able, or not, to provide the goods you need.
Agree. practice, only by doing so could we ultimately decide the amount of sugar we buy from you.
Fourth, about transportation problems, which you did not mention but it is a problem that exists.
We are not familiar with China’s possibilities, for example, variety, standard, and quality.
The Soviet Union has promised that transportation problems that other countries cannot solve could be left to Premier: could have a discussion with departments them.
The Soviet Union will help Romania, Czechoslovakia, concerning foreign trade.
The order of goods we need has already been raised China’s transportation problem, because China is not in the back in Havana.
We raise the same order of goods to all socialCouncil of Eight Countries’ Economic Mutual Assistance. ist countries.
The transportation of over one million tons [of Premier: In this case, given that have already received sugar] is a big task.
In the future, there will probForeign trade minister, Lu Xuzhang, could discuss it with you. ably be a total blockade.
Over the last three years, (At this moment, Guevara left his seat for some reason.
Despite these, we can provide] is not remotely close to what the people Rodriguez , for a word.) need.
Both the heavy industry and the light industry could not provide the products needed by the domestic market.
No, we have two deputy ministers: one for exportation, and trade back mechanical equipment.
It’s went with the foreign minister to the UN General Assembly, impossible for our imports and exports not be influenced by and I stayed. agriculture.
So the foreign minister is now still at the UN. our imports and exports reach seven billion for each.
Even if we get in, will only be part of the north, also eat rice, along with wheat and maize. minority.
When you start to lead Latin America, and twenty [Latin American] countries change, the situation will be different.
The two hundred thousand tons of rice we proposed Guevara: Yes. earlier was based on the calculation of our production capacity and demand.
Your harvest this year is not good. land for sugarcane planting, but there is land, three or four times more , not Guevara: The bad harvest this year is not due to a natural for cultivation but for livestock raising.
When Company has seven thousand caballeria land, out of the technological staff was gone, the production of pesticide which only two thousand have been cultivated. dropped, and the production of rice also dropped.
No matter whethfor the number of Cuba’s arable land.) er it’s one hundred and twenty thousand tons, or one hundred and eight thousand tons, it’s not much against China’s Maj.
Lataste said that Cuba has about nine million hectare population. will be able to provide you when arable land.
We know our needs, and also know the efforts made by China, although not quite thoroughly.
We have only a hectare of arable land for five perPremier: Concrete possibilities should be found. sons.
It’s estimated that by 1961, we could be self-suffiGuevara: If counting in terms of Cuba’s rural population, cient in rice, less so in soybeans and maize.
We can’t produce everyone has three hectares of arable land. wheat, which is one of our problems.
The rural population accounts for 42 percent of Guevara: Yes, it’s rice. eat it every day. total population.
All newly independent countries invariably need a peaceful environment.
This needs time and this is why Zedong and Ernesto “Che” Guevara, 19 November said that we need construction and a peaceful inter1960 national environment.
Cuban Side – Head of Delegation and President Modern imperialism describes China as militant.
You could of National Development Bank, Major Ernesto Che Guevara, judge by yourself to see if China is really militant.
The present international situation is better than Enlai, Li Xiannian, Geng Biao, Shen Jian, Lin Ping. last year.
Our government represents workers and peasants. ated Chairman Mao in our struggle.
We are an official delegaOur country still has a petite bourgeoisie which has a friendly tion, representing Cuba, but members of our delegation were relationship and cooperates with us. born in four nations.
Some people depended entirely on imperialism. born in Cuba, the Cuban people do not resent us by saying we Imperialism gave them capital, technology, patents, and marwere not born in Cuba.
Fidel represents the will of all Latin Americans. were entangled with imperialism, for example, sugar traders.
Asian people, African people, and the entire socialist camp support you.
If purchased over three million Guevara: That’s why I am now in China. tons of sugar from us , would offer a compensation of 5 percent-25 percent [of the value of sugar Chairman: Welcome to you. purchased]. unfamiliar with the situation in Cuba would find it difficult to comprehend the irony embedded in Guevara: Our internal situation had yet to stabilize when I this policy. left Cuba last year, which was why we dealt carefully with the outside world, unlike now. the domestic situation is consolidated and we can be firmer.
According to the press, you returned the capital Guevara: In the first stage of our revolution, Fidel proposed a and profits on a 47-caballeria per year basis with an annual way to solve the public housing problem, because the governinterest rate of 1 percent. ment bears the responsibility to make everyone own a house.
The shooting. problem of the urban handicraft sector and petite bourgeoisie was tackled, likewise, by means of cooperatives.
We should borrow experience from other countries, including China and other socialist countries.
Be firm to the end, this is the hope bourgeoisie, we give them respect, jobs, and money, wishing , and imperialism will find itself in greater they do not go abroad.
The overall amount of capital for the largest Brazilian factory is not quite clear.
The local people have a population of from 9 milentirely depends on the United States Brazil is a big country, yet there is lion to 10 million, whereas the Spanish population there is actually no substantial difference between it and other Latin measured only at ten thousand.
It took more than two has 12 million people, of which 10 million are native and 2 years for you from initially landing on Cuba to the moment million are whites. of ultimate victory.
People of the latter two categories live in the setting for revolution than other Latin American countries. most miserable situation of all.
Like Tibet in the past. as Guatemala—the United States interfering by dispatching marines.
The native Indians are poor but (Chairman invited all members of the delegation for dinner, not slaves.
Guerilla forces used to be present in Columbia, but during which they also had the following conversation) now they have stopped fighting.
Between China and Cuba there are two things Chairman: Does Cuba have diplomatic relations with other almost identical which very much impress me.
I have no idea [of the nature of their of the delegation) wars]. is just a subjective answer.
Once the war broke out, it continued for the folChairman: Is what happened in Guatemala connected to lowing ten years.
I have only seen the declaration of Arbenz on this quently, and were forced to go away, which was the Long issue before I left for China.
These errors taught us—basically we made two errors, of a popular nature. one rightist and another leftist—and a lesson was learned.
Gaining comfort from squandering forces—this is adventurism. unable to pay attention Guevara: Batista had no conflict with the Americans. to villages, it is not at all easy for urban people to ally with Chairman: Jiang Jieshi is the dog of Britain and the US. peasants.
It dawned on me after I read your articooperated with Jiang Jieshi to fight against Japan.
I, too, read the abstract of this article, and very much agree with your points.
But before Batista had the time to flee to this island, they captured the Isle of Pines.
The Americans attempted to attack could defeat reactionaries. don’t have to wait for all the Isle of Pines. conditions to become matured so as to start revolution.
So American imperialism is our shared enemy, also the shared enemy of people of the world.
The third principle is that in Latin America, the very young. main task lies in rural areas.
We hadn’t even been born when you started to wage Premier : It’s very important to connect [revolurevolution, except him having already tion] with rural areas. been born.
Some Latin American friends did not heed peasants, whereas you very much heeded this point and Suñol: Defend the revolution. succeeded.
A point in Chairman Mao’s works is found by Fidel promoted strikes failed. to be very important, which I failed to notice at the beginning.
Once, a tank was captured and we were (Chairman raised his glass and proposed a toast to the health then filled with extreme joy.
The enemy’s was then suffering in jail. newspapers often leaked enemy’s moves, which was one source of information.
You look very young. thousand people; then became over ten thousand, and later grew into three hundred thousand, at Rodriguez: 25 years old. which point committed the leftist mistake.
Rodriguez has been tortured in purpose of Jiang Jieshi was to let the Japanese annihilate us. prison.
Fidel even fought with But did not expect us, after we fought with Japan, to his own gun. only twelve people. grow from twenty thousand to one million and several hundred thousand.
Within three and a half years, we defeated Jiang people left in the end.
The temperature in as mentioned in your article, all failed to play any critical role. your place is good.
In the late period, even captured Chairman: Your lands are also good. tanks.
We are grateful to Batista also because he drove more people to our side.
Trujillo is the most mature Guevara, 21 November 1960 dictator in Latin America.
Good health to the Premier. have proposed a list of goods worth over one hundred million USD for your reference.
Comrade Guevara is about to leave pay them in foreign currencies; as to freight, two sides calcufor other places.
Detailed issues have been discussed with comrade will still be able to charter ships.
The price for said that Cuba has more than one harbor, and that only one sugar is four United States cents per pound.
We will agree to the price place is not enough, and loading that the Soviet Union gave you.
Comrade Li Xiannian and Comrade industry, or handicraft industry, will produce based on Guevara could publishing some communiqués or other raw materials that you have (instead of importing raw materidocuments.
The delegation could study this with our side. als), which is beneficial for the development of one country’s Within the delegation, you could also national economy, helpful to you, but of no influstudy with your deputy foreign minister. ence on us.
Giving you technical materials is in accordance agree to each point you mentioned.
When technical aid from socialist countries, but don’t want ourselves to turn staff go to your place, should receive the same treatinto your heavy burden.
China is a big country that has a ment as your workers have, instead of excessive . spirit of helping others.
Their families at home will be looked ties for you because of helping us. don’t want to let after by us.
Please be patient when you are disdifficulties for you. cussing with them.
The remaining banks that haven’t been nationalized are Zhou: Have you seen the recent interfering activities of the only Canadian banks.
When I was about to come here, just thought that Lu: This is why Canada does not follow the US, and impose it would be great if there could be a discussion between one an embargo.
We should exploit the conflict between them. party member and another party member.
We keep it off record, which is why in the Now the United States has only a Guantanamo Base in Cuba.
We could agree with what Fidel Castro said that the first period of revolution is completed.
You also understand that period. many things could be done in this way, but couldn’t be spoken of as such.
Yes, this approach is good, also beneficial to obtain the posed, to constrain the phenomenon of one person exploiting solidarity of the Latin American people. another, which explains the way ahead for the development of revolution.
Comrade Roca came the public, talked about four classes, which are classes this summer, and has already explained the nature and of workers, peasants, small capitalists, and big capitalists. problems of the Cuban revolution.
I don’t want to discuss the The major leadership goes to the workers’ with citizens and details any more.
Yes, today the People’s Daily publishes the article writI wanted to make the process of nationalization slower.
But ten by Comrade Guevara for the Verde Olivio magazine on facing the aggression of United States imperialism and resistance of the 5 October. big capitalist class , we were left with no other choice.
Of course, we could take this opportunity to talk about provoke deep hostility from the United States imperialists.
The important thing is that the 26th of July Movement we can imagine the danger Cuba is facing.
Now Cuba is is consistent with us in terms of strategy and aggression developing its internal strength.
Both sides agree that the new organization should cible, and they fully support the revolutionary government. be founded on a Marxist-Leninist base.
Its organizational The insurgent troops are the army of workers and peasants, principle should also be a Marxist-Leninist principle.
Every becoming better day by day and having been consolidated element within us has all been actively mobilized.
Cuba established contact with Jiang Jieshi. socialist countries is particularly important, and the meeting today of our two parties is significant.
It’s not your responsibility. helping the Cuban revolution develop is an investment in the global socialist movement; it’s a political investment.
Driving away imperialism and tyranny opens up the destroyed one link of the imperialist chain in Latin America, door for establishing relations with [the People’s Republic and hope that other links will break and fall too. of ] China.
The friendship between the people of two countries is growing day by day.
The friendship between two parties, too, is developing, culties in construction.
But as a comrade, requested that on which Comrade Roca has been insisting.
His proposal was you meet our wishes as fully as you can, to prevent Cuba’s correct and should follow . living standard from dropping.
As Comrade Guevara said, this living standard has reached a certain degree.
We Cuban people cracked a gap of the United States backyard. need support from socialist countries, mainly standing in the frontof ] buying sugar. wish that socialist countries could line of anti-US is what the Chinese people as buy 4 million tons, at no less than 4 cents per pound.
We believe that China could buy 1 million tons, it would be of tremendous once there appears one gap, other gaps will follow.
Comrade Zhou Enlai’s suggestions could be considered, link breaks off, there will be other links following.
Now our two countries have diplomatic relations and two parties have a closer tie, which are all happy things.
These are all good aspects, Castro recently said that the first priority should be given favorable aspects.
We selves capable of repulsing any attack, and therefore make it keep a close eye on the two approaches you mentioned.
One unnecessary for the Soviet Union to aid with missiles. is to provoke the conflict between you and Central American Because just as what Comrade Zhou Enlai said, that would countries, and then let the Organization of American States start a world war and entail huge sacrifice.
Not only does Eisenhower protecting Cuba should be placed on a world war. once again attempt this, the newly elected President Therefore, should consolidate internally as much as Kennedy also speaks of waging a partial war.
The fact that you diplomatic experts, papers, and other mass mediums are all tell me about Kennedy’s words makes me very happy.
I only selling limited warfare, forest fire knew the basic content, while what you said is detailed.
Doing so is good for thwarting United States plans. mind their own business. need to think of your response if this situation emerged.
This is how it is. there should be preparations for explosives, food, solid food and gasoline that could be stored over a long period Zhou: should think over.
We have fought of time. one could still resist with supplies when against the United States in Korea.
When you visit Korea, you could external aid is cut off. don’t know if you are prepared. even talk to them, to see what secret defensive works could be constructed in mountainous areas.
We agree to strive for the best, but prepare that the Chinese Volunteer Army and Korean People’s Army for any possible situation.
The United States spent several ten thousand tons of explonally in developing economy, cooperatives, and increassives, that they couldn’t take even one mountain ing production. top.
With these defensive works, he was on the hilltop, while we were within the hill.
Because of this, the United States imperialists are unhappy with the Koreans and the Chinese the most.
People with less 30 caballeria don’t have article mentioned this point. to.
How many of the 4 million hectares of arable land you Guevara: have a somewhat different situation.
We can’t mentioned in our last conversation (referring to the meeting have large-scale collective employment.
Compared to Chinese peasants, Cuban peasants have a different perception towards land.
China’s experience: a few capitalists, who supported Zhou: You’ve managed foreign trade well.
Our first thing after or sympathized with us, have voting the revolution was to manage foreign trade, by doing these rights, we also select them at different levels of government as cut off the connection with imperialism.
No, mainly people’s congress. day there are people among them going to the US. don’t have time for elections.
Are there many among college students receiving US Zhou: Yes, it’s an era of revolution.
Like in Berlin of East Germany, we have people here Guevara: Certain small factories, while not having big investevery day running for foreign countries. ments, have over one hundred , such as sewing factories.
Are these people supporting the revolutionary governGuevara: Trainers were old, very bad.
They wrote about Cuban history only in the hope to create a counterfeit Cuban history.
Our director of the Land Reform Committee has asked the Protocol Department to arrange a visit for Castro. written a book about the geography of Cuba.
These people Prime Minister Castro, however, insisted on coming to see the became unhappy.
They consider the Ambassador and had close to a one-hour long land reform as a considerable sin. discussion with Ambassador Shen.
I was busy and therefore unable to attend the reception dinner you held for the Chinese delegaLu: China’s revolutionary experience is worth learning. tion (referring to the delegation led by Deputy Commissioner Guo Moruo [a prominent Chinese author as well as governZhou: We share similarities.
Foreign countries’ experience could only be seen as a reference. must according to the detailed situation.
The spoke of the necessary integration with peasants and [the idea Chinese government and Chinese people all look forward to of ] armed revolution against armed counterrevolution, which your visit to our country.
This is a copy, and the original will fits entirely, that is, word by word, the situation of Cuba. arrive soon.
I have Manuel Luzardo, and Member of National Directory Ernesto hoped to know the People’s Republic of China.
It’s mainly a transportation problem, because Cuba is Castro, 11 February 1961 distant from China.
If there are 65 magazines in particular you want to read, please tell me the sorts of aggression from imperialism.
Some Latin American names of the books, and I could try using other quicker ways governments, when having an internal crisis, will invade to transport them to Cuba.
I’m very interested in the Chinese magazines, in take up arms. particular, on planting and the achievements of China in this regard, etc.
Our Spanish publications are not many, because our accordingly, there will be similarities in problems we encountranslation staff is very few. ter and face.
This es to know when the Cuban personnel will depart . is good because he exposes the United States opposition to Cuba and proves that the United States is the one that provokes, not Cuba.
We are still selecting people, picking only the best mask of Kennedy’s policies is being torn apart day by day. people, young and with good eyesight.
It’s reckoned that are half way the other hand, his position towards Cuba stands through now.
Among those selected, some people are from in the way of achieving the above-mentioned aim.
The US the Volunteering Youth Guards who could not solve problems in Latin America by economic have received rigorous tests.
We want to send the best selected means, primarily, it is not willing, and secondly, it people to learn piloting and let the rest learn can’t.
We plan to send people who have already been on Latin America has no interests at all in it.
We have no plane to Cuba, therefore it has to be solved Cuba. , he uses money to raise Cuban by Cuba. counter-revolutionaries. we could also give help to political exiles of each country.
We have always given , but didn’t save him from his destiny. our full support to the Cuban revolution.
I thank China for all it has done in the past for us. then socialism hadn’t acquired global power as it has now, therefore unable to help revoluShen: This is what we should have done.
The Cuban revolutions. tion is a great support to China and also a big encouragement to the entire world.
In a few years, Latin America will have big changes November 1960], we were arguing, partially, about a proband things that occurred in China will also take place here. lem: when discussing communiqué, Maj.
Every time Latin America Guevara’s opinion was to describe as China’s had a revolution, they then blamed Cuba.
You landed with over 80 people; Miami, or any airfield in a country that participates in this then about a dozen people moved to the mountains and encirclement.
Without one’s own efforts and strength, others’ Of course, Cuba is also afraid of the US, because the United States is as support won’t have an effect. yet a powerful imperialist.
There would have been no Cuban revolution in the ment of the Cuban revolution is bound to push the developabsence of the Soviet revolution and China’s revolution.
More have expended tremendous effort, which was in line with Latin American countries will march to victory, which means the law of historical development.
When our country’s defense power becomes well of the law of historical development.
There are many kinds established, improved and unlikely to have major problems, of efforts, but only those that share the same direction with I’ll visit China. historical development will find their way to victory.
This explains why the United States imperialists, having squanernment prepared for each friendly country.) dered so much money and built so many bases, are still unable to save themselves from downfall.
Chairman Mao used to describe bases established by Shen: You mentioned that you wished us to send a circus, the United States across the planet as nooses.
The United States imperialists put which we’re preparing and it will come when it is ready. their head into the noose, one end of which has been handed to the people of each country.
When people of the world all rise to oppose the friendship and fraternity of the two countries.
I wish I imperialism and tighten these nooses together, the United States impecould have the opportunity to see China’s arts.
Our country’s rialists will be dead. people all agree that the performance of the Chinese art delegation was marvelous.
In line with Chairman Mao’s instructions, China’s arts one, Britain, Italy, West Germany, Spain, and other countries should serve workers, peasants, and soldiers, and should not and governments that have connections to United States bases, in the be the stuff of the ivory tower.
In this sense, China’s arts are also will amount to selling their own sovereignty which leads to a form of education. internal conflicts.
That was the Warsaw—of course, as you know, we conduct tit-for-tat first time for these peasant’s children to watch an artist perforstruggle with the United States in parallel to the Sino-American meetmance.
So they the life of our peasants and workers happier and more joyful. only said that they have a diplomatic relationship with Jiang We established music schools at the houses of rich people Jieshi.
We said that Jiang Jieshi had already been overthrown. who fled to foreign countries.
The United States finds their way into all others’ houses people’s houses.
Even the children of United States millionaires would across the world.
I’m looking forward to visiting them, but don’t know big event in the world. where and whom I should contact.
If you want, we could visit them right now. sure that Chairman Mao will be happy to meet you.
Good. to the party and government officials of our country and the Chinese people.
There are big Ambassador to Cuba, Shen Jian, and Cuban Prime Minister running dogs and small running dogs.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] big plantation owners running dogs, some capitalists are also running dogs.
Therefore Cultural Delegation, 19 April 1961 we must strive for these old intellectuals.
We should not adopt the same way as how we deal 19 April 1961 with Batista’ists and Jiang Jieshi’ists to treat old intellectuals.
Top Secret We should not reform them by forced labor. we should talk to them.
On one hand, talk to them, and Should be destroyed when finished on the other hand, let them work.
You’re quite famous among us. not only us, but it oppresses you as well.
It also controls second-tier and third-tier imperialist familiar with me.
We’re happy and and minister to imperialism, such as Batista and Jiang Jieshi proud of this.
It has their running dogs in all countries, learn from the experiences you have accumulated. which is why we also oppose their running dogs.
I said we were co-workers, because I was a feet of imperialism, and understand how to struggle under teacher, too. these circumstances.
I just taught for four or five years, then Chairman Mao: It’s dogmatism if one is not marrying imperialism refused to let me teach and forced us, educated Marxism-Leninism into one’s own country’s peculiar circumpeople, to march on the road of revolution.
I studied feudalist philosophies, virtues and principles such as those of Confucius.
But if stresses only one’s country’s own school, studying capitalist philosophies, at which circumstances and experience and does not accept Marxismtime, had no idea of the existence of Marxist-Leninist Leninism, right-leaning opportunism.
We had thought, also not prepared to conduct revolution, right-leaning opportunism, Chen Duxiu [first party secretary or to organize the communist party.
Our party has committed both kinds of mistakes in us, then rose to the stage of the revolution and started the course of the revolution.
Making mistakes such as these is the drama of the revolution. unavoidable for countries like ours.
Speaking that, we obtained experience and came to know why of re-molding, it’s mainly about transforming old world could knock us down.
It’s because they had guns in their perspective into workers’ world perspective.
The United States gave to Batista, and Batista mean accepting Marxism-Leninism.
It has to be married to handed to you. one country’s own peculiar circumstances.
United States dropped by parachute to counter-revolutionaries, many We, Cuba, are the same.
The fact that the United States imperialists want to occupy the on our way back.
Projects left in the Soviet Union also need Isle of Pines is because wants to establish a puppet to be accelerated.
But before we leave, we are determined to government and separate it from Cuba, which is a common sign the cultural implementation plan of 1961. practice of dealing with other countries.
Come back parts of ] the world are the same. again in the future when you have opportunities.
Your Isle of Pines still has time for fortification, [the in China. success of which] will depend on your preparation.
We believe in the solidarity of the Cuban people, and are also moved by the aid offered by each country.
Cuba is having a discussion about the tasks with to Castro). regard to intellectuals.
We understand that in major Chinese cities, such as Beijing, there were grand demonstrations [in support of Chairman Mao: In this venue of ours, the Cubans are in Cuba]. advantage where the Chinese are in disadvantage.
In terms of quality , you are far ahead which a revolutionary party is present should all support of us.
There people are not working in the realm of education. teach in primary school.
Our country also has intellectuals, They’re freelancers. several million intellectuals.
Based on a series of educational reforms, will be well raised and grow.
There is one thing you should bear in mind to which we paid not enough attention.
Some came back because have a difficult time ating from primary school, should not let an excessive abroad.
As to who are doing harmless jobs such as part go to middle school; out of those graduating being doctors, we let them live on. from middle school, should not let an excessive part go to college.
Correct management. into farming, there will be a shortage in the supply of labor.
People demonstrated their approval by all raising their hands and hailing.
Our university organizations are different from relationship becomes closer. those here.
Our every university includes various colleges, such as industries and humanities.
Because the present teaching system is only ministering to imperialism and therefore, should have a thorough reform.
Thanks very much for receiving us and treatenemies’, we would do what you said. ment.
Among Chinese intellectuals, there are also Chairman Mao: wish Cuba success in the struggle.
Brazil has undergone a serious crisis which left the people’s movement in a grave situation.
As far as we know, Brazil has seized victory from the Zedong & the Cuban Cultural Delegation, Chinese Foreign struggle against imperialism and counter-revolutionaries.
We believe that after the counter-revolutionary 28 September 1961 forces within the Brazilian military made certain gains, they had to retreat in the face of the resistance of the Brazilian Time: 9:30PM -11 PM, 28 September 1961 people and the Latin American people’s vocal support of the Venue: Qingzhen Hall in Zhongnanhai Brazilian people.
Cuban Side: Head of the Delegation of Representatives of Integrated Revolutionary Organization Maj.
The Brazilian congress appears to be on Goulart’s Raúl Roa Kouri. side.
Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai, Chen Yi, Luo Ruiqing, Zeng Yongquan, Shen Jian, Li Qixin Mao: The situation favors you.
The imperialist conspiracy to isolate us has failed, but the imperialists do not give up.
The Brazilian vice-president told me, the US demanded an intervention in Cuba by the Organization Mao: isolate you again.
This is a long-term struggle. efforts in organizing an anti-Cuban demonstration, only to assemble ten thousand people in the end.
Vice-president Goulart has now become the president Dorticos: We have the aid of the socialist camp, and could of Brazil. draw on the lessons of the socialist countries.
But we are in 73 dire need of intellectuals, professors, architects, and other professionals.
You too need to train your own intellectuals. with 12 years passed we still could not master it, but you only have had two years.
This is indeed one of the immediate goals on which we are putting tremendous efforts.
Sometimes, ecothat without a sufficient number of intellectuals, no progress nomic construction was interrupted by foreign intervention, will be achieved in socialist construction. and meanwhile we also had to learn to defend ourselves.
The same case here: capable of conexperience. ducting revolution but incapable of construction.
During revolution, people, highly self-motivated Dorticos: They are skilled in and acting at their best, proved to be fast learners. confiscating properties from imperialists and landlords, but just incompetent in construction.
We are training agricultural technicians and cadres for people’s farms and cooperatives.
Fraternal countries shall be less diplomatic and more of mono-agriculture.
We too actually don’t know how to practice diploDorticos: We are specialized in raising sugarcane, and also macy. tobacco, of very high quality.
One ought to be dipconfiscated foreign companies from Canada and the UK diflomatic towards Western countries, for they don’t speak to fered from that of the United States. you sincerely.
Apart from socialist countries, Japan is one of the major importers of Cuban sugar.
He asked me twice whether it is appropriate for him Canada, Britain, and Japan.
But it is also all right with me if you try persuading him to go next year.
I’m Montgomery one faction within the British supporting him in visiting Cuba.
He concurred that, of course, the United States would not like He said: no. him anyway.
Building Six, Diaoyutai State Guesthouse. dared to fight— is dangerous—so it canPresent: Chinese Side: Zhou Enlai, Shen Jian; Cuban Side: not fight.
There is one of his ideas that could be exploited to your Dorticos: Very bad.
The Venezuelan government is leaning, advantage, helping you reclaim Guantanamo [from the United day by day, towards reactionaries and imperialists.
He is a member of the Upper House, a lord, and also perience of Venezuelan peasants, President Betancourt has with the title of marshal. gained some popularity from the peasants in the rural areas.
He told me that he will be on a business tour to tance towards government and the presidency which escalates Central America this December, in which case he will drop and compels Betancourt to look for measures of suppressions. by Cuba, though only for 24 hours.
The leader of the leftcountries, and next year to Cuba. ist revolutionary movement is Domingo Rangel.
He has maintained an agreeable relationship with the Venezuelan communist party.
One is the country where Latin American communist parties call major reason, among many, is that everyone wants to be the for uprisings to take place.
Besides, Venezuela is also facing the problem of propaganda activities in America, which, especially after I left reactionary military personnel.
The purpose of establishing an exile government is to sabotage and to unite all reactionaries.
Betancourt was a Marxist, but now he is regretting having been a Marxist.
Many countries severed their relations with us. of the Venezuelan communist party.
Peru of South America severed diplomatic relations with us, so did Paraguay.
It couldn’t be worse than to be a regretful comThe Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Guatemala, El munist.
Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, Haiti, Peru, and Paraguay— we have no diplomatic relations with them anymore.
During my visit to Latin American countries one year ago, I went to Venezuela.
Betancourt could not come to receive us, because tries, Mexico, Brazil, and with Panama too. the airport was filled with slogans against him chanted by people, all terrible slogans.
We have relations with Panama, but only strained together met Betancourt in his presidential compound.
I felt sorry. relations with Brazil, Chile, Ecuador and etc., to some extent.
He is facing challenges on two instance, Central American countries, could possibly recogfronts, which is why he looks to Washington for help. nize the exile government.
Is Peru going to put up with a Cuban exile Dorticos: This is what the United States wants.
This is what Pereda and finally establish a government which would receive recproclaimed in the US. ognition from the United States and other countries.
We seized from invaders the documents that had all details of the plan.
It is said that will be estabOnly two highways and one, perhaps two, lanes lead to that lished within the next few days.
They wished to secure the foothold by concentrating ment has yet arrived.
Each faction is scrambling their force at the two highways, therefore, holding us off and 77 fortifying the place.
It seems that the United States did have extra planned to] construct the runway right away after they had worries.
It was afraid of an entrenched war in which you landed. tended not to yield anyway.
Meanwhile, it also sensed that the international situation was turning to its disadvantage.
Ambassador to Cuba Shen Jian and Cuban Finance News came to us at 3 o’clock in the Minister Ernesto “Che” Guevara, Havana, 13 morning.
The October 1962 air force started to attack at the first light of dawn, which was of decisive significance.
Some of their Conversation between Ernesto “Che” Guevara and ships were armed with cannons targeting the highway and Ambassador Shen Jian ready to block us.
Ministry of Industry of Cuba the tactical plan had been better prepared, our sacrifice could have been less.
Since I’m leaving for China for holiday and anti-aircraft units shot enemy planes.
Please forward my greetings Kennedy’s own words, later [we realized that the to Chairman Mao , Chairman Liu , Prime withdrawal of ‘Sabre’ fighters] was because Kennedy at the Minister Zhou and other comrades.
And please let last minute called off the idea of direct involvement of the me, again, point out that it is important that China publish US air force.
I’m very Now we need to cope with a new and ever bigger much interested in this magazine, because it has many valuinvasion. able articles.
We have invited Comrade Anna Louise Strong to Ambassador Shen: What’s the view of the ruling class of the visit us.
She replied with a letter saying she would, as soon as United States towards the statement of the Soviet Union in support of she finishes her ongoing tasks in China.
We think the ruling class has been divided into two Ambassador Shen: I have not quite been informed of this factions.
One is the Pentagon and the other the group ralissue. lying behind Kennedy.
Please say hello to her for me when you meet her arrogant whereas the Pentagon does look more aggressive. back in China.
Let her know that she is always welcome in The Kennedy demonstrates their moderation on the Cuba and could come whenever suitable.
I’m afraid I will issue of POWs exchange [i.e., anti-Castro Cubans held prisbe too busy to write her a reply.
Indeed, it [the estimated that only some 50,000 people will enter the short negotiation] is nothing but a deal. list.
We turned down their cope with some basic problems by ourselves, but the overall proposal, flatly. situation is far from good.
We have an agricultural sector that is poorly organized and an industry without its own basis.
Recently the United States has pressured other nations not to send their merchant ships to Cuba.
I have not seen that document of Albania. of the Soviet Union towards us is very clear.
So far Albania has been the smallest fraternal country in the socialist camp, beleaguered by imperialism and capitalism.
On the contrary, we but the disagreement should only be discussed and solved discussed Soviet backing, and I went to Moscow only with all within the framework of proletarian internationalism and Soviet support already in hand. egalitarianism.
No one would seriously believe that Albania was bullying the Soviet Union, a powerful country.
Comrade Zhou Enlai made a speech in the 22th are so convinced, by what the Soviet Union told us, that there’s party Congress of the Soviet Union [in Moscow in going to be a world war.
Also there are other issues that Soviet October 1961], as you know, we don’t comrades believe are worth discussing at another time. agree to the attitude held by our Soviet comrades.
The problem is that we don’t want Soviet Union who, on contrary, is very nice towards us.
It’s because we are weak instance, the Brazilian communist party said that they didn’t and have made little contribution to the development of want war, because peace was of paramount importance.
The Soviets used to say bad things about Soviet Union knew that we are training new recruits; they, in Albania.
Among our military Still there is something we don’t quite understand, even as instructors, there was a Soviet.
In the future, in international considered as a negative attitude towards the meetings, if everyone condemns Yugoslavia, we also will agree Soviet Union.
I don’t understand why Yugoslavia still continues to be we think this is bad. a problem.
The Soviet Union has given us great support, indeed, support that enables us to survive.
Between Albania and Cuba, we have sionism is diminishing, thanks to the efforts made by every maintained an amicable relationship; we, for example, send Marxist-Leninist to expose and criticize it.
It stood in the way of socialist soliCuba pushed onto the battlefield of the problem. darity and tried to undermine the anti-imperialist movement of nationalist countries.
But we still see it as a people’s democratic made many efforts and will continue doing so.
Tito published a separate modern revisionin the principles of the Moscow Declaration.
The Yugoslavian revisionism now becomes 1957 and the Moscow Statement of 1960—he attacked our ever more rampant.
Of course, we have a funimperialists, via the American journalist, Drew Pearson, advice damental agreement on whether it is good or bad to receive that aimed to infiltrate and sabotage socialist countries.0 money from imperialists.
Didn’t one of Jiang Jieshi’s generals 1960 that Yugoslavia betrayed socialism.
Against the Moscow end up being the minister of water conservation [of the People’s Declaration of 1957, it developed a revisionist agenda.
Sometimes, things turn good from bad, mountains of United States dollars from the Americans, sabotaged socialist sometimes the other way around.
It is dialectics, as we know. solidarity, and stood in the way of the national liberation moveSo far as I know, within Yugoslavia there are factions.
To expose and criticize Yugoslavian modern revisionism is Yugoslav communist and Tito associate] Edvard Kardelj, for the shared duty for each Marxist-Leninist. example, is slightly leaning towards the right.
I said that the country was in danger, because Yet the reason Fu Zuoyi became our minister was because he the seeds of capitalism had been scattered everywhere.
My surrendered his army, cut off his relations with the Jiang Jieshi speech touched off a grand debate.
The peaceful liberaHowever, the adverse impact of Yugoslavia has been tion of Beijing was indeed a great achievement.
For example, when we had just taken control of that some bad people became good does not necessarily mean Cuba, there were people flirting with the ideas of following that other people would also succeed.
So I don’t think there is any reason for Yugoslavia to remain a serious issue.
Revisionism is a no means am I suggesting that Fidel visit Yugoslavia, or we kind of degradation in mind.
Yugoslavia now is the leader of revisionRuiqing , KONG Yuan, FANG Yi, LI Tao ists.
Marxism-Leninism has proven to grow along Central Propaganda Office , Central Liaison Office , with its war on left-leaning and right-leaning thoughts.
QIAO, HAN, LIU, Admin Office of Foreign Ministry , Juan Peron appears left-leaning, seemingly Research Office, Soviet-European Office of Foreign Ministry, wishing to join the revolution.
It’s said that a communist set up a guerrilla force after being expelled by the Columbian communist party.
Thanks to their comrades, all communist guerrillas were killed in the end.
Guevara: The Guatemalan revolution is developing, and Yon Sosa is currently in Cuba which is On the morning of the 22nd , Cuba received entirely confidential.
A son of an Indian person and a Chinese the information that Washington had been actively deployimmigrant, he was an army officer of little education or ing, and the United States would take strong measures.
He is, however, a sinnoon, combat readiness was ordered by the Americans.
I believe that he will Cuba did not expect those measures that appeared in make a splash in the world.
They are riers, ships on which helicopters could land, and amphibious urban fighters, operating in cities.
We are suggesting that they vessels that could transport fifteen thousand troops—socialist should open a guerrilla battlefield . countries’ ships normally all come from that direction.
This is a practice that is only adopted when the By contrast, the agricultural sector will be different. situation is tense.
The United States force involved in the blockade is will not starve to death; estimated to hold out for estimated to be of between 30 and 40 thousand personnel. some year and half.
No accidents has drafted a proposal for restricting petrol consumption occurred.
Now several other Soviet ships are heading towards which will be promulgated soon.
The situation will definitely become tense if Soviet high spirit, ready to engage at any minute, which ships and United States warships meet each other head on. see in Ordoqui’s opinion is critical.
He added that Fidel Castro’s what, in the end, the United States will do.
The development of the speech yesterday is correct, has received positive reacsituation and which strategy the enemy will adopt will be tions from the people. clearer within next 48 hours.
On a American invasion, he reckoned that by the end of this week, the United States would have mobilized four diviSpecial report. sions.
An American aircraft carrier has already anchored in the water not far from Cuba.
Embassy in Cuba: A Report of the Conversation with frequently intruded into Mariel, Matanzas, Oriente, and the Cuban Interior Minister Binianyiluo,, Chinese Foreign Ministry hinterland of Havana Province.
Translated for CWIHP by sion into Cuban territorial sky have proved increasingly blaZhang Qian.] tant.
The General Staff has ordered to shoot down [invading American aircraft], on the only condition that the wreckage could be collected on Cuban territory.
Ordoqui said that the present situation Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] in Cuba was good.
Over the past few months has, as to buy time , made arrangements in all sectors.
More than forty brigades have been raised with both civil defense and militias having started to be mobilized.
On top of these, thirteen anti-amphibious battalions have been established, Chinese Embassy, Havana, A Brief Report of Recent which were small in number of personnel but very strong in Activities in Cuba, 24 October 1962 firepower.
In his speech, he critiand Castro. cized Kennedy’s statement published the day before An American warship was reported early this morning to yesterday and rejected unreasonable demands from the United States have been seen off the Havana coast.
A cargo ship was expectOn issues such as the so-called aggressive weaponry and ed to arrive this morning but it has not arrived even this afterdefensive weaponry, disarmament, enquiries into Cuba by noon.
The Cuban revolutionary government has informed UN-assigned delegates, his attitude was clear and resolute. two airlines, the United Arab Airlines and Holland He expressed firmly that will resist a comprehensive Airlines , that no passenger embargo from the United States and a direct American invasion.
However, Czechoslovakia Soviet Union; instead of stressing Soviet support, he emphaand Cuba are still connected by an airline. sized that the Cubans knew how to defend their motherland.
Fidel spoke with dignity and calmness, instead of China’s Embassy in Cuba appearing agitated as he used to be.
On the other hand, 24 October 1962 he seemingly also spoke with a heavy heart, as his facial expression couldn’t help betray his fatigue.
Within the Leadership Committee, the deputy Defense Minister, the commander of the west military region, the Labor Minister (also as the commander of Civil Defense), too, were absent.
This statement is planned to be broadcast on the morning Havana is the same as usual.
Gas stations are restored of the 25th of October, and to appear in the newspaper of to normality but there is less traffic and fewer pedestrians the day.
Businesses operate as usual, with no sign of the statement, in Chinese and in foreign languages, will be panic buying.
In the downtown, propaganda squads, filled distributed by the news division by female militias, work with a high spirit.
The mobilizaamong journalists of each country in Beijing, and handed by tion of the masses remains ongoing.
Outpatient services the American-Australian division to have already been suspended by hospitals, and patients the Cuban embassy in China.
Please examine and instruct with minor illnesses have been sent back to their homes.
On the whole, the people are calm, and Please send to Geng , Zhang , Marshal Chen , and Premier for examination.
Ordoqui said to Castro that they didn’t expect to see the victory of the revolution, but they do now; therewere convinced that they could even see imperiala government statement on the Cuban crisis, Chinese Foreign ism being toppled.
Chinese Embassy, Accra, Ghana, Report on Conversation with the Third Secretary of Cuban The United States continues to clamor for war.
Yesterday in particuEmbassy, 27 October 1962 lar, they proposed to carry out an invasion; Cuba estimated, it could get underway early this morning.
Yesterday the United States demanded the removal of Cuban misGhana proposed a delegation, which shall be filled by 40 sile bases, which seemingly indicates an increasing American people from African-Asian countries of the UN, to inspect appetite: they wish to push the Soviet Union aside and start Cuban military establishments. to deal with Cuba with no holds barred.
Someone in the United States The United States is going to attack Cuba at half past nine tonight, or clamored that the US’s military base in Turkey was built up tomorrow.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] are cargoes of oil, and nothing ensued.
The Chilean economic advisor, Jaime (now serving in the president’s compound), told to Chargé d’Affaires Huang, Yesterday, Cuban troops shot down an American airplane in Pinar del Rio.
Fidel’s second declaration Conversation with Two Deputy Department Heads was reflected well among the masses, and today’s statement of Cuban General Staff, 30 October 1962 is also very important, to which the detailed reactions are yet to emerge.
Cuba’s sovForeign Ministry and the 2nd Department of the General ereignty must be guaranteed, and the Cuban people have Staff, the right to decide their own matters.
On the 30th , two deputy department heads The danger of a United States invasion remains, but the United States wanted of the Cuban General Staff, respectively from the revolutionto realize its goal by negotiating, which is clearly shown in the ary education department and the film department, talked to US declaration.
Therefore, if the rocket weapons are to be withdrawn, a high spirit and on constant alarm, and that it should be traded for the withdrawal of the missile bases in would not believe the so-called guarantee from American Turkey and the return of Guantanamo.
This is, if the negotiaimperialism; instead, they believe in their own strength, the tion succeeds, a good thing.
The strength of the people and the support of socialist countries United States will bomb the Soviet Union base, and after that and all people of the world.
We enquired about the response it will say that it has achieved its goal, and claim of the troops towards Fidel ’s statement, letters winner itself.
It is a good opportunity for the United States to invade from Khrushchev and Kennedy, and [UN Cuba; the situation depends on the development of events in Secretary-General] U Thant’s visit to Cuba.
The deputy directhe next few days. tor of revolutionary education said that the general response is He said he did not know the news of Khrushchev with that believe Fidel’s statement, believe our leader’s respect to the unconditional withdrawal of bases.
The troops were discussing Fidel’s statement, during if the withdrawal is conditional, our government will not be which they did not mention Khrushchev or the Soviet Union shocked; but if it was a surrender-like withdrawal, then it alone, instead only spoke of socialist countries; [Cuban becomes a blow to the Cuban people, Latin American people, troops] paid close heed to our country’s statement, the socialist camp and the strength of the people of the world, popular assemblies in Beijing and Tianjin metropolises. while feeding the arrogance of imperialism.
Besides, heard that on the 28th The world’s people are standing with Cuba.
But the presan American airplane was shot down by anti-aircraft rockets, ent development of the people’s movement is slow in some exploded immediately with the wreckage spreading across an countries, such as in Chile which still needs the masses to take area of 12 square kilometers. actions.
Some countries’ declarations remain on paper, with no sign of struggle.
What the Cuban people need is active support, Embassy in Cuba such as mass mobilization; because if there is no action, the 30 October 1962 crime of those who hold power will not be stopped.
Chinese Embassy in Cuba: Report on a Conversation not easily abandon their attempt, and we should maintain with Two Deputy Directors From Cuban General Staff, Chinese the mobilization status and be vigilant.
Martinez said, “China’s statement has increased our Chinese Embassy in Cuba, Report on Conversation strength.
With respect to the present situation, Martinez comForeign Ministry, mented, “last week the world experienced an unparalleled, unprecedented peril.
That foreign minister, Roa, went “Someone does not agree to to the UN to open a new front is a mere change of form [of the five conditions we raised.” struggle], and the revolution will continue progressing.
He also said, “This is the victory of peace, because the attempt of 2) “When negotiating with U Thant, imperialists was to start a war, but now war has been preventwe made Cuba’s position crystal clear.
At least for the time being, haven’t started him that an inspection, regardless of its form, the war.
This incident proves that the peaceful forces have the would not be approved , nor would it upper hand, and peace comes not at the mercy of imperialbe approved by the Cuban people.
The basis of negotiation will be these the development of Soviet technology, and socialist countries five points; no other issues could be discussed.
This time U who not only have atomic bombs but also people, such as Thant’s attendants, too, have returned with disappointment.” the Chinese people, etc., that the war was avoided.
One week ago, could not think about immeasurable loss to Latin American people. the possibility of negotiation; we hope that this negotiation will generate productive results.
The Brazilian president sent cessions, in the name of cautious, calm, and rational, da Silva to Cuba, indicating that the to the point of agreeing to dismantle and retrieve missiles Brazilian government is willing to mediate in the hopes of previously deployed to Cuba, under United Nations supervisolving the Cuban problem, that the United States is also willing to sion.
This way, the Soviet Union had turned from initiative maintain relations with Cuba, and that [the Brazilian governto passivity.
From being a plaintiff condemning the United States for ment] wants Cuba to return to the Organization of American threatening and invading Cuba, a defenStates.
Fidel thanked them for their efforts, indicating to him dant, admitting smuggling strategic weaponry and threatenthat Cuba approves abandoned the advantage tive to] do so.
Regarding the issue of joining the Organization supporting Cuba, a sovereign country, , it would not be approved, but we also in conducting a just struggle; it, instead, disadvantaged itself know the direction to which should march. mainby deserting Cuba and accepting all American conditions tained that Cuba will defend its own endeavor in a resolute which were compensated by a guarantee of empty words.
Chinese Embassy in Cuba: A Report on a conversation movement, indeed, to an unprecedented degree.
Chinese Embassy in Moscow Report, ‘‘Khrushchev’s ties have caused damage to Cuba’s pride and sovereignty, and Reconciliation with the United States on the Question of the are also considerably harmful to Cuba’s revolutionary struggle.
Khrushchev’s calculation was to ingratiate and trade with Kennedy for a general improvement of Soviet-American relations which would lead to the settlement of other international disputes.
Cuba, this nail in the eye. exploited the illusions of Khrushchev by releasing empty bait, and then demanded Chinese Embassy, Havana, A Report on Fidel further concessions from the Soviet Union on the Cuba quesCastro’s Televised Address, 1 November 1962 tion.
Khrushchev’s behavior will inevitably generate extremely bitter fruits.
First, it feeds the arrogance of American impe3) During the course of the Cuban crisis, Cuba and the Soviet rialists.
The counter-revolutionaries in the world will hail it Government had a disagreement.
The prestige of Kennedy has been considerably place for discussing it, for the situation could be exploited by enhanced, which will enable him to demand more concessions enemies.
Second, Khrushchev’s activities amounted sit and talk between two parties and between two governto a bowl of cold water, poured right over the Cuban people ments.
We are not happy with particular facts and details. who have been fighting on the front line of the battle against But we shall also bear in mind, especially at this moment, the the Americans.
Because of Khrushchev, those who sit on the generous aid from the Soviet Union. demanded that fence have now leaned rightward.
However, this incident [i.e. people be disciplined. the Soviet-American reconciliation] has again exposed to the world the true face of the modern revisionists.
Modern revisionour minds could never be shipped away. ists will, regardless of Cuba’s interests, continue to seek the opportunity to reconcile with the US, or even the possibility We hold that this speech was well written with a correct of opening high-level meetings by imitating the model generattitude.
With close reference to the confusion in people’s ated from the Cuba Missile Crisis management.
In the latter minds, delivered a powerful blow to imperialism case, the development of the situation will become more and revisionism. complicated.
Fidel decided not to let them in; Cuba rejected [U The Cuban people unite around the leader and support Thant’s proposal] by expressing the inability of Cuba to host the five conditions.
We have noticed the People’s Daily’s editorial about sup2) Someone observed that porting Cuba. feel grateful as well as satisfied towards the five conditions raised by Cuba made the situation more the support from the Chinese people.
Yet on the other hand, I think a political one. you will also understand that this [i.e. the incident of forcing the Norwegian ship to go to Cuba] was regrettable, for it not 3) Insurgents and militias are both in a high spirit.
Anderson was found after and serious; peace could not be begged for. crash with his corpse divided into two.
The United States took more aerial photowere calm and vigilant, guarding as usual their combat and graphs of Cuba than there are of the American film production positions. star, Marilyn Monroe.
The United States also tries to find information Finally, he asked Charge d’Affaires Huang to everywhere, probing if Cuba has had atomic bombs.
Along the coast of Key 1 November 1962 West anti-aircraft missiles have been deployed, and troops are still under mobilization.
If the United States did want a war, they would have blown up the Soviet missile bases a long time ago.
Because of a fuss by making many statements, which looks like deceit haven’t encountered any problem in dealing and blackmail.
Last night Fidel ’s report pointed out in it could only mobilize 6 divisions, one airborne unit.
If a war particular that the Cuban-Soviet disagreement ought to be left against Cuba is to start, these troops are far from enough. to the party and government to solve, and requested that people Unless uses nuclear weapons to destroy Cuba, there not discuss it everywhere.
The Cuban-Soviet relationship is very complex. is to be completely destroyed, socialism will prevail anyway.
Cuba could attack the United States fleet with the weapinterest in the Cuban-Soviet relationship.
Of course, we are unable to prepared to abide by the following several principles when dealdestroy their entire fleet, but we could shatter a part of it.
Guantanamo base is now being besieged by us, completely. to continue referring to editorials published in the past and 5) We understand well that be weaker towards speeches of leaders and positively indicate our support for the imperialism, it would immediately be bloated with pride.
Cuba needs military and political aid, in particular, from to indicate clearly that Fidel’s speech on 1 socialist countries, without which Cuba’s survival is impossible. is absolutely correct, and that we fully support it.
Foreign Ministry, Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian] In recent dealing with foreigners felt that Cuban government officials spoke very discreetly, avoiding mentioning the Soviet Union.
Among the masses, some were very careful, others harshly criticized Khrushchev.
To let the Soviet The Soviet Union] did not dare report the real situation Union break the deadlock, Khrushchev is very likely to proof the negotiation between U Thant pose another advanced meeting with Kennedy. and Castro.
It did not menEmbassy in the Soviet Union tion at all that no agreement was reached.
Embassy in the Soviet Union: The Soviet Union Soviet Union] only reported objectively but dared not conContinues a Reconciliatory Approach to the Cuban Problem, demn.
American militant groups, whereas the White House was comparatively cautious.
Cuba then became even ; the American more resolute, opposing firmly the Soviet Union’s selling its aircraft carrier, Independence, was operating in these waters; sovereignty.
Under these circumstances, the Soviet Union was it constantly sent and received airplanes, scouting and taking very worried, which was why Mikoyan left ahead of photography from Havana Province, schedule for Havana to mediate.
Cuba is willing to negotiate, and sent airplanes, conducting operations of scouting and but it will not sacrifice its people’s interests. blockading along the Oriente Province, Jamaica island, and A instructor at the Embassy observed that Haiti.
In the waters north of Jamaica island, was an American Fidel is a man of dignity.
He is a great leader, braver than aircraft carrier with several medium and small warships.
Khrushchev allowed the UN to send personnel US is transferring troops, weapons, and tanks to Guantanamo to supervise and the Red via warships.
But Castro said no, with an extremely Between the 30th and the 31st of October, when the resolute attitude.
Cuba is not commanded by the Soviet UN general secretary U Thant visited Cuba, American warUnion; it is commanded by the Cuban people.
Most chiefs of the committed a mistake on the Yugoslavia problem, but it did general staff go to the front line, while too on the Cuba problem.
Khrushchev worked at the comsecond-to-chiefs or deputy chiefs will chair routine works. mand of Kennedy.
Chinese Embassy, Havana, “The Reactions of A director from the education ministry said, “The major Cuban Society to Fidel Castro’s Address,” 2 target of this mobilization of war preparation is militias and November 1962 government officials.
A composer said, “The literature and art front of Cuba is A continuing report [on Castro’s televised address on 1 normally filled by endless arguments and disagreements, but November], facing a possible American invasion, it is now in an unprecedented solidarity and unity.
Embassy to the Soviet Union: A Report of a Presentation delivered by Maj.
Boris Gelibusiji from the Defense Ministry of Chinese Embassy to the Soviet Union, Information the Soviet Union in the Moscow Engineering and Physics College, on the report delivered by Maj.
On the 30th of October, in the Moscow Engineering and Physics College, a report of current events was delivChinese Embassy in Cuba, A Report of the ered.
Boris Gelibusiji from the Conversation between Charge d’Affaires Huang Defense Ministry of the Soviet Union.
When it came to the Wenyou and Severo Aguirre del Cristo, Member Sino-Indian border problem, the reporter said, “The Sinoof the National Leadership Committee of Cuban Indian border has never been demarcated.
Prior to 1961, the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations, 5 position adopted by the Chinese government was wrong.
November 1962 For China, with a large population, wanted more territory, we supported India.
He continued, “It and government are determined to defend soveris wrong to terminate the trading between China and India. eignty and independence at any cost, including sacrificing Could China’s present policy be wiser, like the attitude the one’s own life.
The five demands raised by Fidel are Soviet government adopted towards the Cuba problem,e., minimum ones.
When it came to the Albania problem, the reporter said, “Albania originally wanted to form an alliance with Italy, but it was rejected.
Positively indiUrgent cate our position of firmly supporting Cuba’s struggle.
Mikoyan said, “The party of Cuba is an interestPositions Regarding the Cuba-Soviet Relationship, ing party.
It’s the only in the world in which the old 6 November 1962 and the new are married to each other, being more than a simple mingling but a fusion.
With 95 had to grind their machetes for sugarcane-cutting. dance with the instruction of the Foreign Ministry, did requested the charge d’affaires bring back the Ambassador not speak but only listened regarding the Soviet-Cuban conflict. earlier , for there were lots of things According to Guevara’s mother, the leader of to do.
Aisikaluona told us, “Chairman Mao is not only the leader of the Chinese people, he is also the Argentine national liberation movement [sic, sentence the leader of all oppressed peoples in the world.
Let Chinese unclear], prior to , we had met her twice by brothers and sisters know that if it emerges that Cuba has to chance at Madam Moke’s (details of which had been reported fight alone, it will fight United States aggression firmly to the end.
Guevara replied, “ 3) After the president and prime minister left, Mikoyan now is intense.
I have no time to see Chinese spoke to Raúl , “There are always some disagreecomrades.
Madam Moke also suggested that the Chinese or between husband and wife, which are family affairs with comrades ought to look for Guevara and talk. even solidarity being the basic.” then initiated a toast to mentioned that the blow to Guevara this time is considerable, solidarity.
Aragonés was also present, but kept silent. to which we gave no comment.
It appeared that they had worked hard on Mr in the Spanish civil war, to be a military expert and and Mrs.
Castro. economist, with works such as Imperialism of the Dollar [and the Direct Inversions-Appendix], and The Agony of Imperialism.
Towards us all walks of the Cuban society were cordial and give one copy of each to Chairman Mao.
At the friendly. thanked for our country’s great supinvitation of Cuban government came in secrecy to Cuba port, yet with no exception did not touch on the topic of the to work as the staff of an Argentine secret academy which Cuban-Soviet meeting. now has over 40 students.
Abraham claimed to be a nonparty Marxist-Leninist and a Maoist; China, was his Embassy in Cuba second homeland.
Chairman Mao was the leader of all oppressed peoples in the world, and that their plan was devised in accordance with the Chinese Embassy in Cuba Investigation Group, spirit of Chairman Mao’s thought. wished China Guevara’s Mother Talked About the Soviet-Cuban to accelerate the research on the hydrogen bomb, [saying that Relationship, 8 November 1962 only by this would] world peace could be guaranteed and etc.
Foreign Ministry, Investigation Department Military Intelligence Department, Comment by Kong Yuan: According to the third secretary of the Cuban , Please let Foreign Ministry read mercenaries used by the United States to invade Cuba are mainly recruited from Cuban counter-revolutionaries; also Cable Received by Machine enlisted some ordinary refugees and counter-revolutionaries 0356 Central Investigation Department from other Latin American countries.
These mercenaries, unified under the command of the American Central , are divided into two groups.
This army has some 15,000 men, with a backbone of between 3,000 to 4,000 people, including American commanders, all speaking Spanish.
They were dispatched to difCuban Military Intelligence Official’s Talk, ferent states of the US, received different training, and then 8 November 1962 sent to West Germany, Japan, and Latin American countries, to engage in various professions there.
American aircraft carriers, once deployed near Cuba, have now reached the waters relatively distant from Cuba in the Military Attaché of Embassy in Iraq Gulf of Mexico.
Although American airplanes continue 9 November 1962 scouting, surveillance, and intruding into territorial airspace along the Cuban coast, it has become less frequent.
According to our overseas students, on the 31st of October, Chinese Embassy in Iraq, Report on Mercenaries the chief editor of the Soviet weekly, Za Rubezhom delivered a Used by United States to Invade Cuba, report on current events in the Moscow Agriculture College.
The reporter claimed, “Although a contribution has been made According to Vivo, the deputy editor of Hoy, the poson our part, Western countries did not budge accordingly. sibility of Paraguay severing diplomatic relations with Cuba They treated our activities as the projection of weakness.
Washington is having celebratory parties, to congratulate Chile their victory and to praise Kennedy’s wisdom and resolve. may do so earlier than Paraguay; Paraguay won’t sever the Truman, this imperialist of the old brand, also took relationship before the general election.
The rightist Peronist the opportunity and stepped out of the dark, saying that of Argentina also opposes Cuba. to the Russians ought to be tough.
Once being The present threat to Cuba has become less imminent, threatened, they are bound to back down.
Recently, two Argentine The reporter rarely expressed his own opinion. mainly warships and two Dominican warships, along with introduced the situation of the Cuban crisis by referring to a three thousand Argentine soldiers, arrived in Panama. plethora of news from foreign news agencies, and requested It is difficult for the United States to maintain the naval blockade. the audience to keep a close eye on the further development. it wants to intensify the economic blockade and to Regarding the Sino-India border, he commented, “The make ships from capitalist countries not go to Cuba.
The Sino-Indian border incident is not in the interests of world present number of vessels coming to Cuba is less than before. peace, nor was it expected by both countries [Indian and This problem is going to become worse during sugar season.
China is a socialist The Vietnamese ambassador holds that the reacountry and India is a capitalist one.
Embassy in Cuba: A Report of the Conversation with the Indian border problem could be peacefully resolved.
This Chinese Embassy in Cuba, Report on Fidel Castro’s will place American imperialism in a political difficulty.
We letter to UN Secretary-General U Thant, 15 know that imperialism will not abandon its November 1962 aggressive attempt, and also understand that this struggle is a long-lasting one.
We wish, via the discusForeign Ministry, sion of various proposals and especially via the Soviet Union and Cuba adopting a shared position, to expose to the world This afternoon, Castro sent U the true attempt , even if cannot make Thant a letter, once again rejecting any country or internaimperialism honor its promise.
We believe that this is also a tional organization conducting inspections on Cuban terripolitical victory over imperialism. tory and reiterating that the five points raised by Cuba are The Sino-Indian problem.
This letter reveals that the United States recently continued along with other leaders, have kept a close eye on it. sending airplanes into Cuban airspace, and indicates that With respect to the Sino-Indian conflict, we underCuba has the right to retaliate by shooting.
It firmly expresses stand the proposals put forth by the Chinese government that Cuba is determined to defend its sovereignty and rights, in the hope to peacefully solve the border problem, agreed and will never beg for survival on its knees. that these proposals could serve as the basis of negotiation.
What is regrettable is that the Indian government repeatEmbassy in Cuba edly turned them down.
Translated for these invading Indian territory] is to arouse a deviating nationalistic sentiment, and to split the Indian people’s power.
By doing so, Nehru is to gain his personal interests and the interests of the class he represents.
When expressing opinions as deputy Foreign Minister, have to take into account the fact of Cuba having a relaChinese Embassy in Cuba, Report of Military tionship with India.
When being asked if Cuba has received Intelligence Department of Cuban General the petition letter from Nehru, he Staff’s Talking about American Air Intrusion, said that the Cuban government hasn’t.
November 1962 Chargé d’Affaires Huang indicated that feels grateful to Cuba which supports China’s proposals in the aim Foreign Ministry and Military Intelligence Department, to peacefully solve the Sino-Indian border conflict, and that we understand Cuba’s present situation.
American air intrusion has apparently decreased, with only two or three sorties a day.
At an altitude between ten thousand Chinese Embassy in Cuba, A Brief Report of the and twenty thousand , (mainly Conversation with a Cuban Artillery Commander, U-2) dare not go further and hide near Mariel Harbor, Pinar 22 November 1962 del Rio Province, conducting scouting.
On the 19th [of November], an American F-8U intruded into San Diego’s Foreign Ministry and Military Intelligence Department, airspace but was driven away by anti-aircraft forces.
American naval bombers; later he will perhaps invade right maneuvers are mainly maintenance and supply operations. away, or perhaps invade with an army knocked together with mercenaries and puppet countries.
On the 19th and will be politically beneficial to American imperialism.th , conducted shooting at invading Castro’s two letters to U Thant are historical documents, United States naval airplanes.
With respect to Sino-Indian border conflict, make intrusions into territorial air , was created by people] will shoot them down.
Today, Americans could claim Nehru, whereas Indian people were still good. that missiles and bombers are aggressive weapons; tomorrow, they too could say that cannons, even submachine guns, are Military attaché office of embassy in Cuba aggressive weapons.
He said that this time once again, Jawaharlal] Nehru’s mask of peace and neutrality was stripped off.
It is now conducting education via papers, magazines, television stations, and radios.
Without spending more words, as Comrade The cable sent on 8 November was received.
But this is in line with continue to visit Cuban leaders, conduct discussions, with the overall solution to the Caribbean Crisis; in other words, reference to the spirit of the homeland’s policies, and listen to the has to accept Cuba’s Five Demands.
The reason for it is that the developlisten more while speaking less . ment of the situation leaves Cuba with no other choices.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] is ready to participate in all sorts of negotiations, but it will not sell its sovereignty, or yield, nor will it agree to any solution that would damage its sovereignty.
We hold that peace could not be achieved by handing over our power; must stand up to aggressors with dignity and be firm.
When I was about to return to China from Cuba, you at the most tense moment of the situation in Cuba is a regret. asked me to bring back the fourth volume of The Selected But a redeeming feature is to see how our government, party, Works of Mao Zedong.
Many people in difficulty were so united that they resembled one comrades will envy me because of it. person, uniting around the leadership with Premier Fidel as the head.
This is a copy of the statement issued by our governeral times in support of Cuba, and people voluntarily rallied ment on 30 November in support of the IRO [Integrated in both cities and villages, demonstrated and assembled.
In Revolutionary Organizations] and the statement of the counBeijing alone, demonstrations lasted four days, from dawn cil of ministers.
The master copy hasn’t arrived yet though. until dark, in front of the Cuban embassy with one million participants.
I want to take this opportunity, on behalf of your embassy, especially the chargé d’affaires, Comrade Bide our government, to thank the Chinese people.
The Chinese Luosuo , chanted slogans and condemned United States imperialgovernment, at the difficult moment of a possible imminent ism.
I bring a documentary film this time and you could invasion, expressed support to Cuba, in particular, the supwatch it when free.
We are prepared to give as a presport for the Five Demands, for our activities at the UN, and ent one to the Cuban government.
We believe that for our position adopted in the negotiation in the United States We Cuba has made great achievements in this struggle.
Cuba’s want to take this opportunity to tell Comrade Ambassador, struggle is not just for Cuba, but also for the Latin American which Comrade Ambassador may probably have already people and for the people of the world.
I have been away the foreign ministry; it was them, the only people, from Cuba for one month, during which was receiving who rushed to buy food.
There are many things I don’t know. speech, the Italian ambassador came to see me, that Perhaps will ask you to talk about them sometime. had no other important things, which was apparently an excuse.
Few things could now still move know, over these days, apart from our soldiers and our people, me.
But I did shed tears when Fidel was giving his speech this department is the center of all these tasks.
The Cuban people’s behavior is a good lesson for go to your embassy sometime, or invite you to come to my me, and also a fine example.
I bring some materials and maps concerning the Sinois also a problem of another aspect.
We have kept a close eye on this issue, and conif it could put up a sturdy fight against aggressors and dare to ducted several discussions.
I also read the letter, delivered pay whatever cost, this people will win sooner or later.
This by your embassy, from Premier Zhou Enlai to Asian-African is how Comrade Fidel told us.
It was well written, giving a comprehensive and and stick to principles, has to prepare for all sorts of detailed presentation of the Sino-Indian border problem sacrifices.
Not only is revolutionary Cuba saved, its Asian-African country leaders.) prestige is also increased.
We advocate solving the Comrade Ambassador must know, Fidel said in his speech Sino-Indian problem by peaceful and friendly negotiations. that although missiles were withdrawn , our But we both had the experience that when facing capitalists moral missile will never ever be withdrawn. should not always make concessions; sometimes, necessary struggle should be conducted.
He said that he was surprised at such a calm communist life on our streets.
It depends on how the Indians calmness and sufficient supply really surprised him and that will act, and also on the imperialist attitude. our people’s behavior was truly moving.
Behind Nehru, there are imperialists, in particular, United States imperialists, and also British imperialists, which obviously complicates the issue.
But there are some “Che” Guevara and Chinese Ambassador Shen fraternal countries saying that Nehru is peace-loving.
Nehru Jian, Havana, 1 December 1962 sent troops to attack us; Nehru is the representative of the big capitalist class; Nehru colluded closely with imperialism.
They, at the last conversation, the one taking place point of socialist country having conflict with reactionjust before you returned to China. ary nationalist country, adopted an incorrect position.
What happened in Cuba was a bad thing, in terms of the class interests that Nehru represents.
The Cuban Minister knows well this point, you have people and the Cuban leadership have insisted upon a correct conducted face-to-face struggle with Nehru. position, and carried out victorious struggle.
From a but also it provides the world as a whole a valuable experiment long time ago, he has begun to play a reactionary role.
From a which gives it global significance. long time ago, he has turned to imperialism.
Although we were very careful when we expressed English than Williamson, because he also speaks the political our disagreement with the Soviet Union, some countries language of imperialism. have initiated corresponding economic measures.
We know that the fraternal country Cuba is backing us bombs; after all, our lives are God-given.
In Bulgaria, we had on the Sino-Indian border problem. a very interesting discussion with brother parties.
Representatives of a few these materials and maps to the comrades of the Socialist fraternal parties– don’t know what countries exactly they Country Division and Asian Research Division who study were from–responded by saying that the overarching priority this problem.
To let them further the study and discussion on should have been to preserve peace.
The We are more concerned with Cuba’s honor than with Cuba’s assessment of this problem has never been wrong.
Venezuela did not turn up because they disagree past, were devoid of tools, such as maps, which help with our position, but Uruguayan party representatives did gain straight-forward information from knowledge take a conciliatory position.
Perhaps this defeat could lead to victory in the future, yet the division , the Embassy in Cuba division within the progressive movement, is inevitable.
This 30 November 1962 would check the growth of people’s power, or reduce it.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] leaders who subscribe themselves to Revisionism.
This division between the Marxist-Leninist communists and the revisionist communists is to be expected.
Did the Soviet missiles come to Cuba as a result of Engels, found its way to Revisionism.
Our side said that we don’t have this great contribution to the enlargement of the global Marxistsort of need.
But that division also restricts the on whether we should provide them with missile bases.
Instead of promoting and accepted their proposal only in the hope of helping them facilitating revolution, some parties were effectively sup.
They said this was unnecessary and remember that in our last conversation, I told you that there what Kennedy had done was merely orchestrated to win the was something I could not understand—that is because I presidential election.
Still was so deeply convinced by what Soviet top leaders told me we felt that the equivocal promise was dangerous, particu. larly because it did not touch on the extent of the Soviet aid to Cuba.
Among the people who supported the Cuban revoblathering, for example, that they would send their Baltic lution, some did so only because they thought the Cuban revFleet.
They also told us that they preferred actions to hollow olution was a nationalist movement.
So soon after we declared statements, and that the mighty Soviet Union would deliver that we were Marxist-Leninists, they wavered, and after the a destructive strike upon anyone who dared to invade Cuba, withdrawal of Soviet missiles they vowed to initiate their own etc.
At the time we believed their words were true. revolution which, in their vocabulary, basically means the abandonment of the proletarian revolution.
I remember I asked you in our last conversation people actually could be won over by a determined Leftist wondering if a possible American invasion would inevitably force. provoke another world war.
Better to see these people having reason why I asked such a question was that I’m quite suspiremoved their disguise earlier.
In the circumstance tinue their support, only the naïve would keep buying their when there is disarray and people don’t see clearly, the Leftists empty words.
The treaty between Cuba and the Soviet Union, should act and raise their distinct flag.
Otherwise, our [socialwhich has never been publicized, has been violated by the ist] camp would fall into disarray.
Before, facing the American aggression, we had firm Shen: Did the Soviet government consult with you and obtain support from the world.
But now the Soviet missiles are gone Khrushchev made a promise to the Americans.
Fidel had and our international prestige weakened. written a letter to Khrushchev, bidding Khrushchev farewell.
This is, however, a great exposure of the revisionists. day, the letter was not short of agitated words.
Some revisionist countries remain unexposed. anxiety from Fidel’s text.
What further concessions do you think will the Soviet the Americans that the Soviet Union would back down.
The biggest concession I could imagine is that the Soviet Union chooses not to support us when the Americans Shen: China had a similar experience earlier.
As to what political concessions would be, we don’t one month from the moment of the Soviet Union deciding know.
Anyhow, it’s just a discussion between you and me. on withdrawing all of their experts , to the Perhaps the biggest mistake Kennedy has ever committed is point of the last Soviet specialist leaving China.
We proposed that he chose not to support mercenaries and directly attack that some of them stay until contracts were fully impleus in La Batalla de Giron [Battle of Giron,e., the Bay of mented.
Our equipment then was no match for ours today. they were being withdrawn, some Soviet experts cried too.
How did Mikoyan feel about the result of some difficulties in our economy.
Was his mission in us to rely on our own strength in resolving problems.
Some tactical weapons have been transferred to us and new government order arrived.
In another case, he originally our personnel will be trained to operate them.
Yet surfaceassured us that IL-28s would not be a problem, to-air missiles are in their hands.
He also mentioned that he would not leave, they will stay. leave Cuba until the moment he completed his mission.
And it is Soviet helicopters that delivered no guarantee of non-invasion of Cuba.
Be nasty to true Marxist-Leninists while mind, in the most difficult period of the past, you had only being nice to enemies, imperialists, and the anti-revolution12 persons and 7 guns.
This is their nature. pling the US-imperialist-backed Batista regime and obtaining nation-wide victory.
Soviet policies are no policies of Khrushchev alone, the general international situation has, too, become better. but of many.
They said but as long as one man remaining, we will still kill Tito attempted to foster a conciliatory position and he was them.
They also but if there is one man left, we will still kill the Americans. said some bad things about Albania.
The plain fact is, Suslov finally concluded, Yugoslavia has a population of between 17 million and 18 million people but Albania has only more than one million.
It had already been divided before the publication of Guevara: of no principle.
The CPI’s central committee divided into the future they will treat us as roses that have become infected three factions during the discussion of whether China should and stink.
Have you been informed of the It was they who initiated this statement.
When Mikoyan visited me, I said, “Victory is victory; defeat is defeat.
Presumably this is why, as I saw from the television, he Shen: Not . did not give you a hug on leaving.
As far as people within our border are concerned, they 4 January 1963 are either Tibetan or belonging to ethnic groups that have kinship with the Tibetans.
In 1950, the People’s Liberation Guevara and Chinese Ambassador Shen Jian, 1 December 1962, Army liberated Tibet and initiated democratic reforms.
Although the upper Tibetan slave owners rebelled in the first Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] half of 1959, we squashed it quickly.
Democratic reforms were furthered and became quicker and more thorough.
The influence of these democratic reforms on neighboring areas is considerable.
Not now. inces, municipalities, and autonomous zones, and party working committee in Tibet; party leadership groups (party Shen: If, after you check the map and the materials, you still committee) at various central ministries, commissions, govhave questions, I’m happy to answer them.
About your proernment agencies, and people’s organizations, and the General posal of publishing a Spanish version of Peking Review, the Political Department of the People’s Liberation Army; leading homeland has already pondered the idea and will try to begin members of embassies and other agencies abroad (via the publication next March.
The two events happened simultaneously , Fuzhi , KONG Yuan, FANG Yi, during the past month.
The serious struggle during the past Central Secrecy Office, Foreign Liaison Office , Central month has examined and tested various political forces in Propaganda Office , Central Liaison Office , Central the world.
The imperialists, reactionary nationalists, and Investigation Office , Military Intelligence Office , modern revisionists have all fully exposed their true faces in Headquarters of the General Staff front of the people of the whole world.
The Marxist-Leninists and the revolutionary people in various countries have fully CHEN, ZHANG, JI, ZENG, GENG, HUANG, MENG, demonstrated their strength in the struggle.
More and more QIAO, HAN, LIU, Admin Office of Foreign Ministry , people in the world have raised their consciousness and ability Research Office, Division of the Soviet Union and Europe to tell the truth through these two struggles.
All of this will Office , American-Australian Office [of produce profound impact upon the international struggle in Foreign Ministry], Ambassador, Archive ---Total copies the future.
Kennedy seemed to be the CC has the following opinions, which are now conveyed rampant, showing a gesture as if he were to fight a nuclear to you.
Concessions with no principle and accompanied We must fully understand the great significance of the by humiliation will only increase the aggressor’s ambition, Cuban people’s victory in this struggle.
First, after more than making him ask for a foot after gaining an inch with a bigger one month’s resolute struggle, the Cuban people have mainand bigger appetite.
Fourth, what Kennedy fears the most tained their sovereignty and have defended the revolution, are the revolutionary struggles by the Cuban people and the while at the same time giving a powerful blow to the interrevolutionary struggles by the people in Latin America and all vention and serious war provocation by the United States imperialists. over the world.
Only by depending upon the struggle of the Second, Comrade Fidel Castro and the revolutionary forces in people in various countries will the war and aggressive plans Cuba have stood against the huge pressure from the modern of the imperialists be smashed.
This is the only correct way to revisionists, have adhered to a correct revolutionary line of defend world peace.
Marxism-Leninism, and have persisted in a correct stance of In the face of such a ferocious yet crafty enemy as Kennedy, mobilizing the people and the masses in conducting a revoluwe must follow the policy-line set up by Comrade Mao tionary struggle.
Third, during this struggle, the revolutionary Zedong, “in a strategic sense we must despise the enemy, in a Cuban people have experienced a test, and the Cuban revotactical sense, we must carefully study the enemy,” and then lutionary leadership represented by Comrade Fidel Castro we will win victory in this struggle.
The victorious struggle by have greatly increased its prestige, and their experience of the Cuban people has once again proven that this is the truth. struggling against the imperialists and modern revisionists has been greatly enriched.
After winning this valuable experience, The modern revisionists have been frightened to death in the revolutionary forces in Cuba have not been weakened but the face of Kennedy’s nuclear bluffing.
The pessimistic views the enemy in a strategic sense while carefully dealing with that the revolutionary struggle by the Cuban people has sufthe enemy in a tactical sense,” they carried out a policy of fered a serious defeat and that Cuba’s people’s revolution has adventurism, using missiles and nuclear weapons as bargainbeen sold out are not compatible with the reality and, thereing chips to engage in a game of speculation.
When Kennedy fore, are not correct. used nuclear war to threaten them, they were panic-stricken The great victory won by the Cuban people symbolizes and did not know what to do.
They made one concession that Marxism-Leninism has developed an unshakable deep after another and fell into passivity completely.
This is an extremely important develmance of the modern revisionists during the Cuban incident opment of the international communist movement.
The rich represents an unprecedented humiliation and insult in the experience of the Cuban people is invaluable for the people history of socialist countries. in Latin America.
That the Soviet Union has withdrawn missiles and bombers from Cuba is not a bad thing for the Cuban revolution.
In the The victory of the Cuban people’s struggle once again first place, it was a mistake that the modern revisionists decidhas proved that United States imperialism is strong in appearance but ed to establish missile bases in Cuba.
Their true intention was weak in essence, and can only bully the weak but will fear the not to support the Cuban people, but to control the Cuban strong.
First, the Cuban incident makes it clear that Kennedy revolution through violating Cuba’s sovereignty.
Therefore, we should not there not for the purpose of supporting the Cuban people in have any unrealistic illusion about this representative of the struggling against imperialism, but using Cuba as a bargainAmerican monopoly capitalist class.
Second, now Kennedy ing chip in dealing with the United States imperialists.
The United States faces great were allowed to prevail, that would be extremely disadvantadifficulty if it is to fight a nuclear war.
The people of the geous for the Cuban revolution and the revolution in Latin whole world, including the American people, are against America.
In external propaganda and conforces have consistently carried out in the past. tacts, the tone of the open statements made by Central leaders and central newspapers should be followed.
It should particuWe should sufficiently consider the difficulties facing larly be emphasized that certainly statements of this notice Cuba’s revolutionary cause, and should sufficiently undershould not be made openly, and please pay attention to this. stand the circumstances of the Cuban comrades.
The United States The Central Committee imperialists are determined to eliminate Socialist Cuba.
The 4 December 1962 tension between the United States and Cuba will continue for a long period—sometimes more tense, and sometimes less (This is a top secret document.
For a certain period, Cuba still needs to depend cumstances should copies be made.
After use the document upon Soviet support in production, trade, transportation, and should be returned to the Confidential Department of the arms and ammunition supply.
The Cuban comrades, while Administrative Office of the Central Committee and should sticking to revolutionary principles, have to make necessary then be destroyed.) compromises, which will not harm their sovereignty and independence, from time to time.
In the struggle against imperialism, modern revisionism, and reactionary nationalism, it is inevitable that some of their policies may differ from those of ours.
The shining greatness of Mao Chairman Mao, Chairman Liu Shaoqi, and Prime Minister Zedong’s thought has been fully demonstrated in these Zhou Enlai asked me to forward their greetings to Comrade two struggles.
Our 10th plenum of the our thought in practice and struggle, and raise the standard of our party’s central committee, which they [Mao Zedong, Liu consciousness.
We must hold high the three banners of the stake has become how to implement those policies produced General Line, Great Leap Forward, and People’s Commune, at this meeting. and continue to march forward victoriously, so that we will win even greater successes on all fronts.
I have been keeping an eye on this meeting and Dorticós: This is a very precious gift.
I will definitely read it. read quite a few relevant documents and reports.
From 1945 to 1949, prior to the over-all Ambassador Shen: Now China’s economic situation is very national liberation. good.
Comrade Mao Zedong’s works are the ones that we the harvest of 1961 was better than that of 1960, and this often read.
I have personally collected almost all of Comrade year’s turns out to be even more encouraging than last year’s.
I also have the One can say the darkest period of economic difficulty due to Spanish edition of the 1st and 2nd volumes of The Selected natural disasters has now passed.
We plan to translate and struction blueprint, the Great Leap Forward, the institution publish, by ourselves, the Spanish version of volumes 1, 2 of People’s Communes, is undoubtedly correct.
Based on lesand 3. sons and experiences of the past, our central committee now has devised a detailed implementation plan.
In that case, Comrade Ambassador owes me a debt. direction and a series of fitting general polices already in posiDo send me a copy of volumes 1, 2 and 3 after publication. tion, the Chinese people feel that there is no reason that they won’t do better in future socialist constructions.
This is the Chinese version of Prime because of China’s vastness, it is an arduous way ahead, before Minister Fidel Castro’s work, recently published by us, which we reach the stage of total electrification, mechanization, and of course Comrade President would find incomprehensible. modernization.
I’m happy to learn that the Chinese comrades Dorticós: I have learnt this news [of the PRC publishing overcame difficulties and are making progress.
This is a the darkest period of China’s economic difficulty is now over. great gift.
These are all We are quite concerned about the Sino-Indian conflict, on Comrade Fidel’s most important works. which we have kept a close eye.
To make them reader-friendly, we have and a copy of Prime Minister Zhou Enlai’s letter, the one of published these works in the form of booklets.
In fact, I have read all the materials you nation-wide, they have gained popularity from the people. have sent to me.
I remember that before I left Cuba, people chose to walk to the street, rallying and demonstrating, Comrade President expressed his wish to discuss with me to express their support for Cuba. the Sino-Indian border problems on my future arrival.
We have seen the news knowing that China orgahas the time today. nized a large number of marches and demonstrations.
Of course I have time, and I am very much looking much understood. forward to it.
This is the 4th volume of The Selected I’m ready to brief you the situation along the Sino-Indian Works of Mao Zedong, which I brought from Beijing as a gift border. to you.
Otherwise we could only hand over [to Nehru] a huge chunk of territory.
It was hatched by Nehru and American once he obtained one , he would ask for imperialism.
No one could twist the arms of capitalists as to make secret] that Nehru played a major role, because only via India them part of the imperialist camp.
In fact, they would submit could American imperialists conduct their subversive activito imperialism, whatever concessions made to them. ties in Tibet.
Via its consulate consul located in Tibet, India In contrast, revolutionaries would never, regardless of being has managed to collude with Tibetan slave-holders.
Cuba, for example, lusion] has now been proven by the following fact that the faced an extremely difficult situation in which it had to Dalai Lama, the major boss of the rebels, fled to India after stand up to the powerful American imperialists, at the the rebellion was vanquished.
Until now, Nehru uses them to same time resist pressures from the other side [i.e., the Soviet conduct his sabotage activities.
But sticking to its five demands, Cuba flatly rejected for us in the United Nations, supporting any inspection that might damage Cuba’s prestige, soveradmitting us into the UN, on the other hand, he tried to sell eignty, and independence.
Those, who wish to submit to the imperialists, practice Nehru has confused many people, which was in fact would submit to the imperialists anyway.
This is a brief introduction to the Sinooffered more concessions, they would have not submitted to Indian border dispute.
Comrade President attended the meeting of the my knowledge, any question from Comrade President, if you Non-Aligned Movement , at have . which time the Sino-Indian border dispute had yet to become a serious issues.
Comrade President had a face-to-face struggle Thanks very much, for your presentation gives me a more with him, of which I should speak no more. complete understanding of the Sino-Indian border problems.
Of course, it does not mean that we shall abandon proper In general, I have absolutely no doubt of the righteousness of tactics in this struggle.
Still we should separate him from China’s position in the Sino-Indian border dispute.
We hope for it to lean, totally, to the imperialists. that the Sino-Indian border problem could be resolved peacefully.
Recently Pakistan has publicized a docuChinese leading comrades’ good will. ment.
Since it has a military treaty with the US, Pakistan protested against the American military aid to India.
In response, Comrade Ambassador mentioned that I have met Nehru in the Americans showed Pakistan a secret military treaty, which person.
In fact, not only have I met him, I have also come to was signed by Nehru and the United States in 1951.
So Nehru has fallen for the imperialists meeting failed due to the for a long time.
At the heart of the complexity of the Sinofirm position of the Cuban delegation.
In that meeting, we Indian border dispute is the fact that British and American noticed that Nehru’s position of neutrality appeared dubiimperialists together have thrown their weight behind Nehru. ous.
We have done our utmost to strive for the about, because I’m sure that you must have mastered Cuba’s possibility of the Sino-Indian border dispute being solved situation, though you weren’t in Cuba at that time [of the peacefully.
Our retaliation, therefore, came only missile crisis]. after we were pushed into the last corner.
Now the threat of direct military intervention on the negotiation between Mikoyan, Kennedy, and [US has become less imminent, though the possibility remains.
Also in this crisis emerged the conflict Until now no agreement has been reached.
Indeed, we doubtful that it will be reached any moment in the future. maintain friendship with the Soviet Union.
We appreciate Had this consensus emerged between the United States and the Soviet very much for its economic, military, and techUnion, Cuba would express its willingness to participate [in nological aid.
I have talked with the Soviet Union, but the the negotiations], for we have our independent position on division between us continues.
This agreement, highly limited in a sense that that the Soviet Union decided to withdraw, without prior it confined its content only to issues appearing in the corconsultation with Cuba in the first place, its missiles deployed respondence between Khrushchev and Kennedy, would not in Cuba as stipulated by the Soviet Union-Cuban military include Cuba’s five demands.
Furthermore, it permitted the on-site inspection of the dent statement in the Security Council, in order to express missiles’ removal without obtaining our agreement.
In this Cuba’s own view towards development of the entire crisis. struggle, Cuba did not adopt small bourgeoisies’ romantic The Soviet Union is expected to support Cuba by issuing a attitude; on the contrary, we have insisted on the correct separate statement and publicizing the agreement with the Marxist-Leninist revolutionary position and defended Cuba’s Americans—note, this is very confidential.
Cuba firmly ment as I have mentioned previously; stage two, opening a insists on its five demands, and stands against any attempt negotiation focusing on Cuba’s five demands, in the hope of to conduct unilateral inspection in Cuba.
Not even an inch resolving the Caribbean crisis once for all. would Cuba budge from this position.
Yet, according to our observation, there is no great hope Now the Soviet Union expresses its respect towards our for attaining the stage-one agreement.
In the Security Council, the United States and the Soviet ment, even if being reached, still means nothing to Cuba.
They together have pubYesterday, we sent a delegation to the Soviet Union, to lished a statement, in which the Soviet Union confirmed the deal with economic and trade matters.
After the negotiation withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba and a guarantee of no with the Soviet Union, Comrade deliberate attempt in the future to transfer weapons of this Mora will lead another delegation to kind into Cuba.
We wish to discuss economic and trade matters for to invade . the 1963 fiscal year, and economic relations between the two Our side sees no value in this hollow promise; nor do we countries in the future.
The American guarantee applies only our export situation tends to be in extremely bad shape, with to a circumstance in which Cuba ceases to act as a missile export income shrinking noticeably from the 1962 level. base.
It could still invade us with the excuse of Cuba remainBecause our foreign trade will not start to bounce back until ing a base for subversive activities targeted at the United 1964, we badly need foreign financial aid for the upcoming States.
Such a guarantee, besides, will not stand in the way of 1963 fiscal year.63 will see a great improvement in the the United States pressuring other countries to economically blockade supply of staple foods and other necessities. and politically isolate Cuba, devising diplomatic conspiracy, our export income is also expected to rise dramatically from conducting infiltration and espionage, operating pirate-like 1964 onwards.
We could start to Our willingness to negotiate is unquestionable, but we reap profits from it only in 1964. need concrete evidence of a guarantee.
Please also say hello for me to your wife. the friendship between the two peoples, two governments, as well as leaderships.
Recently, our government has issued a series of Trade, Headquarters of the General Staff statements indicating our support to Cuba. support the five demands raised by Prime Minister Fidel.
We support CHEN, ZHANG, JI, ZENG, GENG, HUANG, MENG, Cuba in rejecting of any form of inspection that leads to the QIAO, HAN, LIU, Administration Office [of Foreign damage of Cuban independence, sovereignty, and prestige.
Ministry] , Research Office, Soviet-European Office [of Cuba has followed a correct Marxist-Leninist position in Foreign Ministry], First Asian Office this struggle. provides a , Second Asian Office , Western shining example, not only to the Cuban people but also to the European Office , Americanpeople of Latin America and of the world as a whole, of how Australian Office , Asian-African a nation defends its independence.
As an alternate member of the central committee and deputy Random House, 1994), 261. minister of central propaganda department, comrade Zhou 4 During a summer 1959 visit to neutral countries such as Yang has carried out a lot of work in the area of cultural and Morocco, Egypt, and Indonesia, Che “secretly contacted the Chinese ideological struggle.
The delegation also includes comrade Lin diplomats in these countries and expressed the hope of developing Mohan, who is the deputy minister of both the Propaganda relations with China,” also urging Beijing to buy sugar from Cuba if Department and Cultural Department. the United States cut off purchses.
Zhou Enlai passed such reports to Mao Zedong, who approved a positive response.
Their “Sino-Cuban Relations during the Early Years of the Castro Regime, 1959-1966,” 82. presence will be our honor.
One could also exchange experiences and 6 That said, Mao proved himself remarkably ignorant in some learn from each other.
Please forward my greeting to the respects,e. when he claimed that the UK was not a nuclear power.
Relaying gossip on 10 See the Hungarian Embassy in Havana , report on the latest meeting of Cuban leaders, Alekseev identified Guillermo a meeting with Yugoslav Ambassador Boško Vidaković, 19 March Garcia Frias, Haydée Santamaría Cuadrado, Raúl Curbelo Morales, 1962, in the collection of translated Hungarian documents in this Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, and President Osvaldo Dorticos as openly issue of the CWIHP Bulletin. critical of Khrushchev’s decision; Joaquín Ordoqui and Carlos Rafael 11 Fursenko and Naftali, “One Hell of a Gamble”, 168.
October 1962 Khrushchev-Novotný conversation printed elsewhere Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis (Lanham, in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
However, having second thoughts, on 26 of Yugoslav translated documents elsewhere in this issue of the October Bobby Kennedy reversed his earlier decision and revoked CWIHP Bulletin. authority to conduct “major acts of sabotage” while tensions were so 29 Soviet embassy in Havana , telegram no.43high, and there is no indication that such an assault on China’s embassy 1644, 23 October 1962, translation printed elsewhere in this issue of in Havana was actually carried out or attempted.
November 1962, printed in the collection of Polish translated 18 On the intersection of multiple crises in Soviet foreign documents elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
Cuba, 30 March-9 April 1965, which appears elsewhere in this issue 37 See cable from the veteran Dutch ambassador in Washington, of the CWIHP Bulletin.
Ministry of the Interior Vice April that were precursors to the Bay of Pigs invasion which began Minister in charge of the National Liberation Directorate.
The United States U-2 plan was actually downed over Cuba on the afternoon of Saturday, 27 October, not 28 October.
The Cuban Reaction to the Announcement of the US Received in Tokyo 10/25/1962 05:31 blockad To Foreign Minister Ohira from Chargés 1.
On the night of the 23rd , Prime Minister the United States Embassy since the afternoon of the 24th of October.
He concluded that the United States naval blockade was piracy and a clear violation of 2.
There were people on the street in front of the Embassy (about international law.
More people gathered with this, all people should become united under the revolutionary placards in their hands.
The domestic wartime alert system has been strengthened the increased number of armed militiamen on alert in the streets and the revolutionary armed militias are keeping close watch and the incessant loud radio broadcasts to uplift the morale of on crucial places in Havana.
The public here has stayed demonstrations by communist youth groups are trying to calm as usual and the Japanese here are living a normal life so far. boost the people’s morale.
This cable has been also sent out to Embassies in the United States and Mexico.
This cable has been also transferred to the Embassies in the United States and Mexico.
The Cuban press harshly condemns the United States naval blockade on a daily basis and highly appreciates Soviet support.
When the Soviet government issued a statement on the reported how widespread the pro-Cuban demonstrations Cuban issue on the 24th , one Soviet intellectual in the world have been and blamed the pro-US attitude by working at a newspaper company made the following arguNATO and the Latin American governments as means of ment which reflected suspicion and anxiety shared by others. evidence showing that they were giving in to the United States imperial“It’s hard to understand why we had to build a military base ists.
They have not reported the Japanese policy on this issue in Cuba in the first place.
However, once he gets furious, he was appealing to the nation that people should try to keep the bites you hard and never leaves you even if he loses all of his Ikeda administration from taking a pro-US stance. teeth like an Irish bulldog.
The existence of a mediation proposal by UN Secretariat U Thant was reported.
On the 30th , a young foreign language teacher tion on this has not been made public because it might have had a conversation with one of our Embassy staff.
The following are the findings of military importance on spread in the society.
He also said that there was much tension the situation on the Isle of Pines.
They are provided by some in the workplace meetings he attended and that you could not influential Japanese coming from the island. feel that atmosphere just by reading the papers.
At one point, he really felt threatened by the immediate possibility of the The island had been placed under a strict wartime system occurrence of a nuclear warfare.
Cubana Airlines offers Cable from Japanese Embassy, Havana, 16 one flight a week between Mexico City and here.
To Foreign Minister Ohira from Ambassador This cable has been also transferred to Embassies in Yaguchi the United States and Mexico.
After the incident, most Soviet soldiers have disappeared from the streets and the outstanding activities by the Chinese communists have also not been spotted.
Large amounts of food, other than Cable from the Japanese Embassy, Havana, 21 weapons, used to be imported from the Soviet.
But it seems November 1962 now that there are only a few items available, such as salted fish.
Mikoyan’s efforts to persuade Castro will bear fruit sooner or later because the Soviets Transmitting from Havana 11/28/1962 11:00 intend to tide over this crisis by all means and they hold the oil Received in Tokyo 11/29/1962 05:14 supply route which is so vital for the Cuban economy.
The Situation in Cuba On one side are far right wing people you might call “neocommunists” who worship Stalinism and tend to have a way 1.
There is much speculation over the reason and purpose of of thinking similar to the Chinese communists.
There is a perspecthe Secretary General of the Central Labor Association belong tive that the purpose of Mikoyan’s long stay was to reexamine to this faction.
They are old-type Communists who are in an the value of Cuba as a strategic beachhead and the prospects ideological confrontation with the former group.
This view sounds closer to little likelihood of the break-up of the revolutionary governreality.
Whether this is right or not all depends on how the ment or Castro turning pro-Soviet because of this in-house Soviets will provide assistance to Cuba from now on. discord.
At a dinner party on the 18th hosted by Mikoyan, the Castro brothers didn’t show up, although 2.
Regarding the reasons why Castro reportedly refused to Foreign Minister Roa, Industry Minister [Ernesto accept Mikoyan’s offer, there is the possibility that Castro may “Che”] Guevara, and Chief of the Militia Army be considering the current domestic situation as dangerous as Aragones attended.
Some view this as a clear proof of ill feelwhen he entered Cuba with his army five or six years ago.
He ings that the Castro brothers keep . might really be afraid of the breakdown of the revolutionary government as the result of loosening the current defense sys3.
The whole nation is totally exhausted after a series of tense tem because the measures would let overseas anti-government events over the last four and a half years (the revolution, its people return to the country and regain a beachhead.
Castro failure, and this crisis). might need the possibility of a United States invasion because he wants to crack down on the anti-government movements by stirring 4.
That’s why may accept it on the condition of the normalization of the he cannot accept the base inspections offer.
Japanese Foreign Ministry archives (“Cuban Domestic [Source: Japanese Foreign Ministry archives , Tokyo.
That is why we are curCrisis, on 1 November Kim Il Sung expressed his concern rently falling behind in completing the 7-year plan by one to Soviet Ambassador Vasily Moskovsky that the North’s air year, and we still need 3 to 5 years in order to fulfill the and coastal defenses were in poor shape.
However, 4 Pyongyang, Wonsan, Chongjin, and Hamheung, were poorly years and 2 months have passed and we have fulfilled less protected from air raids.
He therefore requested permission than half of the 7-year plan’s goals. to send a delegation to Moscow to discuss military aid.
Despite long-standing enhance coastal defenses, he asked for submarines.
For air disagreements between Moscow and Pyongyang over North defenses, Kim requested an unspecified number of MIGKorea’s autarkic development strategy, relations remained cor21s and twelve surface-to-air missile batteries.
Kim Gwanghyeop’s 29 November to 5 December visit to The Soviet-North Korean rift lasted from the fall of 1962 Moscow ended in failure.
During this period, North Korea Pyongyang, but not give them on credit.
Without delay, the drew closer to the People’s Republic of China than at any North Korea regime escalated its efforts to achieve self-relipoint in the history of Sino-DPRK relations.
One week later, the Fifth Plenum of losing their freedom of action due to long term exclusive the Fourth KWP Central Committee formally adopted what orientation toward the PRC eventually forced North Korean it referred to as the equal emphasis policy, initially launched leaders to change their approach to developing international in the wake of the May 1960 military coup in South Korea, contacts with the USSR and European socialist countries. which called for simultaneous development of heavy indusThis change coincided with Khrushchev’s involuntary departry and defense capabilities.
In January 1965, North Korean Vice Premier Kim Il the entire country; to train the entire army as a “cadre army”; went to Moscow where he met with Kosygin.
The two held and to modernize weaponry, doctrine, and tactics under very frank talks in which Kim Il revealed North Korea’s thinkthe principle of self-reliance in national defense.
Report, Embassy of Hungary in North Korea to the As for the Tonkin provocation, Comrade Kosygin went Hungarian Foreign Ministry, 8 January 1965 on, for one thing, the Soviet government had assumed the Chinese and Korean military forces to be strong enough to In mid-December Comrade protect the Democratic Republic of Vietnam against the Moskovsky returned from Moscow, and told me the folAmerican imperialist attacks, for these were closer lowing about the negotiations which had taken place between to Vietnam than the Soviet Union.
C Kosygin replied that the position of the have to understand that the time for meetings is behind us.
CPSU CC and all 60 fraternal parties is solid and unchangeOnly actions count today.
Should we now reject this requirement, we would get And who provided both clothing and all weapons and orgainto a conflict with those 60 fraternal parties.
Or how about the PRV, who was again is organized, only 3 parties will be against it.
The date of the meeting “I would like to tell you that I talked about it with Mao is firmly set on March 1, and we have a final commitment Zedong during our stopover in Beijing.
But why wait for a big war, I asked, at the talks will be how to achieve unification of the ICWM.” when Vietnam needs help now, immediately.
We charge all the necessary weapons and planes and submarines. used what we learned from the previous three and five year And if they destroy them, we are willing to give you new ones plans.
That, of course, was the cause of our difficulties today, and twice as many.
Kim Il Sung himself in no time asked Kosygin how he views That is, the goals of the 7-year plan presumed aid from and the current situation in South Vietnam, and with an obvious further broadening of cooperation with you and other socialconcern he then asked whether American provocations would ist countries.
We were counting on this aid but, unfortunot lead to a “great war.” nately, it did not materialize.
That was the main reason why In the ensuing conversation, Kosygin made the KWP we did not fulfill the plan. leadership familiar in detail with the USSR aid to the Due to the Caribbean crisis and the National Liberation Movement and with American aggression in Vietnam, we were forced to quickly training of guerilla cadres in the Soviet Union, and he asked build up our defenses and especially our defense industry.
That is why we are currently falling behind in you already that writing in the press and calling names does completing the 7-year plan by one year, and we still need 3 to not cut it anymore.
Tell me though, which of these two ways 5 years in order to fulfill the seven year plan at least in basic of support of the National Liberation Movement is more parameters.
C Kim Il Sung did not answer that. we have fulfilled less than half of the 7-year plan’s goals.
He first thanked C Kosygin for accepting the invitation and “Information on the Meeting of Comrade for his presentation at the meeting in the Great Theatre.
He Piro Bita with the Korean Ambassador to said that this presentation was a remarkable contribution Tirana,” 7 August 1967 to Marx-Leninism, and it allegedly also contributed to the increased enthusiasm of the Korean people.
Hungarian Foreign Ministry, 8 January 1965, MOL, XIX-J-1-j doboz, IV-100, 001819/1965, Report Korea, 1965, 73. doboz, IV-100, 001819/1965.
Ho so ky hop thu sau cua QH amenable than ever to a resumption of war below the sevkhoa II tu ngay 28.4.1963 08.5.1963.
Phien hop ngay 08.5.1963: Tham luan cua DBQH ve dau tranh thong nhat dat enteenth parallel, Moscow, which remained committed to nuoc o mien Nam, ve tinh hinh Tay Nguyen, ve tang cuong quan ly precluding the outbreak of another major conflagration in kinh te tai chinh, Nghi quyet va bao cao cua CP; Phong Quoc hoi; Vietnam, dispatched Yuri Andropov to Hanoi in January Vietnam National Archives Center 3, Hanoi , 4.
Phieu hop ngay 27.10.1962: Tham luan cua DBQH ve to chuc hardliners and invalidating the notion that the crisis in the HDND va UBHC cac cap, ve tinh hinh mien Nam va thong nhat South could be resolved by negotiations with the Kennedy nuoc; Phong Quoc hoi; VNAC3. administration.
Alekseev opined that Mongolia could serve as a model for Cuba, EMBASSY OF THE MPR [MONGOLIAN PEOPLE’S as a country that successfully escaped feudalism.
Cuban Revolution Fidel Castro, the Socialist camp, headed by the Soviet Union, and the people who struggle for peace, This delegation, other than me, will consist of our deputy saved the entire world from the danger of a nuclear war. trade representatives Hishigsuren, and the third will be a technical expert who will come from Ulaanbaatar.
Our repAlberto—During the last crisis, our people bravely and heroresentatives were invited to your national day celebrations ically struggled against the American aggression.
Other than that, the Committee Politburo, deputy of the State Khural, first secUSSR truly carried out a great duty. retary of Ulaanbaatar city committee, head of the MongolCuban Friendship Society Luvsanravdan, as the head, and Luvsan—People of every socialist country provide Cuba with another person. all necessary help, and Cuba has friends in all corners of the world.
Therefore, I firmly believe that if there is no war, Alberto—I am very satisfied that you will come to Havana to Cuba’s difficult questions can all easily be resolved.
Luvsan—On the occasion of your being in Moscow, and in order to ease our negotiations in Havana, I would like to hear Alberto—Because the governments of these countries are your main thoughts about what goods could be exchanged under the pressure of American imperialism, they are very . irresolute.
But Chile stopped buying our sugar, and buys sugar on the world Alberto—Our trade councilor Arnoldo Peres Pinto will later market at prices that are twice the price of our sugar.
It is clear what Chile-Cuban Notes relations will be like after the meeting between Kennedy and the Chilean President that will take place soon.
Mexico and 1 On Interkit, see James Hershberg, Sergey Radchenko, Péter Brazil are also irresolute like this.
A Window into the believe any of the governments of Latin America but one can Final Decades of the Sino-Soviet Relationship,” CWIHP Working believe the people.
Mongolia hosted a 1975 meeting of this anti-Chinese, Soviet-led coordinating group, and Radchenko has government is brutal, the people are well-disposed towards us, found its records in the Ulaanbaatar archives—ed. and stand on the side of our people.
We should do as much as possible to resume fumifor its blockade in the Security Council. gation, because lacking that can damage us more than the enemy.
I believe we should see how soon fumigation flights 24 — Arinos (Alfonso Arinos de Melo Franco, delegate can be reestablished. from Brazil in the General Assembly) -ambassador in I think there are some of our zones into which we should Havana instructed to take steps in favor of observers. not let pass the Yankee planes that are violating our territory.
I believe we should study some zones and put good anti— Meeting in Washington with Latin Americans; we aircraft weapons so that when they fly there we will be able were told “You are with us or with Cuba.” to shoot them and bring them down, primarily with 30mm anti-aircraft guns and when they pass, in obvious places and 26 — Youst ( Ambassador in low flights, bring them down.
If it’s still over the sea, one, three miles…fine, withdrawal of American ships.
Later a general solution – not but anything flying here, we bring down, making sure it falls only for Cuba – with Brazilian proposal for denuclearization in our territory.
However, we should not give a general order, for we can— United States threats might be to enable negotiating in better not have them shoot down one of our planes.
United States wishes must establish good coordination to avoid the possibility of for suppression of arms and construction in Cuba and then one of our planes passing over these sites. they will lift the blockade.
U Thant sees an opening for It is necessary to start to fire some shots, because the Dorticós’ appeal to negotiate.
Remember what U Thant said in the Security Council on the 24th about Dorticós’ words concerning United States guarantees about Cuba.
He is asking for 29 — Bulgarian Vice Minister of Foreign Relations told suspension of medium and intermediate range ballistic misU Thant that Fidel’s letter had matched up with that of sile plans in order to make a contribution to peace.
He says Khrushchev. that United States and USSR gave encouraging answers toward a peaceful solution. — U Thant introduced the issue of verification on the high seas by the Red Cross, neutrals, or the UN, to the 27 — Zorin and U Soviets.
He said that their presence in Cuba tion on inspection, considering not only Cuba but the entire would halt an invasion.
They would visit bases and after dismantling, make declarations in confirmation.
He sees an advantage, that 28 — U Thant said that, during his stay in Cuba, “Radio this would be the initiative of the Cuban government and not Havana” lowered the pitch of its denunciations. another from outside.
He says this is his own idea and if it is accepted, he will convince Brazil to support it.
Journalist Donald Grant said he had spoken with Clayton Fritchey, from the American 3 — Zorin explained to me that the idea of Red Cross mission Fritchey said “that the policy of the inspection is not a Soviet one, but rather U Thant’s; as U CIA in Cuba had ended, that the letter from Kennedy to Thant and Kennedy said yesterday, that the United States had proposed Khrushchev was the recognition of the social regime here; United States three alternatives, namely UN, neutrals, or Red Cross, and would accept first four points and not the last for reasons of that they preferred the Red Cross.
The three ideas were proits own prestige, that they were ready to resume economic and posed by the United States to U Thant. diplomatic relations.
They tell me 4 November 3 — Irish Ambassador [Frederick H they accept control or verification because it can be no other Boland] said in conversation that he regarded as appropriate way.
I see as positive the negotiations among Latin American Cuba’s demand that United States counterrevolutionary activities be countries because a door is being opened. stopped and that this increased tensions in the Caribbean and incited militaristic hysteria in American public opinion. — Zorin reports to me that in the last meeting with Americans, they insisted on inspection and avoided giving 5 — U Thant consults with countries for the Council sesguarantees; upon proposing some demands containing the sion.
Also awaits the return of Mikoyan. five points, McCloy said that the hand of Castro lurked in the background.
Said that between the United States and other NATO countries, they said the US and USSR were in agreement and that our acceptance possibility for future negotiations with Cuba exists, as well was missing.
Possibly they would use Swedish ships. accept inspection in the Caribbean and not only Cuba.
Impression in United Nations is 10 — I have the impression that the United States insists on inspecthat there is no time. tion and shies away from giving guarantees so that they strengthen their negotiating position.
It is very difficult that 8—U Thant confidentially proposed that accredited Latin they incite worsening of the crisis.
After the elections, public American ambassadors in Cuba be invited by our government tension will dissipate, and after the missiles are withdrawn, to visit bases and later make an informal declaration.
He position in the UN is weaker as they try to win a political believes this is crucial in getting the United States to give guarantees, victory in this second stage. lift the blockade, and suspend its flights.
U Thant has written an unsigned letter about this, but awaits a reaction.
Zorin told me his observations that the prohibition on bomb transport equip12 — U Thant brought to my attention that now there ment must not be accepted, because they might apply to the would be no inspection, but rather verification.
He also affirms that nuclear effects were the same. weapon states must guarantee not to use such weapons against Latin America since the United States can do so from their bases.
This 12 — Seeking joint interview with the USSR and us for U is also in Rapacki’s plan for Thant to present him with a protocol.
Kuznetsov had the idea Central Europe. that he and I would go to see the Americans tonight to present the plan, and I told him no.
I talked about the protocol of Cuban refugees from the United States who propose invasion by in general terms.
The Soviets made modifications and I too American personnel, 2) lifting of the blockade, 3) cessation and until Havana is aware of it, I will not present of the transport of nuclear weapons to Cuba.
I asked Kuznetsov not to see the Americans until I should submit themselves to UN arbitration. received confirmation.
Changes acted as such a group, and that the majority of them feared to Article 12 for U Thant. displeasing the United States; the appeal was aimed toward peace and not solidarity with Cuba.
Almost all of them pres13 — Explanation by U Thant of Article 12. ently agree with inspection to various degrees.
Chanderly also 14 — About Kuznetsov and modification and my criterion, confirmed this to me.
However, they can continue to use it. by which it was substantially altered.
He spoke of the absurdity that would the Soviets found themselves due to Khrushchev’s letter and send a note in protest.
U Thant now proposes the unacceptable and stated that it contained the five points.
Soviets same but with countries from different geographic areas, said it was the basis for negotiation, Americans that they saw it almost all from the group of Belgrade [i.e., the Non-Aligned as difficult.
Zorin recalled that the Council had agreed on this Movement], and neutrals.
He did not mention countries but after UAR and Ghana delegates had spoken. proposed Guinea and Ghana from Black Africa, Mexico and Brazil from Latin America, Austria and Sweden from Europe, 16 — Modification of Brazil plan and reminded me that Sweden is opposed to the blockade; Indonesia and India for Asia and the UAR from the 17 — Arinos told me he would postpone voting on the plan.
He will send a letter to Fidel so that, should he maintain his rejection of the inspection, considering the idea 17 — Kuznetsov with U Thant.
U Thant told him that that those countries offer their “good offices” for a permanent negotiations would be tripartite solution to be a meritorious one.
He spoke also on Article 12 of the protocol. with the United States about the two letters.
It occurred to me U Thant said that he saw no problem in presenting his proposal that the acceptance of “good offices” will serve to nourish 5 on this issue if the parties could agree on eleven of the articles. points propaganda.
The letter from Kennedy to Khrushchev He announced that he was developing a plan to create mobile refers to missiles, and no subsequent solution.
Until someverification groups for the UN, comprised of representatives thing positive has been achieved, the Council will not be of neutral countries approved by all parties.
Verification would occur in all places and the blockade continues, they are considering calling the agreed on by the three parties.
Each party would be able to send Council anyway. groups to determined locations on its own initiative, as would the Secretary General.
Tomorrow I will have lunch with Mikoyan. — Americans have not accepted any procedure.
In the possible they will accept something, but will add other docupast few days negotiation has taken place between the USSR ments.
I told U Thant and to send its letter from October 27, because Kennedy did not the Soviets that it was very important that the UN not lose refer to it in his own letter. control.
The Americans have two alternatives for the proceedings to continue in the 3 January 1963 — Americans say if USSR sends letter Council.
One is that each party makes a declaration and the from October 27 and 28 then they will send additional docuPresident summarizes them.
New Soviet proposal is that United States and USSR not send a session and send written documents then gather them in any documents , but rather a leta dossier.
McCloy’s observation in the letter was that the Caribbean I asked U Thant if now there might be an opportunity to area was mentioned, and not Cuba. obtain a letter about the neutrals.
January — Americans accept Soviet proposition to send only one document and noted some modifications.
McCloy 29 November — Soviets trying to make a similar declarasubmitted the modified document today. tion with the Americans that contains minimum points.
If they succeed, they will write a second one about the matters 5 January — Moscow accepted modifications. on which there is no agreement, supporting the 5 points.
We case there is agreement among the three parties. will wait but turn in ours in person.
In my judgment they will send it because if they go alone they will have to (THERE 5 — Soviets and Americans – two interviews.
It is auspicious that Cables from Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl Roa to efforts will lead to permanent solution and in agreement that Cuban Mission to the United Nations , U Thant send confidential letter along the lines indicated.
Guarantees from nuclear powCable from Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl Roa to ers – should give guarantees not to deploy bombs against Cuban Mission to the United Nations (Amb.
Absurd that other nuclear powers cannot have bases concerning informal invitation [sic; in Latin America and the United States has one in Cuba. i.e., inspection—trans./ed.], besides being an abdication of A promise not to use Guantánamo as a nuclear base is not our position on principle, is futile, since the Yankee governenough, because it lacks effective validity.
Regards, ROA ment is inspecting Soviet ships, and it is known that the dismantling and packing have concluded, and they are now making their departures.
On the other hand, so that you may decide your course of action, informed visitors repre11 November 1962 sent countries that are practically on the side of the enemy.
Insist with Arinos on inclusion of our points of view Cuba Mission UN and if not, present them as amendments.
Essential to demand nuclear powers promise not to have bases in Latin America USSR approved the document as sent.
Text, article nine, and guarantee not to use nuclear weapons against it.
Obtain should be substituted for another in which Soviets confirm formulation of paragraph of having honored the commitment contracted in article eight.
Article Two, the part on devices, to avoid characterizing these We will send exact wording tomorrow.
An avenue for further devices, and vehicles for air and naval launches, as nuclear discussion with U Thant is presentation of the tripartite weapons when they are not.
See arized zone is worth nothing without guarantees against the Kuznetsov immediately.
In case the United States opposes the protocol, only nuclear power on the continent.
Remember a fundamenaccept U Thant’s idea of independent declaration in which tal point is withdrawal of military bases by nuclear powers. each country would promise to uphold its corresponding part In any case, it should be asked that voting on the resolution of the protocol.
Postponing this declaration until the content be separate, the goal being to vote affirmatively on whatever of that of the United States is known satisfies points raised by the proposition or abstain.
If the resolution excludes Cuban concerns tocol and Cuban government gives approval.
Prepared to consider U Cuba Mission to the UN Thant proposal on Article Twelve, always within the general 11 November 1962 and permanent solution envisioned in the protocol project.
Una vision politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security [Source: provided by the Cuban Government for the October Archive.
Una vision politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security Archive.
This ambassador, I met him and we got together countless times, situation allowed them to destroy the missile bases before they and I befriended his son Sergei, but Mikoyan quickly began could be used.
Una vision “If Cuba is assaulted in another way, it must be underpolitica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security stood that the USSR will retaliate in other parts of the world Archive.
I don’t know if the translator is at fault or Havana, November 27, 1962 if Mikoyan preferred leaving it this way.) we must tally what “YEAR OF PLANNING” has been achieved regarding the guarantees not to invade Cuba from the United States.
Emilio Aragones near the United States, as its missile forces are powerful and precise enough to strike the enemy in any place in the world I send to you, enclosed, a copy of the letter sent by Comrade from within the USSR’s own territory.
WE WILL WIN This base today lacks its value for defense of the Panama Canal.
The existence In Copenhagen, I did not state in my speech, nor in any of the base is a point of friction more dangerous to the United declaration, that peace could have been saved.
It is inconceivable that troops how this version was given or who might have thought it.
A would now leave from that base to intervene in Venezuela French journalist from Le Monde asked me for an interview, or whatever Caribbean nation.
I did a television interview, but all stand very well that this base, surrounded by well-armed the questions were insinuating and the main interest seemed enemy troops, is ineffective and dangerous for its occupants. to be David Salvador.
The economic freeze, or, better put, the suspension of principal interpretations of the crisis have aligned fully with all import and export trade with Cuba, in spite of its absolute those of the National Leadership.
My opinions and words, up lack of morality, has a certain foundation in the fact that each to and including in many details, coincided with what I have country is free to trade or not trade with another, to have seen since in the newspapers and Fidel ’s speeches.
To maintain the suspension of am in complete agreement with what I have learned of the import and export trade with Cuba is to maintain economic interpretations and points of view of the National Leadership, aggression.
To keep economic aggression is to keep the door and also with the attitude that leadership has adopted in the open to military aggression. face of the crisis.
Even so, I see no possibility that this kind of aggression I agree entirely with the opposition to any kind of UN might cease, unless the leaders of the United States does commission, or that of any other organization, inspecting a U-turn and tries to establish similar relations with Cuba as Cuba.
The United States, they have with Yugoslavia and with the same ends, if they Guatemala, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua should be inspected, have some hope for a similar arrangement. and other countries that violate rules and principles of interBut as I see things, this is not likely.
With the exception national law and the UN Charter itself – they have been of the cardinal difference between our leadership and the organizing, arming and conducting mercenary invasions from Yugoslavian one, of course, here I have only thought of the their territories against Cuba and today they train mercenarideas that might move Kennedy.
United States must try to defeat the Cuban Revolution so Cuba has not violated any principle, rule, or international that no doubt remains among Latin American nations that law.
The United States cannot renounce to install atomic weapons, and installed them. the fight against the Cuban Revolution in the same way I agree completely with the FIVE POINTS presented by that we cannot give up the struggle against capitalism.
Only if they are fulfilled by the problem is that of the forms of conflict.
Effectively, the US United States, those Five Points will create relative security if turning to invasion can be avoided.
Invasion leads to world war, which would mean what I consider among the greatest probability of success – is risking everything for Cuba. the withdrawal of the naval base at Guantánamo.
It means weapons, breaking the economic blockade, is a significant factor – precisely against invasion, when faced facilitating the construction of socialism to the maximum with the prospect of war. extent.
Invasion of Cuba is costly in terms of life for the possible sacrifices.
That is why Fidel’s position, which I share Yankees because Cuba is well armed and prepared to defend from the heart, is so wise and fair, and so Marxist-Leninist. itself with the spirit of Homeland or Death.
I share the point of view that we have no reason to trust in Kennedy’s statements.
It is not possible at this stage to carry out an I believe a non-invasion pledge to be possible.
No matter how much make the promise possible, but it also could be that no such the invasion drags out, its results would be uncertain and promise is made. problematic, even in the case that it did not lead – as it would I share the justified feeling of affront at the fact that lead – to world war. the Cuban government was not previously informed [by Khrushchev] of the step that would be taken.
The invasion of Cuba, as soon as it unfolds, ously, the necessity of relying upon the Cuban government would unleash a series of anti-American actions in Latin was not stated in the document.
I consider even worse the fact American countries as well as others in the world.
This crisis, that the Soviet document would accept in principle inspection despite its brevity, led to the destruction of American propwithin Cuba, despite Cuba’s categorical rejection of the same erty, businesses, and institutions in various Latin American for solid and sensible reasons.
If it had taken even one week longer, what hapfor this besides accepting what would satisfy the Soviet governpened in Venezuela would have been equaled or surpassed in ment, guaranteeing us in the future that it would not happen many countries. under any circumstances, and fighting together for the FIVE These factors can weigh decisively in the intentions of POINTS of guarantee against direct military aggression by the the Yankee leaders to obligate them to accept and respect the United States against Cuba.
Of course, I believe that, with firmpromise of non-invasion of Cuba. ness and good sense, resolute opposition to inspection must be But what they cannot seriously promise is not to seek maintained, whether in Cuban territory or Cuban waters. many other ways of fighting against the Cuban Revolution, My primary reaction to the problem of the provocative in hopes of diverting, corrupting, or crushing it.
The brazen Yankees I am in complete agreement with the way that comrade exploit the USSR’s eagerness for peace and Cuba’s good sense Fidel set out the matter of our relations and discrepancies to commit these unspeakable acts of abuse.
We have much that goes against my first reaction is that previously, we have to be grateful for from the USSR and we are thankful.
We tolerated these flights and starting to shoot down planes now know of the respect that they have shown for our sovereignty could appear to be a desire to provoke a situation that would and the rights of our State.
And we must be very careful the ideal of socialism and communism and the theory of not to give that impression.
Our opposition to inspection defends Peace, because even between brothers and friends, differences arise.
As we if Cuba gives up its sovereignty and declares itself defeated by have done, we wish to overcome these differences within the the United States, there cannot be peace in the world.
This will not make an agreement easier; it will to strengthen our relations, to make them better, and to make only make countless new, humiliating petitions presented by unity stronger.
Cuba, in the socialist camp, means a great accede to it, the United States will present themselves [i.e., deal.
It is the beginning of the Revolution in Latin America. itself ] as victorious and omnipotent.
It will not facilitate an It is the first hedge against the United States, the center of agreement because inspection is not necessary to prove that great influence over still-undecided governments of Asia and the bases were dismantled and missiles withdrawn.
At the same time, the socialist camp means a great deal not choose the countries or the personnel.
In Germany, I visited the Soviet Confidential Memo from Cuban Mission to the ambassador Pervukhin to sort out matters concernUnited Nations Concerning Anastas Mikoyan’s ing the trip to Moscow, before receiving any indication that Conversations with United States President John F Kennedy it should not be done. , 2 December In the conversation, the crisis became the main topic.
More serious yet is that the message discusses inspection, when “YEAR OF PLANNING” it is known that Cuba will not accept this in any way.
Raúl Roa García have given us advantages and guarantees for the peace and integrity of Cuba.
In Prague, I talked with Caderca , with Fraternally, Hendrix , with the leaders of the International Journal, Soboliev and Rumiantsev.
In these conversations I HOMELAND OR DEATH, WE WILL WIN stated the same thing, with a heavier emphasis on one matter or another, according to the conflict most pertinent to the Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado argument.
With Caderca, for example, the subject was that we could not consider it a victory, but rather a compromise.
With Hendrix, it was that I thought bringing Soviet cruise ships to the Caribbean and having merchant vessels cross under their protection would not provoke war.
The Germans, in a not very Permanent Mission of Cuba in the United Nations, explicit way, led me to understand the same.
They believed that 2 December 1962 the course that the crisis had taken delayed the solution to the Berlin crisis.
He added that Mikoyan declared that the USSR would never accept the the project of the United States declaration before American “right” to interfere with these flights, as this was the Security Council is not satisfactory because it cancels, in against international law. practice, American obligations emerging from the exchange of Kennedy said they would not carry out any more lowmessages between Kennedy and Khrushchev. altitude flights, but that higher flights would continue.
Kennedy said that the idea of agreeing on the three declaMikoyan responded that low flights were an act of blatant rations before the Security Council is generally not acceptable piracy, and the rest were piracy in the high skies.
He added that because they cannot vote for Cuba’s declaration and Cuba if the USA had suspicions, that they should accept multilatwas not going to vote for that of the United States.
He stated that Fidel had accepted it would be better not to arrive at similar declarations and it because it involved a basis of reciprocity, and that was a limit the process to U Thant taking note of the declarations proposition by U Thant.
In that way, he said, the USA could from the USSR and USA, without any voting by the Security assure themselves that Cuba was not subverting order in Latin Council.
He also suggested not going to the Council in any America, a charge that he rejected.
He added that Cuba could form – neither to the session, nor to the proceedings through also talk of subversion in its territory, not only by the United U Thant – but rather producing the declarations, he in States but also by other countries in the Western Hemisphere.
They discussed nucleto guarantee to the Western Hemisphere that the ar tests and other matters.
Rusk, however, spoke of Brazil’s USSR would not send missiles to Cuba again and that Cuba proposal to denuclearize Latin America.
The shock is not comGuantanamo and the Panama Canal to Brazil’s resolution for pletely done.
Among other things, the UN situation persists a territory free of nuclear weapons, with the only reservation and that has meant that the differences between us are repeatbeing that the USA could use the Canal to transport nuclear ing themselves to various extents.
We all want this matter to arms from the Atlantic to the Pacific, or vice versa. be settled, the moment of declarations to pass, and to begin the possibility of working anew toward agreement.
Only the foolish could argue that we placed the missiles there with the purpose of keeping them in that location.
We think that we have gained a victory for Cuba and for the Soviet Union, and that the objectives that we sought in I am sending now to the members of the Secretariat the report bringing the missiles there have been achieved.
The imperialof the conversation with comrade Nikita S Khrushchev in ists have been claiming victory and the American press has Moscow, as well as that of the meal we had with him and made many arguments along these lines.
We have not wished other leaders of the Soviet Government. to answer them, though they have used even the press organs Subsequently, I will send you the report on the result of closest to Kennedy.
Later, information on some political aspects brusque arguments to answer them, if we were to show that of the trip that I believe are of great interest to us. we had won a victory and boasted too much about it, those arguments would work against Kennedy and not allow him Fraternal regards, to develop his policies, making him feel obligated to threaten Cuba again.
REPORT ON THE CONVERSATION OF COMRADE However, we must not get excited.
NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV WITH THE PRESENCE OF Cuba is in a different situation.
COMRADE ANASTAS MIKOYAN, 11 DECEMBER 1962 However, speaking frankly, we do not think it is necessary to egg on the enemies, who are strong.
Upon arrival, comrade Carlos Rafael Rodríguez was received by comrades Khrushchev and Mikoyan.
You can be certain that they would. made an extraordinary effort by situating the missiles in In making our decisions, we have thought this action Cuba, the effort that brought us to move men, weapons, risk would be beneficial to Cuba, but it did not seem this way war and spend enormous sums of money, when we believed to you.
You walked out in order to bring up our differences. we had arrived at the end victorious, suddenly your rude There is another way to solve this problem, through criticism of us crops up.
And afterwards, we have seen how nuclear strikes, but we will only do this when there is no other your attitudes get in the way of solving problems, not only way out.
For then, we are not talking about a war game, but in Cuba but elsewhere.
Its small size and geographic conditions do not let it become such a thing.
I must admit to you that we have not moved beyond this You have Spanish blood – you are proud, you speak of shock either.
We did it us that Lenin in 1905 tried for a revolution, failed, and was thinking of Cuba, we have thought principally of Cuba, and required to emigrate.
Now they have his interview with Adschuvey , he made an omileft that aside, and have accepted Cuba’s survival, including nous comparison between Cuba and Hungary.
They have yielded guarantees, besides, from other States not Khrushchev resolved his problems in Hungary in three days.” to invade.
Because of this, we decided to “This skirmish has been the most interesting in all of hisplace the missiles to frighten the imperialists. tory between imperialism and socialism, and it is imperialism Of course you are proud, for you can “die like heroes,” that has retreated.” you are prepared to do it, but that does not resolve our probWe have retreated tactically, but they have withdrawn in lems.
We have not retreated on any front, we are who knows all that you have in Cuba, how much time it not in any way on the defensive; I insist, not anywhere, even would take him with forces like those of the United States to in Cuba.
I am completely in some words corroborating this statement.) agreement with Malinovski’s judgment.
The Americans’ war But the Cubans did not understand us, and they began to capabilities are extremely powerful.
We could, for example, attack us in their press, using the words of the Albanians and bombard the territory of Cuba from a distance, without the Chinese.
The people us so, and we promise you that we can shout more than the do not want to die; they want to live.
We have sent men, weapons, and spent hundreds of milMikoyan reminded me of the lyrics of a song from lions of rubles on this war.
When the decision reached impression that the Cuban people and leadership underesthe diplomatic core, we had more problems with you than timated their Soviet counterparts, that we believed them to with Kennedy.
Mikoyan barely left Cuba alive . be a people susceptible to weakening in the face of danger, I’ve told Mikoyan that only he would be able to complete while we thought Cuba and its leaders capable of all types of that mission, that no other member of the Presidium could heroism.
War and, on our part, a great admiration existed for all their Now we have a situation in which imperialism is not actions and heroism.
Certainly, we Cubans were proud, as he on the rise anywhere, nowhere, even in Cuba.
At the beginning, we countries, but only with respect to our own national attitude. were quite upset, but when Mikoyan arrived, he softened us He added that comrade Mikoyan had been able to confirm up.
I don’t know what you did to him there, what kind of this admiration and affection by the Cuban people for the treatment you gave him.
We are very proud of you.” with Raúl and Fidel, the messages at the Santiago Airport, the We share your ideas, we support them, but at the time it reception by the university students and other similar things.) was necessary to do things more sensibly.
You have behaved I told him that, secondly, I wanted to make perfectly clear something like fighting roosters.
We know that for you things that in the attitude of Cuba during this crisis, not a trace of have been difficult, but for the United States they have not the Chinese position could be found, nor did Cuban posibeen easy.
Later we will know how many pairs of underwear tions derive from Chinese ones.
I expressed that they knew have been changed during this crisis. well, and I did not wish to hide it from them, that among our We think that the non-aggression against Cuba is assured leaders there were some who sympathized in concrete ways for six years.
We know that Kennedy has two years left, and with some of the positions of our Chinese comrades, but I we are sure that he is a manipulator and will win a second wished to explain how, in this crisis, even the comrades that term, which will give us four more years.
Six years is a good felt more sympathy toward some Chinese positions found the period.
In these years, the correlation of forces will be favorattitude of the Chinese government erroneous, and that the able to us.
It may be that Brazil and other countries enter the solidarity they had expressed was too late and not sufficiently revolution. enthusiastic.
I asked him if he had time to listen upon interpreting Fidel’s letter from the 27th [of October to me, because I had to talk about many topics.
He told me 1962] as a proposition that the Soviet Union would launch a that he did.
I had carefully read Fidel’s letter, and in it many things , but that we had done so thinking it was best for had been made clear in the sense of warning of the imminence the socialist world, even though at its extreme ends, if things of the attack on Cuba, expressing the Cuban disposition to led to war, Cuba would practically disappear from the map. resist until the end.
At the same time, it advised him, once the I told him as well that the comrades that had led the attack against Cuba was done, not to vacillate on deploying first discussions were convinced that the missiles had come atomic weapons, since the attack on Cuba there to stay, as part of a global strategy.
The reference to the sending of the Baltic Fleet and an attitude supporting war at any cost against imperialism. other related things had confirmed our opinions and thereI told them, instead, the way in which Fidel had personally fore, when we learned of the offer to withdraw the missiles, conducted events and had given orders to impede incidents, and after his decision to remove them, we were overwhelmed even at the cost of our pride, as they said, of our own love and by the surprise and disoriented by the choice they made.
We even our military needs; they had tolerated situations (that I understood that there was sufficient time to discuss the matter described) that other leaders would have found difficult to with us and, besides, the way in which the problem had been withstand, all to block a conflict that could degenerate into brought up left us in a harmful situation that has threatened a war of universal proportions.
I explained the firm but cauthe influence and prestige of the Cuban Revolution and the tious position of Fidel in the whole process of relations with sovereign character of our country, obligating us to make a the United States. public expression of our differences, things that for Fidel and I then told him that I wished to get more deeply into the all others have been a bitter decision.
I set out with all possible clarity our points of view, of leading the process, Cuba has had to adopt a position that although with a little more care in expression, than I had done clashed with the commitment from the USSR. in the Havana conversation with comrade Mikoyan, warning Once these two initial positions had been adopted, each Khrushchev that they were points unanimously shared by all had its logical development.
In but that I understood that a serious error had occurred in the our leadership there had been an overwhelming desire that the process.
It is absurd to pretation of the presence of the missiles that, evidently, did think that we placed the missiles to defend the socialist world. not correspond to the intentions of the Soviet government.
He eration that installing the missiles meant the Soviet Union then focused on explaining the incapability of Cuba serving as was devising a global strategy, and the presence of the misa weapons storehouse, due to its narrowness, the vulnerability siles would be beneficial for the socialist area.
I did everything in the interest Soviet generals, and even spoke about Marshal Briusov of Cuba.
It cost three times as much to install the missiles in a way that I did not understand clearly and there as to add a device of the same power among the interthat I refused to confirm because it did not seem opportune continental missiles installed at Soviet bases.
Then he explained what we already know about the way Regarding the military agreement, this is a problem that to emplace the missiles, about the security from palm forhas concerned us.
I cannot understand the reason declaration on Cuba, in that if the Americans did not fulfill behind these interpretations. their promises, neither would the Soviet Union, and the (He then told us what Mikoyan had said about what USSR would feel free to act in whatever manner necessary.
In my conversations Cuba to the beginning of a war. with Raúl, I started from the idea that no declaration would Then comrade Khrushchev said he must confess that be sufficient to contain the Americans, so we decided that we Cubans had scared them.
You have scared us a great deal, because we were convinced that the result would be that the apparently, as relations are worse now.
Yankees would have to reconcile themselves to the Revolution We’ll think, and give a satisfactory solution.
I don’t have the formula will too share the blame for not having made the plan clear, right now.
We’ll keep thinking about this and return to the though what is certain is that we spoke.
Today you that Soviet soldiers presently in Cuba remain as specialists, criticize us harshly, but someday you will understand us. similar to those who stayed and worked in Indonesia, exactly We were convinced that Kennedy had a complex, having as he talked about them in the conversation with us.
These failed in the previous invasion, and therefore felt a necessity specialists would stay in Cuba, showing Cubans how to operto raise his prestige by attacking Cuba, and had the forces to ate weapons, and leave the country as soon as our troops were do it.
His references to Hungary, comparing it to the case of prepared to use all kinds of armaments.
The impeproper balance through which our people and others of the rialists have tried to “appeal” to our conscience so that we world, as well as the imperialists, would come to know that understand their actions, starting from what they understand Cuba would have the level of military readiness necessary to us to have done in the Hungarian case.
Only the missiles could contain the United States, only However, I don’t think it would be sufficient.
Their reports said that the way in which the does not come through, we will feel unconstrained.
Besides, Soviets were acting gave the idea that they wanted to impress, I’ll state that we will never stop supporting Cuba and that we that they wanted Western powers to know that they had the will stand by our duties toward Cuba. missiles in Cuba.
Tomorrow, in this statement but did not think it necessary to say anyon television, I’ll say that we have spoken, that you have told thing in response. us your needs, and that we still have differences around this After this, we went toward the official residences. problem… “but, as you are Khrushchev drove me in his car.
Mora told us that he needed to send off his mother at the airI began to excuse myself, and Khrushchev said to me, “No, port and, as he had not known about the dinner beforehand, we are going in the same direction, so come with me.
He said that of course it was necessary for him to go to see his Leaving the place where we had put our coats, the news mother off, but he wanted him to have a drink with us first. that we were heading out with Khrushchev caused a firestorm, since on principle, people did not understand what it meant.
Una vision some other places to show me the other new things that were politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security along the way, and finally we arrived at the home.
I climbed out of the car, and we said goodbye, but the car had to drive around the residence to be able to get out.
Two or three comrades came to the door, and Khrushchev greeted Notes them at a distance then stepped out of the car.
The Cuban guests would be all the official delegates, and they were offidocuments were contained in two “briefing books” for participants cially invited during the session. in the conference; see the Archive’s digital archive for these (SpanishWhen the session ended, Tito left immediately, and language) materials.
Around that time, scholars were also able to Khrushchev directed me to sit down and take tea.
For some obtain an important Cuban record of a secret speech by Fidel Castro time, they commented on the Congresses of Prague and Italy. in January 1968 to a closed party meeting that covered the 1962 Koslov said he had events during a discussion on Soviet-Cuban relations.
Castro, Khrushchev, Kennedy, and the Missile Brezhnev then said that Blas had not been able to go to Crisis, trans.
David Salvador was a Cuban trade union leader, 6 See,g., the translated Soviet cables published in CWIHP ex-communist, and member of the “26 of July” movement who had Bulletins no. and no.
But “no” the Brink of Nuclear War —both – that is, “not” -is indeed in the original Spanish text. of which rely heavily on United States and Russian sources.
Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui was replaced as Cuba’s of the CWIHP Bulletin, in particular Mark Kramer’s translation and ambassador to the United Nations by Carlos M Lechuga, until then analysis of a record of a January 1963 conversation between Blas Havana’s ambassador to Mexico, at the end of October 1962.
My best estimate, as “cerece,” a typographical in Hyannis Port in November 1961, a conversation that was error, resembles “carece” meaning to lack or fall short. subsequently published, but the reference here is to his private 13 Trans. note: This is part of the original text, in capital letters talk with JFK in Washington in January 1962.
When they had a tough situation in Hungary, they put to nuclear powers—i.e., Guantánamo—a condition which the an end to the conflict in just three days.
Roca made an extensive trip to Europe in Octoberthe Soviet premier in Siberia, and everything was worked out.
According to a report from Hungary’s ambassador in Havana, Roca had been scheduled to represent Cuba at the annual commemorations of the Bolshevik Revolution in Moscow, but his instructions were changed and he was instead directed to fly from Prague to Sofia.
In fact, Che made an erroneous inference from mented by the organs of Cuban counterintelligence.” recent exposés in what he described as “the Democrats’ Little wonder, then, that when Che met furtively a coupress” that “started to actively reveal the training of the ple of months later with a representative of the Kennedy Cuban counterrevolutionaries by the Eisenhower governAdministration, he began their conversation by thanking ment in Florida, Guatemala, on the Swan Island and in him for the Bay of Pigs.
His speech in Congress has only conGuevara, 30 January 1961 firmed my conviction.
RECORD OF CONVERSATION with Minister of Industry of the Republic of Cuba 6.
At the present time one can be sure, continued Guevara, Ernesto Guevara that Kennedy’s main efforts would be directed at achieving 14 April 1961 a more perfect isolation of Cuba from the countries of Latin America and the external world.
At the present time Cuba has In the conversation with E Guevara, inquired about air communications only with Mexico, and that line is hanging his point of view regarding the situation, which recentby a thread.
We should conthe revolutionary government of Cuba. duct our foreign policy in such a way, emphasized Guevara, so In response, Guevara said that the situation remained as not to allow isolation of Cuba from the countries of Latin quite tense, although he personally believes that the danger America.
At the present time, we have great, though maybe of invasion of the country by large beachheads of the external unfounded hopes for Quadros’ counterrevolutionary forces has now in all likelihood receded. assumption of power in Brazil.
Quadros, representing interests The counterrevolution understands that given the presence of Brazil, cannot benefit from the United States strangling of Cuba. of large contingents of well-armed people’s militia and the Therefore, it would be possible to rely on him, or rather use revolutionary army, an operation of deploying paratroopers, his interest in strengthening the national independence of even numbering several thousand troops would be doomed to Brazil in the Cuban interests.
Therefore, mentioned Guevara, it is unlikely that the that Quadros, guided by precisely those considerations, and forces of external counterrevolution would undertake such a in particular by the need to strengthen the Brazilian positions risk now, knowing that it would be senseless to count on any vis-a-vis the United States, would most likely want to establish kind of extensive internal uprisings in Cuba. diplomatic and trade relations with the Soviet Union.
We know, said Guevara later on, that there is no single point of view on this issue among the leadership of the counUSSR Ambassador to the Republic of Cuba terrevolutionary formations, who would have to command such operations.
Besides, it will exert some demoralizing influence on the internal counterrevolution.
We know that the United States this is not the government’s fault, but rather the consequence is presently increasing its assistance to the forces of external of American imperialism’s fight against revolutionary Cuba. and internal counterrevolution.
The main emphasis here is In the course of further conversation, Guevara said that the toward undermining the Cuban economy through stronger revolutionary government is presently seriously studying the acts of sabotage, subversion and the like.
This serves as a kind question regarding the ways of overcoming the growing ecoof supplement to the economic blockade, which is enforced nomic hardships.
Also, the United States is transferring large quantities of explomous assistance and support to Cuba.
And yet, nonetheless, sives and weapons to Cuba. said Guevara, it looks like we will have to ask the Soviet Union In the recent days the internal counterrevolution, continto help us in some areas, especially in supplying some kinds of ued Guevara, stepped up its activity and has practically begun raw materials to ensure uninterrupted work of our industry. an attack.
It would suffice to say that just in the last several Evidently, we will not be able to avoid rationing on fat-condays there were explosions in the Havana water system, power taining products and soap.
As it is known, continued Guevara, station; several warehouses were burned down, a sugar plant Cuba imported all fat-containing products and raw materials was burned down, and finally the biggest store “El Encanton.” for production of soap from the United States for hard currency.
At the All this occurred over the period of 3 or 4 days, and it is present time, the hard currency inflows do not cover the needs extremely difficult for the government to undertake anything of the country, and therefore, we would have to sharply cut the effective to prevent acts of that kind.
The El Encanton store, import of fat -containing products and ingredients for soap as it has been established, was put on fire with special thermal production.
Introduction of rationing cards is very undesirable bombs, which produce very high temperature and burning politically, but it is unavoidable.
The bombs themselves, however, are very sized Guevara, is to provide the industry with raw materials small in size.
The nationalized industry works the store building after the fire with a stamp “US Army” [on well, and its organization is improving.
The United States would drag this process out and would not agree to pay compensation because During the conversation, Guevara, touching upon the interit is not in their interest politically.
He got such an impresnal situation in Cuba, noted that the situation in the country sion from his conversations with the commission of prisoners was in general good.
Elections to the organs of state apparatus of war, who participated in the intervention, who recently both in the center and in the provinces were proceeding sucreturned from the US, and who conducted negotiations with cessfully.
Last week he, Guevara, completed his tour of the the American authorities and with the Roosevelt committee. province Oriente, with which he was very satisfied.
It is likely that the United States continued Guevara, Cuba, but unfortunately the majority of them acts extremely will keep sending their agents to Cuba during these months in indecisively.
States apparently will try to get an OAS agreement to introduce order in the Dominican Republic.
However, nobody believes such statements, Ambassador Barbosa da Silva about an interview realized in and the United States probably will have to leave them behind Montevideo at an informal gathering in the early morning of soon.
The Kennedy government in all likelihood will use the the 18th between, Commandante Ernesto crisis in the Dominican Republic in order to create a certain Guevara and Mister Richard Goodwin, with also the participrecedent of interference in the internal affairs of that country pation of Mister Rodrigues Larreta, of Argentina.
In this with the approval and sanction of the OAS, so that they could meeting, Mister Guevara and Mister Goodwin, speaking as use this precedent also against Cuba at a later stage. “enemies”, made a general appreciation of The rest of the conversation dealt with general issues.
The success transformed the position of the Government from a “small offender” to an equal TELEGRAM to equal, in whatever negotiations that will be realized; 10) Cuba does not intend “to export revolution,” but cannot preSENT vent that its example influences powerful sectors of opinion on the Continent; 11) although it does not FOR THE CABINET IN BRASILIA finance or participate directly in the “pro-Cuba clubs” or similar activities, the Cuban Government knows that its ON/19/VIII/61 example has, in many cases, the power to regiment the left, every time that Cuba was attacked.
This regimentation of the CONFIDENTIAL left can be illustrated by the example with what occurred in 600.
Continuing in his exposition and insisting about SEC/DPC/DEC/Dor/591.7 the necessity of establishing a dialogue between the Cuban Government and the American Government, Commandante Cuba.
I) United States: a) the great discontent of the Economics of Cuba, Mr Guevara.
By the way, Guevara stressed that incompatibilities about the concepts in the same contents, the Cuban Government had nothing to do with the theft of but also because it has the certainty that it will not facilitate airplanes.
Mister Goodwin asked him if the affirmation was any of the recourses linked to the Alliance for Progress.
Asked about the last hijacking, he said again that it a certain moment the help of President Betancourt was not his responsibility, the Cuban Government having of Venezuela was procured, but straightaway since the signing judged until the same was realized by “provocateurs.” of the Commercial Accord with the Soviet Union, President Mister Goodwin declared that such could not be, since the Betancourt has made public declarations for the American Government has not explained this act to its public Cuban Government.
He registered the information and suggestions of the spontaneous support in various countries, but in this it Commandante Guevera and assured him that they would be does not intend to intervene deliberately.
Cuba; 3) the international sector, where the East-West conflict 3 See the “Bibliography of Che Guevara” page on Wikipiedia for can assume such magnitude that Cuba will come to be bara lengthy of compilation of films, novels, documentaries, and plays, as gained between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The well as non-fiction works, for examples of “Che” in popular culture.
The on foreign, non-Cuban records. preoccupation on making a good impression on the American 5 See Cuban G-2 intelligence documents from January-May Republics reveals unquestionably the fear of continental col1961 on anti-Castro Cuban exile preparations to attack Cuba, lective action.
Moreover, exclusive labored vainly to mediate between their American colleague, US dependency on the East weakens its negotiating position, and ambassador Philip Bonsal, and the Castro leadership, prior to the would characterize its exclusion from American environment. formal breaking of diplomatic ties between Washington and Havana The peaceful coexistence inside the Continent would be of in January 1961.
I believe that this inforCity with senior Cuban official Carlos Rafael Rodriguez.
For the mation could be useful to Your Excellence in your audience detailed Cuban record of that conversation—given to the Soviet with Mister Guevara.
G-2 MINFAR developed, plans in which “democrats”[former Costa CENTRAL Rican President] PEPE “CACHUCHA” FIGUERES, HEADQUARTERS [Venezuelan President ROMULO BETANCOURT, and APR 7 1961 MUNOZ MARIN were not RECEIVED NO. 2681 uninvolved, the forces of imperialism transferred out of Santo Domingo their most important preparation center for an attack against Cuba.
Commander Ramiro Valdes Menendez plied, according to reports, by the CIA (Central Intelligence Department Chief.
G-2 MINFAR in different areas of Guatemala, comprising a total of more January 12, 1961 than six thousand mercenaries as well as a large number of “YEAR OF EDUCATION’’ airplanes and huge quantities of arms.
Report on mercenary camps and bases in Guatemala, toward Cuba and preparations underway in Guatemala for Nicaragua, and Florida an invasion were evident.
In mid-October there was a marked increase in activity on In 1959, the “yanki” Department of bases established in the Department of Retalhuleu.
The numState made the Dominican Republic its main mercenary ber of airplanes arriving and unloading was higher than usual. training center.
Adventurers and murderers from different People working in those centers observed that there was every countries, Falangists from the Blue Legion, Nazis, Japanese, indication of an impending attack on Cuba.
The airplanes had “yankis”, war criminals, European renegades, and other unloaded parachutes, field hammocks, and stretchers. riffraff assembled there and trained under the direction The mercenaries were concentrated mainly in the of PEDRAZA Department of Retalhuleu.
Every day, the Dominican ual who was in one of those tents reported that there was an average of ten men in each tent, which added up to six thou169 sand mercenaries.
These included Cubans, Guatemalans, municipality of San Sebastian, Department of Retalhuleu, other nationalities, and North Americans.
They were paid in the area known as Cerro Nil, on the banks of the Nima about ten dollars per day.
Another radar station dred North Americans, who direct training, construction, recently was installed on the central Guatemalan Air Force the radar station, etc.
One of these camps is situated 3 kms. base located at “La Aurora” airport in Guatemala City, and north of the center of the above-mentioned farm. on the base at San Jose airport on the Pacific coast.
The airstrip at Retalhuleu airport is built to withstand The areas where the aggressors have focused their bombardment and to last an average of two years.
Its estiactivities are Retalhuleu; Chinaja; “La Aurora” international mated cost is placed at over one million dollars.
Although airport which also houses the FAG this airstrip was recently built, repair crews are there every base, located on the outskirts of Guatemala City; the base day, which can only be interpreted as a preventive measure located at the port of San Jose on the Pacific coast; and the in case of reprisal from Cuba. base in Puerto Barrios, on the Atlantic coast.
It has been closed to the public for to Champerico port; the new airport was secretly built on the past several weeks, however, having been placed under the national farm called “La Aurora” military jurisdiction during the state of siege.
And although located in the municipality of Nuevo San Carlo, also in it is ostensibly under the control of the Guatemalan Army, Retalhuleu, whose airport is made of concrete cemented on the fact is that the airport actually is controlled by North piles ten meters deep and two meters wide and is outfitted, Americans, to the extent that truck drivers who arrive according to unconfirmed data, with underground hangars. there to unload cargo are replaced by North Americans to Other information sources indicate that there is a keep them from entering.
Moreover, the Governor of the 45,000-gallon gasoline tank covered over with sandbags Department does not even have access to this airport. and garbage in Retalhuleu airport.
Airplanes usually take off There are an estimated 48 airplanes based in Guatemala from Retalhuleu on Mondays at four o’clock in the morning for use in the attack and invasion of Cuba.
There are and return on Wednesdays between four and five o’clock in B-26 airplanes, some propulsion aircraft, and Globemaster the morning.
Most of these planes are based at the of leather boots was received for the alleged invaders.
The apparent chief or authority in the Retalhuleu Flights take place at night.
The majority of the planes are camps is a North American who goes by the assumed name unmarked and most are painted black.
This can be construed not only as a means aviators. to remain inconspicuous and cover up these activities, but Since 11 August 1960, several jets and Mustang airplanes also as a means of preparing the men to operate at night have landed at the base at the port of San Jose.
As a result, there have been a number of air August, a Globemaster landed at the main “La Aurora” airaccidents on the coast of Retalhuleu and the area known port in Guatemala City supposedly to deliver milk to CARE, as Flores, in the Peten.
The plane that crashed in the Peten but was actually carrying weapons and ammunition that had taken off from Tapachula, located almost on were unloaded by Guatemalan Army soldiers.
Nighttime parachute drills week, other Globemasters landed at the San Jose airport and also are taking place. their cargo was transported to Retalhuleu.
On the Ydigoras government has publicly acknowledged that October 14, two North American B-29 bombers and a several men have been killed or wounded, while alleging that transport plane landed at “La Aurora” central airport in this occurred during the training of Guatemalan troops with Guatemala City.
During the third week of October, airmodern weapons. planes marked with registration numbers, or alleged registraOn the “Helvetia” farm, municipality of El Palmar, tion numbers, L-F-5, L-F-8, L-F-9, L-F-11 conducted night Department of Quetzaltenango, but also accessible via the flights between “La Aurora” central airport and Retalhuleu airport.
Also, Lancaster airLast November, AUGUSTO MULET, Press Secretary planes, Canadian­made bombers.
It is possible that the northwestern zone of Retalhuleu It is common knowledge that the Retalhuleu airport Department has been chosen for mercenary camps because was outfitted hastily by North American engineers at an several national farms are located there.
Its main farms that were owned by Germans, were expropriated facility is the airstrip.
Funding was supplied by the “Central following World War II, and are now administrated by Intelligence Agency” and by corporations such as the Guatemalan government.
ALEJOS ARZU, former coordinator of “North American A ten kilowatt radio transmitter has been installed at Aid to the Guatemalan Government,” friend and advisor Puerto Matias de Galvez, at a cost of 35,000 dollars.
Its of YDIGORAS, currently diplomatic representative of the broadcasts on official frequencies and primarily target Belize.
Knights of Malta, and his brother, CARLOS It is therefore possible to surmise that its broadcasts could ALEJOS ARZU, currently the Ambassador to also reach Cuba on other frequencies; that it is able to Washington, is one of the most important mercenary broadcast instead of, or in conjunction with, Radio Swan; concentration points.
Later, Batista followers and other mercenaries began to join YDIGORAS’ chauffeur makes two trips per week to them.
At the end of the third week of October, a large number Military preparations also extend to other areas of the of North American soldiers were brought in by railway via country.
A few kilometers from Champerico Port, work has Puerto Barrios, and were taken to “Helvetia” farm. begun on a new air base in a place called “El Manchon,” Some regular troops of the Guatemalan National Army, some eight kms. to the east, and for the installation of about four infantry companies, have been assigned to guard troops on “Montecristo” farm, approximately 12 kms. from the zone and are deployed at “Helvetia,” “Aurora,” “La there.
Punta de Manabique, enclosing Amatique Bay in the Suiza,” “Tambor,” and “Culsin” farms.
On the banks of the Polochic River, Reports have been received regarding the presence of an what appears to be a new airstrip is under construction; and airplane-launching catapult at “La Suiza” farm, which serves construction took place at a rapid pace in an area known as the dual purpose of instructing pilots for aircraft carrier­ “Rama Blanca,” Izabal Department. based operations and impeding detection of the base from Other reports indicate that it is likely that YDIGORAS the air.
Guatemala and Cuba by falsely claiming the incursion of Other camps worth mentioning are located at “Rancho an alleged Cuban aircraft that would be shot down in Florida” farm in Escuintla Department, “Campo Corriente,” Guatemalan territory.
This is presumably a temies boarded thirteen war vessels, with no flags or registraporary situation. tion numbers, anchored in the bay at Puerto Barrios and Some reports point to a total of 60 aircraft, for the embarked for Nicaragua.
This mercenary contingent was mainly have not been able to obtain exact figures. composed of Cubans, as well as Salvadorans, Hondurans, North American instructors had already concluded other etc.
Other reports add that some of these mercenaries aspects of mercenary training; therefore, those who remain were left in the area of Puerto Cabezas, Blue Fields, Cabo camped at “Helvetia” and other bases are only undergoing Gracias a Dios and the Islas de Maiz in training in parachute jumping, for which a huge transport Nicaragua.
They also were counting on the cenaries as a blow to their military ego. fact that the Guatemalan Air Force would not attack them.
On 11 and 12 November, the principal and take measures to counteract the rebels. officers who had presented the memorandum were arrested, They published just two proclamations, one in Zacapa and 97 others were relieved of their duties and discharged. and the other in Puerto Barrios, about which the rest of the The detainees were taken to jail cells located in the General country remained virtually unaware.
The plan essentially was Headquarters of Military Zone 1 , to wait and see how the situation played out in the Capital. a hub of rebellion since Colonel SESSAN PEREIRA had YDIGORAS had difficulties mobilizing the Air Force won over to the conspiracy many officers from the military against the rebels.
Approximately police, who were headquartered there, many of whom were 25 pilots, more than half, refused to attack their fellow pushing for a coup. soldiers.
The President could only count on the full support When the plotters realized that YDIGORAS had begun of the Air Force chief of operations, who also piloted his to move against them, they decided to act before it was too Comander aircraft, and two or three other aviators.
Several young that same day, 13 November, the United States Embassy’s Air officers who played prominent roles in this military action Force Attache, together with other “yanki” military attaches, are university students, and others had received specialized directed operations from the Presidential Palace, where pilots “ranger” training in the United States and the Panama Canal presented themselves in person to report and receive their Zone.
Although it is still weak, a certain nationalism is operated out of Retalhuleu and Chinaja.
Some Guatemalan unquestionably taking root among young officers, and some FAG pilots were used for nothing more than to taxi the wish that “things not continue as they are.” aircraft out onto the runway where they would deboard the Democratic forces continue to struggle to overthrow plane and a “yanki” pilot would take over the controls.
To this end, they orgaused B-2 bombers and Mustangs. nize and assemble, awaiting new battles in the struggle against Later, there were reports from Puerto Barrios that the sell-out government.
Colonel JOSE LUIS While the FAG had few bombs, during those days they CRUZ SALAZAR, a favorite of the North Americans and were amply stocked from the arsenals of the North American the government’s Minister of Communications and Public mercenary bases.
Works, at one point during the uprising looked for an YDIGORAS’ army chief of staff, AUGUSTIN DONNIS opportunity to carry out a coup d’etat with Castillo Armas KESTLER, with strong ties to the “yankis” dating back to followers. 1954, stated that the Army Chief of Staff intended to request Colonel ENRIQUE PERALTA AZURDIA, who was the deployment of North American marine infantry if the named Chief of Operations during the revolt, now is emergsituation got complicated.
This plan to request United States assistance ing as a new United States favorite and is the man IGIDORAS [sic; was furthered, without YDIGORAS’ prior knowledge, by YDIGORAS] is grooming to be his presidential successor by EISENHOWER’s order to send, as he did, several United States Marine appointing him Minister of National Defense. units and an aircraft carrier to guard Guatemala’s Atlantic coast.
However, YDIGORAS’ prompt use of the “yanki” against Cuba, by accusing it of links to Fidel, which events aviators and the immediate maritime intervention decreed by soon proved false.
The Government regained from thy Military Police headquarters in the Capital; b) those control in the other areas without resorting to armed force.
A dispatch from Retalhuleu reports that “this uprising, he had had the opportunity to purge the Army’s zone is the focal point for Guatemalan military preparations, ranks of disgruntled officers, disaffected with his administrafor which Guatemalans believe that a clash with Cuba is tion.
It later adds that the United States dering government, the deployment of naval guard units in is supporting this action not only with personnel, but also Guatemala’s Atlantic waters, is considered a decisive factor with materials and the construction of facilities for air and likely to quell any threat by the opposition against his regime. ground services.
YDIGORAS, then is considered to be in a strong position, While ground forces train on the spurs of the mountain in charge of the situation.
And therefore, in compliance with range a few kilometers from the Pacific, intense air training orders from his “yanki” bosses, he is resuming mercenary is taking place here in a partially camouflaged aerodrome. activities in the Guatemalan camps.
President YDIGORAS admitted in an interview that trainIn light of Guatemala’s internal situation at the end of ing in guerrilla warfare was taking place on the spurs of October,1960 it is easy to appreciate the threats that hovered the “Helvetia” hacienda, located a few kilometers from the over the mercenary camps and, as a consequence, over the provincial capital.
He further stated that the air base located “yanki” plans to attack Cuba.
That explains why the North approximately 5 kms. west of the Capital on the Pacific side American government did not hesitate to mobilize part of its was being used for military purposes, but that he expected fleet and openly declared its willingness to use any means to that it would be turned over to commercial use in the near prevent the downfall of the YDIGORAS government, which future. would put a serious wrench in the CIA’s invasion plans.
A Guatemalan authority at the “Helvetia” farm indicated, In fact, they justified their open intervention in support according to the Times, that the project had grown so quickof YDIGORAS by invoking the already stale and false excuse ly that they had imported foreign instructors.
According of a possible attack by Cuba and communism. to this source, most of these were North American guerThis reactivation of the mercenary camps has become so rilla warfare specialists; experts also had been imported from obvious that it has been reported openly in the “yanki” press, other countries.
DWIGGINS reported that he had been able to confirm the “There are North American officers in Guatemala and existence of a military base in Retalhuleu.
Rifle-bearing guards are will be arriving shortly. posted on roads leading to the base.
Since there are no flights to and from battles in Zacapa and Puerto Barrios.
It is common knowlthe Department of Retalhuleu, there is no doubt as to the edge that infantry forces did not operate there and that the purpose of the base there. air power used was operated by “yanki” pilots.
These County police authorities were investigating similar cases of salaried pilots are bringing into the Caribbean a heterogeunmarked planes, with their lights off, picking up groups of neous fleet ranging from English jet propulsion “Vampires” men from an abandoned air strip near Clewiston . to B-25s and P-51s from the last war.
The newspaper further reported that recruits, some of Mercenary training in the United States is carried out them North American, have been active in the Miami area so blatantly that the 31 October edition of “Life” magazine for several months, screening exiles for men considered to included photographs of mercenary camps in the State be qualified and trustworthy.
GURULE, a Korean war veteran, said that Islands, in Nassau, in Cayo Sal and Cayo la Roque.
There the force he plans to mobilize will join the invading force is also talk that mercenaries assembled in camps in Miami, undergoing training in Florida.
Isla Cisne is used as a transfer in the affairs of Cuba, Guatemala, El Congo, Indonesia, point where mercenaries remain for several days before being Iraq, Iran, Burma, Laos, and other countries.
He went on transferred to Guantanamo Naval Base. to say that, based on conservative estimates, the CIA spends The first group transported to Guantanamo comprised approximately one billion dollars annually to obtain intel150 men who traveled last 24 October on United States ligence and promote subversive activities abroad.
These vessels left today in the early morning, headed for Cuban Intelligence Report, 15 April 1961 the naval base at Guantanamo, carrying only regular crew members in each destroyer.
April 1961 From the air base in Key West, Boxcar type “Year of Education” transport planes are leaving daily, as of five or six days ago, with Panama as their destination.
Commander Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, Chief of since after these flights, the planes return empty in order to Department of G-2, Ministry of the Revolutionary return with another contingent.
Armed Forces The majority of these flights have left for Panama in the night and early morning hours, and return to Key West In Washington, meetings and exchanges of opinions [took in the afternoon or at dusk.
This is clear evidence that an place] between public officials in the Department of State, the attack on our Island is being prepared, since these men White House, the CIA, and the Pentagon, but there were no could also be transported from Panama in the vessels of the common, unanimous views with regard to Cuba.
Opinions American Marines. were divided into two families, each one of which included Please respond to this.” its reasoning and conclusions.
Kennedy himself who would say the last appropriate Section the departure of the ship destined for word and approve one of the two plans.
Liaisons, Revolutionary United as well as the training of the mercenaries and saboteurs in Front the camps already set up in Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama, and some marine bases in the states of Florida and North Under Liaisons: Operational Groups: Armament, Carolina, and also in Puerto Rico.
Military Coordinator, Supplies, Finances, from the national bourgeoisie, and from some organizations Propaganda, Coordination, Action and Sabotage, Political that played a role against tyranny like the Coordinator Second Front of Escambray, the OA and elements of the right wing from 26 July and the Directorate.
They would be able to dedicate all necesits core all counterrevolutionary groups that operate sary aid and possibly be recognized by some puppet governin our country, forming an Executive , ments in America, and therefore gave themselves over who is chosen by the leaders of counterrevolutionary to the work of preparing these personnel in the handling of organizations, and whose function is military and weapons and armed struggle. political coordination, supplies, finances, propaganda, action and sabotage, communications, etc.
Gonzalo Miranda, presently 10) Anticommunist Youth of America – Raúl detained; work consisted of coordinating military matters, attempting to capture members of the Revolutionary Armed 11) Constitutional Democratic Legion (Nelson Forces, as well as all those who were discharged soldiers for Granado) whatever reason and still assisted active military personnel, and those who were prisoners or fugitives.
Tobarich, as well, was 14) Cuban Action – Demetrio in charge of Action and Sabotage, and substituted for Engineer Ray, responsible for various bombs that 15) Insurrectional Democratic Organization – produced an explosion in Havana, and the entrance of Ludovies arms and explosives into the capital, including among their missions the occupation of Celimar and the lading 16) Student Revolutionary Democratic Federation near Eufemio Cay.
This position was occupied by Salvador García Marcelino Toro who found himself a fugitive, and substituting for one within the group who had 18) Christianity Against Communism – Teté been shot previously, as the CIA had foreseen that its leaders would be taken prisoner and stipulated that each 19) Anticommunist Front – Felipe Executive member would have a substitute.
His work 20) Naval Revolutionary Corps – Benito consisted of distributing money for operations and the counterrevolutionary elements’ needs.
Aside from the story of Brazil’s mediation efforts in War battles in Latin America, making them arguably more Cuba1, we still know relatively little about how the crisis intense and centered on Cuba.
In part, this was because affected Cuba’s Latin American and Caribbean neighbors, many governments in the hemisphere were alarmed both by let alone the significance it had for the inter-American President Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba in return system.
This is now beginning to change thanks the missiles must be removed as evidence that Washington to the opening of archives in the region.
Guatemala’s armed forces years to come, we can expect new research and revelations were proclaimed ready for action, a state of emergency was on the crisis as seen from Latin America along with studies imposed in the Dominican Republic, Costa Rica offered its of how it altered Cuba’s relationships with its neighbors. ports and airspace to help impose a blockade , This will be highly significant to those of us seeking to and Argentina proclaimed its navy was ready to defend the understand the Cold War in Latin America.
When the crisis ended, however, Castro was where Cuba most actively supported revolutionary was still in power, more intransigent and revolutionary than endeavors and where the United States and Cuba (someever, now in open defiance of the Soviet Union and even more times, but not always, in conjunction with the Soviet committed to supporting revolution abroad.
The Cuban exile leader, José Miró Cardona, was so and mounting tensions that had arisen over Cuba’s influence angered by what he saw as a lack of support from the United and stated aims of supporting socialist revolution in the States in the shadow of the crisis that he resigned his post as region.
In fact, given the way that events had unfolded over head of the Cuban Revolutionary Council in exile citing what the two years before October 1962, the crisis was a showdown he saw as United States negligence as the reason.
Preoccupations about the fragility of the status quo United States embassy, without appearing to do anything after October 1962 nevertheless continued into 1963 and to intervene against them.
The Cuban government, meanefforts to isolate Cuba escalated, culminating with the impowhile, sought direct diplomatic support from Mexico and the sition of collective OAS diplomatic and economic sanctions Mexicans remained relatively well informed about what was against the island in 1964.
Latin America by the United States as is commonly assumed, what the Indeed, Mexico’s government and diplomats had a panMexican documents below show is that the call for harsher, oramic view of developments.
On the one hand, its refusal was grounded in its United States when it came to clamping down on the left proud tradition of non-interference in the internal affairs of and Cuban operations via Mexico.
This in turn sparked susother countries as a cardinal principle of its foreign policy. picion and distrust from the Cuban government who came President Adolfo Lopez Mateos was also wary of domestic to regard Mexico as being awash with CIA operatives.
But opinion and a widespread support for Cuba within Mexico. in many ways Mexico’s officially non-committal stance on Alongside, and in coordination with, Brazil, it therefore Cuba allowed it to remain a bridge within Latin America abstained from US-backed OAS resolutions sanctioning the and the inter-American system, a home to exiles of differuse of armed force against Cuba to enforce the “quarantine” ent political persuasions, and a nationalist Third Worldist and condemnation of the Cuban regime at the OAS during country at the same time as belonging to the United States sphere. the crisis.
Indeed, to be advocating an invasion of Cuba while not opposing so close both to the United States and Cuba, dependent on the basis for the OAS’ position of support for the removal United States trade, with a revolutionary history and a sizeable leftof Soviet missiles and an end to the transport of offensive wing population, the Mexican government remained torn weapons to Cuba overall.
However, two key points from mounting tensions over Cuba before the crisis or from emerge from them that will be of interest to scholars of the how the crisis itself played out in the hemisphere.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, any losses; he also assured, that the practice of shootings Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Obtained by continues, and that he fears that in one moment Jorge Mendoza Castro and translated by Tanya Harmer.] or another an extremely serious incident will occur.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, reflection that Ambassador Sánchez Gavito made about the Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Director General of the Diplomatic Service that that morn ing, at the request of the Prime Minister and Attentively, Minister of Foreign Relations, he had a long meeting ACTING DIRECTOR GENERAL with him to examine the Cuban situation.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, – the same as the Ambassador of Cuba in Rio de Janeiro – Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Brazilian government that it would be advisable for Cuba to examine the possibility of taking the initiative itself of suggesting a UN Investigating Commission (composed naturally of countries that have an independent position) go to the island.
Professor Lima assured Ambassador García Robles that the Mexican representative at the Organization of American Brazilian delegate had refrained, together with the Mexican States Council voted in favor of calling the Organ , from voting in favor of calling the Provisional of Consultation and in keeping with our information Organ of Consultation for lack of instructions.
In this afternoon’s sesto the essence of the matter, instructions have been sent to sion a United States resolution was approved that contains the Brazilian Representative this morning stating that Brazil two fundamental points to know first is that Soviet would have no objections if, on the basis that resolution 8 of bases in Cuba will be dismantled second, authorization Punta del Este was approved, a system of control, was estabfor member states to adopt individual or collective lished to obstruct the transfer of arms, without this going furmeasures including the use of armed force.
On the other hand, whatever voted for in parts and Mexico, Brazil, and Bolivia abstained resolution should make reference to the from second part.
In the block vote Mexico and Brazil investigation that the United Nations carries out and indicate voted in favor that they should await results of this investigation. with the Mexican representative having raised the caveat relating to the constitutional limitations of facilitating executive The Prime Minister of Brazil asked the Mexican power.
Our representative has maintained close contact with Ambassador that he communicate this to this Secretariat Brazilian representative.
Our impression is that the preswith the wish that Brazil keeps in closest ent international situation is of great seriousness. possible contact with it in these moments.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría Relations considers pertinent to communicate. de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Guatemala in its great anticommunist majority as meeting this afternoon. city is restless because of troop it demonstrated on 20 October, is prepared as a democratic movements maintaining order.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, the assigned peace that our countries, enemies of war and of Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Given state of emeratomic . gency, measures have been given public force to suppress I consider that the possible existence of the installations of possible disorders and agreement government to the type referred to could constitute a serious threat not only give wide protection embassies.
According to non-official to the security of the peoples in the American continent [i.e., sources possibility of suspension of individual hemisphere—ed.] but for the peace of the world. guarantees with decreeing state of emergency counI think that neither the government nor the Cuban try.
This afternoon the text communicated delivered people wish to be constituted as a threat to the peoples of diplomatic corps so that it can be made known fully America nor as factors that may lead to a breach of the peace. to our governments.
The Chargé d’Affaires ended by saying that his Government would have, as always, special interest in exchanging informaMessage from Mexican Embassy, Washington tion with Mexico in everything related to the situation of the , 24 October 1962 moment.
Obtained by 140. As the OAS session was ending Secretary Rusk took James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya care to thank our country for its attitude.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, City, 25 October 1962 Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Mexico, D.F., 25 October 1962 The Ambassador of Canada visited the Second Undersecretary Campos Ortiz.
Memo of Conversation between Mexican Foreign That this will proceed as such in accordance with provisions Ministry official and Peruvian Diplomat, Mexico contained in international agreements, according to which City, 25 October 1962 civilian airplanes are not allowed to transport arms unless MEMORANDUM previous approval is obtained.
The Ambassador added that Mexico, D F., 25 October 1962 the above is independent of the provisions also dictated by the Canadian authorities, to the effect that Russian airplanes The Peruvian Chargé d’affaires Mr Don Carlos Pérez will not be permitted to fly over Canadian territory nor land Cánepa, visited the Second Undersecretary Campos at Canadian airports.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, that it was not a Peruvian initiative.
Morrison asked, in name of the North American govCouncil on the 23rd of this month, to consider ernment, that the resolution be read, that I enclose as annex 3 the request by the Government of the United States that the and requested that the session be suspended until three in the Council, in accordance with what is established in Article 6 of afternoon in order to give time for the Representatives to ask the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, that the for instructions.
In a separate oficio, I will inform you about organ of consultation be immediately called and authorized, the afternoon session on the same 23rd of October. in accordance of Article 12 of that Treaty, to act provisionally as such.
As annex 1 I enclose the note from the Representative Very attentively, of the United States.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría that has been created because of the existence in this country de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
The last session of the Council that was convened to examine a request to call the Organ of Consultation was that Letter from Mexican Ambassador to the of 14 November 1961.
On that occasion, as the request, in Organization of American States , the Mexican government’s opinion, did not fill, among others, Washington, to Mexican Foreign Minister, 26 the requirement of alleging that the inviolability or territorial October 1962 integrity or the sovereignty or the political independence of X/442/17 an American State had been affected, the Mexican Delegation declared that it would not support it.
CONFIDENTIAL Consistent with the above, the Secretariat of Foreign Relations has given me instructions to vote in C Manuel Tello favor of the draft resolution presented by the United States Secretariat of Foreign Relations Delegation, to call the Organ of Consultation and ask the General Directorate of International Organs Council to constitute itself and act provisionally as such.
Mexico, DF Submitted to a vote, the Resolution that I enclose as annex 2, was approved by the 18 favorable votes.
Bolivia Please find enclosed three examples of the reports by and Uruguay abstained.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría to my question, Mr Allen, from de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Department was planning to request a meeting of the Organ of Consultation today, Friday, precisely to receive the information that has been sent to me by mail.
Fenochio to inform him that the State Department had given up on the aforementioned project and suggested to Letter from Yugoslav President Tito to Brazilian the governments that were taking measures to record the President Goulart, 26 October 1962 corresponding information in writing.
Mr Allen added that in this way it would be possible to avoid governments that LETTER DIRECTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF have not yet taken measures and those that have decided not YUGOSLAVIA TO PRESIDENT GOULART ON THE to take measures of any kind, being seen to be placed in an DATE 26 OCTOBER 1962 embarrassing situation.
He summed his thinking by the use of the idiomatic phrase “we do not want to put countries like The critical situation that, with a rapidity that is causing Mexico on the spot.” worry, develops around Cuba impels me to address this brief Although his attitude had displeased me a great deal, message to you.
We received with a certain relief When he confirmed to me what he had said, exactly in the first results of the efforts already realized in the United the same terms that Mr Fenochio had communicated to me, Nations and we share the determination of the Secretary I told him that he could be sure that, in the whole process General U Thant in the sense that the tension might be lessthat the OAS observes with respect to the serious situation ened by means of direct negotiations.
We consider, however, that we are going through, the Mexican government would that, as much as for the success of the current initial conversanever view itself as being in an embarrassing situation and tions as for the success of the previous efforts destined to put that, for the same reason, this possibility should be discarded an end to crisis, it is also necessary to abolish the quarantine when he would be collaborating in determining the course of and suspend the transportation of offensive arms to Cuba, action of the Delegation of the United States.
I limited myself in saying to the instrument that in the present situation can and should him that the difficulty lies in his lack of understanding and act with most efficiency to put an end to the crisis.
As such that, instead of going over things that have already past, the we completely support the efforts that have been made at important thing, was to clearly establish that the Mexican the United Nations by countries that do not belong to any Government has no objection to the Organ of Consultation bloc and other countries, as well as the indefatigable effort having as many meetings as the member states wish. by U Thant.
As far as I am On the other hand, the Foreign Minister concerned I have the intention of doing this as soon as possible.
The Brazilian Foreign Minister was referring to the position taken by the Brazilian Delegate in the Council of the Joseph Broz Tito.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría the resolution that was approved on the 23rd of the current de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Air Letter from Mexican Embassy, Rio de Janeiro, What we did not vote on and will not vote for is a condemna27 October 1962 tion of the Cuban regime or for an authorization of the invasion.
Number 1607 The “Jornal do Brasil” on the 25th of the current Expedient 81-0/210 publishes a journalistic report about this.
Brazil’s international policy same day in the “Diario de Noticias” that refers likewise to Rio de Janeiro, 27 October 1962 the Cuban question.
On the occasion of the recent international crisis, the Minister of War, General Amaury Kruel, declared on the 23rd Attached. of the current , to the “Journal do Brasil” that “the c.p.
Cuban situation Number 2551 Washington, 29 October 1962 Washington, DC RELACIONES MEXICO 29 October 1962 144. I confirm telephone conversaCONFIDENTIAL tion last night.
Secretary Rusk summoned Ambassadors [to the] White House and OAS to specify development C Manuel Tello, international crisis last few days.
He told of Foreign Relations that the] message transmitted by Moscow yesterday and General Directorate of International Organizations immediate response by President Kennedy had fundamentally alleviated tension.
Very attentively, Rusk asked us to tell our governments imminent danger removed through withdrawal of nuclear Vicente Sanchez Gavito, weapons from Cuba Cuban problem remains Ambassador alive and that President Kennedy taken nor will he take any commitment contrary resolutions approved the] consultation meeting of Foreign Ministers at Punta del Este without consulting the Organization system. long oficio I expand information and commentary.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Department on Sunday 28 October 1962 Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Although he was extremely cautious, he gave the impression of being seriously worried 2. The message disseminated by radio the about the turn that events had taken.
The Secretary of State, 27th in which Mr Khrushchev related Cuba in reply, made clear what he had already expressed, saying with Turkey.
With regards and not allude to this message of the 27th; to this last issue, he announced that the Secretary General of the United Nations, with a group of numerous experts, will 3. The message disseminated on the morning of the 28th go to Cuba on the 30th of this month.
Likewise, he repeated in which the USSR announces that it is prepared to suspend that one should not consider that there had been “a great victhe construction of the bases in Cuba, dismantle them and tory” and that the problem had ended.
With regards to the return the armaments to its territory, all under supervision latter, he told us that it is his understanding that there had of United Nations representatives.
As a counterpart, the been changes in the Kremlin over the last two days and that aforementioned power has requested assurances that the it was important that the position of Mr Khrushchev did not United States will not launch an armed attack against Cuba. weaken too much.
His last words constithe] Soviet Government to liquidate conflict threats tuted an appeal to his interlocutors for them to be discreet in world peace. their declarations to the press given that the situation facing the world continues being delicate.
PROCEDURAL COPY 759. Number 2557 I beg you take note that due to the situation that prevails in Prague, 29 October 1962 Cuba it is not possible for the time being to carry out interRELACIONCES MEXICO views to deal with urgent or pending matters with officials of 104. Continuing on from my 98.
Panic purchases the Ministry of Foreign Relations in light of most of them the population ran out of existing basic food being mobilized. supplies.
Last Thursday ordered demonstrations were carried INZUNZA . out against the United States of America and in solidarity with Cuba in front of the embassies of those countries.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Czechoslovakian government declaration that I enclosed in Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Czechoslovakia repudiates Memo of Conversation of Mexican Foreign Ministry blockade, declared its support Cuba, and supports official with Cuban charge d’affaires, Mexico City, declaration Soviet delegate Security Council.
October 1962 Last Saturday Czechoslovak Foreign Minister returned American notes relating to blockade.
In a message directed to the country on 24 of this Campos Ortiz told him that the information in this past month of October, President Betancourt respect, which appeared in the newspapers on the 29th, announced the grave situation that was coming and made has no basis whatsoever and that Excelsior on this date puba call to National Unity in order to face the danger of the lished an explanatory about the specific case.
The beans would be answered to a series of questions about the international polisent to Cuba at the same time as the rice.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, [Source: Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
UNDERSECRETARY Hermes Lima, conceded a group press interview yesterday in DON JOSE GOROSTIZA.which he, in keeping with the coincidental version published in the newspapers today, expressed, amongst other things, 1.
Brazil has taken on “on its own behalf and risk” the role of mediator, offering its good offices aimed at establishing a 2.
In addition to communicating these facts to the Mexican American countries that are broken since this “will be a guarForeign Ministry, the Chilean Government would be antee for Cuba as much as for said countries.” greatly indebted if you could give your points of view about The Prime Minister denied that part of the Brazilian the specific matter. envoy’s mission was to propose that Cuba held elections, affirming that a proposal of this kind would constitute interMexico City, 31 October 1962 ference in the internal affairs of Cuba.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, 2) The Government of Brazil and its envoy are well aware Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Obtained by that the fundamental conditions for overcoming the crisis James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya will be “proof of the existence of the nuclear bases and its Harmer.] dismantling,” which must have as a counterpart the commitment of the United States to not invade Cuba.
He answered that he did and that he between peoples was reestablished the United States, would send it to him immediately. with its nuclear superiority, gave an example of prudence and Mr Sinobas expressed to Campos Ortiz that the Cuban care.
This proves the high political capacity and statesmanlike government considered the support of Mexico, in this case, as ability of President Kennedy.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Government a conciliatory proposal communicated to the Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, November 1962 Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Mexico, DF, 7 November 1962 The Cuban Chargé d’Affaires, Mr Ramon Sinobas, visited today, by prior appointment, the Undersecretary Campos Ortiz.
He said he had instructions to ask us if we could give him an answer yet to the request his government had made to us Memo of Conversation between Mexican Foreign for the Delegation of Mexico to give its support in the United Ministry official and Cuban diplomat, Mexico City, 1 Nations, more concretely in the General Assembly, to the Five November 1962 Points that Prime Minister Castro made known recently, and MEMORANDUM that are related to the crisis situation that has been taking 1 November 1962 place between Cuba and the United States.
The He did not have with him the text of the Five Points, but he Secretary gave instructions to Mr Licenciado Campos gave it to us that same day in the afternoon in a note.
Campos Ortiz said to Mr Sinobas that the General Mr Sinobas said that he had instructions from his governAssembly of the UN could not approve any resolution nor ment to ask the Mexican government for its support in the make any recommendation about this matter, as it is already United Nations, to obtain acceptance of the five points that being considered by the Security Council.
Campos Ortiz added, in the first paragraph of Article 12 of the Charter, which he then read.
In addition, he added, in the previous Mr Sinobas asked Campos Ortiz if we could disclose to cases, similar to this one, presentation of the freight contract him what would be our position would be in the event that has never been requested. the matter was discussed in the Assembly.
Since the 3rd of November – he added Mr Sinobas thanked Mr Campos Ortiz’s offer and com– the steamship “Bahia de Marriel” has been in Veracruz, mented that he would very much like to have these reports in but the merchandise has not been able to board given that time to send them to Havana on next Friday’s airplane. the Head of the ANDSA at the Port, a gentleman with the surname Vega, is not allowing 4.
Fourthly, Mr Sinobas asked Undersecretary Campos Ortiz its dispatch because of not having, he says, instructions for if any resolution had been taken yet in relation to Cuba it from the seller.
In addition, Mr Vega is requesting that joining the Convention on the Inter-American Indigenous the proper contract of the freight be presented.
Campos Ortiz answered him that an answer to the considers that perhaps there is a misunderstanding in this note that the Cuban Embassy had sent with regards to this case, given that the Embassy’s Commercial Counselor was matter was still pending. informed that CONASUPO had given instructions for dispatching the merchandise.
By way of conclusion, Campos Ortiz repeated what he had told Mr Sinobas in respect to the Five Points contained in the Memo of Conversation between Mexican officials Declaration by Prime Minister Castro, because he wanted, he regarding trade with Cuba, 8 November 1962 told Mr Sinobas, to be very precise on this point so that Mr Sinobas, in turn, took note, very clearly, of our answer.
Mexico, DF, 8 November 1962 Undersecretary Campos Ortiz was not able to comSecretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
With respect to the rice, he said that the 4,500 tons of rice that were obtained from CONASUPO and that brings in Memo of Conversation between Mexican officials $9,000,000, appeared consigned to a Swiss firm in Lausanne, regarding shipment to Cuba, 7 November 1962 but that it was later known that the rice was destined to Cuba.
Letter from Mexican Ambassador to the Unfortunately, he did not offer us his ideas on this last point Organization of American States to Mexican and it did not appear to me to be convenient to ask for Foreign Minister, 14 November 1962 clarifications.
He finished saying that ity of making concrete plans while the results of the conversawhen in his country communists are not pursued his governtions between Mikoyan and Castro are not ment is accused of being unfriendly to the United States and known.
He gave the impression that his government representatives there undoubtedly exists unrest over of the did not attribute importance to the problem of denuclearizapossible repercussions of a North American agreement not to tion.
In effect, many of my colleagues have been talkthe activities of communist agents, with the Ambassador ing, both in the Council and in conversations with me, about having informed us that last Saturday , the neutralization and “Finlandization” of Cuba. two Guatemalan communists had arrived from Cuba in It is my understanding that, until now, the Department Guatemala, and “attacked” a radio transmitter.
At the various proposals to intervene in the resolution of the Cubanmoment, all events of real importance for the solution of the North American problem.
Cuban problem have as their stage, like yesterday, Cuba in first place and, in second, the place that the United States and Attentively the Soviet Union choose to hold their negotiations.
I will continue carefully EL DIRECTOR GENERAL INTERINO. observing the direction they take I will endeavor to reduce their proportions and I will keep you informed of any Lic.
Another aspect, that he was examining at this stage Council, where Cuba would be present and could take advanof the conversations, related to whether representatives of the tage of the opportunity to begin launching diatribes and Red Cross should use a North American boat, a Soviet one, or insults again.
Fortunately, Stevenson said, the USSR did not one from a neutral country.
He added that, by this time, the only share this point of view but, in fact, gave the appearance USSR had already withdrawn the offensive arms that it had of having an even greater interest than the North American in Cuba and begun to dismantle the corresponding platforms. delegation of avoiding debate in the Security Council.
Finally, an agreement was reached so that the missiles and During the next stage, the possibility of sending a joint bombers that were withdrawn, would go on the deck of the letter to Secretary General of United Nations was examined boats so that the United States could verify their withdrawal and, after this, what would be two separate letters with the on the high seas easily.
In this way, he added, 42 missiles of interpretations of each government.
Mr Martin expressed that the negotiations Martin’s answer was this was what they were trying to do with the Soviet Union were finished as of this morning, meanaround the whole world but that China does not count, in ing that the problem of Cuba and its relations with American Latin America, on resources that the Soviet Union has. countries would continue to be a question for consideration The Uruguayan Representative asked to speak again to ask in the Council.
We should bear in mind, he said, that the if it was considered useful for the Organ of Consultation to Soviet could establish an offensive base in Cuba.
Mr Martin replied that this United States has reserved its right to aerial reconnaissance. was one of the points that the Department of State wanted to The other members of the OAS would also have to keen on consult other American Foreign Ministries about. guard.
My government, he added, will not allow any of our republics to be attacked and is ready Washington, DC, 7 January 1963 to act where necessary.
Obtained by saying that, for now, they do not have concrete proposals to Jorge Mendoza Castro, translated by Tanya Harmer.] make and that what is next is to undertake consultations to consider what measures can be taken.
In turn, the Argentine ambassador asked if there was any news about the Soviet Union’s proposals or plans for the 91.
Mr Martin declared that for now there were no morning, in a “secret” session, acting provisionally as an indications that these activities were going to decrease.
In the case of Cuba, he said, 1) Presence of Soviet troops on the island; the only product that was spoken about during the talks was 2) Visit by Prime Minister Fidel Castro to the Soviet Union; sugar.
At no point is the possibility of establishing industries 3) Internal situation in Cuba. of any kind mentioned.
As a result, he indicated that Cuba remains limited to the role of producing primary materials, 1) Presence of Soviet Troops in Cuba. in this case, sugar.
He finished this chapter indicating that Khrushchev’s triumph had amounted to presenting Castro With regards to this issue Mr Johnson reported that to the world as an example of the good results of his policy. his government calculated that at the moment there were between twelve and thirteen thousand Soviet nationals on the 3) Internal Situation in Cuba. island, without being able to be precise about the number of these that corresponded to technicians and that [which In the communiqué that was issued after the meeting, on corresponded] to soldiers.
He said that the presence of these which he based nearly all his information on, he reported troops did not represent any threat to the Continent in view that emphasis is being placed on the need to consolidate Fidel of the lack of boats to transport them outside the island.
He declared that the Cuban even so, his government continues to make efforts designed economy is continuing to deteriorate and, as an example, he to get them to leave Cuba.
Since last February, he added, mentioned the fact that, this year, the production of sugar will approximately five thousand men had left.
The troops that only be 3. million tons, which is the lowest figure registered remain on the island continue controlling arms such as the until now.
He mentioned the shortage of certain items such guided missiles but, as far as he can tell, they are trainas shoes and others, which they are rationing.
In terms of ing Cuban elements to operate “MiG” airplanes and torpedo transport, he said that the situation is also difficult due to the boats . lack of replacement parts, since they have run into serious difficulties with the equipment that the Soviet Union has pro2) Visit by Prime Minister Fidel Castro to the Soviet Union. vided them with.
He reported that the level of morale among workers was very low and that the lack of certain products Undersecretary Johnson reported that, apparently, the purobliged the government to take measures that aggravated the pose of Mr Castro’s trip to the Soviet Union was to “inject situation.
In spite of this, he added, you could not say that the new life” into the alliance between both countries.
He notes regime in Cuba was in a dangerous situation, given that, the that it is a triumph for the Soviet Union that Prime Minister security measures that it had adopted, are very effective.
He Khrushchev has obtained Castro’s support in relation to the commented that the subversive radio propaganda from Cuba existing dispute between his country and Communist China had declined while, in other countries in America, it had and, in relation to this point, he stressed the importance that increased.
That the United States are trying was given, during the conversations that both prime ministers to cooperate with the Governments that see themselves as had, to “coexistence,” in relation with other affairs that were seriously threatened.
That, on journeys to and from Cuba continues to be a real problem even so, the North American government harbors serious but, he added, via Europe. doubts about Castro’s intention to tie himself totally to the Ending his speech, Undersecretary Johnson offered to political line followed by the Soviet Union.
The measures that that are being thought about “person” of Fidel Castro.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, and Cuba had notably declined.
That some of them had Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Prime Minister Hermes Lima at that time was Cuba and the role of the exiles would only be to help their temporarily also serving as foreign minister due to the illness of San compatriots on the island.
This refers to a resolution passed at the January 1962 meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay, at which hemispheric Very attentively, countries approved measures against Cuba.
This place is about 10 “The invasion planned for the near future is imminent. km from Puerto Juárez.
Yucatán Peninsula, Quintana Roo town by about 2 km, and 14 km from Puerto Juárez, there are , and Belize. movements of about 80 foreigners, who carry long weapons and pistols.
According to subsequent information it has become known that the individuals that are to be found in the three FEDERAL DIRECTOR OF SECURITY aforementioned places, received orders to move to Cabo Catoche, which had not yet happened at the time of the MANUEL RANGEL ESCAMINA. report due to the bad weather that existed in this region.
Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City, Dirección arrived from Cuba: 17 men and 5 women.
Information relating to POLITICAL CUBAN REFUGEES CARLOS FERNANDEZ TRUJILLO and Drs.
ROLANDO mentioned above, have officially expressed today that it will ROJAS, ALDO-FOREST, CARMEN VILLARES, ANGEL stop functioning because it does not count on the economic GONZALEZ FERNANDEZ and the rest of the Directors means necessary, now that the subsidy that the Embassy of the of the Cuban Revolutionary Council [Consejo Revolucionario United States had been giving them and that they basically Cubano] (formerly the Cuban Revolutionary Democratic depended on has been withdrawn.
It is said that as a result of the above, it is possible that the Council in question will dissolve.
Information relating to the It is my duty to address the Revolutionary Council of Cuba, CUBAN REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL IN EXILE which I chair, to resign from the post which I have held to this day, which I was appointed to on 22 March 1961 by unanimous agreement of the organizations and dignitaries which I Mexico, D F., 9 April 1963 am honored to address.
The only reason for my irrevocable decision is extremely In the offices of this Organization, situated on Calle Paris serious.
In view of the fact that the answer of the aforementioned president was negative, MIRO II Historical Account CARDONA chose to resign the position that he occupies, “because the anti-Castro forces can not count in any way, on Before explaining the main reason for my irrevocable deciNorth American backing.” sion, I feel obliged to give, in a short synthesis, an account of At 1600 hours today, in Miami, FL, Cuban leaders in exile the main events which occurred after 17th April 1961.
I made met, to try and stop and convince MIRO CARDONA not to it my duty to maintain absolute silence regarding the agreeresign, saying “anti-Castro Cubans without North American ments with the United States and the Council’s plans, thinksupport or support from another nation, should form combat ing it would better serve the cause.
That judgment stopped brigades on their own in every country, whether their governme, until now, from clearing up the situation and offering the ments oppose them or not, that is to say, that these groups guidance, which exile continuously demands.
Today it cannot would integrate themselves clandestinely.” be negated in any way.
The road travelled guerrillas, for the proud political prisoners; for the heroic between May and October of 1961 was unforgiving at times. combatants of the Bay of Pigs; for the civilian population of We did not waver in expressing our disagreement with the Cuba dominated by terror; for the long-suffering émigrés; for President’s collaborators about methods and tactics, with a the revolutionary organizations that have seen their fighting spirit of cooperation, it must be said, always prevailing.
As Mr Goodwin was dealing with the quesHonorable Secretary of State to hear about the policy that tions about Cuba very reluctantly, I, there and then, asked for would be advocated at the Conference of Foreign a meeting with President Kennedy.
After analyzing each nation’s position, he put an end and illegal trial prompted us to do this.
Varona and myself to have an not be repeated and I beg you to inform your people that the audience with the President.
We were handed over to another United Stated will not permit Communism to continue in person, Mr Mac George Bundy.
I will inform the President of your points of view this polite but cold.
The seriousness of this corus are in agreement, he, you and I.” rect gentleman was only lifted slightly as a result of a certain expression by Dr.
We contributed as far as we could and it as a lawyer for the men of the Brigade, I send them my most was possible to unify the American heartfelt regards.
We were not asking for clemency. being at the threshold of great achievements.
The first, because of its the liberation of the homeland with a Cuban presence at the urgency, was the freeing of the prisoners, an issue which until forefront of battle, was getting close. then Mr Goodwin had disrupted or delayed.
After listening to me with undivided attention and giving thought to the i) Crisis in the Council arguments, he promised to take charge of solving the matter.
The crisis whole question and I expressed my worries about the differwithin the Council intensified.
Absences were noticed at ences I had observed between Mr Goodwin’s vagueness and the session we held for me to inform them of my efforts. the assurances of the Honorable President.
He gave me a date for a further was agreed to approve the plans and I was given a vote of meeting on Tuesday 10th April at 4 pm. confidence to put them into effect and I was congratulated for the patriotic work I had undertaken.
The internal crisis h) The Meeting of 10 April was averted but I lost the effective collaboration of nationally relevant figure at the time I most needed them.
Pleas were After talking briefly with the Attorney General in his office not worthwhile. on the appointed day, he invited me to accompany him to the President’s house.
The The sugar quota meeting with the President lasted one hour exactly.
During the meeting, I outlined Cuba’s internal crisis of Cuba, the hemispheric crisis, the crisis From that moment on, under tremendous attack by the exiles of a lack of trust of those exiled and the troubled position in opposition, whilst the revolutionary organizations were of the Council.
We carrying out truly brave acts, we prepared a register of poshad a genuine dialogue in which he assured me emphatisible combatants and without vetoes or exclusions, the lists cally, conclusively and with finality “that it was essentially of officers, within the age limits given.
General a military problem of six divisions,” and that the Council Lansdale came to Miami to discuss certain aspects of the had to contribute the largest contingent of fighters possible; military problem, which had no simple solution and implied that unilateral action should not be adopted, because, in inevitable delays.
Whilst these matters were being fleshed total agreement with my judgment, it would be a very seriout, the Council defended Cuba’s right to the sugar quota ous error with continental repercussions.
He listened to my at the House of Representatives , under the opinions attentively and repeated his request that the Cubans direction of Professor Arturo Manas, who I am grateful to. should continue their training in the military units.
When I Afterwards, for international political reasons, I visited the informed him that the agreed plan was on its way to being a nations of Central America and Panama , disaster, because of the bureaucratic delays, excessive demands whose unity of thought and action were due, in part, to the of certain physical conditions, because of the limit on the agreements of Punta del Este.
The exiles who were there agreed age and because officers had not been invited, he welcomed us affectionately.
I met with all the presidents and asked Mr Goodwin for explanations I ministers.
President Kennedy’s visit, which had just taken answered, I have been asking, nearly daily for the fulfillment place, was outlined.
With little opposition, the Honorable united, proud, in solidarity with Cuba, but powerless.
President dictated orders, then and there, for massive recruitment, without as many requirements and with a formal invik) Recruitments.
The meeting, obviously, also covered aspects which it is not my place to reveal.
But it was an intense time of meetings with Latin destiny is to suffer.
I left the White House certain that organizations did a great job of providing intelligence.
This delegation worked all Sunday night and early On 25 August , at a press conference on the subject, Monday morning.
Those recruited to Fort Knox were underwe denounced the arsenal in the Antilles and the invasion of going intense training.
We asked for a naval and air blockade of the eight days from 22 October.
I was reassured by the approach island, we alerted all the nations of the continent.
I felt confident, despite criticism was to made public at six in the evening.
Before those men, punUnited States that it had violated agreements. ished by lead, he made statements of unequivocal alliance, as 2) The note from the Department of State “condemning he picked up the flag of the Brigade.
The leader of Democracy Cuban actions that had been carried out,” which contradicts spoke and he spoke as leader.
His words were vibrant, strong, the Joint Resolution of Congress in September 1962.
He reiterated his commitment to Cuba significant that the action carried out by the Revolutionary before the world.
All the circumstances that I interrupt the prolonged process of evacuation of the Russian have made reference to, by themselves constitute a series of technicians, (that comprise more than a division of soldiers of a rational indications, vehement indications, that lead, in an Soviet army) or the freeing of North American prisoners.
In the capital, free of the pressure Resolutions, the sovereign will of this nation expressed in the that the ideas I had come up with had been agitating me over Resolution of Congress in September 1962 and the repeated the course of 48 hours in Miami, after a serene analysis, I offers of cooperation I have received. adopted, in principal, the decision that I am making known today.
My frame of mind was permeable to the slightest recently created and with headquarters in Miami, implementargument in which they might offer me the minimum sense ing a rapid liquidation of the Cuban process that is reflected, of security.
To promote or attempt an insurrectional movement determined by desperation without These are, in grim reality, the facts.
As a result, in a constant way, with the right to be free and independent,” the legislative power of absolute clarity, I have suggested coexistence once again, the this nation said on this historic occasion. necessity of establishing an alliance on basis of mutual respect By virtue of the “rough riders” under the leadership of for a joint military action.
So we demanded, another our country has been converted into a Soviet province and time again, that we be given an analogous warlike capability the security of the United States is being threatened by a to the one that Fidel Castro receives from the Soviet Union, so communist fortress in the Caribbean. as to win a battle alone or succumb to a Holocaust together.
They f ) Our reiterated standpoints have inexplicitly shut off our alliance from 1898.
For the reasons outlined above and many others that could be added I have favored the alliance with the United V Final States so that it is understood, with very good reason, that Cuba should be helped by the whole hemisphere.
God, homeland, and family; as are as a consequence that they outline, without defining, confused prospects for an invaluable assets such as: democracy, independence, freedom, imprecise and far-off liberation, denied by objective facts in justice, and social well-being.
Dominated by the specter of uncertainty and the tism is upholding is far more profound that the insurrection having lost trust in the realization of offered assurances, I canof a people against a typical American dictatorship. not continue in the position of chair of the Council.
Today installation of a Communist Regime that demands everyone’s it needs, more than ever, all its forces to make the Homeland assistance to destroy.
This is what the unavoidable fulfillment that its founders wanted a historic reality.
But in the Cuban crisis a completely as inexhaustible as its moral reserves.
Yet it was fairly high-level access, which makes their cables particularly not a total failure, as it foreshadowed the adoption, within five valuable; Campos had conversations with Dean Rusk and years, of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which was signed in Mexico President Kennedy himself, while Pinto, during the crisis City in 1967 and proand immediately afterwards, had regular encounters with hibited nuclear weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl Roa; an important talk with (In another ultimately futile initiative at the UN, Brazil also Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos on 27 October, amid promoted the notion for ambassadors from neutral countries fears of an imminent United States invasion; and facilitated the visit to inspect the dismantling and removal of Soviet missiles from of Gen.
Translated from Portuguese sile crisis and even by James G Hershberg.] the now half-century-long US-Cuban confrontation—can greatly enrich the international history of both stories, and of the cold war as a whole.
There does not remain any doubt that the United States of Czechoslovak and Russian anti-aircraft batteries already is already exercising, in a systematic character, strict naval and known here.
Personally, I have seen on the quay of Havana aerial vigilance around Cuba.
American ships are controlling roads, there are some already disembarked, of the models used at a distance of a few miles the entrances to various ports of here for transport of these armaments; 2) convoys of tanks this country.
In the last days, the vigilance seems to have been and some launchers against torpedoes have been sighted in reinforced, since, almost daily, the local press publishes photothe early morning on the roads near the port of Mariel; 3) graphs of Latin American planes flying over ships in the vicinthe latest news is up to that radar installations and electronic ity of Cuba.
According to a what is its exact application; 4) there is no information about declaration to me, confidentially, the captain of rockets of any type; 5) various news about the arrival and a French ship that just arrived in Havana from movement of paths of concrete , that Russia, American planes, more than one time, requested that there appear to be significant application of known Cuban their ship identify themselves when it came near to Cuban program of underground installations and anti-aircraft warewaters.
Until now, nevertheless, the only verified international houses; 6) all indicates that the number of Russian military incident was referred to in oficio no 238.
Beyond the the Polish minister was to hear the Brazilian delegation in experts of the systems of communications, they have, also, respect to the informal meeting in Washington.
I gave him chauffeurs, builders, etc.; 7) the Russian military personnel an account that, not without touching on certain details of are seen in encampments of canvas in areas situated around importance, did not go beyond which could be found pubHavana, Trinidad, Caibarien, and Banes.
Before they are lished in the news sections and in the editorials installed, the local residents have been evacuated.
All wear ordinary sports seriously preoccupied with the consequences of what Rapacki clothes.
This afternoon, I was personally this afternoon in two called the “economic blockade” of Cuba, giving the impressites where some hundreds of them are camped.
There is no sion that they fear Soviet retaliation which could prejudice doubt that they exist and that their physical type is unequivotheir own commercial interests and the relative political cally Russian.
I tried to give him the impression that the current by James G Hershberg.] severity against Cuba may diminish after the American elections or with the progress of negotiations in other fields, including in the disarmament but he did not seem to me at all convinced.
OUTUBRO DE 1962//”), Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
The speech of Cuban President Dorticós, in the UN, DORTICOS INVITED ME TO HIS HOTEL was extremely ponderous and even conservative, by Cuban WHERE HE RECEIVED ME IN THE COMPANY OF standards.
I WAS ACCOMPANIED time, the “complex of invasion” that has motivated in large BY AMBASSADOR LUIS measures the comportment of the revolutionary government LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO AND MINISTER ROBERTO in international politics.
A DEVICE OF AGGRESSION the United States and to challenge that country to introduce IS FORMING AROUND CUBA AT THE SAME TIME an identical proposition.
HE SAID THAT IT WOULD BE A Havana—1962/1964,” CX 229, Ministry of External Relations FATAL ERROR TO BELIEVE THAT THE AGGRESSION Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
I observed LISTENED ATTENTIVELY AND RETORTED THAT also that since yesterday there have been frequent meetings HIS VIEW THAT THE RISK CONTINUES SINCE and consultations between the principal members and organs THIS COUNTRY HAS RESERVED THE RIGHT of the government, especially of the Department of State and IN CERTAIN CASES OF INTERVENTION AND the Pentagon.
The facts however appear, to DAC/DAS/DCET/DEA/600. indicate that it probably deals with Cuba; the aircraft carrier “Enterprise” was launched yesterday from the coast of Puerto Return to Washington of the North-American Secretary of Rico, sailing toward the south; one finds in the area of the Treasury.
As I pondered to him the repercussions that hypothesis of have verified some of the predicthis departure can have on the Conference and made to him ed cases of President Kennedy, which justify drastic actions on an appeal to remain here, at least until the representatives of the part of the United States of America, such as the supply of Latin America have made their speeches, Secretary Dillon offensive arms to Cuba or exportation of military equipment literally lost control, declaring, visibly upset, that the situation of Cuba for some countries of the Caribbean.
The Council of in Cuba was of such gravity that he could not say if there will International Security met today be or not a world nuclear war by the weekend. at 1500hs with the President, who convened the Cabinet at 1600hs today.
ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF CIES – MEXICO ON/22/23/X/62 20 – MONDAY – 2330hs – Supplementary to my telegram no 19.
The Council of the OAS will convene tomorrow, the 23rd, at nine o’clock in the morning TELEGRAM and transforming in a provisional meeting of consultaRECEIVED tion, the United States is hoping, also tomorrow, for approval 12602 of the resolution the text already transmitted to Ambassador Penna Marinho, authorizing individual and collective action, FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON including the use of armed forces for blocking the arrival ON/22/22/X/62 of offensive armament or installation of missiles.
I call attention to the language used in paragraph two of the resolution CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT giving a blank check not only for the blockade DAS/DAC/DOr/DEA//600. but for any other military action, in the individual judgment of the country that adopts it, agreeing that we are alerted by Question of Cuba.
I have been informed, after a meetmantling of the offensive remote-controlled missiles.
In case ing at the Department of State, that of a probable veto in the Security Council the matter will be Rusk justifies as follows the severity of the American reaction raised to the General Assembly.
IF Tuesday, 23 October 1962 IT IS STILL LIKE THIS YOUR EXCELLENCY CALLED TO VOTE ON THE DRAFT RESOLUTION IN THE SECRETARY OF STATE CURRENT TERMS, YOU SHOULD DECLARE THAT, FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS WITHTOUT PREJUDICE TO OUR SOLIDARITY TO THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL AT THE WITH THE COUNTRIES OF THE HEMISPHERE ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES -AND WITH THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, WASHINGTON AND THE FUTURE POSITIONS THAT WE WILL CONFIDENTIAL ADOPT IN LIGHT OF THE MAIN EXPLANATIONS On 23 of outubro de 19 62 REGARDING THE SITUATION, WE ARE UNABLE TO SSE/DEA/DAS/DAC/DAM/DOR/600.
Translated from Portuguese on the UN and the OAS making new decisions if one admits by James G Hershberg.] various hypotheses as voluntary decisions of the Russians or Cubans to suspend the assembly of the remote-controlled rockets pressure of the method/mood of the blockade to provoke an insurrection in Cuba limited bombardments specifically on rocket bases and invasion.
The OAS Council now starts the session headed CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT to approve the North-American draft resolution.
The Secretary Martin put forRussell, that the Soviet Union will not take hurried measures ward that, soon, there will be fully disseminated, to convince and would favor a summit meeting.
There is an urgent necesLatin American public opinion of the gravity of the threat, sity for creative formulas that, avoiding humiliation for both photographs of the remote-controlled missiles in Cuba. sides, reduces the tension.
MD—Washington—Telgr.-Cartas—Receb.a proposal for the denuclearization of Latin America and Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External Africa under UN inspection.
Assembly, where Brazil itself could lead the prodenuclearization movement, certainly all of Latin America and the neutral world would combine, with perhaps the exception of the UAR, the nuclear program of Nasser.
A subsidiary hypothesis would Washington , 5m., Wednesday, 24 be the denuclearization as well of the Middle East, that taking October 1962 in Israel and … the abandonment of NATO’s nuclear installations in Turkey, today already considered obsolete.
These SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS measurements represent a smaller price to pay for world peace than concessions in Berlin, where the allied position is irreducTELEGRAM ible, and in Formosa, where it can become more difficult, [in RECEIVED view of--dada] the Chinese aggressiveness in relation to India.
The supply of foodstuffs and other articles for memPostponement of visit of President Kennedy’s visit to Brazil. bers of this Embassy and for the asylum-seekers will become a grave problem within a few days.
IN VIEW OF THE lem of eventual evacuation of their families; some are intendINTERNATIONAL TENSION, HOWEVER, NO ing to hold back, in their efforts for this end, two European DECISION WILL BE TAKEN REGARDING THE navies that one encounters here.
Translated from Portuguese Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
TWO … IMMEDIATE da Cunha informs that even if diplomats accredited here OBJECTIVES OF THE NORTHAMERICAN manifest apprehension on the measures announced yesterday GOVERNMENT ACCORDING TO WHAT WAS by this government, it is making difficult a retreat for considDEFINED IN THE SPEECH OF KENNEDY ON THE erations of international prestige and national pride.
A) TO BLOCK NEW OFFENSIVE yes, manifest apprehension before the fact of that about two ARMS FROM ARRIVING IN CUBA; B) TO OBTAIN THE tens of Soviet ships if find the way to Cuba.
VARIOUS FACTORS MAKE WITH WHAT TO order to put in practice the points announced by Kennedy.
THESE SAME FACTORS Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External THAT ASSURE THE POLITICAL SUCCESS OF THE Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
OTHER ALTERNATIVES THAT THE SOVIET UNION COULD AIM AT WILL BE TO GAIN Question of Cuba.
Since AGAINST THE CUBAN TERRITORY, VICTIMIZING yesterday, one can perceive a certain relief with the efforts of CUBA AND OBTAINING WITH IT A POLITICAL AND the Secretary-General and of numerous memberJURIDCAL ETHICAL POSITION SUPERIOR TO THE countries of the UN to avoid aggravating the situation.
FACED WITH SUCH POSSIBILITIES, Cuban press and radio give prominence to this news, while THE ONLY HOPE IS TO STILL INTENSIFY THE they continue to summon the people to prepare themselves DIPLOMATIC PRESSURE ON HAVANA AND for the defense, at the same time, insisting that world opinion MOSCOW, IN THE SENSE OF IF OBTAINING OR is mobilizing in favor of Cuba.
However, a high functionary of the chancellor said, still yesterday, to my ROBERTO DE OLIVEIRA CAMPOS colleague that Cuba considers Brazil more firm, in its favor, than Mexico.
MD—Washington—Telgr.-Cartas—Receb.LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
I was informed order to inform him about the gesture of President Tito to by the substitute deputy representative of the United States gather together various heads of state, including the Brazilian, in the OAS Council, and to probe regarding the receptivity for a proposal of a soluMr Ward Allen, that the State Department determined that tion of the crisis.
Dorticós, extremely perturbed, told him that the American Delegation at the General Assembly of the American planes are making low-level flights over United Nations would enter into contact with the Brazilian Cuba and, according to information obtained in recent hours, Delegation to examine the proposal for banning nuclear arms the American attack is imminent; it would even be a “miracle” in Latin America and Africa.
American interest in the proposition aims at neutralizing the He said that Cuba is ready to negotiate any solution, includeffect of the Soviet manifestation regarding the opportune ing the disarmament, the denuclearization, and the neutralBrazilian proposal, well-received on the part of some member ization, repeat the neutralization, since it would not surrender countries of the United Nations.
I am led to this supposition with tied hands to the United States of America.
In case Your for it is obvious that the Soviet Union will see with great Excellency thinks it appropriate, it may be possible to get in interest and sympathy the de-nuclearization of the abovetouch with the president to confirm the account. mentioned regions, as I incidentally had an opportunity to confirm in a conversation with one of the secretaries of the LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO Soviet Embassy, Mr Goundarev, who saw this Delegation on a courtesy visit.
I have just had a long lecture with the under-Secretary of ON/27/X/62 External Relations, who communicated to me his conviction that the United States is not disposed to negotiate SECRET—EXTREMELY URGENT on the Cuban question and has decided to intervene militarG/SSE/DEA/DAS/DAC/DAM/DOr/DNU/600. ily on the island, since is it persuaded that the military and political base that has been established by the USSR disturbs Question of Cuba. the world equilibrium between the two blocs.
I reaffirm our full support to obtain guarantees but if will not cooperate in such a sense as for the situation in for the territorial integrity of Cuba. the long term; he finds indisputable that in case of an acute aggravation of the world crisis, historical, geographical and EXTERIORES ideological reasons make doubtless the homogeneity of the position of the American countries, in spite of some possible NOTE OF DCA – This telegram was dictated by telephone internal dissent in some of them.
Invitation of Fidel Castro to the Secretaryunable, therefore, to speak to him about the permission for General of the UN to go to Havana. the coming of a small commission of the United Nations but requested him to try to do it with maximum speed.
In spite of the demand to view of the publicly reiterated affirmation, of this lift the blockade, it seems to me that the response of Fidel government, that it would not accept any type of audit , offers favorable calização] or inspection.
However, already today, the response possibilities that should be explored.
I believe that the immeof Fidel Castro to the UN Secretary General, in his long diate visit of the UN Secretary-General to Havana will be of initial section, strongly affirms to reject the blockade as the major importance and, I have the impression that the Cuban pretension of the United States of America to determine the government is disposed to make important concessions in sovereign acts of Cuba such as the type of defensive arms, direct negotiations with him.
The Yugoslav Government still ……………………………………………. [ellipsis/undeinsisted today, with the UN Secretary-General so that he coded section in original] its relations with the USSR and the accepts the invitation of Fidel Castro.
Permit me to suggest a steps of internal politics; but does not make any reference to similar gesture by Brazil, next to the UN Secretary-General. inspection or to an audit , which could indicate a softening in this matter.
POLITICA—OUTUBRO DE 1962//,” Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese in the current crisis would generate future Soviet demands if by James G Hershberg.] not in relation to Berlin, known to be no negotiable, at least in relation to Northern Italy, where there exist roughly thirty Jupiter missiles.
Exists in Latin American diplofor not having mentioned the Turkish quid pro quo.
The note the Castroist ideology and the fundamental alteration in the of Kennedy accepted curtly a commitment of balance of power in Latin America that would result in the non-invasion on the part of the United States, indicating that contrast between nuclearized Cuba under adventurist leaderthe Latin-American countries, probably, would agree with ship and the conventional armies of many countries.
Translated from Portuguese Dean] Rusk, I will attend today at five hours ing] at the Department of State with many Latin American Ambassadors.
This government will to the USSR, to show to both, that Cuba is not a toy in receive with much pleasure General Albino Silva.
The flight the hands of the great powers and should be heard in the authorization has already been granted, but, in view of the coming negotiations; he also told me that, emergency measures, it is indispensable to know with all , that these demands would be, repeat, would urgency the type of plane, the insignia and the be, an object of negotiations.
The secretary-general of important and sympathetic role of Brazil in the present crithe United Nations has just communicated to this governsis.
He informed me that the low-level American flights over ment that he will arrive in Havana the day after tomorrow, Cuba have ceased since yesterday.
The ambassador of Cuba and the president of the company will follow also.
POLITICA—OUTUBRO DE 1962//,” Ministry of External Your Excellency and the general have the necessity of an Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
I request to Your Excellency to orient ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES -me about the line of conduct I should assume in discussion of WASHINGTON the next meetings of the Organ of Consultation.
ON/28/28/X/62 JOSÉ BARREIROS CONFIDENTIAL URGENT DEA/DNU/DAS/DAC/DAM/DOr/600.
Messages between President Kennedy and Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Position of Brazil in Meeting of Organ Translated from Portuguese by James G Hershberg.] of Consultation.
Secretary , 1:30m., Monday, 29 October 1962 Rusk recapitulated the negotiations started by the UN secreSECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS tary general and continued with the messages sent directly by Prime Minister Khrushchev, to conclude saying that TELEGRAM the letter dated today, 28 of October, in which this chief of RECEIVED state presents real assurance to begin a compromise regarding 12962 the Cuban crisis to be an important contribution for peace.
However, Secretary Rusk declared that one should not believe FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON that the Cuban crisis is resolved, since is not impossible that ON/29/29/X/62 another Soviet message could come to be published tomorrow, presenting other conditions.
EVEN THOUGH ON SUNDAY, THE 28TH OF Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
I have, ADJUNCT SECRETARY-GENERAL, MISTER WILLIAM yes, the sensed the desire of responsible elements that the SANDERS, TO DIRECT THE WORD TO THE TRAINEES Brazilian government do so and a certain disappointment THAT COMPLETED THE “PROGRAM OF THE PANfor not having done so until now.
I request to conserve the secret October 1962 character of this communication.
I have the honor of sending to Your Excellency the attached 31 August – Senator Keating affirmed that he had certain memorandum of analysis of the developments of the Cuban information that 1,200 men, dressed in the uniform of the crisis until the 30th of last October, elaborated by the Political Soviet army, have disembarked in Cuba, during the month Sector of the Embassy. of August.
September – President Kennedy declares that Russia is supplying missiles to Cuba.
If, subsequently, it is verified that they are of such character, Roberto de Oliveira Campos the administration will consider the adoption of pertinent Ambassador measures.
LVP/zw 11 September – The Tass Agency gave publicity to a comCONFIDENTIAL munication in which the Soviet Union declared that it would retaliate with nuclear arms to any attack of the United States Analysis of the Cuban crisis. on Cuba or Soviet ships, sailing toward that island.
It was added that the government of the Soviet Union would discuss I – Retrospective the problem of Berlin after the American elections.
He criticized what he described as “irresponsible soldiers have arrived in Cuba.
The administration said it did conversation” about invasion. not have any information in this respect.
The OAS approved the plan, being constructed, in Cuba, six ramps for launching rockets presented by the United States, in the sense of avoiding by capable of carrying nuclear warheads, which can reach the all means, including by use of force, which Cuba continues Panama Canal.” to receive armament from the Soviet Union.
Kennedy accepts, pointing out, however, 21 October – At 2:30 the President received information that that U Thant, in his appeal, did not mention the dismantling missiles with a 1,000 range were in position of launchof the missile bases in Cuba. ing; platforms for launching missiles of 2,000 miles range, under construction.
October – U Thant received promises, from the United States and from Russia, of avoiding incidents with their 22 October – President Kennedy called the party leadrespective ships.
He passes all the evening in tion of the bases, in Cuba, continues at an accelerated pace. conferences with Rusk, McNamara, Hillebrand, etc.
At Khrushchev sends a letter to Kennedy, whose text still has not mid-day it was announced that the President would speak been divulged.
Dean Rusk referred to it as confused, making to the nation at 7 that evening, about a matter of high one think of internal difficulties inside the Kremlin.
White House and gives him knowledge of the points which were covered in the speech and delivered to him a letter for a) The Soviet Union agrees to withdraw its missile bases Khrushchev.
Following that the Latin American chiefs of misfrom Cuba, under inspection of the United Nations, and will sion were invited to the White House, at 19 hours not send more warlike material to Fidel Castro; addressed the Nation announcing the existence of offensive b) The United States will lift the blockade and will give nuclear armaments in Cuba. guarantees that Cuba will not be invaded, either by the United States, or by Latin-American countries.
It gives publicity to the text of the American government would lead a direct attack against letter of Kennedy to Khrushchev, responding to the two of Cuba, in case of which, in spite of taking the risk of losing his.
It announced that it has ordered the dismantling c) the possibility of a split, other than in our governments, at of the bases and the re-embarking of the same with the least in the public opinion of the countries of Western Europe; destination the Soviet Union. d) the possibility of adopting parallel measures in other areas 29 October – Fidel Castro demands the return of Guantanamo of tension, notably Turkey, Iran or Southeast Asia, otherwise as a basis for negotiations.
Belaunde, Head of the Peruvian Delegation, raised FROM THE EMBASSY IN WARSAW vague doubts about the opportunity of the project, alleging ON/5/5/XI/62 that the rockets-anti-rockets could carry nuclear warheads and that, however, the denuclearization SECRET could see the continent deprived of an important arm of DAC/DOr/DAS/DNU/600.
According to my interlocutor, Brazil is the only country CONFIDENTIAL capable to mediate, although “the rigidity” of Fidel Castro DOr/DAC/DAS/DEA/DNU/600. constitutes the major obstacle.
Visit of Novotny, Ulbricht and Gomulka about Khrushchev’s “desire for peace,” he admitted that to Moscow.
Kennedy was under pressure from “reactionary circles” and from the Pentagon not to abandon the base at Guantanamo. – MONDAY – 1615hs – In the last days Novotny, Poland looks with sympathy on the Brazilian motion in the Ulbricht and Gomulka visited Moscow United Nations about the denuclearization and held encounters at a high level with the Soviet authoriof Africa and Latin America and its possible favorable reflecties.
These rapid encounters with those who have not counted tion in a solution of the Cuban crisis.
Continuing on a “tour before now leave no doubt that the principal motive is the d’horizon” of the international situation, Cuban crisis and its repercussions.
The recent international the same source told me that the intransigence of Adenauer’s events ought to have brought a reasonable of confuin not having diplomatic relations with Warsaw provoked a sion between the leaders of countries of the socialist bloc, hardening of Poland in the sense of its joining the German above all because the reactions and likewise the concessions Democratic Republic to demand express recognition of the of this government were excessively rapid for which, certainly, Oder-Neisse frontier, under which De Gaulle realistically it did not have time to consult its allies.
On the other hand, would accept to recognize that the “status quo” could only be the relations with China have encountered the edge of new modified through war.
The Polish position, contrary to that important events by cause simultaneously of the questions of Bonn, is that the frontier is definitive, not being an object of India and of Cuba.
Passing to the Chinese intransigence, which I international events have created a state of disorientation in took to be similar to the Cuban intransithe community of socialist countries and that the great chalgence, my interlocutor admitted as inexplicable the aggression lenge of Khrushchev will be to accommodate this state of toward India.
Before departing for Brazil, I requested an interaffairs in the short term.
Since the question of Hungary [in view with Rapacki to inform 1956] the leadership of Khrushchev has not suffered a more myself better about the Polish position in relation to Cuba. difficult test.
Kennedy on last Friday contributed to this, above all for not having threatened to CONFIDENTIAL URGENT adopt new measures against Cuba.
On the other hand, the DAC/DOr/DEA/DAS/DNU/600. speech of Fidel Castro, on last Thursday Question of Cuba. , was skillful, since he led the facts, with Visit of A Mikoyan. frankness, to the knowledge of the people and, at the same time, was conciliatory in its relatively moderate tone.
This will permit a complete review events regarding the internal prestige of Fidel, but it does of relations between Cuba and Russia, in face of the last not appear to have had a noticeable effect on his popularity. events.
The Minister of External Relations intends ties, with whom I conversed, seem to indicate that the prosto travel soon to the UN in order to defend personally the pects of future Soviet aid are good for Cuba.
Cuban position that the solution to the crisis only can be attained on the basis of the Five Points.
But in view of the novembro a dezembre de 1.962//6223,” Ministry of External accord between the American and Soviet governments about Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese some immediate questions, in the present moment, I have by James G Hershberg.] the impression that the crisis has entered a less critical phase and will go on in a type of status quo, in case it does not return to become suddenly aggravated.
Maço “600.—SITUAÇÃO POLITICA—CUBA New Representative of Cuba in the UN Carlos Lechuga. de novembro a dezembro de 1,962//6223,” Ministry of External 600.
American rejection; 6) U Thant asked me if I desired that Question of Cuba. he pass on the proposal to the Americans; 7) I told him that yes but that would ask such a thing of him [que o fizesse como 46 – WEDNESDAY – 17hs00 – Response to your telegram coisa dele], because it would give more authority and because no 128.
I approve the suggestion of Your Excellency to the I did not have authorization of Your Excellency; 8) without secretary general agreeing also in that the scheme will gain hesitating U Thant responded that he would take on the visibility if it is presented to the directly interested parties by initiative and requested me to maintain secrecy until he called U Thant.
As U Thant spoke to me of the importance of a action with that of the secretary general, insisting together to personal demarche of President Goulart, I the Cuban representatives about the advantages that a soluconsult Your Excellency it would not be approprition of this nature would have for the Government of Havana. ate for the president of the republic to telephone the prime As for the intercession of the president of the republic, that minister of Cuba. would depend on the progress made in these first contacts.
The attitude of the UNITED NATIONS—NEW YORK Government seems to be more cautious.
Habituated for years ON/8/8/XI/62 of the threat and with the blockade in front of Havana, the revolutionary government is plainly conscious that the danger has not passed and can reemerge at any moment; it is also SECRET conscious that, after the elections of yesterday, it could DEA/DAC/DAS/DAM/DNU/DOr/600. produce in the United States of America at most a favorable Question of Cuba. pull for negotiations, but that the American Government has not given up its intentions.
HOWEVER THE PROBLEM OF LOCAL Latin American leaders has contributed to the crystallizing INSPECTION CONTINUES TO BE THE PRINCIPAL of the position of Fidel Castro in terms of his program of OBSTACLE TO THE FINAL ACCORD. five points.
The day before yesterday, SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS in the Soviet Embassy, I conversed with Mikoyan and Fidel Castro, both expansive but we did not speak on this matter; TELEGRAM Mikoyan made long and elegiac references to the independent RECEIVED policy of Brazil and of President Goulart.
On the other SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE hand, from a fairly sure source, we obtained information that UNITED NATIONS—NEW YORK the declarations of Governor Brizola profoundly impressed ON/9/9/XI/62 the Cuban leaders and Fidel Castro, that they are utilizing them to explain to Mikoyan the necessity of the Cuban CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT Government maintaining a minimum of its own demands as DNU/DAS/DAC/DOr/DEA/600.
Declarations of the Cuban Minister of the country causes great damage to production, although External Relations. the Government affirmed that its effort to reduce its effects, though emergency measures.
There the gravity of the situation, is disposed to make concessions is contradictory information that it is possible to obtain how to reach a minimal guarantee; he requested anew the support much is the reserve of gasoline, foodstuffs, and consumer of Brazil that Cuba “has the right” to present in the UN its goods.
In these conditions it would seem to him more reasonable the second hypothesis, SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS that would bring a tolerable economic effort to assure the economic survival of Cuba without transforming it into a TELEGRAM model of development.
I argued that this policy does not RECEIVED seem to me viable without a combination of hypotheses two 13488 and three because the economic un-success or stagnation of Cuba will turn the Castroite movement unexportable FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON it would aggravate the prospects of internal subversion in ON/10/13/XI/62 Cuba.
In conversation with a high officials from the State already to exist in Cuba.
The various military units Castro to its own fate; limit itself to leave constituted in were highly mechanized and have become capable of rapid Cuba a socialist regime, based on a well-structured commumovement to liquidate subversive movements that can arise nist party and endowed with a repressive political machine, in any part of the island.
Finally, through the committees of as a political base of propaganda and infiltration in Latin political vigilance in the villages, factories and cooperatives America and to intensify Soviet technical and economic constitute an efficient apparatus of espionage.
All of this will assistance in a manner to transform Cuba into a living demfacilitate the indefinite maintenance of the repressive regime. onstration of the efficacy of communism as an instrument of As for the economic model of development, the Soviets will economic development in Latin America.
The first hypothrenounce this, …ing more in the eventual success esis seemed to him impractical since it would demoralize all of the local communist movement, that will demand access the communist efforts in Latin America.
Also he did not to power through the mechanism of popular fronts and of believe plausible the third hypothesis due to the following infiltration in other democratic parties.
As for the North American attitude in the 13576 present negotiations about dismantling the bases in Cuba, he indicates that, for internal political motives, it would FROM THE EMBASSY IN HAVANA be extremely difficult for the United States to abandon the ON/14/14/XI/62 demands of international control, since, the dissatisfaction of this requirement, would increase the political resistance, CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT already enormous, to the commitment of non-invasion.
I said that Cuba does in order to document the non-reestablishment of aggressive not give up, in this third amendment; I did not know until equipment.
In the second place, , 3:15m., Wednesday, 14 Mikoyan made clear that the Soviet Union did not admit November 1962 that Cuba interferes in its international politics.
The anti-American ideological line advocated in this document is prejudicial to the left on CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT the continent and in this respect various complaints have DAC/DEA/DNU/DAS/DAM/DOr/600. arrived to Moscow.
The USSR is against the declaration of Substitution Havana, which was in frank disagreement with the doctrine Question of Cuba. of peaceful coexistence.
The Cubans began to independence in the face of the USSR obligating it to complain that during the first weeks of the crisis they were assume a more concrete responsibility in relation to the not consulted nor informed by the Soviet Government. created situation.
I transmit this information with due They pointed out, , it had been an error [to reservations, although I believe sufficiently in its veracity.
I make?—word illegible] the Russian proposal to trade the judge it usable to understand the Cuban position and the Cuban bases in Turkey, since, antecedents of the joint Cuban-Soviet proposal presented, in the first place, Cuba is a socialist country, that it could yesterday, to the Secretary General of the UN. not be, however, an object of negotiations with the West.
The Cuban leaders stressed that the referred position lessLUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO ens the prestige of the Cuban revolution on the continent.
With indelicacy, they complain novembro a dezembre de 1.962//6223,” Ministry of External that the Soviet Government did not previously consult the Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese Cuban Government about the international inspection of by James G Hershberg.] this country; 3 o) Mikoyan retorted with identical violence, explaining that the Soviet Union worried itself with saving the peace, but also created conditions that guaranteed the integrity of Cuba.
From what it is possible to observe in ON/16/16/XI/1962 Cuba, I agree entirely with the considerations and conclusions of Ambassador Vasco Tristão Leitão da Cunha.
Also, CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT in his direct relations with Cuba, Khrushchev has shown an DAC/DOr/DAS/DEA/DNU/600. attitude pacificating and open to compromise.
This seems to confirm the rumor that circulated, help it, Fidel Castro to show his independence and here, in recent days, in the sense that Fidel is inclined to accept even arrogance.
It is each time more ostensible the Cuban some type of inspection that is not limited to Cuba, perhaps for with Mikoyan that, in the last days, which are including Guantanamo or other territories; it coincides, also, not mentioned in the newspapers; however his presence here, with what he told to General Albino Silva (see my telegram no for fifteen days, is evidently proof of Soviet goodwill.
Some foreign observHavana—1962/1964,” , Ministry of External ers here judge, however, that the USSR will have in the near Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese future to modify radically its policy for with this by James G Hershberg.] country.
We insist, however, in that the same that the opportune Brazilian mediation still more favorable. draft will come to be voted in the Commission and in the plenary before the present period of sessions of the General BUX RIBEIRO COUTO Assembly is closed.
To reach a final solution to the Cuban question, the Castro to permit the local verification.
In this case, the Government of Cuba has Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Ambassador Leitão da Cunha commented on the immediSECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS ate effects that the events in the Caribbean have had regarding the line of foreign policy of Moscow.
It appears to have fixed MEMORANDUM for Mr ADJUNCT SECRETARY on a new idea of “compromise,” in solution of international GENERAL FOR AMERICAN AFFAIRS disputes in which the Soviet Union is a direct party.
This new philosophy was not adopted without the Soviet Premier having to overcome obstacles, in front of difficulPermit me Your Excellency to recapitulate, in a manner more ties and criticisms, above all on the part of its more radical succinct and focused, only, on aspects of the question that allies.
Pressured by the Soviets, Fidel Castro has ready now conSoviet Union agreed to withdraw, or dismantle, sur place, formed in abdicating certain demands that he initially made – the armaments which had been installed on Cuban territory, withdrawal of the Americans of the naval base of Guantanamo under its control.
On the other hand, in the bilateral negotia– as conditions for agreeing with an international inspection tions that have been between the United States of America on his territory.
It may not be, therefore, that he would be lead to assume a II – not to intervene, directly or indirectly, in the politics, of position of intransigence, compromising irremediably the other countries of the continent. conciliatory solution that he searches to reach.
The initiative of the Brazilian Government on the above the Governments of the United States of America, the Soviet lines indicate that it would be perfectly coherent with its Union and of Havana. position toward the events in the Caribbean, and, more still, would present an opportunity for us to reaffirm certain prin9.
The idea would be to launch in an informal manner, for ciples that our foreign policy in the hemisphere; example, in an interview granted by the Mr Minister of State the self-determination of peoples; the opposition to armed with a highly-regarded foreign correspondent.
It would not methods ; and the rejection of infilassume the form of an offer of good offices or of mediation tration and imposition of political ideology to our on the part of Brazil, but an indication of a formula that all democratic system. would be able to accept.
Another form of action in this sense would be of a gesture together or isolated on the part of Latin Respectfully, American Governments that maintain diplomatic relations with Fidel Castro.
A Revolução Cubana e a América Latina fested its recognition to Brazil and its confidence in that we . would not alter our policy favorable to Cuban autonomy.
Memórias (Rio de international questions, on which depended its very survival.
Twice on 23 and 27 of October, the gravest John F Kennedy Confronts Communist Revolution in Latin America moments of the crisis, and, according to the instructions . of Your Excellency, I requested this Government, in order 6 Interestingly, the Brazilians also sensed some Argentine to transmit to it the suggestion and even appeal of the reluctance to back its denuclearization plan, and behind that Brazilian government that, if heeded, without doubt would potential nuclear ambitions—piquant evidence of the traditional have altered the course of events.
According to Wikipedia, “Cuba present circumstance, the Cuban government has not taken was the last country to sign and to ratify, in 1995 and on 23 October advantage of the opportunities Brazil offered to it and our 2002, completing signature and ratification by all 33 nations of Latin evident sincerity to help it on the path to a solution acceptAmerica and the Caribbean.
I judge that I should bring to the knowledge achieving a solution to the United States hostility to Cuba and the of Your Excellency these observations, which I believe will be use of the Guantánamo Bay military base for United States nuclear weapons useful.
In the following telegram I transmit some impressions was a precondition to Cuba’s continued adherence.” about the probable causes of this attitude.
At the same time, Goulart seemed to express strong of the Brazilian emissary’s mission was limited at the time by Cuban support for JFK’s actions in his talks with United States ambassador Lincoln censorship, which suppressed mention of it in reporters’ dispatches.
Afonso Arinos, at the UN, had previously opened files of records of Brazilian diplomacy in Chile formerly been Brazil’s foreign minister, and the translations here during the Allende period . include records of his meetings with such figures as U Thant, Cuban 13 Ed. note.
For President Osvaldo Dorticos, and Cuba’s ambassador to the UN; and translated West German records of his discussions with United States President in Moscow, Vasco Leitao da Cunha sent analyses of the Soviets and Kennedy regarding Cuba, on 14 November 1962, see elsewhere in the crisis informed by his prior experience as Rio’s ambassador in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
Havana during the Cuban Revolution, when he had close contacts with the Castro leadership.
As shown by the translated (and apparently So far there is no indication that the United States is comverbatim) record below, the planning sessions offered an opportumitted to the bilateral relations maintained with our country, nity for candid discussion of the conflicting pressures on the issue, especially regarding financial help, to any kind of political and the policy options available.
An official ally of Washington attitude adopted by us concerning the large hemispheric by virtue of the 1947 Rio Treaty, Brazil clearly belonged to the problems, notably the Cuban problem.
Nevertheless we US sphere of influence, politically and economically, and formally cannot discard such an hypothesis in just a simple manner. opposed Soviet or communist penetration of the hemisphere.
Yet, However, we should be able to admit it and make use of such within Brazilian domestic politics there was considerable leftist an element for study purposes, inasmuch as it is undeniable admiration and sympathy for the Cuban revolution, and a widethat the visit of President Kennedy to two of the spread belief that the island should be left to determine its own major countries in South America is an event that cannot be destiny—without interference or intervention from the United left unnoted.
Moreover, Brazil’s diplomats represented that, at present, one of them has severed relations with Cuba, a nation eager to show a more independent posture to the world putting itself into a position of an anti-Cuban policy center, (it had recently even sent an observer to the first conference of while the other has assumed the position of intermediary of the “nonaligned” movement in Belgrade2), even as it had to the State Department at the OAS. safeguard its crucial relationship with Washington.
Ultimately, at considering that only people are the legitimate instrument for Punta del Este, the Brazilians, led by Dantas, would resist and the choice of a regime, especially if such a regime is a demosignificantly water down the sanctions promoted by United States Secretary cratic one.
If the goal to achieve is the re-democratization of State Dean Rusk.--J.H. of Cuba, whatever could be considered an imposition from outward would certainly represent a real contradiction to the democratic principles themselves, aside from being the violation of the self-determination principles.
First we tried and a systematic denial and sometimes kind of evasive position to postpone the consultative meeting the utmost.
In conseto hold opinion of the democratic character of Fidel Castro’s quence of said adjournment we tried a diplomatic move towards government.
This point was considered a matter of fact. the United States to obtain from their government a comEven Minister Afonso Arinos in one of his visits to the parliapromise of a pledge for the non-use of violence against Cuba. ment, categorically declared that he had not seen any evidence At that time there were signs of a planned invasion of Cuba that Fidel Castro’s regime was a communist one, leaving the launched by Nicaragua or Guatemala, or both countries altoimpression that the fact of such proofs existing or not could gether.
There was a great number of trained Cuban volunteers be of great importance.
Moreover, attitudes such as awarding in the United States army; works or preparation at ports and Commander Guevara with a decoration showed that airports in Guatemala that could be related to the new invasion his sympathy had nothing to do with self-determination, renattempt.
There was also an extremely confidential information dering to such an official attitude a rather more controversial that a prestigious governor had attended a conference characterization than what we have been trying to notice. with President Kennedy insisting on the idea of an invasion.
This, because it is very difficult to define whether a Soviet Union were becoming smaller every day.
What really hand, because from the USSR’s economic point of view the mattered was to classify it as a non-democratic regime accordpurchase of more than a million tons of sugar for a country ing to the Santiago’s declaration pattern.
Thus, the problem that has an excess of such a product was too expensive; on the of ideological sympathy was eliminated.
The Brazilian govother hand, because the Soviet Union never left any doubts in ernment is not in ideological sympathy with Fidel Castro’s the air that it could not come to Cuba’s defense.
Even though there might be political groups within offer would be a retaliation in a country close its boundaries the government, the latter has only sympathy with what is or by adopting other more symbolic policies. part of the Constitution or its treaties.
We were under the impression that should we manage The non-intervention principle and the respect of selfto obtain from the United States a non-violence pledge, we determination have gained new force because they acquired would be able to count on Cuba itself to obtain from Fidel more absolute character once the question of knowing Castro’s government a progressing observance of Santiago’s whether the regime was a socialist or democratic one ceased Declaration.
Said Declaration plays a very important role to exert any influence on them. because it is the sole document signed by Fidel Castro’s govFrom this point on we begin to look for a solution due to ernment in which the recognition of democratic principles is the increasing probability that the countries be convoked for clearly indicated.
We were afraid of such a gathering strengthened by the non-violence pledge, to accept a gradual as it was set from the start by calling upon the Rio de Janeiro evolution for its observing the Santiago Declaration.
Santiago’s Declaration offense by the Cuban regime and, consequently, conform to could eventually take root, we would try to further develop violation of the Article 6; or else, characterizing the regime as the scheme and move in the direction of some kind of neutrala communist one.
The latter being the case, as per Resolution ization of Cuba, maintaining their basic social achievements, 93 of Caracas, it is marked as an amplification or addendum the establishment of a democratic state, and the break of their to the Treaty of Rio de Janeiro, namely, a presumed aggression. ties with the Soviet Union.
This was the idea resulting from The simple fact of being communist and being affiliated to the the meeting at Casa das Pedras and which was the subject of international communism presumes the regime’s aggression two good investigations.
The first one with Ambassador and brings forth the application of sanctions.
The second one was with Cuba’s ambasgood-will diplomacy which has positive and negative aspects. sador who also highly praised the idea and informed the One of the negative ones is that he hides from us a little the Havana government accordingly. hostile reactions in American environment with respect to This third stage, however, ended with Fidel Castro’s our attitudes.
What we now have to do is all and exerted upon abstention. to set a line of conduct and the impression is that we have Here I have to open some brackets to cover the quesfirst to set it under the form of an internal philosophy for the tion of the remaining South-American countries.
Ecuador is the one I consider, Argentina, Chile as well as Mexico, cannot go to the meeting at this moment, the more dubious because the government just to be presented with an already taken decision and to be is extremely unstable, characterized by a line of opportunbound to a legal norm without having had any possibility of ism trying to take the support of Velasco Ibarra’s government re-discuss it.
This entire group voted for abstention, with exception the sense that there are defined obligations in treaties and of Mexico that voted against and, in other words, left not aspiration in defined declarations.
It has been admitted as a doubt about its position contrary to the consultative meeting. development of the regional international law that normally In the United States the reaction to this attitude is not aspirations are the prior forms or else, a period of germinasympathetic.
Ambassador Gordon is an ambassador of exception of future obligations and that the system develops while tional value, an intellectual, a man concerned in making a changing aspirations into obligations.
The principles of non285 intervention and of self-determination are the field of obligacountries that are difficult to accept by countries that have tions and are not only of regional obligation as they belong different social and economical goals have been accepted.
It cannot as well be condemned to diplomatic aggression or danger of aggression it is within the scope of isolationism by means of its relations being severed.
It is an organizaconstructive agreement one could find a solution similar to tion based on obligations and aspirations.
The obligations that of Bizerta, of a gradual retreat. are the ones that no country can fail to comply with.
From here he visited with President João Goulart and the Under-Secretary Renato Archer – It looks like the consultanext morning had an appointment with Minister Tancredo tion should be preceded by a formal condemnation.
From both he obtained the same information, namely, Brazil, before declaring itself contrary, follow what others are that Brazil was inflexible with respect to the non-intervention doing might give the impression that we are willing to divide principle; that we would not turn our backs on defending the responsibilities. inter-American system.
Minister Carlos Duarte – Would appreciate it if Deputy As far as the method in which that attitude would be Renato Archer were to provide clarification.
Shall he speak converted into a diplomatic action was concerned, they would now or during the Meeting. have to obtain that information from the Ministry of Foreign Under-Secretary Renato Archer – This would indicate a type Relations.
Neither the President of the Republic nor the Prime of behavior that would reward Brazil.
On his way back Jânio Quadros statements took effect before any consultation.
These statements strengthened Brazil’s position which was I gave Ambassador Gordon a general idea of that scheme. firm and of its own regarding the involved subjects.
He can Although the ambassador was also favorably impressed by the carry on his conversations on the basis of a position he already idea he did not feel in a condition to discuss it any further has.
He insists on the invitation he made to me in order to will weaken our position. discuss it with Secretary Rusk in Washington.
This is a point Ambassador Dias Carneiro – I would like to say a few words I leave to this group to speculate. about a legal question.
To which an extent are obligations Ambassador Goodwin and aspirations conceptually different when included in the arrived two days ago.
State Minister – Sometimes the distinction is very easy, We now have the problem of the line to follow at the sometimes it is not.
For example, in the case of the Santiago’s signs that the American point of view is not favorable to the Declaration it clearly enunciates that it covers aspiration.
The OAS charter interest in a document of sanctioning character which allows presents some doubts.
Some subjects are explicit while others that after a period of time the conduct of the Cuban governare dubious. ment be established with the help of a commission.
It is possible that such a revolution may already have started at the time the MEETING OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION ON Consultation Meeting takes place and in that case it will have SUBJECTS RELATED TO THE VIII CONSULTATION to change all arguments conceived so far.
Revise the philosophical line that I have recapitulated in expressing myself verbally, I am replying to your yesterday’s general terms; order by some notes which I request your permission to be 2.
For either hypothesis we must have at least government will obtain a good average. an acceptable and flexible tactical solution.
Another point to check is about the suitability to proceed State Minister – I think that rather than considering the with the consultations around these practical suggestions.
Cuban problem as a separate issue we would profit by includ287 ing it in the general picture of our position towards variand the public opinion about the impending menace to the ous other problems.
I really think he offered a country in America that was in fact looking for a solution of good contribution to the committee’s concerns.
To conclude, that the matter requesting a maximum of discretion and a I would propose that we tried to achieve or merge that second modesty of any country’s action before making approaches to phase into the first or else, get back to the first stage. the United States with a view of obtaining acceptance of the At the beginning, the Cuban problem was just bilateral latter regarding an understanding with Cuba.
It about that and we, in Brazil, when the question arose, tried has always been the American government that demonstrated to situate it as such because we considered it to probably be an attitude of intransigence in dealing with the problem.
Until the best way for an approach, with a view to find a positive the invasion phase, even though the aggressive actions had and constructive solution for the problem.
The United started in Washington, it was more approachable than Havana.
In fact, it became a continental occasion, have presented an idea to the United States with problem, not so much because of Cuba but by influence of regard to the problem that could have convinced some of its the United States.
After the failure of the invasion attempt interest to solve the problem in such terms.
For that purpose the United States clearly understood that the only way to treat it was necessary for Brazil to refrain from any kind of publicity the problem was in a continent-wide manner.
Thenceforth, trying by a strange coincidence, they started to note a flexibility its best to reach a solution for the problem.
This for a simple between various American countries vis-a-vis Cuba. reason.
The State Department would never accept facing the From the moment on it became of continental interest it public opinion with a confession that it had been lead by the turned into a problem of diplomatic tactics for each country Brazilian, Mexican, or Argentine diplomacy.
Today we are not in search of a have had its origin in the United States.
It had to be seen as solution for the Cuban problem, but a solution to the mena generous act by the United States.
Around this point arose aces in the form of the crisis of the inter-American system, the action of Ecuador, Mexico, and Argentina which damaged which is negative.
It was a matter of three countries and best, if we continue this line of reasoning we shall find a way one of them being Ecuador, a country which lacks seriousto save the system and, at the same time we, Brazilians, will ness because of its involvement in a conflict with Peru, aside come honorably out of a situation which places us in a minorfrom playing a prestige game.
This is a negative “optimum” because the real Colombia was sympathetic.
Argentina immediately brought “optimum” is a solution for the Cuban problem. in Brazil.
There was a possibility to If our efforts were towards forgetting the dazzling sensahandle the question on that occasion.
The idea of details was tion we are feeling at present with these two problems of in mind at that time.
On the other side another proposal of various ior within this line but it seems that we would not have much other countries orders that relations be severed immediately. to lose if we considered the possibility of a conversation on this subject now, maybe only between ourselves and the United States.
It does not look like an idea to be discarded Ambassador Araújo Castro – I will try to summarize my without some examination.
We, at this stage, are no longer concerned with the solution of the Cuban problem but with a solution for the State Minister – It is a little overtaken by the events because inter-American problem.
More specifically, making use of a at the stage when one thought that everything seemed to Brazilian diplomatic solution, not only with respect to what turn around a possible matter of re-absorption, so as if the is of the latter’s interest but how we are to explain it to the problems were of indemnity for expropriation of confiscatpublic opinion which, in this case, is split.
The matter is ing nature or the absence of certain guarantees to private maximizing and in January the Cuban subject will become rights.
Now everything denotes that we are dealing with the great issue of the Brazilian politics.
It is in fact impressive an extra-hemisphere problem besides how Fidel Castro’s to note the problem of the left wing’s pressure in Brazil.
It posture adjusted itself to such an American interpretation of gives the impression that they are mobilized about the Cuban the events.
You think we are leading to an evasive attithe case of Goa, for example, the reaction was null.
I go under the impression that it may be a personal reacAmbassador Gibson – Evasion in two directions.
Evasion tion although I would rather place the Cuban problem within because we are no longer looking for a solution to the probthe Brazilian diplomatic field in order to explain our position. lem as we think that the phase for a solution of the problem is Evasion is unfeasible.
There has been an invasion; there has been an organization we are seeking for the less unfavorable position American position which we all know will put an end to Fidel for Brazil, in particular.
To conclude, in my opinion, all that Castro. has happened in the last four months and culminating with Fidel Castro’s speech excluded almost irreparably a solution State Minister – I was told by Ambassador Goodwin that of the problem.
United he only believes in an internal revolution within the next six States-Cuba.
It is possible that such a position may not be months. feasible anymore.
This is the way it placed itself towards the continental public opinion.
It is very difficult to convince Ambassador Araújo Castro – The public opinion was poipeople that the problem does not concern the United States soned by the State Department itself.
If the United States succeeded in to be a prisoner of pressure groups which he himself helped obtaining an agreement term with Cuba there would be no to create.
The change of the American position in relation more problem in the hemisphere. with Russia involves, at least, a political power game; as far as Cuba is concerned the problem is of an ideological nature Ambassador Henrique Valle – The placing of the problem and a more serious one.
On the other hand, we are well developed from a flexure to the establishment of a communist acquainted with the importance of semantics in the American regime within the hemisphere.
We have just received from the Embassy of Bogota relation in the United States.
They think the problem should be situated as or three matters on which we cannot fail to comments about. a cold war instead.
Taking this smallest possibility into conOne of them concerns the existence of the socialist regime sideration we should reflect on the Brazilian position.
Our attitude should be that we are against the application of sanctions, severance of firm and previously defined.
We should arrive with a deterrelations, in favor of the “status quo” maintenance is a posimined position.
I would not, at this point, try a new attempt tion that no matter how much it may gain by its perseverance, of approach with Cuba or United States.
Not even sounding by being clear and firm still opens a very large flank to inquithe matter out or trying a large diplomatic articulation against ries that cannot remain without an answer.
I would declare to be against it and vote against public opinion is completely convergent to the examination it.
To what extent this case will turn out badly for the Pan-American system. besides the manifestation of being against do our explanations have to go.
Ambassador Araújo Castro – I am under the impression that it would be vital that we reach a position about what we are Ambassador Araújo Castro – That is what I think.
Let us proclaim it to the countries that folemphasis given was against the thought that the diplomatic lowed us without influencing to the point of a plot of conaction is still possible.
It is not the fact that I do not consider Cuba as a ated from the Cuban one.
My emphasis, however, is about the unfeasibility with them inasmuch as at this point mediation seems almost of an arbitrating action and about the excess of conducts on impossible.
Furthermore, if we maintain coherence until the our part. date I think we will be in a position to face the storm with the required serenity.
Once resolved we would have complied State Minister – Do you think that in our clear statement we with the determinations.
A statement trying to establish the Brazilian diplomatic concept should be considered as well.
Under the guise of genAmbassador Araújo Castro – Yes, I do. eral action principles we could take advantage of the colonial question showing that the Brazilian diplomacy is all around Ambassador Henrique Valle – We should clarify our posiindependent.
Intrinsically it does not seem the right time to tion, make it really clear.
We would as a first attempt find a concentrate the Brazilian position in face of the problem.
We should accept a socialist country within trying to conciliate and adjust a position we will reach but the continent and outside of the system.
Otherwise, we have indecision which may create an accusation from either side. an open flank.
By means of taking moment when we will have to give full explanation of our from three to four positions, we should say who are the ones position because the military intervention does not solve the that shall throw the stones at us.
Ministry Maury Valente – It would be favorable to Brazil to State Minister – The military intervention works as a power guarantee a formula of declaring at once that Cuba is outside of great destruction.
It will involve the overthrow of the the inter-American system because it dissociated itself from Government, the defeat of a great number of party members. the aspirations.
It would bring forth new problems because to massacre Cubans, causing the Ambassador Henrique Valle – Even the consequences of overthrow of the government by force, would create in other non-intervention lead us to admit it within the continent but American countries totally incurable reactions of internal outside the system. character.
Each countries internal political fight will be exclusively marked by it.
From the communist point of view it is State Minister – One thing is Brazil going to a conference the splitting being brought up and the transformation of the ready to comply with its deliberations.
The other is going hemisphere political fight into an ideological fight. to a conference where there is no longer any deliberation to be taken and where the proposal that has just been read is Ambassador Araújo Castro – The communism in Latin co-sponsored by 14 countries whereas our role is to offer our America has never born a continental subject.
However in approval of the application to the system. this manner it would be converted into it.
They are much more interested in a gradual and methodic penetration than Ambassador Gibson – I think I need to make a clarification. in penetrating into Cuba where they know that the problem I did not intend to say that we should, for example, start an cannot last. offer of mediation to deal with the Cuban problem.
But it Ministry Maury Valente – The best would be that the interis my opinion that we moved from the constructive to the American system be prepared to accept an eventual existence negative phase.
It was in this respect that I had requested your of a Finland in the hemisphere. attention.
I was not meant with a view of offering mediation or self-determination with regard to Cuba.
That seems totally insinuating same but the statement must also be made to the impossible. – We must recognize that the Cuban danger United States.
This bears a character of seriousness to the exists. – We must give the Americans a pre-notice. – Brazilian politics and covers a certain field of repercussion of In our consultative meeting we must take an affirmative our attitude.
Once the relations have been broken off the cation within the inter-American system. second step would be much easier.
We shall not forget that, regime characterization and, maybe this is the moment to whether we are willing to or not, we will have to face these undertake a position against violence as far as Cuba is conresolution projects that will be voted at Punta del Este.
I would ask whether it would not be a more tactical attitude, instead of ignoring it, that we try to talk with the Colombians Ambassador Leão Moura – I agree with the general consenand the American in objective terms, stating that we were sus about the position that Brazil shall adopt.
I do not say it should necessarily be Ambassador Henrique Valle – I would like to ask whether I made by the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
It could eventually can talk with Goodwin who is going to have luncheon with be taken over by the President of the Cabinet.
A statement me now and inquire if he has knowledge of said memorandum. about this matter by the prime minister is also missing.
The President of the Cabinet has already a great State Minister – I make a distinction. problem on his shoulders which is to support the government.
We have no interest in Ambassador Henrique Valle – If we do not comply with it the having him make a statement that may possibly reduce the inter-American system ends by being “de juris.” cabinet’s political support basis.
We succeeded in avoiding State Minister – I make distinction between the fact of going that the criticism raised by the re-establishment of relations to a consultation at which we make deliberations and reach was divulged to the cabinet.
There a conclusion, in which we are a defeated vote, and going to a was a proposal to take a censorship motion to the minister pre-fabricated conference.
The Rio Treaty only admits a twoof foreign relations but at no time any one thought about thirds rule for the unchained or imminent aggression.
I am known as a man with positions skills Minister Carlos Duarte – My intervening was just with the rather than one who sublimate positions. purpose of pursuing a line of frankness.
Ambassador Araújo Castro – In our statement, possibly by It is the government’s general intention by reason of internal means of a newspaper interview, there would be no need for political convenience to consider that certain politics was a a specific backing up of the enclosed project because some of success when this was not the case.
I do not consider it inopthese projects are trusted to diplomatic means.
However, a portune to state that we are concerned about it, that we no definition of Brazil in Montevideo will maintain the principle glimpse of a solution. of non-intervention.
State Ministry – Our victory will consist of gradually giving State Minister – I am considering some kind of statement up such a success towards the public opinion.
National Archives of Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, San Tiago not the solution of the problem.
We would be heading towards giving the American politics a continental ideological 1 This Punta del Este gathering followed a separate OAS theme which the communist propaganda failed to offer.
We foreign ministers’ gathering at the Uruguayan resort, in the summer are not evading from sanctioning Fidel Castro in a strong of 1961, at which Washington presented its plans for the Alliance for manner.
Brazil, What we are doing is to be aware that an inaccurately perthe 1961 Belgrade Non-Aligned Conference, and the Limits of an formed surgery in that spot will open a new incurable prob‘Independent’ Foreign Policy during the High Cold War,” Cold War lem of large proportions.
A reference to Kennedy aide Richard Goodwin, who had visited Brazil earlier in December 1961.
As a legitimate cause sent to Havana to “act at the same time with the United Cuba will be given non-intervention assurances for its territory.
Archivo General Historico, Ministerio de Relaciones international organizations defending principles and not sysExteriores, Santiago, Chile.
The verbal intemperance of the matic feat in war or in peace… Prime Minister in affronting the national conPyrotechnic diplomacy, to fool the idiots.
That is what we science with expressions that run contrary to traditional beliefs have done in this entire episode.” of the country is not debated.
Even less is the insufficiency unacknowledged, of those that, in the circumstances, thought to **** assume the direction of Brazilian diplomacy and extend the defiBe what they may, the commentaries about “Brazilian nition of our international political diplomacy precisely at the mediation to save world peace,” objective or exaggerated, the moment when facts served to undermine their assurances and truth is that General Albino Silva’s trip to Havana has had a prove their obvious unimportance.
This is already a lot, but at received General Albino Silva returning from Havana.
The the same time it still falls short of explaining the enormity of the Head of the Military Office of the Presidency ‘gaffe’ made by the Brazilian Government, taking initiative reported on the conversations in that capital with the Head without anyone asking it to and without any prior consultation of the Cuban Government and with the Secretary General of with anyone, of proposing ‘mediation’ with Fidel Castro, in the the United Nations.
The whole world smiled at such a provincial presumpto bring about the negotiations that are deemed indispensable tion.
Archivo General Histórico, Ministerio de Relaxiones Another important and circulated publication, “O Globo,” Exteriores, Santiago, Chile.
FIRST.He finds great similarity in proposals contained He referred to letter g) of your proposal the text of which I your telegram with points of view held permapreviously paraphrased and had left in his possession, that in nently by Brazil as well as with the current efforts of his view could be considered a veiled threat.
The rest of the Thant which, according to reports in his possession, is on its text in principal did not merit observations for him.
Archivo General Histórico, Ministerio de Relaxiones in Cuba by representatives of neutral countries chosen by the Exteriores, Santiago, Chile.
THIRD. He believes that Castro’s government has no other Notes alternative other than accepting the aforementioned proposal.
Wallinger, quoted Minister who would later call Brasilia, promising to give me in Hershberg, “The United States, Brazil, and the Cuban Missile his answer as soon as possible.
The only missiles the Kremlin By May, this approach—which Khrushchev likened to intended to send at that time were the non-nuclear SAMs creating a liquid meniscus by pouring enough wine in and the Sopkas.
Khrushchev, Kozlov, Brezhnev, Mikoyan, Suslov, Soviet Union Kuusinen, Kosygin, Polyansky, Voronov, Kirilenko, Shvernik, Gromyko, Malinovsky Presidium Endorse Cde.
Brezhnev, Kirilenko, Kozlov, Kosygin, Kuusinen, Suslov, Khrushchev, Rashidov, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, Continue : Ponomarev, Shelepin, Malinovsky, Grechko, Chuikov, Western countries reduce their troops by half in W Berlin.
Kosygin and Ustinov are to examine the proposals I Regarding the speech by McNamara. from a practical standpoint.
RGANI, F 3, Op., D 947, Ll.-16ob subordinate to the ambassador, take them from Cent.
Khrushchev, Brezhnev, Kozlov, Kosygin, Malinovsky, Kuznetsov Presidium On relations between the PRC and India.
On the dispatch to Cuba of a group of advisers on The PRC proposal for troop withdrawals is reasonable. economic matters.
Khrushchev, Malinovsky, Session of 14 October 1962 Ivanov, Mikoyan, Kozlov, Brezhnev, Kosygin, Ponomarev, Suslov 33.
I do not think that the USA right now The proposals are being readied by Cde.
On instructions to the Soviet ambassador in India, Cde. this will be after another 24 hours has passed in order to get Benediktov.
We are in favor of eliminating the conflict, it will not bring The difficult thing is that we did not concentrate everything any benefit. that we wanted and did not publish the treaty.
Aff. is to brief the ambassadors of the An attack is being organized against Cuba.
Kuznetsov Warn the gov’t it is taking upon itself great responsibility.
This is lawlessness and unprecedented treachery — demand an account from the other gov’t.
On information to F Castro about our further steps in For preservation of the UN. events around Cuba.
The “Aleksandrov” It is not essential for Cuba but is essential for the USA. is to head to the nearest port.
Time will pass, and if needed, it will again be Send a telegram to Castro. sent.
We are raising the matter in the Security Council against US treachery, and Cuba should come to the Security Council.
Through Soviet Union a gov’t decision, an order has been given to the minister of defense.
On the response to UN Secretary General U Thant Session of 25 October 1962 The text proposed by the Min. of For.
Khrushchev, Shvernik, Kosygin, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, Affirm the response to U Thant.
Gromyko’s message about the delegation’s work On the return of the ship carrying special cargo. at the UN’s XVII Session Khrushchev Approve the delegation’s work Return it.
We have made Cuba a country that is the focus of the world’s attention.
You give a commitment not to touch Cuba, and we will give Session of 25 October 1962 our consent to the dismantling and then will permit UN inspectors to verify it.
Shvernik; Ponomarev, Brezhnev, Suslov, Candidate member of the CC Presidium Cde.
On the response of the Chairman of the USSR resolution introduced by Ghana and the U A Council of Ministers Cde.
Khrushchev to the letter R30 at the Security Council of United States President Kennedy Gromyko, Mikoyan, Kozlov, Cde.
Khrushchev says he decided to convene a session Kuznetsov, Khrushchev, of the Presidium in connection with the further events in Brezhnev, Ponomarev, Cuba.
Polyansky, Ilichev The further course of events is proceeding in the following Mikoyan.
The Americans say that the missile installations in Cuba resolution introduced by Ghana and the UAR, and instead must be dismantled.
Soviet Union We could pull out the R-12 missiles and leave the Presidium other missiles there.
Beyond that, it is Session of 27 October 1962 not worth forcing the situation to the boiling point.
Brezhnev, Kozlov, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, will not be what it was previously.
Suslov, Khrushchev, Shvernik, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, Ponomarev, Shelepin, Malinovsky, Gromyko, Grechko, They, the Americans, are threatening an economic blockade, Zakharov, Ivanov, Kuznetsov, Malin, Chernukha, Serov. but the USA will not attack Cuba.
We should not inflame the situation and should conduct a reasonable policy.
The informational report indicates the complexity of the situation Cde.
I About further steps concerning Cuba We must draft a document in which we say where we are Khrushchev, Mikoyan, heading.
The correspondence with U Thant can hardly be a restrainTime will pass, and if need be, the missiles can appear there ing mechanism in conditions when negotiations have begun. again.
They will not embark on an invasion, but it is impossible to make a guarantee.
They are heaping all the blame on us, they had decided to Presidium settle accounts with Cuba, but now, in my view, they have reassessed this decision.
Khrushchev, Shvernik, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, I think that we should not be obstinate.
And if we receive in return the elimination of the base in Turkey and Pakistan, then we will end up victorious.
If an attack is provoked, we have issued an order to inflict We agree to verification when we pull out the missiles. a retaliatory strike.
I On the letter to United States President Kennedy Continuation of the discussion concerning Cuba Cde.
The letter to United States President Kennedy V On the letter to F Castro Gromyko, Khrushchev, The text of the letter is being dictated by Cde.
Pavlov35 Kosygin Dictation of the text of the letter to United States President Kennedy is Cde.
On the letter to U Thant Discussion of the text of the letter to United States President Kennedy.
Session of 28 October 1962 Entrust it to the United States ambassador in the USSR Broadcast the letter on the radio at 5:00m. on 27.
Kozlov, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Suslov, and publish it in the press.
Instructions to Zorin We can show U Thant that we are dismantling the missile installations.
Pavlov Presidium Instructions to Pavlov to show to U Thant About the ships.
Voronov, Kirilenko, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Red Cross representatives .37 Suslov, Khrushchev, Efremov, Demichev, Andropov, Ilichev, Compose an informational letter to Kennedy.
The USA was compelled to recognize that we, too, have our Session of 16 November 1962 interests in the Western Hemisphere.
Kuusinen, Polyansky, Suslov, Khrushchev, Grishin, We pulled out the missiles — that is correct.
They themselves got On the message from United States President R Kennedy38 about frightened. further steps concerning Cuba.
If we had held out for a while longer, then perhaps nothing would have come of it.
Brezhnev, Kosygin, Kozlov, Now he is backing away from this and glossing over it.
Ponomarev, Suslov39 A treaty with him is not needed, within a certain time we About Castro’s position — unreasonable and screechy should consider some sort of declaration.
Either they will Malinovsky, Kosygin cooperate or we will let our people go.
Cde Mikoyan’s letter requesting a conversation We should be careful in dealing with our gains. with Castro.
The transcription process is extremely difficult Our tactics in relation to the C C P and the fact that excellent transcripts only emerge as the result of a leadership — do not burn bridges. collaborative, evolutionary process is one of the key lessons of this story.
Mikoyan brilliantly handled the CC’s mission and Missile Crisis transcripts.
The Inside Story Notes of an American Adversary , Melvyn P Leffler, For the Soul of Mankind: The United States, the Soviet Union 1 Dr.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on New America Foundation. the Brink of Nuclear War have drawn upon 2 Two transcripts, from the missile crisis meetings of Kennedy the Malin notes to analyze the missile crisis.
The notes were originally and his advisors (a group that became known as the Executive held by the closed Archive of the President of the Russian Federation Committee of the National Security Council), on 16 and were transferred to RGANI in 2001. and 27 October 1962, were released earlier, in the mid-late 1980s, 5 Harold Macmillan, introduction to Robert F Kennedy, but without audio files.
Ernest May and Philip Zelikow produced the first 8 See Fursenko and Naftali, One Hell of A Gamble. collection of transcripts for the entire set of ExComm conversations 9 Ibid., Chapter 17. in 1997.
The timing of the Dobrynin edition of the Kennedy Tapes that included the revised May/Zelikow message needs more study because getting this right would alter the transcripts The Norton edition of the Kennedy Tapes also included debate over whether Kennedy needed to make the Jupiter offer to transcripts of conversations related to the Cuban missile crisis end the crisis peacefully. that were not in the Harvard edition.
A draft “Treaty between the Republic of structure of the 28 October session, that Khrushchev considered the Cuba and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics December 3 meeting too large to hear about JFK’s secret promise. on the Stationing of the Soviet Armed Forces on the Territory of the The December 3 meeting included people who were neither full nor Republic of Cuba” was initialed in Moscow in early July 1962 by candidate members of the Presidium.
Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro and Soviet Defense Minister 16 Please see Fursenko and Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War, Malinovsky.
Castro proposed some small changes, delegation that visited Bulgaria from 14 to 20 May 1962 to discuss a which were incorporated into the final version.
See Anatoly Gribkov, wide range of political, economic, and security issues.
Erinnerungen eines Armeegenerals (Berlin: account of the visit and its context, see RFE Research and Evaluation edition Q, 1992), esp. chs.-4.
United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk joined the Khrushchev was removed from office in Moscow.
The delegation was ostensibly headed by Sharaf Rashidov eastern sector of the Indo-Tibetan border was a demarcation line , but Biryuzov was drawn by the British government for the Treaty of Simla in 1914. the one who handled the crucial negotiations with Castro about the In later decades the Chinese government claimed that it had never missile deployment scheme.
Because of the 7-hour time difference should be approached in much the same way that more conventional between Moscow and Washington, DC (a difference that increased military operations have been regarded in the past.
By taking such delivered his 18-minute address announcing the discovery of Soviet an approach, McNamara argued, “we are giving a possible opponent missile installations on Cuba.
That address, broadcast over television the strongest imaginable incentive to refrain from striking our own and radio, started at 7m.
Much of the speech was intended to stress the need for which in Moscow would have been 2m. on 23 October 1962.
NATO’s nuclear deterrent to be based predominantly on United States nuclear According to Aleksei Serov’s notes of this Presidium session, the forces rather than on multiple small forces akin to the ones already deliberations began at 10m.
Moscow time on 22 October 1962, developed by Britain and France, but the targeting priorities laid out some four hours before Kennedy delivered his address.
This is referring to the sea-bound Kennedy would be making a major announcement about Cuba later transfers of weapons and logistical supplies to Cuba in support of the that day.
The first part of the CPSU Presidium meeting occurred planned missile deployments.
Kennedy’s address from the United States government roughly an hour before Kennedy went on the air.
The translated Brazilian documents elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP remaining part of the notes is from the deliberations that began at Bulletin. 10m. on 23 October, Moscow time.
This is the last recorded comment prior taking over as ambassador in mid-August, Alekseev became a key to the arrival of the text of Kennedy’s address.
Castro thereby hoped to preclude a 1986) was the Soviet ambassador to the United Nations from 1952 United States attempt to portray the confrontation as one solely between the to 1953 and again from 1956 to 1965, when he also served as United States and Cuba.
He was involved in the celebrated contexts was used for General Pliev, and confusion can at times confrontation with United States ambassador Adlai E Stevenson on 25 result.
Here, once again, “Pavlov” is the 29 Translator’s Note: The four submarines in question were pseudonym used for Ambassador Alekseev.
The Soviet ambassador to the United the R-14 missiles that were supposed to be deployed on Cuba States, Anatoly Fedorovich Dobrynin , had met with US and 44 14-kiloton warheads for Soviet tactical cruise missiles.
The Attorney General Robert F Kennedy Aleksandrovsk was originally supposed to dock in the Cuban port of on the evening of 27 October United States east coast time.
Kennedy indicated Mariel, but the outbreak of the crisis caused the ship to be diverted that after all Soviet missile installations in Cuba were dismantled, the to the much closer Cuban port of La Isabela.
Four other Soviet United States would agree to eliminate United States Jupiter nuclear missile surface ships, including the Almat’evsk, which was escorting the bases in Turkey, provided that the Soviet leaders kept this offer Aleksandrovsk, were also allowed to proceed to the nearby Cuban strictly secret and unwritten.
Norton, Republic from 1958 to 1972, but the UAR as an entity 1969), and it was not acknowledged by any of President Kennedy’s essentially ceased to exist after the planned merger between Egypt other advisers until many years later. and Syria broke down in 1961.
The three words in brackets were Egypt were one and the same. crossed out in the notes.
Aleksei Kapitonovich Serov (1918Moscow and Havana — Fidel Castro vehemently rejected the idea 1993) was the head of the first sector of the CPSU General beginning with his “Five Points” statement on 28 October 1962 — Department from 1961 to 1963.
The confusion may have arisen because on 12 November (four Presidium meetings.
Andrei Andronovich Fomin (1918to lift the naval quarantine against Cuba even before the UN gave 1983), the Soviet ambassador in Brazil, was conveying the Brazilian confirmation of the dismantling of the Soviet missiles.
For a detailed, Presidium had already dealt with this offer on 14 November, but the insightful review of Brazil’s role during and after the missile crisis, issue kept coming up as the two sides sought a mutually acceptable see James G Hershberg, “The United States, Brazil, and the Cuban arrangement.
The listing of speakers mistakenly the document (as well as of other cables between Khrushchev and mentions Ponomarev and Groymko twice each.
Translations of these documents imminent) sent an urgent cable to Khrushchev calling on the Soviet have also been published in the CWIHP Bulletin and in numerous Union to launch a nuclear strike against the United States if United States anthologies. forces embarked on a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
The line breaks off here unfinished. declared, would be “an act of the most legitimate self-defense,” and 43 Translator’s Note: The phrase “difficult circumstances” is “no matter how harsh and terrible would be, there an understatement.
Khrushchev promptly sent a blunt reply turning clear his extreme displeasure with the Soviet Union’s handling of down Castro’s suggestion.
Castro’s cable was first publicly mentioned the crisis, including Moscow’s consent to the United States demand for the by Sergei Khrushchev at an international conference in withdrawal of Soviet Il-28 bombers.
See also the translated documents published the text of the cable in the Communist daily Granma on presented by Svetlana Savranskaya elsewhere in this special issue of 25 November 1990.
Much has hapnuclear aspirations in the context of ongoing tensions over pened to me in America, but I have never seen such agitated Berlin, readers can help gauge the Kremlin’s mindset as anticipation for the improvement of relations between our Khrushchev prepared to roll the nuclear dice in Cuba. countries as exists now.
Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev said that the hour has come—the American nation is beginning to wake up and Americans are ceasing to be lazy seals that warm themselves on warm shores.
In any Adzhubei’s Account of His Visit to case, as the most experienced American journalists say frankly, Washington to the CC CPSU in many respects they can’t figure Americans out.
When I told Lippmann that there is a very positive ures from the President’s circle.
You’ve signed the German peace treaty, estabof International Affairs Dantos, and a lished a border in Berlin, put a gate there, and since you few other officials.
In Mexico I had a short conversation with signed the agreement a war hasn’t started, and now everything President Lopez Mateos.
Kennedy was troubled border questions, it is completely possible that steps intended by this question, and was feeling particularly clumsy because to regulate our disputes will lead to an announcement of the of the presence of Soviet journalists.
Khrushchev appeared continuwill lead to some softening of the general world situation and ously in American newspapers.
Americans with whom I have permit, as he expressed it, a more composed perspective from had the opportunity to speak ask this question if they are in which to observe the state of affairs in the world.
In connecsome way interested in political questions. tion with this he said that in Laos he will “tie Boun Oum I would also like to point out one more fact in connec‘s arms” if for our part we guarantee him the Pathet Lao’s tion with Kennedy’s press conference.
Right now my wife and I are occupied strategic striking power, thereby casting aside notions of a “missile with writing letters to various parties to give donations for the gap” favoring the Soviets.
In this connection, the President referred to the Soviet reaction to the Hungarian uprising. him at his home.
Moreover, he his contention that the crisis had in fact ended with a Soviet intends to proceed in the same manner,e. in a reckless manvictory.
However, first of all the policy of “penetration” is the Manuscript Division, Reel 18.
And secondly, only an adventurer could insist Savranskaya, .] that in the current situation our state could provide real military assistance to the countries of that continent.
It is many Notes thousands of kilometers from us, and oceans separate us.
The Last Testament , with the Cold War still However, the documents were not widely circulated then, actively raging.
Against the backdrop of Mikhail Gorbachev’s and are printed below for the first time.
The Glasnost Tapes, Castro strongly of Soviet nuclear missile sites in Cuba and the impending denied that he had urged Khrushchev to make a preemptive imposition of a blockade to block any further nuclear strike, and two months later the Cuban communist shipments of arms.
Presented with the official Soviet statenewspaper Granma published the full texts of the Castroments on the crisis, Castro reviews the situation and confiKhrushchev correspondence from late October 1962.
In dently vowed defiance to the United States “aggression” which he said the actual letter, it emerged, Castro had indeed counseled was doomed to failure.
Foreshadowing the contents of that controverdisagreement-filled correspondence between the Soviet and sial letter , Alekseev said the alarmed Cuban leaders over the resolution to the crisis.
Khrushchev that will immediately be appearing in the Cuban newspapers, which flattered the sent to him. excited Cubans.
We were glad that you expressed your thoughts frankly as From the letter that had been sent to you, Castro’s conit is appropriate for a Marxist-Leninist. fusion is obvious.
The second item that offended him, and Only on these conditions true friendship is possible.
It is posabout it) and regarding my information that among some sible that we do not cry against imperialism as loudly as some, Cuban comrades the opinion exists that the Cuban people but with our actions we deliver much more sensitive blows would have wanted a different statement, in any case against it.
It would be desirable to emphasize the courage of the By the way, the Russian text of the letter contains an Cuban people and the personal courage of Castro and his unfortunate mistake, which we had to correct in the interest concern about the future of his people and the cause of of our cause. socialism.
Had we repeatedly regret having written that letter. not corrected that mistake, one should have no doubts about I start from the assumption that we would need one or two the directness of Castro’s reply that would have followed. years of especially careful work with Castro until he acquires In the most recent days, I think, Castro has understood all the qualities of the Marxist Leninist party spirit.
He signed conversation, Castro starts by declaring his disagreement with the first series of trade agreements with the Cuban revolutionthe decision to remove the IL-28s but then assures Mikoyan ary government and established friendly relations based on a that the revolutionary leadership discussed the issue and mutual person agreed to the removal.
Mikoyan, 11 November 1962 The insistent demand of the United States to remove the Il-28s can be explained first of all not because they are worried 11 November 1962 about their presence in Cuba, or because they want to remove them from Cuba, saying that they are offensive weapons.
We have been delaying this posts be established in those countries from which such answer for some time, and we would like to receive your opinaggression is possible. ion, which would be passed to us after having already incorWe believe this approach to be correct.
Then we would be able and then in 1958, we ourselves introduced proposals at the to give Kennedy an answer that we would not have to change disarmament negotiations, which presupposed establishing later—an answer that would ideally express a coordinated observer posts at airports, at railway hubs, on highways, and position and would satisfy ours and Cuba’s mutual interests. in large ports on a mutual basis.
Their purpose is to avert the danger of some decided, and the military for their part quite firmly said, aggressive country preparing a sudden attack, concentrating that in the interests of normalizing the situation the Il-28s forces, and carrying out an invasion of the other country. should be removed from Cuba in order not to make the Il-28 Apparently, even if we eliminate the crisis we are currently into some kind of fetish—either the Il-28s or nothing.
This living through—and we think that we will eliminate it on the would be foolish because this is not the kind of weapon for basis of a mutual agreement—this question will take on an which it would be worth breaking off negotiations and thus importance beyond Cuba . jeopardizing all the achievements we have reached in our corThis system then could be expanded to Europe and Asia, respondence with the president.
We should not provide an which would serve the cause of guaranteeing the security of all opportunity for the aggressive forces to undermine what was countries of the world and most of all of the two camps—of already achieved and place the responsibility for the breakup the countries of the socialist camp and the countries of the on us.
This would be unforgivable from our side; it would imperialist camp that have joined NATO’s military bloc. show a lack of understanding of simple things.
Therefore now we need From the materials we have obtained (and we sent these to to enter diplomatic negotiations, which have already started. you), you can see that among the responsible leading circles In order to create a basis for that, our country has to fulfill of the United States they allegedly allow for the possibility its obligations so that the other country can fulfill its obligathat in order not to create a crisis out of the dispute over the tion.
Il-28s, the Americans could even agree to leave the planes (But you should not cite this last confidential letter in your there; however, we must give assurances that their numbers conversation with the Cubans.) will not increase in the future.
In our letter to Comrade Fidel Castro, we have already This, of course, would be the best option for us.
But it given an explanation to his statement that we would not be completely correct to start from this assumption allegedly have not consulted with him.
Of course, from a military point of view, the ties to strange the revolution with the bony hand of hunger.
I read today in a review of the foreign press tive toward Cuba than any other American reactionaries.
But, a report that said the MiG-21 fighter planes can be used as he is smarter, he understands that he should not undermine offensive weapons. the prestige of the United States by a military attack on Cuba.
If you fly the MiG-21 one way and cause economic hardship and the fall of the revolutionary jump off with a parachute, then the aircraft can be used at a government.
It should be We have to secure the removal of the blockade and guarnoted that for the entire time of the blockade, controllers did antees that the United States and other countries will not not go on board of Soviet ships, they feared conflict. attack Cuba.
However, the Americans Ernesto “Che” Guevara, Havana, themselves retreated on the question of inspections of strate16 November 1962 gic missiles.
We believe that since they confirmed the removal of these missiles through aerial photography, it will suffice.
Mikoyan and his that they have no information as to whether or not the miscolleagues—deputy chairman of the State Committee of the siles were removed.
Guevara that Comrade Alikhanov would give a progress the course we agreed upon earlier, when it was decided that report on the Soviet Union’s obligations for building indussteel structures would be manufactured in Cuba from metal trial facilities in Cuba. imported from the Soviet Union.
A part of the equipment has they saw that the cost of the work outlined in the project already been delivered from the USSR, and considering that is approximately twice as much as the construction costs construction of this plant is proceeding ahead of schedule, we of similar North American plants that are located in Cuba. will try to take action so the majority of the essential equipThe specialists are well aware of the costs of building North ment will be shipped in the first half of 1963.
You should put him to work more In addition, design engineers sometimes make mistakes in He built a plant there for 1 million tons counting the cost of equipment, especially if it is a new model. of steel.
And now it is already working at Different kinds of mistakes can happen, too.
The British and the West Germans also built a a case with an oil refinery that we were planning to build in factory each in India.
This refinery was designed to power half a million thirds of their capacity.
When the project was finished and the Ethiopians there is some kind of misunderstanding here.
In India we are looked it over, they said that they did not like it because it cost building an oil refinery, also for 2 million tons of oil.
I noticed that there are some paradoxes in designed to meet the utility needs of the city, and in addition the prices of Soviet industrial equipment.
Some equipment is there were expenditures for construction of port facilities for sold far below world prices, other equipment is sold at world receiving oil.
We only had to deduct these expenses from the prices, and yet other is considerably above world prices. cost of the project and everything fell into place.
As you can our industrial equipment at world market prices, or rather, see, our engineers are far from commerce, and made plant slightly below.
Inside the country the price of industrial construction cost calculations based on our internal regulamachinery and equipment differ significantly from internations.
For example, we make a profit on the producwill give an order to organize a special expertise on this project tion of trucks and tractors, but we produce passenger cars at a in Moscow.
When we sell products abroad we set prices in line with us precise data on the construction costs of North American world prices.
For this purpose, we study reference manuals, plants, to facilitate the work of our experts.
If we cannot find price engineers really made a mistake, we will correct them.
Such data on certain equipment in reference materials, we give a study would be useful to the Soviet Union as well.
If our instructions to one of our trade representatives to contact the plants are more expensive to make, we will have to catch up.
It is not like wheat or some other agricultural comCriticism and self-criticism are at the heart of our develmodity, the prices for which are readily available every day.
Then you will have no shortage of raw We buy tobacco from Greece and Turkey out of political materials, and you will be able to further develop the brewing considerations, but not in large quantities.
Considering had a bad harvest of tobacco, and it supplied us with only that your country has too much money in circulation, 20,000 tons.
And in general, increasing beer consumption would play a positive role. we could always buy the tobacco that you do not sell to other And while you are building a factory for the production of countries, provided that it is cheap-grade tobacco.
We could malt, we could negotiate the purchase of barley from us and conclude a long-term agreement on this, securing a certain its treatment, either in the Soviet Union or in Czechoslovakia, share of Cuban tobacco in our purchases of tobacco abroad. if the Soviet Union does not have the capacity.
We process a large number Czechoslovakia for processing and further transportation to of tobacco products and, blended with other varieties of Cuba.
This work in two directions will help you to quickly tobacco, we might be able to use the black tobacco.
I think increase production and meet demand. we should instruct our trade associations to discuss this issue.
We told out Venezuelan comrades that they Manuel Forntuny, at their request. were using the wrong tactics.
He stated that the partisan movement in Cuba, which began as an isolated action of armed petty bourgeois democrats, gradually changed into a mass movement of armed workers and peasants who form 90% of the revolutionDOCUMENTS ON CZECHOSLOVAKIAary army.
A series of significant command posts were held and are held Resolution by communists.
The sending of a trade mission to Cuba with the goal of to the requests of the masses.
In the past the communists preparing the road to normalizing diplomatic ties, criticized Castro often—even publicly—for his incorrect 2.
To express agreement for eventual negotiations about approach that testified to the petty bourgeois mentality of the supplying arms should the Czechoslovak delegation be uprising’s leaders.
For example, in the spring of last year an asked, appeal for a revolt was made to the soldiers in Batista’s army— 3.
Willy Strub said that the transaction would ammunition to the Cuban armed be made on the basis of a proper Swiss re-export license, forces. and in several shipments.
In the closing discussions the above named beforehand, and with a resolution passed on 8 September Cuban functionary affirmed interest in arms from the 1959 agreeing with this plan, the goods were Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
At the same time he voiced handed over on 10 September of this year. the opinion of the head of the government, Dr.
Fidel Castro, The called-for 50,000 guns would be covered by the that given the current tense situation the purchase of these main technical division of the Ministry of International goods could only be made by way of a third country, otherTrade from its military supplies, allowing them to release wise direct supplies from Czechoslovakia could be politically 20,000 pieces this year, and the remaining 30,000 in 1960. manipulated by the United States, as in the case of Guatemala.
As far as cartridges are concerned, the Ministry of National Therefore, the Ministry of International Trade assumes Defense is putting only 80 million pieces up for disposal, that, taking into consideration the current viewpoint of the and of this about 1/4th this year and the rest next year.
The Cuban representatives, it would be useful to take advantage requested number of cartridges is of suitable intermediaries, and possibly realize special technidisproportionately high when compared with the number of cal supplies of Czechoslovak types to Cuba.
Trade would try to import the goods from either Poland or The recent visit of Mr W Strub to Prague seems to be Bulgaria, and possibly, together with the Ministry of General in line with the stated conception of the Cuban locals, who Engineering they would try to find a means for the manufacapparently found it suitable to locate an intermediary in neuture of these goods in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
Considering CPCz Politburo Resolution, 17 May 1960 the fact that arms of the 2nd catagory are involved—that is, used arms—it would be necessary to undertake an inspection of these guns.
Comrade F Krajčír The realization of this transaction would have a series of 16 May 1960 advantages.
Czechoslovakia would not carry the risk of the naval transEnclosure II port.
Furthermore, it would be a useful way to utilize guns Report already put out of commission, and the Ministry of National On supplying special materials from Czechoslovakia to Cuba.
Defense would gradually release a total of 160,000 pieces for export by the year 1964.
At the same time, old ammunition During his visit to Czechoslovakia in April 1960, manufactured in the years 1946-1951 would be sold.
Central State Archive, Prague, Archive of the Central preparation of cadres from the Cuban armed forces.
Obtained and translated for the National The possibility of supplying Cuba with special technology Security Archive.] as well as providing technical assistance was consulted with the Soviet Union a number of times, the most recent being in March 1960.
This means that the manufacture of such an planes L-60 in a joint version.
At the same time, pieces) and TU-20 , which are not possible to get Czechoslovakia will save on the naval transportation costs, from the Ministry of National Defense’s supplies at the current time, and which it would also be necessary to manufacture.
The Czechoslovak side will secure the technical docuDuring the discussions the Soviet side stated refusal mentation that must be sent to Cuba with the special with having a representative of the Soviet side join the materials, and do the same for the Soviet materials.
The Czechoslovak delegation for negotiations in Cuba and did Soviet delegation reasoned its position by saying that it not recommend the Czechoslovak delegation to come into does not have the opportunity to secure a translation of contact with representatives of the USSR in Cuba.
At the same delegation also refused to have the needed Czechoslovak spetime it emphasized that with the supply of special materials cialists be transported to Cuba with the first Soviet shipment to Egypt and Indonesia the same practice was utilized, with of special materials.
Thus there is a question of how to best the Czechoslovak organizations being given the required undertake the transport of the rather numerous Czechoslovak documentation in Russian, and with the Soviet Union delegation.
For to secure the storage, transfer and conservapassing on only additions and changes to the documentation of the first shipment it will be necessary to have about tion.
The Soviet side binds itself to paying Czechoslovakia 12 Czechoslovak military experts in Cuba beforehand, who all the expenses related to the translation and preparation together with the members of the delegation will comprise of the documentation for the Cuban side.
It is probable that such a number will been proven in earlier operations, securing this request draw the attention of the public.
That due to the unique situation of Cuba, the first five instalments during the years 1961-1965, at a 2% shipment of specialized technology should proceed interest rate; the same conditions apply to shipments of without a contract with the Cuban side; some Soviet materials of a civilian character; 3.
Material for the Reception of Raul Castro, Khrushchev or our party never said that imperialism would be the Cuban Minister of the Revolutionary any different than before, or that it was not necessary to fight Armed Forces, July 1960 against it.
I emphasized that we fully support the position of the CPSU and the Moscow Declaration. in Brozik salon on the 1st floor on 13 July 1960 at 10:00 am.
They were also saying that neither the USSR nor the CSR know the situation in Cuba well and that we do not understand the importance of the Cuban revolution.
In early morning hours on 27 June, a fourteen member As for the USSR, Luis Martino said he talked with Soviet Cuban delegation, headed by Minister of the Cuban comrades who did not talk about Revolutionary Armed Forces Raul Castro, arrived on a the importance of the revolution and about the measures special plane.
During R Castro’s visit at At the time of Castro’s delegation’s arrival, the Cuban the residence of the Korean titulary, the talk was specifically economic mission headed by Antonio Nunez Jimenez, about the possibility to open diplomatic contacts between director of the National Institute for Land Reform in Cuba, the DPRK and Cuba.
In the course of a friendly and open was very fruitful because it showed where the Cuban people conversation, minister David especially emphasized the have real friends. international impact of the Cuban revolution and added On 30 June, National Defense Minister cde.
Lomsky that it is undoubtedly an attractive example for other Latin accepted R Castro.
During the conversation, the Cuban origin and development of the guerilla movement in Cuba, representatives compared the revolutionary movement in strategy and tactics of guerilla warfare, as well as the current Cuba with the coup in Guatemala in 1954 and pointed out condition of the Cuban revolutionary army.
The issue of the mistakes that the Cuban revolution avoided, unlike the establishing a regular army in Cuba was also discussed in movement in Guatemala.
Ever since the revolutionary government seized power, he has On 7 July, R Castro was also accepted by minister of held many top functions.
Krajcir who later arranged for him a on 16 February 1959, and when this bureau was closed, he was courtesy dinner. appointed the minister of Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces.
He has very friendly attitude mutual diplomatic ties in the near future. towards the CSR, which he visited for the first time in 1953 Saturday 9 and Sunday 10 of July were resting days for with a delegation of Cuban youth. the Cuban delegation.
He is Around noon, the state deputy, accompanied by the de facto in the function of a Deputy Chairman of the Cuban ambassador, paid a courtesy visit to the President of the government, and as for importance, he ranks the third after Republic, Dr.
Roa organized a dinner in honor of the He actively fought against the Peron dictatorship in state deputy, which was attended by all prominent officials of Argentina, then alongside Arbenz in Guatemala, and the Cuban foreign ministry, the designated Cuban ambassador since 1955, together with Fidel Castro against the Batista dicto Prague, and employees at the Czechoslovak embassy.
In 1956, he was among the 82 of Castro’s comrades that night, the state deputy and the ambassador visited the who in the beginning of December landed in Cuba and out chairman of the National Bank, Dr.
He grew to be with whom they held very lengthy and interesting political the most capable commander of the revolutionary army, and conversations on the present international standing of Cuba, successfully led one of the key strikes against the Batista army. possible ways to thwart United States aggression, and the We can assume that during his stay in the CSSR, he will support Cuba looks forward to receiving from other Latin namely want to discus construction of a car factory in Cuba, American countries.
It is interesting that, at this time, Guevara granting of further credit of about $50 million, and maybe, was convinced of planned American aggression.
It is worth the question of possible cooperation within the Council for mentioning that this conversation was one of the best political Mutual Economic Assistance . conversations during the state deputy’s visit to Havana.
Mr Guevara supposedly wants to negotiate in the USSR possible participation in the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance to some extent.
At the conclusion of discussions in the Czechoslovak Proposal of our position on issues that need to be Socialist Republic, Mr Jimenez sent a letter to the Deputy discussed with Guevara Prime Minister and Chairman of the National Planning Commission cde.
Simunek and his first deputy The National Planning Commission thinks it is right to Pucek on the issues of planned development and control of grant the request of the Cuban side, and confirmed in writing economy, and showed a genuine interest in Czechoslovak its approval of sending an experienced expert.
It is recomknow-how, experience and experts. mended to promise Mr Guevara that an expert would be At the end of discussions, Mr Jimenez presented the sent in shortest possible time.
The Commission also thinks it Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the National would be constructive to recommend to Mr Guevara that a Planning Commission cde.
The date of their work agreement between the government of the Czechoslovak departure would be agreed upon later.
However, we to expedite import and distribution of those Cuban can assume that by collecting knowledge of and information products that were traditionally made for the USA and about the first part of the process located in Cuba, and by other capitalist countries, which is especially urgent trial runs of the technological guidelines, conditions could now when the USA is strongly restricting trade with be created relatively soon for production support of this Cuba; first part of the plant, which would be producing nickel and Also to study, which measures the Cuban side should cobalt sulfides.
Even though the socialist camp countries do take in order to secure long-term needs of both not have the technology yet for processing this feedstock, the countries; Soviet Union could possibly process these sulfides in some of The results of the expert group’s activities should its plants by adding them to their production process, until be recommendations on organization of planning the second part is built.
It will be necessary to consult production of 50 thousand tons of nickel.
The Cuban govwith the USSR on the many questions associated with proernment nationalized one of them Moa with capacity of 25 duction restart in Moa and how best to help Cuba. thousand tons of nickel contained in the feedstock, before Obviously, even if all goes well, resumption of nickel all aggregates could be made fully operational and before production will take a long time.
The plant, built to equipped quarries whose capacity is estimated from 1. to 2 the highest technical level and for new technologies, was million tons of ore a year, could partially help Cuba in this soon afterwards shut down.
Restarting the production will be a very from the People’s Republic of Albania, the difference being complicated matter because Cubans in the plant are only that the Cuban ore contains 1. to 1. % nickel compared to in positions of middle technical level and know only basic 1 % for the Albanian ore.
The Nicaro the quantity obtained) in cooperation with other countries of plant is still in the hands of a capitalist company with prethe socialist camp. dominantly American capital, which closed it in the first days Cuba also has considerable reserves of good quality of October 1960 under the pretense that they have to pay manganese ores.
Currently, down production in this plant is undoubtedly to be a represabout 10 thousand tons of these processed ores is waresive measure from the USA because the Cuban government housed.
Considering the difficult situation in supplying the declared it would nationalize the plant at a convenient time.
Czechoslovak metallurgy with rich manganese ores, it makes As for securing production of this plant after nationalization, sense to look into possibilities of importing Cuban ores and the situation here is much better than in the case of the Moa into conditions, under which this could be secured. plant.
With short interruptions, Nicaro is producing since Similar possibilities exist in chromium ores that, true, 1943 and it has a well-trained workforce knowledgeable contain only 33% of chromium oxide but they have about the production technology, as well as many middle suitable composition as for other components.
The CSSR could also contribute difficult to obtain these ores from countries of the socialist to ensuring proper operation of the plant by sending a group camp, we should explore the possibilities of importing Cuban of up to 10 technologists and shop managers who are workchromium ores. ing with a large semi-production installation for nickel proSignificant aid to Cuba would be making order in their duction in Vitkovice Steelworks.
The USSR could possibly geological survey, mine organization, and keeping good provide this kind of specialists as well.
The current situation is rather however, that due to the change in ownership relationship of dismal.
Many nationalized plants work with a minimum of this plant, securing the delivery of about 7 thousand tons of confirmed reserves, exploration is not organized into projects, ammonia a year is required, as well as a large quantity of coke there is practically no mining/geological and survey docufor production of producer gas.
Aid could be organized by sending a group of and many other questions will have to be discussed namely geologists, mining engineers and surveyors who would at the with the USSR and some other socialist camp countries. plants ensure smooth operation and also help with training Cuba was getting certain part of the Nicaro production in the Cuban cadres.
The USSR is planning similar aid. the form of sinter containing about 91% of nickel.
Following the nationalization of Nicaro, it may be possible to secure considerable part of nickel deliveries for the Nickel Czechoslovak economy in the form of sinter.
The Moa plant – to reach an agreement with the USSR utilization of Cuban natural resources. about close cooperation and aid in bringing the Cuban By rough calculations of finishing capabilities, our experts plant to production, and about the most efficient estimated that Cuba is currently producing over 30,000 approach to utilization and processing of nickel and tons of rich copper concentrates containing about 10,000 cobalt sulfides. tons of copper.
Import of nickel sinter of Motokov representatives resulted in closing contracts for Secure within trade relations shipments of nickel sinter 14 small engineering units (for instance production of locks, up to the maximum the Czechoslovak economy can bolts, refrigerators, small gasoline motors, etc.) in total value utilise. about 35 million CZK; most of the shipments will be made in 1961.
Negotiation of other representatives of Czechoslovak foreign trade enterprises resulted in unification of especially Copper concentrates contracts for engineering goods.
Engineering enterprises of international trade placed orders for 1960 worth more than 1.
Explore possibilities of processing the copper concentrate 24 million CZK in foreign prices by 1st October 1960, which in the CSSR and in friendly countries. is 244% of the original export plan for shipments of engi2.
Jimenez, Chromium ore Director of INRA , Explore usability and suitability of imports of chromium ores was to clarify and expedite shipments of some small engineerfor the Czechoslovak economy. ing units, and to negotiate crucial measures in the area of economic cooperation.
Exchange of goods between the Czechoslovak Socialist Bank of International Trade, which so far is the only authorRepublic and the Republic of Cuba ity of the foreign trade monopoly, visited the CSSR in August and presented the Czechoslovak side with a list of goods that Trade between Cuba and Czechoslovakia has been Cuba wants to import from countries of the socialist camp characterized by heavy Cs. trade surplus in recent years.
The Cuban side was to specify quantities and values goods, was between 16 and 19 million CZK from 1954 to in this list in September.
There was practically no import to the CSSR except foreign trade enterprises prepared preliminary reports of for packaged tobacco worth small amounts of money.
This delivery possibilities; since the Cuban lists have not been situation resulted in a protest from the Cuban side and amended and specified, these reports along with some offers therefore, the Czechoslovak side started to buy sugar for refrom foreign trade enterprises were sent to the Czechoslovak export from 1955 to 1956.
Exchange of goods was temporarily Trade Department to be available to the Cuban side.
Recently, suspended due to introduction of licensing proceedings. the Cuban side presented the Czechoslovak Trade Mission a By negotiating long-term trade, payment, and credit list of about 2,500 items of goods with requested quantities agreements, and a protocol on scientific and technological of import.
The Czechoslovak delivery capabilities will be cooperation, conditions were created for exchange of goods promptly reviewed and coordinated with other socialist camp on a substantially larger scale, and for the necessary changes countries, to which a similar list was also given. in the structure of Czechoslovak export.
The pertinent agreeCzechoslovak imports are hampered by considerable ments were signed in June of this year, and mutual trade is difficulties.
True, the Cuban side presented an informative increasing strongly in the coming months summary of their export capabilities but it became apparent . that the current status of production and organization of Cuban exports is making purchases difficult.
Cuban port twice upon Cuban invitation; promised shipment of copper concentrates did not materialize either for similar III. reasons.
Credit request for construction of an automobile plant The current status of mutual exchange of goods indicates in Cuba that in the near future , trade balance will show Cuban representatives, headed by Mr Guevara, discussed a considerable surplus on the Czechoslovak side.
Transfer of the Soviet side’s surplus American countries as one of the important signs of remainders in interesting clearing accounts will be requested. industrialization; In connection with issues of barter and economic cooperac) The Cuban government wants to utilize the halls tion with the Republic of Cuba, correctness of the current that Americans built. system of territorial division of the foreign trade plan will be assessed.
It is, therefore, safe to assume that during his visit in Czechoslovakia, a) Point out to Mr Guevara that the projected low batch Mr Guevara will discuss this issue with our representatives. manufacturing implies low efficiency and consequently, high According to preliminary information from the CSSR envoy capital costs; to Moscow cde.
Balaban, deputy of the b) Recommend first organizing assembly from Czechoslovak CSSR representative, there is no official knowledge about this parts.
In such a case, credit of $20 for Mutual Economic Assistance on selected issues. million would be required in addition to the $20 million already granted.
The additional credit could be created, as a c) Inform Mr Guevara about the main objectives of preliminary thought, by transferring about $10 million from the CMEA, namely coordination of plans for the next credit reserves for less developed capitalist countries, and $10 20 years. million from reserves for socialist countries.
Based on this framework d) As for assembly of passenger cars in Cuba from Cs. parts document, the FTE Polytechna sent in September until their production is introduced, it will require negligible 1960 its representatives to discuss concrete forms and construction , which could general conditions of technological cooperation with the be drawn from the already provided credit.
Regarding this, Fidel Castro supposedly said that in the Cuban economy compared to most of other Cuba did not intend to develop complex heavy industry and less developed countries.
In the short term, Republic, Comrade A Novotný, for assistance with the shortages of auxiliary and spare parts, and aggregates construction of anti-aircraft defenses for the country against should be expected, which could paralyze the whole expected hostile air strikes. industry to a great extent; The Cuban Revolutionary Government intends to coun3.
Considering this, we would recommend to Mr Guevara ter this threat by developing a radiolocation network and to prepare a short-term plan by organizing anti-aircraft defenses.
To this end, it plans to of reconstruction and development of the national use anti-aircraft weapons supplied by Czechoslovakia and economy as a basis for the economic policy of the Cuban the Soviet Union.
Considering the fact that Soviet arms Government in being supplied with additional special shipments to Cuba are no longer a secret, the Soviet technology.
Government believes that it would be useful if further supplies to Cuba take place without the participation of Leading representatives of the Cuban Revolutionary Czechoslovak organs.
By the same token, Soviet specialists Government have submitted via the Czechoslovak Embassy will be sent directly to Cuba. in Havana new requests for supplies of special technology and The Soviet Ambassador further informed that the investment mechanisms.
Soviet Government, in harmony with the opinions of the Czechoslovak side, believes that it would be useful if specialThe requests have been dealt with by the State Planning ists from the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic were sent to Commission, the Defense Ministry, the Ministry of Industry, Cuba as soon as possible in order to assist in the organization and the Finance Ministry. of anti-aircraft defense for the country using the already supplied materials.
As a significant portion of the resources for anti-aircraft defense have been and will be supplied by the Enclosure I Soviet Union, the Soviet side considers it appropriate to send its own group of specialists to Cuba who, in cooperation with Suggested resolution the Czechoslovak specialists, would solve all problems surrounding anti-aircraft defense in Cuba.
It is clear from the above-mentioned facts that it will be Enclosure III possible to satisfy fully the new Cuban requests, including the sending of a small group of Czechoslovak specialists Report who, together with Soviet specialists, will formulate a plan for the organization of anti-aircraft defense in Cuba.
The training of Cuban pilots, which will enable them to fly Enclosure IV fighter planes as well as that of specialists for their maintenance and specialists of other supplied equipment will be provided by the Soviet Union.
The rest would be covered on the basis of a 12 million crown loan, which would be repaid Resolution in five successive annual payments.
Comrade F Krajčír with the task of finalizing any additions to the agreement of 11 June 1960 or additions a) To supply 50 million 7.92 mm bullets to the Cuban to established contacts concerning supplies described in Revolutionary Government of which 2 million will come Points II a to d of this resolution. from Defense Ministry stockpiles for one-third of their Comrade B Lomský value on the basis of the reserve sum of the Czechoslovak1. with the task of freeing up 2 million 7.92 mm.
Cuban Agreement of 11 June 1960 on supplies of special bullets and 2 mobile artillery batteries, technology reached between the Government of the 2. of preparing a group of specialists for the provision Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Government of technical assistance with the organization of antiof the Cuban Republic and the other 48 million bullets aircraft defenses on Cuban territory. will be re-exported from the Bulgarian People’s Republic Comrade K Poláček with the following tasks on the basis at full value.
The remaining 21. million Czechoslovak rifle model 52 Cz. by deadlines agreed upon with crowns will be paid off in five annual payments based the Ministry of Foreign Trade. on Czechoslovak-Cuban clearing accounts at 2% interest 2.
Foreign Trade a b) To supply 2 mobile artillery batteries from the stockpiles final offer to build an army repair station keeping in of the Ministry of Defense at one-third of their value, mind Cuba’s need to secure its ability to repair namely for 423,000 Czechoslovak crowns on the basis of supplied weapons. the reserve sum of the Czechoslovak-Cuban Agreement 3.
HAVANA Comrade F Krajčír Pavlíček Comrade B Lomský Gramatges informs through Pleskot: Comrade K Poláček Comrade J Ďuriš Ricardo Toriente, who arrived in Paris from Bonn tonight, received written information from H Felske, Essen, Huyssenallee 33, offering detailed documentation on prepaTo the attention of: rations for a counterrevolutionary coup against the Cuban Government and an assassination attempt against Fidel Comrade V Široký Castro.
The holder of the documents allegedly worked until Comrade O Šimůnek recently at a consulate in Havana.
Involved are microfilms Comrade L Jankovcová containing detailed information about the organizers and Comrade V David place of action.
He requests 28 thousand German marks Comrade B Kőhler for the materials.
In negotiations over recent days on the Comrade A Dubček conditions of the handover, Felske stated that, among other Comrade V Koucký things, an assassination attempt is being prepared during a big public celebration and that a large amount of explosives have been transported to Havana by individuals whose families live there.
Toriente believes that a possible assassination Czechoslovak Intelligence Reports attempt could occur during celebrations marking 1 May.
His Correspondence with Czechoslovak go-between held discussions in Essen on 29. in the evening Embassy, Havana, Regarding Purported and requested evidence that the films on offer truly contain Assassination Plot against Fidel Castro the mentioned information.
He will receive a report by ten and Coup Plot against Cuban Government, o’clock.
April 1961 Pleskot will provide another report should anything seri6th Division/Petrželka Lightning-Immediately ous develop.
It appears as ately I, III though the action against Cuba is still being prepared.
In the 62nd Radio Company, 33 2nd-year soldiers have committed themselves to help work Send a lightning message immediately to Pleskot telling him their 1st-year comrades into their functions.
Similar cases of to inform Cuban ambassador, Gramatges, of the arrival of the helpfulness and conscientious fulfillment of tasks are being Bonn charges in Paris.
Officers are working intensively on combat provided by Fernandel. alert and readiness tasks.
Appropriate attention is being paid to these issues on the part of the political organs.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA AND THE CUBAN CPCz, measures have been taken in all sectors as directed by MISSILE CRISIS, 1962 the XI Department of the CC CPCz.
The resolution was published in and political personnel are focused on securing the fulfillment the Svazarm magazine Obránce vlasti. of combat readiness tasks.
Thorough checks of their fulfillment Likewise at the Ministry of Justice and the General are being carried out.
So far the results of these checks show Procurator’s Office, the measures assigned by the politburo good readiness on the part of the armed forces, and only defects of the CC CPCz have been carried out.
In the 13th Tank Division extraordinary events has been verified, and telecommunicasevere insufficiencies in the material outfitting of soldiers were tions links and readiness at all equipment have been verified. discovered; care for the soldiers had been neglected.
Control It has been ordered to increase watchfulness and wakefulness organs have adopted remedial measures. at all workplaces, and move consistently and in a timely manPolitical organs in nearly all units and sub-units agree in ner against those who would misuse the situation. their reports that the current measures taken by our armed Staff is on duty round-the-clock in all sectors. forces have led to a marked strengthening of ties between the different class years of basic-service soldiers and reservists.
Signature Comrades are helping one another to unify the level of their readiness as much as possible.
Kozelka disOldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] cussed these matters with Cde.
Mevald, who drew up a list of comrades into two ranks, which is being speedily verified.
The defense headquarters of the ÚRO was joined by comrades from the World Federation of Labor Unions.
Report on “Extraordinary Measures” Regarding Czechoslovak Organizations, Unresolved issues 26 October 1962 The limit for the relief of ROH [Revolutionary Trade Report on implementation of extraordinary measures in Union Movement] functionaries was assembled without the the ROH , ČSM district labor councils, and without the World Federation of , and National Front Labor Unions.
The question of archive materials from the CC ČSM, the International Students’ Union, Mladá fronta, and the ČSM Central School has thus far not been resolved.
The archives of the CC ČSM are supposed to be deposited Report to CPCz General Secretary Antonin in the state archives, which have rejected them however, saying Novnotný, 27 October 1962 that the Institute for the History of the CPCz is responsible for this task.
Here they refuse also, saying that it has not been Top Secret approved by the Secretariat or the leading comrades of the CC CPCz.
Report for Comrade Novotný The economic archive has also not been dealt with, During the night there was no significant change in the because the CC ČSM has no place to put it, and no means. military-political situation.
According to information from the Ministry of the Also unresolved is the question of relocating the archive Interior, Kennedy offered [British to a selected place in Slovakia.
No site or money has been Prime Minister Harold] Macmillan to arrange for mutual approved with which the archive could be relocated. telephone contact for the purpose of exchanging opinions during the course of the next few days.
The biggest problems are with the International Macmillan on this proposal is not known.
In military circles in Great Britain indignation is being So far there is no site or means to relocate the personnel of expressed that the government of the USA did not discuss this organization.
There is the possibility of relocating them if its actions in the Caribbean area with its allies in NATO, needed to the recreation facility in Pec, but there are no means namely with Great Britain.
The archive of that organization and armed forces of Great Britain are not participating through what to do with it is an unresolved question. any measures in the current military-political situation.
They don’t the slightest doubt about its determination to attain its goal. know what to do with the archive.
It is an open question In the Security Council it presented the aerial photos what to do in the event of extraordinary measures with the of 4 missile bases and one airfield for jet airplanes in Cuba. publishing house, and especially with the daily newspaper In commenting on the submitted photos, an American army Mladá fronta. colonel had to admit that so far no atomic weapons had been found.
In case of need the municipal CD command center Cuban representative to Cuba to carry out an inspection of will request in case of need from the CC ČSM buses and the bases. delivery trucks with civilian and girl drivers.
The CC ČSM President Kennedy has supposedly decided to call a special does not have civilian and women drivers, and all the Svazarm session of Congress to discuss the situation in Cuba in regard courses are full.
This task has not been fulfilled. to alleged continued construction of missile bases.
The search for both of these deserters is being is assuming the right to take further steps if construction carried out by Public Security. continues on guided missile bases, which are being labeled as On 26.10.1962 , 15 soldiers at a techthe main cause of the current crisis.
Military circles continue nical vocational school (where the officer corps is trained to to be fed reports of a possible invasion, preparations for which serve anti-aircraft rockets) were found listening to a broadcast are linked to the continuing concentration of forces in the of Radio Free Europe in the Hungarian language, which was Caribbean area. translated by one of the listeners.
The report spoke of the With the feeling that so far no positive result has been border conflict between India and China. obtained in arranging talks between representatives of the Similarly, in the 2nd company of the Cheb brigade of the USSR, USA, and Cuba, and the official statement of the Border Guards, several members listened to West Berlin staUSA, the situation among diplomatic circles in the UN on tion Rias on a transistor receiver. the evening of 26.10 was described as deterioA private of the 151st engineer regiment was found taking rating. grenades off base.
The American ambassador in Vienna has assured the In the area of Hradiště exercise range yesterday afternoon, Austrian government that there is no immediate danger of a foreigner on a visa, Arthur Roger Henrichs, who is an war.
Obtained by Oldřich majority of members of the army and Interior Ministry Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] troops to more active and responsible activity in the accomplishment of duties.
Inquiries on the possibilities of Cable no. from the Czechoslovak recruiting volunteers to go to Cuba are increasing.
Embassy in Havana , 27 October Measures for supply of the population are being positively 1962 received, and it is reported that the wave of panic buying in stores has subsided in most instances.
At 16:17 h a group of American Gregor. planes penetrated to above Pinar del Rio province, and were repelled by anti-aircraft artillery.
That sent by you via Washington, and a discussion In Nicaragua, Panama, Guatemala, and other countries, between Vrána and Pinner 26.10. passed on this exile intervention units are at the ready.
If [Soviet where 50% of officers were at their stations during the night.
Ambassador Aleksandr] Alexejev confirms this Preparations for other measures toward heightened combat information during the night hours, we will give the order readiness has been observed in Italy.
On 27.10. to burn all classified materials except for the enciphered data, police were put on alert in Rome, and instructed that possible which we will destroy last.
At the same time I will order the internal unrest should be expected, especially in the event of emergency measures for informing and organizing our citimobilization.
The mood among the ranks of the Italian police zens, as per the emergency plan. and army is strongly anti-American.
Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, the Mediterranean area at the rate of 48 flights per day.
Obtained by During the night continuing preparations were discovOldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] ered to destroy routes of communications in the area of Ludwigsthal.
Novnotný, 28 October 1962 Repairs to equipment are being rapidly completed.
Combat readiness is maintained Defense Ministry has called 24 transport planes of the Air at a high level.
Preparations for the swearing-in ceremony of National Guard to active duty.st year recruits were taken advantage of to explain the curAccording to information from General Headquarters rent international situation and the necessity for high combat of the Ministry of National Defense, on 27.10,1962 [27 readiness.
In several units the ceremony has already taken October 1962] at 16:00 h our time a Cuban anti-aircraft batplace; in others it will take place today.
Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCZ sor factories, and the participation of parents.
Obtained by to quality and timely fulfillment of tasks are adopted then Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] and there at the assembly under the impression created by the oath-taking.
From the ceremonial assemblies and meetings, greetings are sent to the district conferences of the CPCz in which soldiers assure the delegates that they will fulfill their assigned tasks.
In the Blansko RMZ there was a gross breach of discipline by two officers, Major Koš, a former The night of 26.10 to 27.10 member of the government troops, and 1st Lieutenant Kriš, passed by in relative calm, although in absolute readiness and who had been released to the reserves in 1950 and reactivated. understandable nervousness.
The case is being investigated by firmed by Alekseev and we decided to the head of the Regional Military Authority and the RMA wait.
In the morning hours of 27.10. , a U-2 Political Department. rocket in Oriente along with gunfire shot down In the 4th Tank Division, listening to Radio Free Europe and fended off an attack by a group of United States jet bombers, likely was discovered in the political education office.
The comon a mission to examine the missile bases in Pinar del Rio. mander of the army and the chief of political administration Caught a Pentagon announcement that if the Cubans do not have taken the appropriate measures. leave a free zone for United States flight inspections of Cuba and if an A drop has occurred in the increased buying within the immediate dismantling of missile bases does not begin, there territory of Prague.
Buying continues near bus and train stawill be further action, including armed forces.
Kennedy refused well, and diplomatic personnel are especially involved in Khrushchev’s offer to negotiate, the bases will not be dismanthis.
With this comes the climax of the third, this time very has recorded increased purchases by the embassies of foreign dangerous, crisis where the Cubans anticipate a direct attack states.
Therefore we are undertaking the same security the Prague 5 district as well. measures on 27.10 and during the night of 28.10.
In the West Bohemia region there is constant demand for sugar, salt, butter, and flour.
Khrushchev is understood correctly and with trust. and which compose the norms of UN standards—Cuba Amongst the intelligentsia there is concern that a portion of has a right to these so that it can ensure its security and the population will be fooled by the offer, that Cuba’s defenses sovereignty.
The KRV is willing to accept suggestions in its will be weakened as a result and inspections allowed, despite effort to maintain peace, but on the assumption that during Fidel ’s claim that inspections will never be permitted the negotiations the USA will cease the threats and aggressive and that defenses will continue to be erected.
Please pass along the briefly worded message from Fidel, as per the wishes of Minister Roa Raúl Cable no. from the Czechoslovak Kouro.
All tasks of civil defense, medical services, Embassy in Havana , 29 October and others are fulfilled in accordance with Cuban possibilities 1962 and organizational capabilities.
It is a great mistake that the Cubans do not inform the Other events gradually took place during 27 October embassies of the socialist camp countries about the course of which further dramatized the tense state of affairs; but on the events and the internal measures.
We are in close touch with other hand, in our view, these events clarified the position to Cubans at the highest levels, as well as with the Soviet friends such a degree that an invasion by the USA can scarcely be and we inform the Polish, Hungarian, Bulgarian, Romanian, expected, and we can instead hope that the entire problem will and partially the German and Vietnamese be resolved through negotiations.
The entire [For the Czech record of the 30 October 1962 conversation country lives in a state of preparedness, awaiting a United States attack in Moscow between CPCz first secretary Antoniń Novotný which would for them end in catastrophe.
Provocateurs appear and Nikita Khrushchev (i.e., excerpt containing Khrushchev’s only sporadically, their work having an immediately guaranteed comments on the missile crisis), see the section below.] effect.
Among the clear that Fidel and the KRV, who are clear about current press clippings, pay special attention to Revolucion Khrushchev’s orders to dismantle from 29.10 , to the proportions and placement , are nevertheless concerned that the general of the message’s titles, etc., which already resulted in protests population and the army will not understand this step, and by the revolutionaries and supported an undesirable discusthey are also concerned about the danger of the Soviet Union sion.
Thus far the press and radio are cominadequate understanding of the situation by Revolucion; we menting on the matter insufficiently and clarifying for do not discount a focus unfavorable to the USSR’s prestige.
I the people all the measures and suggestions on the part of send more details by messenger.
Thus, according to Alekseev, Fidel will reporter in Havana] has an opportunity to visit with military evidently speak on television and clarify the entire situation. personnel and he is consulting his steps with the embassy.
After the negoOldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] tiations end, Roa will return to the UN with U Thant.
In Venezuela, there was a huge act of sabotage affecting oil equipment, which forced Betancourt Cable no. from the Czechoslovak to mobilize and protect the equipment.
The internal situation remains 30 October 1962 unchanged, as we reported last time.
Cable no. from the Czechoslovak After Fidel ’s 5 Points for guaranEmbassy in Havana , 31 October tees were made public, the Cubans unfortunately did not at 1962 all understand the historic steps by Khrushchev and instead believe that the USSR backed away from the USA, and that Cuban defenses have been weakened.
In fact, in some instances it is apparently intentionally standing in contrast to the views The mood of the general population continues to be in of Khrushchev and Fidel and not clarifying the importance of a state of considerable confusion regarding the problem of the Soviet steps.
The situation is worsened by the difference of friends, including Alekseev, of opinion among the mid-level staff, which echoes in the it seems that varying opinions were also expressed within the masses.
According to personal interviews with secretaries Aleksandr] Alekseev, Fidel underof the CTC, there is an apparent total disorder of opinions. stood the situation exactly, but he has to lead politically unstaThey do not understand the situation from a world-wide ble and doubtful elements in their relationship to the Soviet perspective, only a Cuban one, and their only vision remains Union.
From this perspective, clarity is expected in his speech the fulfillment of Fidel’s requests.
It has been illustrated, and the publishes anything about the USSR, and instead speaks of comrades understand how hard it is, especially now with an the indestructible nature of Fidel-ism in a prominent editoinsufficient political party that is substituted by a very imporrial.
Fidel will speak on Thursday, probably after his talks tant unit around Fidel and his decision-making.
During discusinformation from conversations with friends and some higher sions with Alekseev I learned of the Soviet friends’ concerns and middle functioning staff, because those highest around regarding the losses in the USSR’s position.
The President , Fidel, being raised about whether Fidel was informed of the USSR’s Carlos and Rodriguez are in Havana, Raúl in the position and the dismantling beforehand, and about the fact east, and Guevara in Pinar.
Together we are very uneasy about the face level, in keeping with Cuban temperaments, and there current state of affairs; we are trying to provide explanations is no lack of comment about another Congo, abandonment, but assume that only Fidel’s speech on 1.11 the defense of Cuba, etc.
Quick meetings called by ORI are will bring clarity. not very effective.
All the while it is clear to Fidel himself that the maximum request for the liquidation of Guantanamo is unacceptable to [US President Kennedy.
Obtained by the Soviet friends, and while they are convinced there will be a Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] positive ending, they are stunned and surprised by the Cuban reaction.
According to some officials it will be necessary to explain much to the Cubans.
Otherwise the internal situation has not undergone a change with regard to resoluteness, preparedness, and security, apart from the above-mentioned confused discussions.
Rodriguez confirmed that [Soviet Ambassador supplies of food and fuel are decreasing and could be seriously Aleksandr] Alekseev learned of the order to dismantle from my threatened during prolonged negotiations.
The total supply of telephone conversation, based on news from Prensa Latina. vital products is estimated as being enough for only 3 weeks.
Some Cuban officials expect that once the USA realizes the After receiving the order, the Soviet personnel absolutely did extent of the situation, they will prolong the negotiations in not understand and cried.
Security forces liquidate refused to work further and there were many instances of individual provocateurs quickly and effectively so this kind drunkenness in old Havana.
Rodriguez said that they are of activity is minimal throughout the country and absolutely awaiting the arrival of unorganized—and thus has brought a deep sense of disapMikoyan.
If possible, we will try to learn some Union will have a catastrophic effect for the USSR’s position, of the results of the talks with U Thant.
The predominant as well as that of the entire socialist camp and Latin America. opinion is that despite favorable commentaries and prosHe sees only a partial salvation of the situation in the form pects about the negotiations, it is not possible to expect any of perfect guarantees, in which he does not believe anyhow. improvement in relations between the USA and Cuba; in the The internal situation will depend much on Fidel’s speech of event of a “guarantee,” the dangerous situation will be post1 November.
U Thant’s preliminary poned, not resolved. discussions are not yet known.
Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, amongst the Cuban colleagues is difficult.
Obtained by a series of comments and innuendos suggesting that we all Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] abandoned Cuba.
There is also considerable disorientation among a series of our friends.
The press, radio, and televirequests are based on discontinuing the blockade, fulfilling sion with its explicit focus on Fidel ’s 5 Points only Fidel ’s 5 Points, and not supporting an international worsened the situation.
The firmness of the Cuban government and the tional cooling amongst a segment of the intelligentsia and revolutionary enthusiasm of the people made an impression the middle classes, while this was much less the case amongst on U Thant.
There has also been a significant rise in nationalAlekseev, the Brazilians, and ism.
He asked Alekseev about the dismantling of the for Fidel’s appearance tomorrow, on 1 November, from the rockets and the manner in which they would be transported viewpoint of resolving the situation not only from a Cuban back to the Soviet Union.
Alekseev said that he does not perspective, but a world-wide one for the preservation of know anything about the bases and referred U Thant to the peace.
According to Roa, the Brazilians offered its versity where he expressed the hope that the negotiations will good offices and were eager to present suggestions for the be successful and that he believes that Cuba’s security will be removal of Soviet bases on Cuba, but also for those of the secured with the help of the Soviet Union and all countries of USA in the entire Caribbean.
In cooperation with the Brazilians, the Yugoslav Secretary-General] U Thant’s talks indicate that the Cubans also offered its good offices, wanting to gain support for the continue to insist upon Fidel’s 5 Points being fulfilled, and Cuban requests from Asian and African countries, especially they are opposed to UN inspections. those that signed the Belgrade Declaration.
They await the debate, but can for example deduce the views of the hithMikoyan’s explanations, which will erto unbalanced socialist thoughts of members like [Minister clarify much.
They have a real desire to quickly bring to a halt of Education Armando] Hart, [economic advisor Raúl and paralyze the anti-Soviet campaign which was unleashed by Cepero] Bonilla, Machado, counter-revolutionary elements and reactionaries, and caused Cienfuegos, Yadur [not much confusion.
He understands the very difficult situation further identified] and others.
Also Guevara, of Alekseev and the Soviet soldiers living in Cuba, and believes but he only learned of the dismantling in the evening hours of that the situation will improve after Fidel’s speech, although it Sunday, was crushed and could not believe that the defensive will be difficult to completely erase the incident from memory. agreement remained unfulfilled.
Mory Jansov’s commentary Alekseev was present for the entire discussion and admitted was also interesting, in line with [Cuban Foreign Minister big mistakes, expressing the hope that Mikoyan will clarify Raúl] Roa’s viewpoint about which I write separately.
Roa said that the KRV very much welcomes prevented the danger of further divisions with the publication Mikoyan’s visit and sees it as an important political gesture of his 5 Points and the request that unity be maintained at all given the current situation.
Alekseev and Roa agreed that costs in the government, as well as his personal explanation to Guevara and Roa will be present for the arrival ceremony, the people about the USSR’s actions meant to prevent a loss without an invitation from the diplomatic office dealing of prestige and block the anti-Soviet campaign.
Despite this, we are going to the airport ness then came at the stage where there were efforts to prevent with friends from countries of the socialist camp.
I will send disunity and divisions which would weaken the revolution information about the course of the visit. and cause internal wavering.
The press makes no mention of China’s openly about some disagreements that will be dealt with durheightened position given its proclamation supporting the 5 ing joint talks, and on the other hand he clearly placed above Points and Cuba, nor of the Chinese-Indian conflict.
We can all else the help and friendship of the USSR, as well as about expect the press to take some direction after Fidel’s speech. the anti-Soviet campaign that was unleashed by the counterExplain to ČTK that Vavruš [a ČTK revolutionaries and which was assisted by the unsuitable reporter] is consulting important steps with the embassy and writings of the local press on Sunday 28 October.
However, cannot make note of certain negative realities included in our we would have liked to have heard an emphasis on the [critiother, already sent messages.
At a press conference we probed cal] role of the USSR in saving world peace and preventing for reactions to the Czechoslovak government’s gift—results a nuclear war, although much of this could be deduced from are good and there were positive evaluations from our partners the speech.
He will probably concern himself with the entire in East Germany , the USSR, etc.
Details and analysis situation after Mikoyan’s visit and the talks end.
Thus far the of individual tendencies in the press and the like will be sent reaction to Fidel’s speech means an absolute calming of the by messenger.
We recommend an increase of photos and situation and a clear orientation for the Cubans in the curmaterials about the situation via Prel and also the embassy. rent situation.
Mikoyan’s talks with the Cubans has been complicated by the unexpected death of comrade Mrs.
The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the has struck Mikoyan deeply.
The results are not the opinion that a council of representatives of communist yet known.
Roa, to whom parties should be elected for the purpose of discussing certain I passed on news from Ghana, indicated that according to problems of the international communist movement.
Creydt Lechuga there reigns a expressed the opinion that such a meeting will likely take great deal of confusion at the UN regarding the next develplace during the Bulgarian Congress. opments, for there is no one or coordinated set of views.
It will be necessary to ask comrade Creydt for precise pressures and is in fact continuing to concentrate forces details). . in Florida, strengthen Guantanamo, the flight inspections and the blockade.
There was a considerable calmness inside the country after Fidel’s speech.
The Cubans remain Embassy in Havana , 7 adamant about refusing inspections, even on the open ocean, November 1962 and they are absolutely against UN inspections.
Roy Inchaustegui was harshly criticized ernment’s support and greetings to N.S. by Fidel for the fact that instead Khrushchev were reacted to very coolly by some of discussing Cuba’s right to defense at the Security government officials ( Dorticos, [Minister Council, he discussed the question of the authenticity of of Construction Osmany] Cienfuegos, [Commandante Jose documents related to the bases.
Sinhu is making a special effort to feed those feelings with his blatant nonsensical 2.
We are asked about the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic’s information in a bulletin that the local press willingly accepts. stance towards Fidel’s 5 points.
We are replying positively, in There was even a comment about a new Munich.
Let us connection with Mikoyan’s believe in a solution, although it is probable that some issues acknowledged support.
Yet I am still requesting an official of prestige and self-complacency are difficult to overcome viewpoint. without solid political arguments.
Mikoyan provided from the Soviet Union, and no publication in Prensa Latina of information about the talks with the Cubans, though probany news regarding peaceful coexistence nor about the solidarably in a reserved fashion given the presence of the Chinese. ity of whomever with the Soviet Union, especially about the Thus we did not consider it appropriate to ask deeper quesexports of arms, etc., until the situation is resolved.
Mikoyan said that it is necessary to look towards the do not mention Khrushchev.
In time, nations will remember that the foreign correspondents and writers are also emphasized—they USA caused the situation and presented the danger of a nuclewill get materials only from the director or his replacement. ar war.
Nothing about the Cuban revolution will change, it ADN and PAP allegedly protested.
Thus far unconfirmed information states of the strategic materials, including bombers, Cuba will get that Pen, a former administrator and Revuelta’s successor, has a guarantee of non-aggression and the blockade will end.
In been sentenced to death in connection with allowing a United States effect, this means the end of the Monroe Doctrine and the Rio reconnaissance plan to unfold—a government plan to estabPact.
The OAS agreements lish a section for a secret agency within the offices of Prensa also suffered a heavy shake-up.
The Soviet Union, together Latina, the goals of which are not yet known.
Revuelta’s with Cuba, agreed to a joint measure regarding the USA, and appeal is perhaps connected to the problems already menthis will be negotiated after a discussion with them and [UN tioned, but he is not accused.
Inspections and improvements Secretary-General] U Thant at the Security Council.
Thus, the requests of the USA similar statement coming from the Central Committee of the will be fulfilled.
Cuba include an end to the blockade, an end to provocative We are watching and consulting the entire question with flights, and negotiations regarding Fidel ’s 5 Points. the Soviet friends and will inform further.
The first was to be an inspection of Cuban territory Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] by members of the United Nations Secretariat, the second by ambassadors of Latin American countries posted in Cuba, and then the third inspection by ambassadors of neutral countries posted in Cuba.
Given the one-sided approach and unfavorable conditions for Cuba, U Thant is currently considering Cable no. from the Czechoslovak creating a permanent watch unit at the Security Council Embassy in Havana , 21 which would undertake similar inspections if required.
Mikoyan highly praised the honesty, solid NEWSFLASH nature and determination of Fidel and the Cubans, expressing the wish that there be more of such people and countries.
About three views of strong doubts are me that he will give me more information.
From this I infer taking shape which also match the observations of the Soviet that Mikoyan did not go into great detail about his discussion friends and correspond to difficulties during their explanawith the Cubans in the presence of the Chinese, and that he tions.
The first reality is the Cubans’ opinion that the USA will inform Alekseev of these details.
Mikoyan’s departure has did not give and is not willing to give any definitive guarnot yet been fixed.
The second is the categorical and unchangeable Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] view of Cubans regarding any kind of inspections on Cuba.
They say that Cuba did nothing wrong and inspections indicate a humiliation and an attempt by the USA, the aggressor, to further provoke and insult Cuba.
Meanwhile, this, together with our friends in favor of honesty and diliwe can still see reservations about the approach of the Soviet gence amongst the leaders of the revolution, we believe in a Union and often disappointment, as reflected in talks with return to a better understanding, though not without a long and speeches of government officials, as well as in the mood and difficult road of explanations and discussions. of the general population.
At the same time they condemn as Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] politically risky and harmful to the socialist camp the position of the People’s Republic of China, and the speeches of the Albanians.
During the conversation President Kennedy brought up the idea of a certain division of spheres, in the sense that The partner critically needs practice ammunition. the Western hemisphere should be considered the area of According to the announcement he has no other option but American influence and that the USSR should not interfere in to accept a delay in the terms of delivery.
There followed a discussion on the ther identified] is not willing to negotiate directly with the question of supporting revolutions, where Kennedy and [US Bulgarian People’s Republic, nor with their new representative Secretary of State Dean] Rusk sought to show that the USSR in Havana.
Comrade Mikoyan us, as allies, to discuss the delivery of the remainder, and if refuted this view and argued, using the example of Castro, in possible already in the first quarter of the year.
According the sense that, after all, the USA had its representation abroad to Minfar’s in Cuba, a monopoly of its affiliations, and many possibililist the number of outstanding ammunition supplies to be ties to influence the situation, and none of that helped.
Send word on whether the difference has not already into a socialist, not because of the support of the USSR but been sent off in one of the prepared transports.
Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, ics of the Cuban revolution and live with it in peace.
Kennedy argued that the American intervention became necessary after weapons had been brought to the island, and stated that the USSR would not have been able to sleep either if the USA brought that sort of weapon to Finland.
He insisted on the five-point reached an agreement with Kennedy, could understandably program, and did not even want to go to welcome Mikoyan commit himself only in so far as it concerned Soviet property at the airport.
The Dorticos, however, did not go, USSR therefore offered inspection carried out on the open which is, anyway, within protocol, because it was unnecessary seas, without allowing inspectors on Soviet territory, that for the head of state to be at the airport.
During his departure, is to say, on deck, and that had been agreed to even before both Castro and Dorticos were at the airport.
Kennedy and Rusk, nevertheAfter the withdrawal of the missiles the Cubans are left with less, stuck to their position, which they further argued by three kinds of MIG—namely, the MIG 17, 19, and 21—as saying that guarantees against the re-deployment of offensive well as defensive missiles.
According to Comrade Mikoyan, the weapons in Cuba were necessary because China, too, could American U-2 aircraft piloted by Major Anderson send similar weapons there in two or three years. had been shot down by a Soviet crew.
There had also been other The question of the violation of Cuban airspace by overoperations against American aircraft. flights of American aircraft and the question of bases on forThe population of Cuba behaved very well, and everything eign territory were also discussed.
Mikoyan protested against was flawless in the area of military measures.
Economically continuing over-flights over Cuban territory by American airthere are many problems, but the harvest will be better. craft, and stated, among other things, that these over-flights Intensive activity had been undertaken by the Chinese; they were not necessary even for technical reasons, because conhad organized blood donations, sent resolutions, etc.
This sidering the small width of the island of Cuba, the zone conactivity, however, has had no influence on the leadership of taining the whole territory of Cuba could be photographed Cuba.
Before his departure, Khrushchev was told by Castro from positions above the open seas.
The Chinese are very active in the use of revoit said that nuclear weapons in Cuba were concealed in caves. lutionary clichés, but have done virtually nothing useful for Mikoyan brushed off this argument with a joke, saying that Cuba.
Soviet garrisons were in Cuba, and if it came to a fight, articles like that were intended for idiots.
From the beginning Castro socialist countries, and it would, in fact, thus be possible to rejected talks with the USA and the efforts to obtain guarinfluence her in the event of international difficulties, rather antees against invasion, arguing that weapons were a better than from capitalist countries.
At the same time, father on this ground-breaking trip to the island, which he recounts Mikoyan stated that the delivery of Soviet MIG­21 aircraft to in the book, an earlier version of which appeared in Russian.
India, which was being written about a great deal in the press, 4 For more on this story, see Hana Bortlová, Československo a depended on the concrete situation at the time they were to Kuba 1959-1962 (Filozofická fakulta Univerzity Karlovy v Praze, be delivered, in December 1962.
A few a communiqué in view of the fact that they were more familmonths after this conversation, in March 1960, the Eisenhower iar with the American press.
Administration would secretly approve Operation Zapata, the plan During the conversation Kennedy, using the same domesthat would a year later, after modification by the incoming Kennedy tic-political reasons, explained his reluctance to issue a formal Administration, produce the fiasco at the Bay of Pigs. statement against the invasion of Cuba.
In this, he reiterated 8 Cuban Foreign Ministry Raúl Roa visited Prague in June his earlier statements that the USA had not intended to attack 1961 and presumably discussed military aid, though the records are Cuba and that they had been concerned only with offensive not reproduced here.
More murky than the military relationship, the Czech documents from 1961 printed herein also point to weapons.
In this sense, Mikoyan also said that Kennedy’s intelligence cooperation between Prague and Havana—a couple of statement at the press conference of 20 November 1962 cryptic cables refer to assassination plotting against Fidel Castro.
Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, track such conspiracies.
In the previous resolution proposal V David’s name was 14 Czechoslovak official, Stross, quoted in included only in the “those to be notified” column. report from Hungarian Embassy, Prague, on Czechoslovakia-Cuba 8 The main Technical Department of the Ministry of International Relations, 25 June 1963, published elsewhere in this issue of the Trade is de facto Omnipol.
Apart from the export of so-called “special CWIHP Bulletin. materials” under the company Omnipol, which concerns itself with 15 See the report of Miloslav Ruzek, Czechoslovak Ambassador foreign trade, the employees of the Technical Department were to the United States, on the 29 November 1962 meeting with directly responsible for acquiring goods under embargo by the West.
His arrival ended a series of scandals (the incapability of issue of the CWIHP Bulletin. the former Director, Antonín Podzimka, conflicts with the general 17 For the report of a Czechoslovak military delegation that staff of the Ministry of National Defense, with Minister of the visited Cuba in March-April 1965, led by Defense Minister Gen.
Interior Rudolf Barák, the leak of information regarding a contract Bohumil Lemsky, which met with, among others, Fidel Castro, with Egypt, and especially the detainment of the Czechoslovak vessel Raúl Castro, and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, see the compilation Lidice that contained arms for Algerian rebel mutineers) that had of translated Polish, Bulgarian, and Czech documents on East accompanied the Technical Department’s work.
After a certain time European-Cuban contacts in early 1965 published elsewhere in this František Mareš was succeeded by František Langer, another longissue of the CWIHP Bulletin. time boss of the Technical Department.
According to Czech scholar Oldřich Tůma, 4 František Krajčír was the Czechoslovak Minister of International Svazarm was a frequently used abbreviated name for Svaz pro Trade. spolupráci s armádou , an 5 The first page of this report consists of a page with these handorganization for pre-military training of youth, military sports, etc.] written notes.
Among other leaders who came to Moscow at the end of This clash demOctober and in early November were Poland’s Władysław Gomułka, East Germany’s Walter Ulbricht, and, a few days later, Hungary’s onstrated that war today is not inevitably destined by fate, Janos Kadar.
Rodriguez, a member of the inner circle around Fidel 499/top secret 1963.
The leaders can now also products were bought by the USA at a price determined by see that the development of Cuban economic life is far from the buyer, at the same time, the USA supplied the industrial being an internal question alone, but it is also an international appliances needed by the country.
He further It should be noted, Rodriguez further said, that in conpointed out that Fidel Castro’s speech in connection with nection with all these activities of the Chinese Ambassador, the assassination of Kennedy was a false opinion was created as if Cuba supported the Chinese motivated also by the desire to clearly express differences in views.
It shows particularly in this case that some comrades judgment of Kennedy as opposed to how he is judged by leaddo not understand the conditions of the Cuban revolution. ing Chinese comrades.
It seems to them that some of comrades too much overrate He also emphasized that our party throughout its history has his progressivism in comparison with what was in Argentina always assumed that it was necessary to adapt and possibly before his election.
He reminded of tion, in which Cuban comrades operate; on the other hand his and Guevara’s talks in years 1959-1960, when a purchase though, Cuban comrades should realize that, especially our of capital equipment for Cuba was negotiated and when the lower ranking comrades may have and indeed have differrevolutionary leaders had to overcome misconceptions of ent questions concerning Cuban positions.
C Rodriguez confirmed that among some Cuban comrades Also, very strong divisions over pricing for different products – he specifically named Ordoqui, there are certain appear in many discussions.
Further, as for the technological objections to his appointment as an ambassador to Cuba, and level of many products and equipment that are shipped to that he himself believes as well that this appointment should Cuba, there are shortcomings and Cuban comrades have to be abandoned.
C Koucky replied that Pavlicek is to be overcome in many aspects opinions of their own cadres who replaced within 2 months and that a new Cs. ambassador will were used to the often perfect American technology. be sent to Cuba.
Czech National Archives, Prague, CPCz CC collection, was necessary to understand the special political situation that Kuba folders.
He explained that there were many antitranslated for CWIHP by Adolf Kotlik.] communists in Cuba, who, at the moment, especially under the guise of combating sectarian tendencies , Notes are actually trying to fight against communism.
It is necessary to do everything possible to avoid creating suitable oppor1 On Hungarian perceptions of the aftermath of Castro’s tunities for their dark intentions.
Cuban leaders have many spring 1963 visit to the Soviet Union, see translated documents in concerns with the problem of youth in Cuba.
For example, the collection of Hungarian materials elsewhere in this issue of the the entire leadership of youth organizations had to be replaced CWIHP Bulletin. recently, because it did not follow the correct policy.
For more on Sino-Cuban relations during this period, see the collection of translated Chinese documents and analysis by Sergey Radchenko and James G Hershberg elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
This was seen as reflecting ment of our ambassador to Cuba, and the case of our lingering tensions between Castro’s “26th of July Movement” Ambassador-designate Kocman has been also discussed. guerrillas and the old, urban, pro-Moscow communist party—ed.
Among other things, the Polish leadwere committed against the Soviet Union.
Indeed, Wynne ers objected to Moscow’s lack of consultation with Warsaw was a British diplomat in Moscow acting as an intermediary Pact member-states concerning the nuclear test ban treaty, for the famous Soviet spy Oleg Penkovsky, who was selling especially since they had to sign it as well after the treaty military secrets to British intelligence.
During his negotiations in Budapest for spying to eight years in prison in May 1963.
He was in November 1963 , Gomułka stated released in exchange for the Soviet spy Gordon Lonsdale, that Cuba intended to join the Warsaw Pact, which would serving a fifteen year prison term in Great Britain, in 1964. pose a significant threat to the security of the eastern bloc We know nothing of any similar case, neither from previous as well as world peace.
Therefore he firmly stated that nor from later times, so it is not impossible, that this imporshould the request be officially submitted, Poland would veto tant international issue was at least one of the main reasons Cuba’s admission.
A similarly negative Polish stand prevented for Kádár’s hastily-arranged visit to the Soviet capital on 7-10 another Soviet Bloc ally, Mongolia from joining the Warsaw November.
The information about the Cuban crisis acquired Pact during the same year.
The Polish position, neveran American guarantee that the Cuban communist regime theless was based on the legal argument that the Warsaw Pact would survive21 . was a European defense alliance, therefore extending it to Asia would be a violation of the organization’s statute.
It was Although the Hungarian leadership was much more especially hard for them to understand, that if the Soviet cautious in criticizing the Soviet behavior than the Poles, it leaders had considered the Berlin crisis, which had generated basically agreed with the Polish views pertaining to the nature significantly lower international tension, important enough of future co-operation within the Warsaw Pact.
Kádár, durto hold regular consultations with the allies, then how it could ing his visit in Moscow in July 1963, proposed to establish have happened that a third world war had nearly broken out a Committee of Warsaw Pact Foreign Ministers, long before while the members of the eastern military bloc just had to the plans to reform the Warsaw Pact were officially placed on stand by and wait for the denouement without any substanthe agenda in 1965–66.24 The clear objective of the initiatial information.
I thought counterpart that Romania would remain neutral in the case of a preliminary consultation.
He explained that now the Soviet fact that the Kremlin was indeed unwilling to give an explicit Union had an advantage in terms of military technology.
As reported by suggested he did not know “whether the advantage would Hungary’s ambassador, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez told him remain, increase or, quite the contrary, decrease or totally on 23 October 1962 that “Cuba was ready to agree to the disappear in the future.
Kuzenetsov had a hard time explaining that of the documents is addressed to the United States’ ambas“there were several ways of making agreements between states sador to Venezuela, in which the and governments, one form of talks and agreement wasg. members of the United States State Department present the principles what had been realized by the published correspondence” concerning Venezuelan economic policy.
Budapest’s embassies in both Havana and Moscow also point Douglas] Dillon participating at the Montevideo conference to the improvement in Cuban-Soviet relations, and Fidel did not dare to doubt their authenticity.
The Venezuelan America-friendly government protested in a Finally, to demonstrate that the leaders in Havana may note to the Cuban government, they considered the publicahave learned a lesson from the missile crisis in several ways, tion of the document interference in their internal affairs.
I suggest that their exact Hungarian translations should be sent to all our embassies to Latin-America or maybe to DOCUMENTS all our embassies to capitalist countries.
Our embassies to Latin-America and Washington should study the documents thoroughly by all means.
I have expressed our gratitude in a note to the Cuban Ministry Hungarian Embassy in Havana, Report on Secret of Foreign Affairs for sending the document.
Thus, the USA will take care not to submit, or not that if the USA had begun using these tactics last winter on to have another country submit, a proposal that explicitly the same scale, it would have caused immense damages to condemns or imposes sanctions on Cuba.
Soviet Union because of its advantage in terms of military As for the probability of the invasion and its impact on technology.
By way of an example, he some issues that affected the Latin American countries and noted that when the Soviet Union recalled its ambassador also some other matters.
Translated for CWIHP among the crew there traveled an officer of the FRG military by András Bocz.] navy disguised as a sailor.
The protocol chief always explains that he is the head of the GDR political mission, who Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on has been invited similarly to the members of the diplomatic the Federal Republic of Germany and Cuba, 16 corps to represent his country.
The West-German ambassador March 1962 is usually satisfied with the answer and it has happened several times that the protocol chief or other foreign affairs staff asked The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic him whether he wanted to protest about it or something like To Comrade János Péter, Foreign Minister that and he answered no and said he only wanted to point out Budapest and state the fact.
The Federal Republic of Germany and Cuba. to the worse and on the other hand, it would make its now intensive penetration into the new African countries more There are normal diplomatic relations between the Federal difficult.
Translated for CWIHP Union whose all-embracing help has made the preservation by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] and development of the Cuban revolution possible.
Concerning all this of the Directory of 13 March on the one hand, and he makes I am going to talk to other people and come back to the it possible that the communists could be blamed for the individual problems. consequences of the mistakes on the other hand, although it is just the communists who will make up for the damage caused János Beck by the egocentric and megalomaniac Fidel Castro.
Ambassador Relying on Yugoslavian expert calculations, Vidaković thinks that Cuba is in a catastrophic economic situation.
Translated for CWIHP can already be seen), which would mean the beginning of by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] the fall of the system.
Vidaković also said that the official Cuban side’s attitude toward Yugoslavia had changed.
Now their economic relaHungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on tions are better.
If the Cubans follow the agreement June 1962 and carry out the deliveries, this loan may be doubled in the future or even trebled.
Written: in six copies: Yugoslavia does not wish to interfere in internal affairs.
Minister Péter But she would not like if in Cuba there was something like First Deputy of the Minister P Mód a cold war going on in connection with Yugoslavia.
Out of Deputy Minister Szarka general socialist interest, Yugoslavia wishes to provide help to Deputy Head of Department Szűcsné Cuba unselfishly, she is willing to give loans as well besides Embassy Department. the mutually advantageous trade.
A visit to President of the Republic Dorticos on 15 participate at the Belgrade conference [of the Non-Aligned June 1962 Movement, or NAM, in September 1961—ed.] against all the resistance) and will do so in the future too.
It is an obviI was received by President of the Republic Dorticos on ous interest of Cuba to maintain good political and economic 15 June and we had a conversation lasting one hour and 45 relations with Yugoslavia, as the USA’s policy—Cuba’s ecominutes.
But there will still be a be raised, and the quantity of beef for consumption could shortage of manpower, which, similarly to this year, but to a be increased, but they are waiting, among other much smaller extent, will be made up for by unpaid or volunbecause it will be inevitable to raise the consumer price of tary permanent work.
For the rise in prices they must wait for the best away with the shortage of labor force only by 1964 or 1965. moment politically and also prepare for it.
As far as the harvesting of coffee is concerned, there still The present shortage of food cannot be done away with remains the great shortage of manpower, so harvesting will be in some months anyway, it will last until the next winter and solved with voluntary work andg. by deploying students even until the next year. who receive grants in this work during harvest time.
As in the In the long run the food situation will be substantially past years a lot of people have left agriculture andg. started improved by fishing.
Before the revolution fishing was carto work in public projects, they are going to take measures to ried out by quite primitive devices and the quantity that was redirect the labor force to agriculture. caught played an irrelevant role in provisioning.
To increase agricultural production in prospect and to There have been taken serious measures already to increase eliminate the serious damage caused by the dry weather, fishing, but only a few days ago did they start to eliminate one of the most important devices will be the creation of a radically those mistakes that hindered the development of water economy system at high technical level.
First of all, we must mention that the fishermen got level Soviet expert delegation has been to Cuba, and after the so little money for the fish and the fishermen were paid so low departure of their leaders the remaining experts started work wages in the cooperatives, which were formed a long time ago right away.
There is a possibility to reach an immediate result and which have acquired a dominant role in fishing (besides or one that can be seen in, let us say, two years by a smaller egalitarianism), that it was not worth fishing and they tried to investment, but they will start to make long-run plans as well sell the few fish they caught on the black market.
They have to be able to begin the bigger jobs as well to the best of their already bought and will receive bigger fishing vessels from the ability.
This help means The plan of the United States and the preparation for it is expert help from the highest level to the simplest skilled workprobably that she tries to increase the economic difficulties, er and the manufacturing and delivery of material equipment. which would contribute to the creation of a counter-revolutionary base in the population and the latter would provide a Industry ground to carry out some kind of aggression.
In Matanzas county some places may become worse too. in most recent times the situation has become so much worse (Here I wish to interject that, according to the news that they approached the highways as well, and raided vehicles spread in Havana, there have been talks going on for a long or people.
Even if for others, but the highest leaderand the ex-members of the armed forces and power-enforceship of the Planning Bureau will be obviously substituted.) ment organizations of the old system or their relations and the smaller part is made up of the petit-bourgeoisie of towns.
But they cannot allow either, what the after several hours of debate, rejecting one by saying that he counter-revolution has already tried, that the counter-revoluwas a drunkard, the other belonged to the circle tion formed even one group of bandits in the farthest county, of friends of the counter-revolutionary cafe-owner, etc.
In this Oriente county, which has always been the main fortress of village the counter-revolution will have no base any more.
Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian vided an opportunity for further guessing within the diploNational Archives], Budapest, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Top matic corps, too.
Translated for CWIHP During my visit with him, the Polish Ambassador by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] expressed his deep disapproval about the case, bringing it up as an example of the carelessness and hot-headedness of the Cuban leaders.
Budapest He considered the return order to have been given at random and without responsibility.
I inquired of some leading functionaries of the Cuban 375/1962/Top Secret Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the causes of the return of the plane.
Republic Dorticos President Dorticos’ speech of October 8 at the UN was broadcast on Cuban radio and television.
Republic Dorticos and his speech at the UN in advance of the When returning to Cuba, President Dorticos was again announcement in the Cuban press. welcomed by the chiefs of mission of all the diplomatic corps All the chiefs of mission of the diplomatic corps were presat the airport.
All the chiefs of mission, including the papal ent without exception at Dorticos’ and Roa’s departure.
So was Prime Minister Fidel Castro. conspicuous that Fidel Castro was not present.
At the mass rally following the arrival, on the balcony of As we learned from the press the day after, half-an-hour the presidential palace, however, I could see only the chiefs of after take-off, the plane carrying the president of the republic, mission of friendly and neutral countries. the foreign minister, and their entourage turned back so that The general assembly made an unforgettable impression some technical defects could be repaired, and the defect in the on me.
The square in front of the presidential palace, and engine was fixed at the Havana airport.
Prime Minister Fidel the side-streets leading there, were black with the immense, Castro arrived in the meantime and he had a long conversaunbelievably enthusiastic crowd, which fêted their returning tion with President Dorticos and Roa and the plane left only president.
Fidel Castro, was hailed by immense crowds on the road leading from the airport to the town and decorated by signs with Erzsébet Görög the picture of Ben Bella.
Ben Bella, who was making his first official visit abroad to Cuba, which was threatened by blockade and American aggression.
He emphasized how happy he was to have been able to come to Cuba, to the country he had wanted to Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on get to know so much and he said that the heroic fight, the vicAlgerian Prime Minister Ben Bella’s visit to Cuba, tory at Playa Giron was viewed as their 16 October 1962 own, national affair by the Algerian people.
Ben Bella underlined that by the victory of the Algerian The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic people, the exploitation of man by man would cease and to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter never return to his country.
Comrade Lajos Czinege, Colonel General—Minister of no reference to his telegram to the defense ministers.
Trade, Comrade Jenő Köteles, First Deputy Minister of Defense, The Government approvingly acknowledged the measures Comrade György Lázár, Vice-President of the National that had been taken.
We have convened the Council of Ministers to provide information on the Cuban situation.
You, Comrades, know the statement, so I will cite only the main points.
The first Comrade János Kádár informs the members of the measure was the announcement of a blockade around Cuba, Government on the international situation that has arisen as which means a blockade both in the air and on the sea.
They a result of the aggressive steps taken by the USA against Cuba are monitoring the situation in Cuba and will deem any and on the measures taken by the Hungarian Government. attack coming from Cuba as an attack by the Soviet Union.
The United States’ troops were put As far as the member states of the Warsaw Treaty are on high alert, the granting of leave was discontinued, military concerned, the Polish People’s Republic mobilized significant service at the naval forces was extended by one year, and other troops along the Odera border section, and so did Bulgaria measures were taken to complement these steps. along the Turkish­–Greek border.
All the member states of the In the same speech they called upon the Soviet Union to Warsaw Treaty put their existing troops on alert. withdraw their arms from Cuba as they had been informed In this situation we also need to consider what to do.
It that the Soviet Union has mid-range missiles in place in was necessary to make a political statement.
The statement concludes by saying that he Cuban peostatement of the Hungarian government on the basis of the ple are oppressed and calls upon them to rise in revolt.
This proposal made by the Foreign Minister and, statement was complemented by another statement issued by given the urgency of the matter, we had it approved by the the United States government in which it was published that deputy prime ministers and had it published. the blockade would begin on 24 October at 3m.
Central The commander-in-chief of the Warsaw Treaty [Marshal European Time.
Andrei Grechko] is maintaining proper contact with and The Soviet and the Cuban governments gave an adequate has informed the commanders of the Hungarian People’s response to this decision of the United States government.
They evaluated the American steps, basically stating that The commander-in-chief requested us to take measures and the blockade and the additional steps breach a wide range of inform him about them.
Comrade Köteles43 international laws and violate Cuba’s sovereignty, while the and other competent comrades worked out the proposal, obstacle to free navigation also violates the sovereign rights which we approved and informed the commander-in-chief of of every country.
The statements made it clear that the steps the Warsaw Treaty about them.
The essence of the measures taken by the United States were warlike and unlawful, which involved putting some troops of our army on alert, primarily the statements rejected by saying that the Soviet Union and in the air force and the air defense force.
In other units we Cuba would take the necessary measures to prevent the USA discontinued granting leave without ordering all those already from realizing these steps. on leave to return to service and without calling up reservists.
It is worth noting a few things about the various steps that Currently, the various commanders stay closely together and the United States has taken.
The USA put his thanks for providing such effective support for him as the its forces stationed in Europe on high alert, and here the most commander-in-chief in the present situation. important thing is that the number of patrol aircraft equipped In my view, this is the most serious international conflict with nuclear weapons was increased significantly.
As for the ber of these aircraft—which have been constantly in the air steps taken by the United States government, it should be known that for years—is usually 4, 5 or 6, but now it was raised to 42 in there was no negotiation with the allies in advance, and that’s the Mediterranean region and Europe. what the reaction to them by some of the NATO member As far as the NATO High Command is concerned, no states reflects.
Essentially, the NATO member states officially special military measure that would be binding for the NATO endorse the United States steps but their informal statements make it countries was taken.
If I remember well, the only thing that very clear that they are offended and feel that they should not happened was that Italy’s air force and air defense were put on take part in any such military action.
This is what the French alert, and so was the Greek army. and the English positions seem to suggest.
The American capitalists representatives of society will voice their position.
This meetmade incredible amounts of money during the First World ing will be held this afternoon in the Sports Hall.
The USA rarely got involved in dangerous or risky situWe have introduced a duty service in the Worker’s Militia, ations in the Second World War.
As far as we can tell during the Cold War period too, ousting their allies from now, the Hungarian people have taken the developments of different places whenever the occasion arose,g.
They even undertook to support the Algerian freethe night asking what the latest news was.
One of the county dom fighters to some extent just to soften up the French in party secretaries was working on his report; another one said another respect. there was some positive concern in his county.
The Ministry We must understand the USA’s motives very well because of the Interior complained that it could hardly dissuade a we need to consider the situation on the bases of these youth group from going out to protest.
They keep bragging, suggesting that they can make sense of sympathy with Cuba among the public. it in every situation, they are very strong, and nobody can face This had been the situation until last night.
The Americans are characterized by the politics there had been various developments on both sides in terms of bluffing; they find pleasure in scaring others.
The position Cuba, demanded to convene the Security Council, all of the USA has become weaker in connection with most of of them expressing the view that some kind of negotiation is the key international issues.
This claim provided some basis for the work of the lot of problems, which hit the American capitalists hard too.
Security Council, which was complemented by several other Their position regarding the issue of Wes Berlin is very bad. things.
The different governments issued a wide range of In Laos they were happy to be able to get out of the situaresolutions, including the governments of the socialist tion, and they don’t have much to expect in Vietnam either. countries.
In addition, a group of 40 non-allied states within I could continue this list on and on as far as mentioning the the UN also discussed the situation and took action.
Apart fact that the UN is gradually slipping out of their hands too. from a group of African countries, three neutral European There is an obvious deterioration in their general position. states, Finland, Austria and Switzerland, also participated in It is also important to know that there are very effective this action.
They also worked out their own position, urging weapons in Cuba. negotiations and for every party to make an effort to prevent It is also worth considering that the position of the cura military clash.
The UN Secretary-General spoke rent United States government is not rosy at home either.
It looks like in this spirit at the session of the Security Council held durthe Kennedy cabinet had a lot of progressive votes during the ing the night, suggesting that the United States should lift the presidential elections; the trade unions supported them and blockade and the Soviet Union should stop supplying Cuba cherished great hopes in a positive sense, but nothing has for two weeks.
These supporters are already dissatisfied, response to this suggestion is known at this point. and so are many of the aggressive monopolist circles.
This is Other viewpoints on the situation cannot be disregarded the kind of situation in which they decided to take this step. either.
They deserve to be called a country playing with fire in a hazRussell has also emerged, ardous manner, and anything can come out of it. and what actually happened was that Khrushchev, Kennedy, In addition to the measures mentioned before, we have and Russell began exchanging messages, some of which gave decided on launching a certain political campaign too.
We rise to hopes that it might be possible to prevent the further can mobilize the Hungarian public in the correct manner intensification of the conflict, and some of the positions regarding this issue.
There are ad-hoc political meetings in appear to support the truth of our position politically.
Ten days ago I was asked to give an interview worth noting that the statement of the Soviet government46 to Cuban journalists, and it seemed right to make use of issued the day before yesterday was regarded even by the this opportunity.
English and several others as very moderate and as calm as We will continue with the campaign and we are planning to was possible in a situation like this.
The Soviet government’s organize an important meeting today where several different statement has made a very good impression.
In his message to the here and there but they are quite sporadic, not general at all, US president he called upon the United States to stop provoking the so there is no cause for concern in view of the situation we other party.
I understand that our task is to bear in gave a very good response, pointing out several important mind that the requirement to be prepared also applies to us in political aspects and unveiling the dangerous nature of the the sense that we should run our reporting service with even American position.
Khrushchev said that if a particular situmore vigilance. ation emerged, the Soviet Union would take action by using As far as the supply of goods is concerned, I believe we its defensive weapons.
The response makes it clear that there should continue with our correct policy of not imposing any is room for negotiation and it also demonstrates that the restrictions.
Restrictions tend to backfire, generally costing Soviet Union is ready to participate in a summit meeting more than what we can gain by them.
This approach made a good impression on the entire lems arise, we will try to localize them.
Obviously, we should pay attention the blockade and the ships should have clashed.
With respect to all sorts of phenomena; however, we should make sure to this, the tension has eased a little bit since then, as there that our reassuring measures do not drive people to believe is no news on any clash yet.
I don’t know the reporting service between the ships that keep up the blockade and the ships of domestic trade but it must be a huge organization.
It seems now that the extraordinary tasks are given to the reporting service there, most critical danger is over and diplomacy has come to the maybe one hundred thousand people will get the order and fore.
I need to add though that the danger is certainly not the same number of people will begin to wonder why there is over yet. no panic when there should be panic.
Comrade Tausz should I request the Government to acknowledge the governnot order the reporting service to carry out any extraordinary ment statement that has been issued and the measures tasks; our domestic trade organization is socialist enough that have been taken to increase defense preparedness.
The already to report to the competent authorities should any Government should give authorization to take any other signs of a hoarding craze break out.
Instead we should approve necessary action in case of an emergency in consultation with of the normal procedure with respect to our reserves; that the deputy prime ministers and the ministers of defense and is, the reserves should be filled up.
The situation changes from hour to hour, so bad with respect to hoarding; it would have been a lot more prompt action is crucial at such times. inconvenient at the beginning of June.
As a general task we suggest that the level of readiness that applies to us should be maintained but otherwise we should Comrade continue to work as usual.
Not underestimating the dangers inherent to people at various events and meetings, we should promote in the United States steps, it occurred to me whether these steps and our fair standpoint and request the support of the Hungarian the election campaign that is people.
We should make it clear that this support requires disunderway are related.
It’s unlikely that the two are related but the issue government’s statement which was specifically addressed to should be viewed in accordance with its significance.
The the Soviet people, expressing the view that in the current situweakening of the position of the Kennedy cabinet is not temation the Soviet government is sure that the Soviet people will porary, it has been obvious for some years now, and it is not work even harder and will do everything they can to increase characteristic of the current period only.
It should not be seen the defense capabilities of the country and accomplish any as a mere election bluff, though.
This part was omitted from our they commit such a stupid and use a short-term bluff statement but it should be taken into consideration when the like this because it would result in complete political destructasks are being carried out. tion.
The United States chargé d’affairs to Budapest [Horace G Front, and the Council of Trade Unions.
Comrade Gyula Kállai and the Cuban ambassaday at around 10m. and requested to be urgently received dor.
Comrade Gyula Kállai will speak on behalf of the Central by a senior official of the ministry.
I request the government to acknowledge that. ally the audience took place in the afternoon at around 4m.
To what extent will resolution of his government because it will implement all the the Soviet Union take into account the blockade and will its steps that are contained in the statement.
That was a clear signal as to how serithe most important thing here is the joint statement issued ous the situation really was. by the Cuban and the Soviet governments in September Last Saturday our chargé d’affaires in Washington [János which declared that the Soviet Union is supplying Cuba with Radványi] was summoned by the State Department and was weapons that can help Cuba preserve its independence.
This was part of trying to figure out latest Soviet government statement says that the United States step is the Hungarian position through diplomatic channels that has illegal, and then there is Khrushchev’s letter, which puts it in been going on since the summer.
This time it was a specific a popular language, saying that you should not give a robber proposal submitted by the American party to the Hungarian just part of your money because he will come back for the government.
I don’t know anything more specific regarding said if the Hungarian government was to declare, of its own the other things, I could only present assumptions but there’s free will, that nobody was in prison due to the 1956 events, no point in doing so. the American cabinet would be willing to do a number of I don’t know what each of the two parties is doing on the things.
The sea is huge, it’s dark at night, but there has been no in the UN and state that there have been changes in Hungary clash so far.
The United States wants to kill Cuba and the socialist world and the United States no longer believes that the Hungarian issue should not let it happen, nor should the progressive forces should be put on the agenda.
All the relevant international posed, disputed issues could be negotiated, the Mindszenty laws say that our position is right and the USA’s aggression is issue47 could be discussed, ambassadors could be exchanged, directed not only at the socialist countries but it also affects etc.
It appears that the fundamental norms of international life. the USA’s position is not very good regarding this issue either; Cuba has taken adequate measures and ordered mobilizatherefore, they are seeking a way out. tion.
I told them that a Central Committee meetChairman of the Central Revision Committee. ing would be held on Monday.
Especially since the Cuban revolution rades from the Central Committee, and their relatives were shook all of Latin America under the American imperialists’ feet.
Since these South American and Latin American coun435 tries are colonies of the United States and the situation differs circles that suffer from self-delusion and are puffing, bluffing entirely from what the official reports declare in the United constantly by nature.
Furthermore, the domestic situation in these Latin by a general panic, hence aggression—the belief that they are American countries, the citizen’s spirits, views, ambitions, better and stronger than all the rest—and a general desperahopes, fights are not the same as the American diplomats’ tion were present simultaneously.
These were the two factors views and positions talking there on behalf of them.
It has to be said, the existence of the Cuban revolution indeed, means a lethal that both were visible in the government’s actions.
The first being the Sicily and without mobilizing the entire army were combat aggressive circles of the Unites States Department of Defense ready that the comrades that is naturally backed up by the entire weapon industry of know very well from the news.
This is what the government the United States, the monopolies that pursue a politics of of the United States has done.
I said, that the view here is that American States —this was the ally who they referred at a push or if we cannot find a solution in an issue we can to.
But where you go in critical situations Some kind of monitoring system, a certain preparedness that are hard to tackle, that’s your secret.
I also mentioned that in a situation like this I would like to That is what essentially happened.
Because neither the Soviet, nor the Cuban such an agreement will be concluded.
Apart from that, it is government’s plan was to deploy any weapons there and then quite clear to us, that from this tension the world’s people attack the United States, but to deter the enemy and protect have learnt a lesson and we have to continue our general antiCuba and the Cuban revolution.
Certainly, during those imperialist propaganda and fight increasingly, to continue the hours it looked—and there were such voices in the United fight in the issue of general disarmament, the elimination of States—as if the Soviet Union had retreated.
And Regarding our Congress, the topic on the agendathis this promise will be kept by them.
The wrestling will continue means…I ask for the compliance of the Central Committee, in this question as well.
Those meet the interests of the Hungarian leaders, thought that there was not only the possibility of war people, and they also meet the interests of the Hungarian revbut the Cuban crisis might be solved in another way, too.
As olution as well as the interests of the international proletariat. he said, there could be talks about reducing the Cuban army’s armament to the defense weapons described in the wellknown definition.
The government of the United States reacted in such a way that was not on the list of foreseen possibilities.
Consequently, Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on such steps had to be taken by the Soviet Union and in such Soviet-Cuban Divergence, 29 November 1962 form that had not been calculated.
Neither the Polish ambassador nor I could check the correctness of this information.
Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic Neither I, nor the socialist ambassadors to Havana, have To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter been able to form a clear picture of what happened from the morning of 27 to the morning of 28 October 1962.
A quarter of an hour later a U-2. type plane flew in over West-Cuba Havana, 29 November 1962 at a great height and it was shot with a missile.
After these two a divergence of opinions incursions until Sunday dawn no air activity could be expebetween Cuba and the rienced from the American side over Cuba.
Moreover, the Soviet Union. radar devices in Cuba showed that in Florida all air activity ceased after these two incursions.
On Saturday afternoon we I still do not know what agreement between Cuba and the could hear the ultimatum-like demand of American President Soviet Union was the basis for sending the so-called “strategic Kennedy, which was followed by Comrade Khrushchev’s arms” to Cuba in October.
As a consequence, I have also no letter on Saturday night [sic; actually Sunday morning, idea about what consequences the Soviet and Cuban sides Washington and Havana time—ed.], in which as a reply to reckoned with concerning the transportation of strategic arms Kennedy’s promise to guarantee non-aggression toward Cuba, to Cuba.
But it is obvious that both sides were trying to calcuhe announced the disarmament of missiles and their removal late the expectable consequences and to determine in advance from Cuba.
Cuban government and the necessity of the Cuban governWe could hear all kinds of anti-Soviet positions, such as the ment’s approval is not present.
At least it is not included in the Soviet Union is only a super power just like the USA and she text the Cuban organs, the Cuban press, and I have received leads power politics, or she used Cuba only as a means of here in Cuba. solving her conflict with the United States, and so on.
Many All of us here in Havana know that neither the Cuban govwere upset by the fact that she connected the removal of misernment, nor the Soviet ambassador, Comrade siles from Cuba with the withdrawal of American weapons Alekseyev, was notified in advance of this letter of Comrade from Turkey, that is, she put a sign of equality between Cuba Khrushchev, but all of them learnt it from the press and radio. and Turkey and used them as the objects or means of bargain These two letters of Comrade Khrushchev to Kennedy, between the Soviet Union and the United States.
I would like to list a few examples. have accepted any more and anything warmer.
But we should For the arrival of Comrade Mikoyan, the add that we who watched Fidel Castro on television had the Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not organize such a reception impression that the statement that he trusted the government at the airport as they usually do to welcome not only the of the Soviet Union, the party of the Soviet Union, and the prime minister or vice-premier, but a lot of times the deputy political leadership of the Soviet Union was difficult to make minister of foreign trade as well.
The original idea concerning 7 November was that the Translated for CWIHP by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] center of trade unions would organize the ceremony.
But this year the ambassadors of socialist countries Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on were not invited.
Translated for leaders behaved coolly or demonstratively, but we could see CWIHP by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] the applauding audience.
I can see in “Népszabadság”, Cuban–Soviet Divergence, 1 December 1962 which has arrived since then, that our party’s paper reported on the dinner in a more conspicuous place, in more detail.
In one of his statements in Denmark he agreed with the position of the One copy to Emb.
Since then no ambasmy information, Blas Roca did not make such statement in sadors of the friendly countries, including Czechoslovakia, Berlin at all.
This was published in Cuba to counterbalance have managed to contact any Cuban leaders.
Besides, he was called up Czechoslovakian ambassador , being the and, as I hear, lectured and ordered back to Cuba at once. first representative of socialist countries to Havana, he used Although, according to the plans, he would have had to to meet first of all Foreign Minister Roa several times represent the Cuban party in Moscow at the 7 November a day and often the other leaders as well.
As a result of the ordering home, according to Roa first of all because in the United States Cuban interests my information, there was no one as a delegation in Moscow are represented by Czechoslovakia, between the Czechoslovak from the Cuban side.
When Comrade Blas Roca was waiting embassy to Washington and the Havana embassy there is a for an airplane in Prague to return to Cuba, he received the special direct code connection and courier service.
In this instruction not to return but to go to Sofia and represent the period he has not been able to get in to Cuban leaders and Cuban party there.
And in Sofia to inform him and discuss Foreign Minister Roa, who had the closest and most confithe political questions with him, one of the functionaries of dential relationship with him, has behaved toward him coolly, the party center at home was sent there. or even if this coolness has become relaxed in the past days, he has not been willing to say anything important to him.
I have had the closest relationship with Czechoslovakian The second factor, which plays a role at every level, in the ambassador Pavlicek since the beginning of my stay in Havana. great masses of the Cuban people as well, but is particularly We have often exchanged our information, we have always strongly seen among the leaders, can be called revolutionary discussed the different problems.
This relationship has become romantics with many petit-bourgeois and anarchist features. even more intensive in this period of crisis, and meant someIt can also be mentioned here that the Cuban people and, of times several phone conversations a day or, if necessary, meetcourse, the present leaders of the Cuban people have never ings at night in each other’s apartments.
Taking such an idea as a starting point, the Cuban the United States, the greatest imperialist power, unaided, leaders often judge the events of world importance not from through the movement led by Fidel Castro, that Cuba could the aspect of the world-wide victory of socialism, or from the develop the fight for independence and the democratic aspect of the international world movement, but from the revolution into a socialist revolution on her own, made the so-called Latin American aspect. people especially jealous and sensitive concerning everything This point of view is not Marxist.
The reorganization is going on very slowly and of the report prepared by the embassy in Havana on 3 since the Escalante case about two thousand earlier December 1962. party members were excluded.
Comrade Mikoyan’s meeting with socialist Soviet Union not having discussed her urgent steps with ambassadors. the Cuban leaders in the gravest moments of the crisis, this way already offending Cuba’s sovereignty, for ignoring Neither I nor the other socialist ambassadors had a chance Cuba’s self-government, independence during the talks with to meet with the Soviet ambassador during the entire period the Americans when she discussed control and other issues of the crisis.
We have not had a chance to meet with Comrade concerning Cuba’s sovereignty.
That they were unwilling to Mikoyan either since his arrival, except for the accept the solution suggested by the Soviet Union for weeks reception at the airport, which obviously did not give us an meant they did not disagree with the method only, but to opportunity to speak with him.
The first time we were able to some extent with the aim of the Soviet Union too, probmeet with him was right before his departure. ably they always had in mind their idea about their Latin On 20 November, before Comrade Mikoyan’s departure, American role. we were invited by phone to attend a cocktail party at the Finally I would like to present Comrade Soviet embassy together with our spouses.
Comrade Mikoyan, the delegation led by him as well as severThe Cuban leaders are young, honest people, they are true al officials of the embassy and their spouses.
The ambassadors to the revolution, the people; in a difficult situation in their who were invited to and attended the event included, apart country they were able to ensure a greater unity and had less from myself, the Czech, the Polish, the Romanian, the GDR, chaos than other nations would have had, for this they deserve the Korean and the Vietnamese ambassadors respect and appreciation, and there is every reason to trust as well as the Chinese, the Bulgarian, and the Mongolian them and the impending progress in the future. ambassador’s deputies.
Hungarian National Archives, Foreign Ministry, Top and discuss my view of it with him.
Translated for CWIHP by plained to him that for several weeks we had been unable to Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] meet either the Cuban or the Soviet leaders and we had not received any information from them.
Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on We spent at least one-and-a-half hours with Comrade Anastas Mikoyan’s meeting with socialist ambasMikoyan.
However, the inforComrade Árpád Pulai and mation did not really cover more than what was published Imre Hollai that day or in a few days later.
I need to note that the Cuban leaders had not pubtook place in Hungary and what consequences these trials had licly given any sign, either on that day or since then, whether there, which demonstrates that Rákosi’s responsibility cannot they agreed with this view. be seen as of secondary importance.
He held, first and foremost, Stalin responsible for the personality cult in the European Hungarian Legation in Washington , socialist countries, so I felt obliged to say that I could not fully Report on Mikoyan’s visit to Washington, 5 agree with this statement.
During this dinner, Comrade Mikoyan gave an account of his experiences gained Copy at the meeting with President Kennedy, and made some comof the report made by the embassy to Washington on 5 ments on his visit to Cuba and also on China.
Comrade Mikoyan’s visit to Washington I Comrade Mikoyan characterized his meeting with President Kennedy as open, honest, and objective.
Kennedy agreement, the American party should provide The visit had aroused considerable interest, and the comformal guarantees for not attacking Cuba.
In his answer ments and news on it were treated by the press as a central President Kennedy gave two arguments.
Before the visit, the comrades announced during talks he referred to Comrade Khrushchev’s letter of 28 October in conducted at the State Department that Comrade Mikoyan which Comrade Khrushchev promised to implement internawould be staying in Washington for a few days as Comrade tional monitoring on the territory of Cuba.
On the other, he Dobrynin’ explained that given the internal situation (public opinion, s guest and during this time he would be glad to meet with the Senate), he was not able to give formal guarantees without American officials.
State Department answered that they were pleased with In his answer Comrade Mikoyan called Kennedy’s attenComrade Mikoyan’s visit to Washington and added that the tion to Comrade Khrushchev’s letter of 26 November in American government officials were also ready to meet with which the Soviet leader expressly stated that the Soviet Union him.
They also raised the possibility of receiving Comrade was ready to enable the international monitoring of dismanMikoyan as an official state guest.
Comrade Mikoyan politely tling the Soviet missiles provided that the Cuban government evaded this opportunity. also agreed to it.
The president had been made an enemy by the United States and the best admitted that too and noted that he had given orders to the course of action would be to make an agreement with him Pentagon not to violate, if possible, the Cuban air space and on the basis of the principle of peaceful coexistence.
They South American region. exchanged ideas in more detail on general disarmament In regard to the internal situation in Cuba Comrade the ban on nuclear explosions, as well as on Berlin and the Mikoyan said that sentiment among the people was good, the German issue.
As an example, Comrade Mikoyan mentioned Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on the Tibetan and the Hungarian issues.
He pointed out that Soviet-Cuban Conflicts, 24 January 1963 the Chinese, in alliance with the top-level aristocracy, created a situation in Tibet that led to an uprising and they failed to Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic draw the necessary conclusions from it.
Three to Center I consider unnecessary to list here as evidence the facts One to Embassy that may be read, heard and observed day-by-day on the basis Havana, 24 January 1963 of which I came to the conclusion already earlier that in the Cuban leadership nationalism played an important role.
Hungarian Embassy, Havana , Report on The delegations visiting Cuba on the occasion of 1 “The Visible signs of the Cuban-Soviet Conflict,” 25 January were given dinner by the ICAP, where Blas Roca gave January 1963 a speech.
After such preceding events, he looked forward to the longer talks and meetings with Fidel Castro a bit worried.
Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on By the 17th, however, Fidel Castro had calmed down and Soviet Deputy Foreign Ministry Vasily Kuznetsov, proved a completely different person during his conversa28 January 1963 tion with Comrade Kuznetsov.
At first Fidel Castro contradicted the evaluation accordKuznetsov’s Report ing to which the USA president formally obliged himself not to attack Cuba or allow any other American states to do so.
On the evening of January 17 in the apartment of Comrade Kuznetsov had to explain it for a long time that the Soviet ambassador , Comrade there were numerous ways of making agreements between Kuznetsov gave a report to the Polish, Czechoslovakian, states and governments, one form of talks and agreement was Romanian and Bulgarian ambassadors and me.
After long explanaDuring the report he talked about the meetings between tions, Fidel Castro understood it finally. the Soviet Union and the USA concerning the Caribbean Comrade Kuznetsov did not mention any other important crisis, about the talks on disarmament, the ban on nuclear things that Fidel Castro would have told him, except for the experiments and Berlin.
During the conversation started following Comrade Comrade Kuznetsov had no pre-determined program Kuznetsov’s report, I told what I had heard from Blas Roca for his stay in Cuba.
He had his most important, single about the “details of form” Fidel Castro was criticizing.
The The crisis and its solution, however, brought up a lot of Cuban leaders had received the right explanation both from facts from the Cuban side that make it possible to achieve this him and Comrade Mikoyan, when he was here.
Concerning only through a longer and more crooked development, in the Khrushchev’s letter of 28 October to Kennedy, the situation long run.
The statement who may be really called Marxists and communists is smaller concerning it sent by the Soviet government to the Cuban than we believed.
We can feel the impact of various nationalist government arrived three hours after the publication as a or petit-bourgeois opinions and of the practical standpoints result of the necessary double encoding and listening-in.
Translated for Before the crisis, the Cuban leaders at most different levels, CWIHP by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] beginning from the Prime Minister and the president of the republic talked to the ambassadors of socialist countries, even if rarely, but always completely frankly and openly.
If January 1963 there is a conversation, it is far from being as rich in information as before, conversations are formal and empty.
Siomara Sánchez, the official in charge of Hungarian matters told frankly that when he was moved to the Hungarian department, he had not been very happy about it as he had known little of Hungary, he had considered it a not very relevant small socialist country.
Hungarian matters more closely, he dealt with Hungary with enthusiasm and interest.
Hungarian National Archives , Budapest, Foreign two countries were very good.
Translated for basis of the reports received from their embassy to Budapest CWIHP by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] and on the basis of the friendly, good relations between the Hungarian embassy to Havana and the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Never mind, says Fidel Castro, if Kennedy does not Three to Center consider the situation right for it.
One to Embassy Donovan’s talks with others (e.g. a Cuban under-secretary of internal affairs) were extremely violent and pointed, but Havana, 31 March 1963 they have never hindered further connections.
Cuban–USA Talks that the Cuban press and Cuban leaders have recently been making distinctions—at last!—in connection with the USA, they do not put everything and everybody in the same cateIt is well known that from the American side, “lawyer” gory.
Since then, from the Cuban it is not likely to be his private opinion, that for Cuba among side, Fidel Castro himself has had talks with Donovan at the the possible presidents at present Kennedy is the best. level of theory and politics, only the technicalities were discussed with Donovan at a lower level.
Translated for the shot U-2 and his exchange for Abel, the CWIHP by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] spy arrested and convicted in the USA, and it was also he who directed the exchange itself from the American side.
Kennedy himself, moreover behind the Soviet Union’s back, without informing the Soviet Union.
Yugoslavian ambassador Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Boško Vidaković, who appears such a friend of the Soviets Fidel Castro’s Television Report on his Trip to the before the socialist ambassadors that he looks more Catholic Soviet Union, 6 June 1963 than the Pope, is saying directly that Fidel Castro is playing a double game and he is blackmailing or wants to blackmail The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic the Soviet Union.
Hungarian National Archives , Budapest, Foreign influence of his SU experience.
Translated for Fidel Castro’s listeners during his speeches apart from his CWIHP by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] unheard of oratorical skills are his basic honesty, frankness and sincerity.
Soviet-Cuban Relations, 21 June 1963 When he was talking about the Soviet nation, the Soviet people, he was almost disturbed by the journalists’ questions.
Probably he was hinting at Juan Arcocha’s disgusting reports always ranking him with Lenin, which I already 001254/1/top secret/1963 reported on in the previous mail.
The appearance and consolidain the SU to the Cuban revolution and stressed that it had tion of the first socialist state on the American continent is concerned rather the future than the achieved results.
And in due to the existence and never-ceasing continuous support of his report he rejected even more firmly the effusions addressed socialist countries, mainly the Soviet Union. to his person and he raised his voice only when he was talking It is well-known that the Soviet Union has provided all about the mistakes. help to defend the independence and restore the economy Fidel Castro’s television interview has also shown what of the revolutionary country from the beginning.
From the turn the Soviet experiences and talks will mean in Cuba’s ecobeginning the Soviet Union has fought for the rights of the nomic, internal, and foreign political life and first of all, in the Cuban people in the UN and at other international forums. question of party building and the role of the party.
The Soviet Union has sent her representatives and specialists to Cuba to assess on the spot what the Cuban people needed.
Economic and cultural delments of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and among the egations have visited each other’s countries.
It was a great help leading members of the Cuban embassy, we can observe the to the Cuban economy threatened by American economic opinion that Soviet-Cuban relations are developing in a really blockade that the Soviet Union and the other socialist coungood direction and are characterized by sincere, comradely tries supported them generously and directly when they took cooperation. over the surplus of sugar of the country, which has a monoThere was a great reaction in Cuba to Castro’s visit, which culture economic structure, and they provided the most increased the unity of the two countries.
The mentioned needed means and loans to rebuild the country’s economy. opinions, however, reflect Cuba’s present economic difficulThe visit of the Cuban government delegation headed ties as well.
But the country’s leaders can see well that these by Raoul Castro to the Soviet Union last fall [sic; difficulties can be counterbalanced only by persistent and presummer] and the agreement signed as a consequence was of planned work, by the complete mobilization of the people for historic importance too.
The party being formed now will play a crucial role in talks pointed out unambiguously and clearly that the Soviet providing foundations for this development.
Union undertook the responsibility to defend Cuba’s indeCuba’s international position has become consolidated due pendence by all means—including the most modern military to Castro’s visit and the political reactions to it.
According to technology as well—if the imperialists should attack Cuba.
It the head of the Latin American Department of the is well-known that during the Caribbean Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Cuban leaders have undercrisis the Soviet Union carried out this duty by providing the stood that they should achieve a firm position.
They have country with appropriate military technology, then, replying understood that they belong to the American continent, the to the aggression of the imperialists, making definite and flexneighborhood of American imperialism, which requires a ible political steps, she ensured Cuba’s sanctity and, by this, determined but, at the same time, flexible policy.
In recent peace in the whole world. times, we have seen that the Cuban leaders have reacted in a In the days of the crisis and afterwards, as a result of the reserved and moderate manner to the USA’s policy and there complicated international situation, we could observe the has been a decrease in the sharpness of the declarations against signs of hesitation in the statements of some Cuban leaders, American policy in general.
The Cuban leaders can see that which the imperialist press and the opponents of the policy the Americans cannot ravage around freely in the Caribbean of peaceful co-existence tried to exploit.
At the same time, and the Soviet Union can defend the country’s sanctity.
Comrade Fidel Castro and other leaders have always stressed They can also witness that Kennedy has given up aggressive definitely the extremely important help received from the experiments for a time and has taken measures to control Soviet Union and the inviolable friendship with the Soviet Cuban emigrants.
The Caribbean crisis meant great experience for the MID has considered the leaders of the Cuban revolution from an international recently that, although the Cuban crisis cannot still be looked political aspect too.
Since then the events following it have upon as being solved, the tension has decreased considerably proved numerous times the rightness of the Soviet politics. in the past weeks.
There are still provocations and they can The Cuban leaders have seen this politics justified in connecexpect them in the future too, but it seems that it is not so tion with the situation of their own country as well.
Kennedy can see that the Soviet that Comrade Fidel Castro’s declarations unambiguously and Union always stands up for Cuba and Cuba has not become definitely pointed out their full agreement with the foreign isolated.
Fidel Castro’s visit to the Soviet Union warned even policy steps of the Soviet Union. the American leading circles to take a more sober position.
The news published about the talks and agreements of Comrade Bazikin has said that they are not Fidel Castro and his delegation in the Soviet Union show sending a high level Soviet delegation this year to Cuba’s that the relations between the two countries will develop at national holiday on 26 July, because Comrade Khrushchev is an even greater pace in the future and are based completely expected to visit Cuba in the near future.
This will probably on the principles of Lenin concerning cooperation between take place in August.
The agreements signed here determine the Soviet Union was represented by Comrade Nina Popova, the direction of relations between the two countries for a and they are likely to send a similar delegation to Havana this long time. year as well.
It is difficult to understand why the Cuban comrades in the training of specialists and in the organization of new considered this necessary. institutions to be set up.
In exchange Cuba supplies group of 25 Soviet artists, the ballet of the Great Theater the Soviet Union with sugar, alcohol, articles containing and, at the request of Comrade Fidel Castro, probably the nickel, tobacco, cigars and other articles.
I consider it unnecessary to emphasize that there is no danger of internal revolt.
There are smaller active counter3) By Cuba’s joining , the atmosphere revolutionary groups, but the Cuban army and militia are of the Cold War would return and would surely influence the eliminating them one after the other. ongoing détente process unfavorably within the international political community.
Erzsébet Görög chargé d’affaires ad interim The United States would consider this action as if the Soviet Union has stationed missiles in Cuba, it would creto Comrade Foreign Minister Péter János ate a war scare and would turn international public opinion Budapest against us.
Our decision on Cuba’s entry would be beneficial for Kennedy, since by this he would feel justified and relieved from his publicly announced responsibilities concerning Cuba.
In case of signing , according to the Warsaw Treaty, armed forces, Soviet armed forces, thus nucleViews of Polish Leader Władysław Gomułka on ar weapons could and should be shipped to Cuba.
Unfortunately Fidel’s suggesno. and 8/9 . tion is not new and he continues to force this idea onwards 4 Earlier Khrushchev—since the facts could not be verified— determinedly which is the reason why this issue is so serious. did everything he could to make the world believe that the Soviet Union possessed a huge arsenal of intercontinental missiles, and thus The Cuban leaders somewhat feel suspicious about us and was way ahead of the United States in this field.
They did not sign the Nuclear Test Ban United States had four times more ICBMs than the Soviet Union.
Concerning the Warsaw Treaty, if Cuba were to take and Naftali, op. cit., 171.
In the following years the disadvantage action, they will surely apply pressure, the Soviet Union will continued to grow until 1967, and finally only in 1969 the Soviet find herself in a hard situation, declining the proposition will Union managed to exceed the number of the United States’ surely be difficult.
Foreign Minister] comrade Rapacki and comrade 5 Due to Khrushchev’s demand Kennedy secretly agreed to Gromiko who fully shared dismantle the American Jupiter missiles which were installed in our opinion.
Since this formally required the approval of NATO, it did not happen until the following spring.
About this secret Soviet– We have been informed about that comrade Khrushchev American deal only very few officials—including the President, his intends to return Castro’s visit [to Moscow in the Spring of brother, Robert Kennedy, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk—knew 1963] and travel to Cuba.
Notes on Władysław Gomułka’s views on the issues of Cold War see Csaba Békés, “Cold War, Détente and the 1956 international politics.
It is also possible that edited by Csaba Békés, Anna Locher, Christian Nuenlist, Parallel Moscow’s ambassador in Hungary provided some information to History Project on NATO and the Warsaw Pact, www.isn.ethz.ch/ the Hungarian leaders, since according to the minutes of the CPSU php, 2005.
Politics,” 8 August 1961, and reproduced at www.marxists.org/ 16 Népszabadság, 26 October 1962. archive/guevara/1961/08/08/1961.htm—ed.
Dagajev, Colonel General was head of the 10th group Story of Wynne and Penkovsky . at the Soviet general staff.
At the time this organ was in charge 21 János Kádár’s account on his Moscow visit at the session of of coordination with the Warsaw Pact member states’ military the HSWP CC, 12 November 1962, MOL, M-KS-288.
Poland and the CSCE, 1964–1989,” CWIHP 23 October was published in Népszabadság on 25 October.
See Baráth Magdolna, minister of defence who was acting minister while Minister “Magyarország a szovjet diplomáciai iratokban 1957–1964,” in Múlt of Defence Lajos Czinege was hospitalized during the crisis— századi hétköznapok, 79.
His claim that the present 45 A detailed account on the mass meeting, including leaders know nothing “the participation of large masses in the speeches of deputy prime minister Gyula Kállai and the revolutionary fight” clearly indicates that he regarded the Cuban ambassador Quintin Pino Machado, was published Cuban Revolution led by Fidel Castro as more a coup d’état in Népszabadság on 26 October.
Catholic Church, sought refuge at the United States legation on 4 53 This was a serious obfuscation.
KRAJEWSKI8 Khrushchev’s closest associate in the Kremlin and now his From: JELEŃ9 emissary to inform and, if possible, mollify Fidel Castro, flew … to Cuba and spent several weeks in talks with the Cubans.
The English and French cantly enrich the record of the “secret” Soviet-Cuban crisis of are implying that they are, once again, afraid that the United States would November 1962 that followed the far better known US-Soviet make a mistake in their assessment of the internal mood in crisis during the “thirteen days” the previous month.
Obtained Even though the Poles naturally lacked insider access to by James G Hershberg and the secret decision-making deliberations of the Kennedy translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] administration, their ambassador in Washington was able to report some intriguing tidbits and gossip from well-informed or at least well-connected Washingtonians such as White House aides Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., and Walt Rostow and journalists Charles Bartlett and columnist Joe Alsop.
JELEŃ11 get the full story, but they certainly heard more than US officials—let alone uncleared American newspaper readers— regarding Punta del Este12 [has been compiled could easily about what was happening inside the complicated based on] the conversations with, among others, Blas Roca communist realm. ,13 Roa ,14 and Lechuga.
DOCUMENTS Calling on Cuba to break its relations with the communist bloc.
Sanctions adopted according to the Rio Treaty that one should create such conditions which would , after all, apply to mold the Cuban system once Cuba is faced with reality. all of the members.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, minister, is unfavorable to Cuba.
We have noted disappointment here caused by the position assumed by Mexico, which [Regarding the Eight Meeting of Consultation of Foreign has been far removed from the one they have assumed Ministers of the Organization of American States at] Punta until now.
There is no complete picture in the Cuban press regarding Olivares, with whom I had talked today, sees this change the resolutions adopted at and how as the expression of the complexity and inconsistency of each country voted on specific resolutions.
Cuba’s exclusion from the inter-American defense committee; 2) conversation with Adzhubei19 and [Soviet Prohibition of supplying weapons and strategic Ambassador to Cuba Sergei Mikhailovich] Kudryavtsev materials to Cuba by the members of the OAS on the 24th of this month.
Adzhubei pointed out that ; in his conversation with , Fidel decisively “Solidarity towards progress;” rejected the concept of “Finlandization”20 of Cuba.
On his part, Kudryavtsev emphasized that the Cuban Concrete steps to delegation left with a clear directive defend the Hemisphere. of exploiting the Brazilian concept in order to obtain a negotiating opportunity.
A and K It is still not known what other resolutions had been adopted. think that neutralism of a Finnish type, although with Also, the lack of the complete response to the adopted some reservations, is an acceptable option.
Given that the OAS charter does not allow for the , they Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Among other things, there is speculation that belongs to the pan-American conference.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Committee which is an autonomous organ Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
KRAJEWSKI26 sanctions included in Article 8 of the treaty24 are From: JELEŃ27 foreseen to be used not only towards the countries which are associated with it.
The United States was not able to obtain the of the anti-communist declaration in sanctions to the extent initially proposed by Caracas in 1954, only Mexico and Argentina abstained Colombia.
Even though the United States has not achieved from voting and only Guatemala voted against it. the maximum, it achieved quite a bit, including obtaining new tools which could be exploited in 4) They are all of the opinion that because of their future anti-Cuban actions. exclusion , the argument that the OAS the Security Council 2.
All of the resolutions (see the enumeration of the UN in case of a dispute between Cuba and according to our claris 27) were adopted the members of the OAS (see Article 20 of the OAS unanimously with Cuba voting against them.
The Charter)25 is no longer valid. unanimous vote pertained also to the political part of resolution IV28 (only its legal and executive part 5) There is a general opinion that the United States will in points 3 and 4)29; as a result the entire resolution exploit the decisions made at Punta [del Este was adopted by a majority vote of 14 countries.
JELEŃ33 determination and the form of the so-called free elections has been achieved through resolutions I I I am relaying the information presented today by Blas , III 35 (secretary of the Consultative Committee on Security Against the ORI to the Subversive Action of International Communism], heads of the diplomatic posts of the countries of the socialist and IV . camp.
He used these methods towards other comrades regardless of their previous 8) The members of the Cuban delegation state that only organizational membership [that is, whether they Brazil showed a commendable position.
He managed to Mexico the problems at the conference. control of a series of ministries, among others, the Ministry of Internal Affairs; he undertook the 9) The first opinions within the diplomatic corps regarding steps in order to control the military cadres.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, during these different periods.
The discussion related to the activities of A E. translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] began in February of this year under the older leadership.
The information, which I presented in the first point daily regarding current decisions.
Korean sent his secretary out their activities everywhere until now; the even though he attended a party soon before the meeting.
The activities were predominant in workplaces, especially charge d’affaires represented the Vietnamese embassy. among the management and administration.
K informed me that he was recalled [back to July Movement” in the revolutionary process and the Moscow] to work at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
At the Cuban government had already granted an agreement same time, it seems that these issues have not met with an to his successor Alekseyev.
At the same time, one can see clear signs of In his opinion, no fundamental strengthening economic aid for Cuba by the USSR (the change has taken place as far as the attitude towards protocol of exchange of goods for 1962 has been seriously Cuba , there has been a change in expanded; contracts for investment equipment; tactics instead.
RAPACKI arrived and presented the content of their communique to be included in the press.
In the manner of warmhearted honesty, Castro complained about a certain cooling in our The pacification of the peasantry [is taking place mutual relations.
I thanked They are publicly emphasizing the rapprochement him for his honesty and said that indeed we also sensed with our party as the most palatable [lit. their cool attitude towards us.
I agreed that I did not think that it was necessary to introduce any our relations should be strengthened so we can get to corrections to their text, which was, after all, treated as know each other better. ”unilateral” information for the press.
I think that we should also publish it extensively. trade and very extensive plans to expand the fishing I am sending my proposition via PAP . industry.
A series of Western diplomats were also to this declaration was aimed at, among other things, share the opinion of such a possibility.
He is rather minimizing the leadership thinks that, following the Soviet declaration, extent of internal difficulties.
He is promising a there is currently a possibility that a series of attempts by serious increase in the Soviet economic aid and large isolated and heavy marine landings, aimed deliveries of food, which are to achieve the last year’s at unleashing a series of internal hotspots of the armed level of food supply.
Western diplomats generally take into account the Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
They by James G Hershberg and are expressing concern about the anti-Cuban history in translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] the United States.
The government is currently discussing the draft of the participation of Dorticós in the Session, will be response to the resolution in the United States Congress regarding published on 1 October.
As to my question regarding the overall situation, R. are predicting that meetings with some Afro-Asian and assessed that currently there was no danger of Latin American delegations will also take place.
Rodriguez, with also predicting that a meeting with the chairman of the whom I had a lengthy talk today, assessed the situation Yugoslav delegation will take place.
DROŻNIAK75 ing China with nuclear weapons for years all the more it will not provide Cuba with such weapons.
They are focusing on the production [This information has been compiled based on my of missile defense weapons.
They are foreseeing that in the near conversation with Charles] Bartlett (a journalist who has future all of the bombers will be fully eliminated.
They are getting ready to use tactical nuclear weapons in case 1) Bartlett thinks that Kennedy was shocked by intelligence of the conflicts in Asia.
This will not be as dangerous as using information, which reached the Republican senators such weapons in Europe.
They are not planning a already on the 14th of this month, that is, a week before invasion of Cuba, this would require a much greater they reached him. effort than last year.
During the last year of Thompson’s stay in the 2) According to Bartlett, the climate of trust, which has Soviet Union the been emerging between Kennedy and Khrushchev, was pace of change, which began since the death of Stalin [in ruined just like the game played by the Japanese prior 1953], has clearly accelerated.
The much stronger to the on Pearl Harbor . support for Cuba can be dated to Khrushchev’s visit to The steps [to address the crisis,g., the “quarantine” Beijing.
The Cuban ambassador in Moscow was of Cuba], which Kennedy announced [on much more interested in Beijing and wanted to be transferred Monday, 22 October], will be implemented in the there.
It is easier for the USSR to provide military than atmosphere of a great pressure from the economic aid to Cuba, because they possess a lot of outdated public opinion. military equipment.
He realizes that there is not much time left for him Soviets] on Cuba was a shock to the administration, to carry out the goals he set out for himself.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, [Source: Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Dispatched from Moscow on 24.10.1962 at 16:00 Received on 24.10.1962 at 19:40 When discussing his country’s position, he Came into the Deciphering Department on 24.10.1962 at emphasized that doors towards negotiations should 20:00 not be closed.
He also sees opening URGENT, EYES ONLY some kind of a way out for the United States.
PASZKOWSKI Based on Cieslak’s conversations with the board members He thinks that Cuba’s defensive capabilities are of Pravda : currently sufficient.
When the initial information arrived regarding the heated consultations in Washington, the He assumes that the Soviet ships, if they are forced comrades believed that this was a typical pre-election to do so, will have to submit to inspection in order bluff.
All of the interlocutors generally agree that even if the He personally thinks that the tensions will subside conflict were to take place based on individual encounters after the presidential then one could isolate it.
This subtext will be elections in the United States. included in the materials prepared for publication in the press for tomorrow.
They think that the Americans He is not hiding his dissatisfaction with the Sinowill not shoot, but instead “block the road” and impose Indian developments. arrests.
It takes 2-3 days to get to Cuba and tensions of the elections in the United States. therefore tonight it will be the first time for the Soviet ships to “come in contact with Kennedy’s orders carried 3) various Cubans.
They are receiving information from all over the country about the calm and disciplined attitudes 4) My impressions.
They will not exacerbate the tensions but without any signs of panic and fears of the threat of more than necessary.
Khrushchev’s presence at the opera during the visit of the Romanian delegation.
The conflict in Cuba, translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] however, will not have any serious consequences when it comes to the moods of the more conservative part of the society or the party apparatus.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, Council (some of the journalists believe that by favorably Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Dispatched from Washington, D.C., on 10.26.1962 at 23:00 Kuznetsov assessed the resolution of Ghana and the and received on 10.27.1962 at 7:25 United Arab Republic as kind of a band-aid, but a Came to the Decoding Department on 10.27.1962 at 7:30 one that nevertheless is significant.
MILNIKIEL97 considers the statement of the Afro-Asian nations as both From: DROŻNIAK98 good and strong.
He also thinks that the atmosphere in the UN does not favor the United States.
The pressure from the a reliable neutral nations on the United States is strong.
They also think that crisis to the General Assembly and to bring about a vote on the point of the Chinese proposition was to demand the the resolution by the United Arab Republic.
U guarantees of recognizing the actual status of Cuba in Thant is convinced that many will vote in favor of the resoluexchange for disassembling new military installations. tion, maybe even the majority.
According to Kuznetsov, U The overall opinion, however, is that the decision [on Thant’s intentions are bringing about some results.
The tone how to solve the crisis] is currently beyond that of Cuba of Stevenson’s and therefore there is much anticipation as to the Cuban has changed somewhat.
One should not exclude the posreaction related to this issue. sibility, however, that Kennedy could move towards making more provocations under the pressure 2.
The about “unidentified” planes that entered the Cuban United States is looking for strong and convincing reasons airspace but which were “chased out” by the Cuban air that would allow it to directly carry out the invasion of Cuba. force.
MILNIKIEL,102 seriously, the possibility of the bombings of military EYES ONLY facilities.
However, the conditions request with sympathy, but they will take their time. posed by the Cubans were made after the decision of the USSR to withdraw the Soviet military installations.
He did not have much to add to the already published [Source: Szyfrogramy from Moskwa 1962, 6/77 w-83 t-1263. statements made by Khrushchev.
Obtained serve as the basis to eliminate tensions and to protect Cuba by James G Hershberg and from aggression.
Based on to the United States Anatoly] Dobrynin’s information, it looks like Kennedy does not doubt Khrushchev’s statements.
KRAJEWSKI, Urgent, EYES ONLY Came into the Deciphering Department on 30.10.1962 at From: JELEŃ108 15:25 To: RAPACKI, IMMEDIATELY 1.
JASZCZUK109 decision to withdraw the military installations is yesterday’s speech by Raul Castro in Santiago.
Overall, he From the visit at [First Deputy Chairman of the Council of outlines the USSR’s position as calm and reasonable.
He was well received by the he states that the liquidation of the Guantanamo base Americans, who are pleased with his arrival. must take place sooner than later, but through peaceful 2.
The situation of the past few days has been exceptionally means. tense.
Based on the information from various sources it would Khrushchev’s statement regarding the dismantling of the seem that Fidel is not pleased with how the decision to starting devices was made pretty much at the last minute. withdraw was made and the disclosure that If the Americans went into Cuba and wiped it out, half the installations are exclusively the property of the USSR. of the Cuban population and many Americans, could One can sense much bitterness on the part of Cubans perish in the process.
It is noteworthy that the prestige have been a nuclear war, because only a madman would of Fidel Castro could seriously suffer within the Latin dare drop an atomic bomb.
I do not exclude the fact that the “five and Cuba, would pose a great obstacle. conditions” were also We received guarantees from Kennedy of not attacking Fidel Castro’s reaction to the Soviet position.
There is said to be an especial international norms would be trampled. envoy on the way sent by Goulart 3.
The blockade of Cuba continues, but the Soviet ships who is carrying a letter to Fidel. were already given instructions to leave the Cuban ports.
Szyfrogramy from Moskwa 1962, 6/77 w-83 t-1263. that he was the one to relay a proposition from Tito to Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained Dorticos of inviting U Thant by James G Hershberg and and that this influenced Fidel’s letter from the 27th which translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] contained this invitation.
India, egging Castro on to oppose the reached agreement, and presenting the USSR position as a serious concession 1) thinks that the unpublished exchange to the United States.
JASZCZUK116 proliferation; a declaration or a treaty of non-aggression between NATO Kohler’s (which Organization] and the Warsaw Pact; the elimination of lasted 50 minutes): some bases; declaring both Africa and Latin America as non-nuclear zones.
Kohler stated in implementing the agreement regarding Cuba, there that the United States is really surprised that the USSR is a real possibility for a summit meeting thought that America would allow for the creation of relatively quickly and for a serious relaxation the missile bases right under its nose and for the change in the international situation.
I took up the issue of the so called “offensive think that right now the disassembling and transport of the nature” of the missile weapons and I also returned to the missiles back to the USSR will take place very quickly.
This is issue of unfriendly United States policy towards Cuba because, the Soviet Union will not want to create a precedent the international commisPolish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
MILNIKIEL,117 EYES ONLY Dispatched from Havana on 10.31.1962 at 14:20 From: DROŻNIAK118 Received on 10.31.1962 at 12:12 /From A Schlesinger, Kennedy’s Came into the Deciphering Department on 10.31.1962 at adviser.
Goulart’s delegation arrived [US Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs W and talked through the night with [Cuban President Averell] Harriman was the first one to see that Khrushchev’s Osvaldo Torrado] Dorticos.
Obtained by James G Hershberg and 3) In case Castro continues to make things difficult, translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] the administration will not aspire to complicate the situation.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Siedlecki Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, the situation with India, something that Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Even though the old communist apparatus best understands the line of the USSR, it had to unconditionally support Fidel in order to strengthen unity and counter the anti-Soviet tendencies.
One should Otto] Kuusinen at the VII Comintern Congress. contrast the level of Kalecki, Lange, and Schaff with the low theoretical level in the Soviet leadership.
Thus, contrary to the rumors, the Second Havana fact that it was precisely Mikoyan who distinguished Declaration is current and alive.
The national bourgeoisie, not because Stalin emphasize the exceptionally low and primitive level of said so at the XIX Congress but because it is Ponomarev’s article. rickety and afraid of socialist transformations, is not capable of and cannot lead revolutionary movements.
Ministers of Foreign Affairs; c) The Council; d) The Pan American org/consejo/meetings%20OF%20consultation/actas/acta%208.pdf.
The ORI was comprised of the members yale.edu/20th_century/decad062.asp. of the revolutionary organization called the “26th of July Movement” 26 Official in the Polish Foreign Ministry.
On March 26, 1962, the ORI was transformed into as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil.
That the Council Castro that overthrew the regime of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba in of the Organization of American States and the other organs and 1959.
After Castro’s victory, the movement was integrated into the organizations the inter-American system adopt without delay the Organizaciones Revolucionarias Integradas in 1961. measures necessary to comply with this resolution.
To he served as the vice-chair of the Administrative and Budgetary request the Council of the Organization of American States to Committee of the UN General Assembly.
In 1965-1970, he served maintain all necessary vigilance, for the purpose of warning against as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil. any acts of aggression, subversion, or other dangers to peace and 43 Poland’s ambassador to Cuba . security, or the preparation of such acts, resulting from the continued 44 Organizaciones Revolucionarias Integradas was formed intervention of Sino-Soviet powers in this hemisphere, and to make in July 1961 following the Cuban Revolution and the fall of the recommendations to the governments of the member states with Fulgencio Batista regime.
Most likely, the reference here is to the Soviet missiles installed in 76 [Ben Bella had just visited Washington, where he met with Cuba.
Wierna, Comrade Michalowski, Comrade Birecki,Comrade Katz79 Edward Drożniak , Poland’s ambassador to the Suchy, Comrade Milnikiel.
Bodzilowski, Comrade Korczynski, Comrade Naszkowski, Comrade 1957 – 1962 and 1967 – 1969.
Wierna, Comrade Michalowski, Comrade Birecki, Comrade Katz84 The reference here is to Khrushchev’s visit to Beijing in Suchy, Comrade Milnikiel.
In 1950-1951, Comrade Korczynski, Comrade Naszkowski, Comrade Wierna, he served as the vice-chair of the Administrative and Budgetary Comrade Michalowski, Comrade Birecki, Comrade Katz-Suchy, Committee of the UN General Assembly.
In 1965-1970, he served Comrade Milnikiel. as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil.
Ayub Khan, Shastri, and four times Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR Cubans (Raul , Guevara and [Osvaldo Torrado] Dorticos)…[also visited us…They all wanted to get to know the new leadership, but not only that.
Although he could have informed the Romanian Minister of Armed Forces about the operation “Anadyr,” which was ongoing, the Report on Romanian Government Supreme Commander of the Warsaw Pact Unified Armed Delegation Visit to Moscow and SovietForces made no gesture in this direction, and General Sălăjan Romanian Talks, 23 October 1962 was also surprised as Gheorghiu-Dej and Maurer were by Kennedy’s revelation on October 22 of the existence of Soviet 30 October 1962. missiles in Cuba.
In fact, it appears that Romanian authorities didn’t know The report submitted by Foreign Minister Corneliu Mănescu anything about the existence of the Soviet operation “Anadyr” to the members of the Politburo of the RWP CC, regarding the discussions of the members of a Romanian government until United States Presidente John F Kennedy revealed to the world delegations and several members of the CPSU and Soviet on 22 October 1962.
Khrushchev was some16 b USSR what apologetic about his failure to inform Gheorghiu-Dej in advance, but explained that few knew the secret even in GD Moscow, and defended his decision to deploy the missiles N C as necessary “to frighten America” and thereby protect Cuba C S from being lost to the socialist camp.
Subandrio’s attitude – the that the relations between the two parties, between the two Minister of Foreign Affairs, is more withdrawn and it seems countries are very good, very close. that the most times he has a reactionary position, similar to After comrade Gheorghiu-Dej had similarly toasted, we Nasution’s position.
Ne Win, highlighted followed the Soviet comrades’ proposal and left together to by comrade Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, seems to be quite the Grand Theatre where the shrewd and far-sighted in international affairs.
Khrushchev, comrade Mikoyan, and Regarding the Soviet relations with Indonesia, comrade N. other companions in these countries and currently.
Khrushchev insisted more on the attitude of and the Netherlands, conflict generated by the intention to Nehru and the Sino-Indian probfree the ex-Portuguese colonies’ territories from Indonesia, lem.
In this context, comrade generally menSukarno took the initiative and sent Subandrio to Moscow for tioned that Nehru had oscillated between the line of imperialist asking a military aid – submarines, aircraft and commanders for countries, neutrality and the socialist countries.
Starting from the idea that the Soviet carriers can under the influence of the ruling party, of the reactionary forces, do a good attempt to destroy Dutch aircraft in case of an air Nehru seems to be closer to the line of imperialist countries.
The attack of the Dutch aviation, the Soviet comrades accepted the position he occupies in the last time, toward the issue of border help requested, at the same time saying the argument mentioned conflict with China, is downright reactionary.
Also tioned that he doesn’t have any guarantee that Sukarno had under the pressure of the reactionary forces, the Indian side rejectknown about this.
Khrushchev was established and the USSR provided to Nasser Soviet bomber toasted to the Romanian-Soviet friendship and mentioned aircraft, flown by Soviet crews.
Series of experiments conducted under a siles installed in Cuba for a number of United States cities (it seems that nuclear test were performed only in the atmosphere, as the Kennedy has even nominated, add comrade Mikoyan), Canada costs of underground experiments are enormous.
A new spirit prevails even among the working grain into a centralized state fund and expects this figure to rise, class.
Previously, some workers came and put conditions on whereas in some regions it is still harvesting the corn.
The state – work well, in the third quarter it produced more steel than plans were drawn up so that deficits were foreseen from the beginthe United States So thus it is obvious that the United States can be matched in ning. v i the production of the main industrial products.
In addition, all the Soviet people must it will require some improvements in the system of organization give economic aid to the German people.
When you stan the position of When there is only one regional party organ that deals the hand reached for s aid, you are not enjoying the prestige; with problems of industry and agriculture issues, inevitably 2.
You should keep in mind the realities, to rely firstly on them – one of the two sectors suffers.
Gavriil Preda, Petre Opriş, România Gheorghiu-Dej, being asked if he received it, he confirmed în Organizaţia Tratatului de la Varşovia.
Firstly, comrade started with simple information from our delegation about the visit which comrade Walter Ulbricht is going to do in the USSR on 31 October.
He didn’t talk with me, he didn’t ask my battalions of tactical missiles – at Lugoj, Oradea and Corbu opinion, but just so, I only was informed by him that he sent – and they bought six 2 K-6 systems, equipped missiles to Cuba.
Romanian General Staff on the situation in the Caribbean Sea, but this was based only by the Western broadcast radio news.
Bulgarian Communist leader 1962 while he was on vacation at his Black Sea residence in Zhivkov had a chance to meet Khrushchev personally during the Crimea.
Thus, in and Marshal Matvei Zacharov, Chief of General Staff, gave less than nine years Zhivkov Khrushchev a top secret handwritten proposal to organize a had defeated consecutively all his former political rivals and military operation code-named “Anadyr” which would station finally established his monocracy, which continued until his the 43rd missile division to Cuba. own removal from power in November 1989.
The Bulgarian leaderIn Bulgaria, the Cuban missile crisis was closely related to ship just followed the official information from the available the state of nuclear proliferation on the Balkans, particularly open sources, collected at the Foreign Ministry and “Foreign with the eventual removal of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Diplomatic Archive , Sofia, Opis 19,e.4, This collection of Bulgarian documents on the Cuban mis3; translated by Greta Keremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev.] sile crisis below was selected from four major state archives.
The second main source was the Diplomatic Archive [Diplomaticheski Message from the Bulgarian Foreign Arhiv – DA] of the Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Ministry to the Cuban Embassy in Sofia, Several documents were taken from the Bulgarian military 24 October 1962 records, which were subsumed under the Ministry of Defense to the Central State Archives in 1999 under the name State VERBAL NOTE Military History Archive [Darzhaven Voennoistoricheski Arhiv – DVIA], located in the city of Veliko Tarnovo.
Note from Cuban Ambassador to Bulgaria, Salvador Garcia Aguero, to Bulgarian Foreign Minister, 2 September 1962 Chief of Staff, Bulgarian Navy, Order re Sofia, 2 September 1962 Naval Combat Readiness, 24 October 1962 Comrade Minister, Secret Only 1 copy I have the honor to send Your Excellency a copy of a ORDER recently received declaration, prepared by the Prime Minister OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF OF THE NAVY of my country, Commandante Fidel Castro, with regard to 24 October 1962 recent libels and threats against Cuba by the United States government.
C 3198 The content of this declaration absolves me from the need Varna to provide a detailed description and comments, which are not necessary for Your Excellency, since you are aware of the Ref.
Preparation to raise combat readiness in the formations maneuvers of the aggressive North American imperialists. and units of the Navy I am sending the media and other authorities copies of the same declaration.
With regard to the Declaration issued by the Bulgarian I take this opportunity to pay once again my deep respect government dated 23 October6 and instructions from the to you.
The air defense command post of the army, the air defense posts in the formations, anti-aircraft regiments TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS and divisions shall organize and maintain continuous CABINET OF THE MINISTER combat duty.
SOFIA The air defense command post shall maintain continuous As we have already informed the Ministry with a cable, contacts with the command post of 2nd anti-aircraft with regard to the extremely tense international situation brigade. and a direct threat of an imminent war, we have destroyed all confidential reports, memos, instructions, work plans and 2.
One combat ready battery shall be formed in each antiaccounts, as well as correspondence, in order to prevent the aircraft division in the formations and in 32nd anti-aircraft enemy from getting hold of them.
We have kept only the regiment, and they will be deployed in the vicinity of the materials concerning the code, the Embassy annual work plan barracks and will stay on combat duty. and the last quarterly plan, which are of confidential nature but due to their small volume, are easy to destroy if the need 3.
All destroyed materials were included in a list with aircraft regiment shall be deployed close to the garrison incoming and outgoing reference numbers. and shall be ready to act by additional order.
The army commander shall give permission to the antiprovocations and attacks against legation facilities, employees aircraft batteries to open fire after permission is granted and their families, we have strengthened the security of the room by the General Staff. where the coded materials and other secret correspondence are kept.
All important information from the Instruction for fire night duty after working hours two in the room with secret interaction between air defense and air force and air materials and one in the adjacent room who will be able to give defense in the troops shall be provided to the commanders a timely warning of any imminent threat.
All flammable materiof anti-aircraft units. als have been thrown away from the offices and the basement, and all fire protection facilities checked.
Each anti-aircraft battery shall be supplied with 0. set The employees and their families were summoned and of shells. instructed what precautions to take in order to increase their level of alertness and to prevent provocations like kidnapping, CHIEF OF STAFF OF 2ND BULGARIAN ARMY attacks, beating, etc.
I should mention that during these days of extreme tenColonel /sign/ Alexiev sion and anxiety, a sense of duty and the self-confidence [on behalf ] of all employees in the Legation, in the Commercial Printed in 6 copies and Military missions is required.
DVIA, Fond 317, Opis 4,e., 249; translated by special measures to strengthen security and to raise the alertGreta Keremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev.] ness and readiness of employees and their families.
There were intensive Bulgarian Embassy, Havana , to transportation activities and stockpiling of large quantities of Bulgarian Foreign Ministry, 12 November ammunitions, especially in the area of Lübeck, where military 1962 supply troops were deployed.
There was intensive movement of supply troops Havana, 12 November 1962 from the ports to the inner regions of the country, tanks and XIII – 0 12 artillery – mainly anti-aircraft.
Due to the strong and effective proLa Habana paganda, a large part of the population justified the aggressive acts of the Americans, who averted Soviet actions not only in Nr.4 the western hemisphere, but also in Berlin.
To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS SOFIA /sign/ Gen.
XII.1962 October 1962 the confidential archives of the Embassy were Sofia destroyed by burning.
Nr.58/NS 3 copies Attached are two protocols and a list of the demolished materials.
These proposals, made in order tries expressed their reserved attitude towards the positions to respond to the opinions and fears of Western delegations of socialist countries.
US in their attempts to impose their position on compulsory Dean] characterized the new Soviet proposal concerning mison-site inspections, even in the presence of automatic seismic sile weapons as interesting, deserving attention and opening stations.
Relevant to this context is the report by Swedish sciopportunities for negotiations, in his speech on the general entists, submitted by the Swedish delegation, which contains principles of disarmament on 14 December the United States represenconclusions on the impossibility to identify [automatically/ tative rejected these suggestions.
The United States, however, remotely—ed.] all underground phenomena. did not succeed in making neutral countries or their allies Despite the seemingly constructive tone of the declarations accept their negative attitude concerning the Soviet proposals. of the American delegation at the start of the session, later stateThe behavior of Great Britain is typical.
According to ments aimed at creating the impression among the neutrals that information from the Indian delegate, when Dean11 delivered the United States have superior nuclear power.
This became his speech to reject the Soviet proposal, the British delegate particularly obvious in the speech of the American delegate had a printed copy of his speech for the same session in which in the Committee of the 18 on 14 December, on the opening he made clear that they were ready to negotiate on the new day of NATO’s session.
Taking into account the decisive American positions on disarmament underlying that they would never position, he had to abandon the printed text and agree to such kind of disarmament which would pose a threat speak extemporaneously, not to differ from the United States delegate’s to the existence of their military political alliances.
The British representative stated that the United States posistatements during a lunch, attended only by Czechoslovakian tion surprised and even disappointed Great Britain.
Later, the and Bulgarian delegations of all other socialist countries, the chief British delegate and his deputy made clear in their stateUS delegate tried to create the impression among the present ments that they differed from the United States positions and assumed neutral representatives that the United States was in fact the only nuclear a more constructive attitude towards the issue of automatic power.
When asked what that meant and wasn’t the Soviet stations for nuclear tests control, as well as on the proposal Union a nuclear state, the American delegate replied that the for keeping a strict number of missiles on the territories of the Cuban crisis had proved that the United States was the only USSR and the United States until the end of the second phase. nuclear country.
This statement was immediately mitigated by Typical for the differences between the United States and other another American delegate who explained that they mean the Western countries is Canada’s position on tests.
Almost every only real nuclear country without underestimating the entire time delegations meet informally, it is said even as a joke that military power of the Soviet Union and the socialist camp.
When speaking in the lobby, the Italian participants are considerably more Sofia, 27 December 1962 inclined to mutually acceptable decisions than in their official declarations in the Committee.
Such credits have been offered by the USSR and to divert negotiations on disarmament towards some of the the CSSR . above-mentioned events.
In this context, Western countries will Taking into consideration the difficulties in Cuba, its find support among most of the neutrals.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs disassembly of the bases, housing the Jupiter missiles.
Istanbul Written on 28 January 1963 at 5.00 pm Thus the United States government would demonstrate before the world its military presence in Turkey.
They will be replaced by Polaris misKeremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev.] siles, which will float in the Mediterranean and will be under the command of Sixth United States Fleet.
Today, Istanbul newspapers published statements from foreign media agencies according to which Turkey and Italy are not going to be at a disadvantage after the removal of Jupiter missiles since NATO will obtain Bulgarian Legation, Washington , access to Polaris missiles and they will be deployed in the Cable to Foreign Ministry, 15 February Mediterranean this year.
We 1963 have no precise information whether NATO is engaged in this matter, when the dismantling of Jupiter missiles will start, etc.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs From: Washington Written on 13 February at 1.00 pm United States Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric has Bulgarian Legation, Washington , stated that United States would send three POLARIS submarines on Cable to Foreign Ministry, 12 February April 11,th to replace the missile bases in Turkey and Italy.
Athens armed forces of the Soviet Union and its allies were quickly Written on 16 March 1963 at 5.00 pm procuring most modern weapons, especially Bulgaria, which has modernized its troops systematically with Soviet assault Today’s newspapers present brief information on the weapons.
NATO received information that during the last two NATO meeting that was held in Athens yesterday.
In his months the Bulgarian army had conducted a series of maneuintroductory remarks, the Chief of the Greek General Staff vers close to the Greek and Turkish borders.
The maneuvers General Pipilis stated that the purpose of the meeting was to included exercises aiming at achieving full combat readiness. further strengthen the relations and cooperation between the According to newspaper Katimerini, a NATO declaration Greek and Turkish armed forces.
The Chief of the Turkish states that in the upcoming months the fast adoption of NATO General Staff, General Sunay, the Commander of forward strategy in Greece will start, according to which Greek NATO Staff in Izmir, General Brown, and the Chief of Staff divisions will be deployed in a new pattern at a short distance of South European forces, General Seyds, also expressed their along the borders.
This strategy aims at the preparation for positions on the same issue. attacks from 50 divisions, used by the Soviet Union.
The defense of Greece and particularly of Thrace was attention and support since the two Balkan countries were estimated as vitally important, and NATO would not leave a poor and were not in a position to meet the requirements of single inch of Greek land . a wide allied defense; conducting summer military exercises.
Joint intelligence activities were evaluated highly by the United States Plenipotentiary minister, Anderson, who sent Ministry of Internal Affairs, Information information to Washington, thanking NATO member-states Report, 5 July 1963 Defense Attaches.
During the visual observation, one of the most commonly used tricks was the usage of Russian language.
The French Personal, Top Secret Defense Attaché even introduced himself as a Russian.
Ministry of Internal Affairs Some of them used special intelligence equipment.
The regular visits NATO Military Intelligence Services had developed to the legations were also used for gathering of information and instructions concerning the work of their agents in the for arranging secret meetings with some agents.
The latter had to keep under observaThe official press was used as an additional information tion the activity of the Warsaw Pact Political Consultative and source, too.
The Intelligence Services had quite detailed data for several miliAmerican Attaches coordinated the activity of all NATO tary warehouses and exact data for the technical equipment Defense Attaches. in use.
Its predecessor was Ten Nations Committee on Disarmament To be returned to Cipher , which was formed by five representatives from NATO Department in 48 hours countries and five representatives from Warsaw Pact countries.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs the 18 nation disarmament committee in Geneva, rather than Sir From: Istanbul Patrick Dean, UK representative at United Nations—ed.
The Turkish side stated that they could only accept these sub17 Nikolai Minchev – Ambassador to Greece and marines, in case that they were used for the defense of Turkey.
The first visit of a Soviet leader Establishment of diplomatic relations with to Cuba was carried out in late January– Cuba, 1960 early February 1974.
It should be explicitly countries have already come to an agreement on the construcdeclared that if the delegation has the authority to do it, we tion of different enterprises in Cuba. are ready to sign a trade agreement and to buy certain quantiA Cuban economic delegation led by [Antonio ties of sugar, exporting our goods in return.
Núñez ] Jiménez, the director of the National Institute for Depending on the answer, we will announce the negotiaAgricultural Reform, is at present in the Soviet Union.
It has also signed a joint commuComrade Todor Zhivkov reports. niqué on the trade-economic relations etc.
The same delegation will also visit other countries from the socialist block 1.
Hence it is necessary to ensure the after coordinating it with the Cuban government. export of sugar on the one hand and the import of petrol 2.
The Foreign Affairs commission at Politburo should work and petrol products, agricultural machines and others on the out concrete measures regarding the establishment and other,g. goods with which it has so far traded with the USA. expansion of political, economic and cultural relations Since the ideas of the Cuban revolution and the socialist between our country and the Republic of Cuba. community are close, the USSR and other socialist coun3.
If the told us that we were expected guests who were absolutely delegation comes to our country it will by all means want confirmed when we arrived in Cuba.
The delegation was met us to buy certain amounts of sugar from Cuba, in return for at the airport by the Deputy-Minister of Foreign Affairs and which we would export our goods.
The preliminary research meeting, the deputy-minister Chevari explicitly declared that made by the Ministry of Foreign Trade regarding the opporCuba wanted to establish regular diplomatic and cultural tunities for importing raw Cuban sugar and after processing relations with the People’s Republic of Bulgaria.
Later on, we it in our plants re-exporting it, showed that it is not economionly specified the details in the further meetings that we had. cally profitable due to the high freight and processing costs Finally, the text for a joint message was coordinated.
It would be more profitable if the sugar, being approved by the competent organs in the two countries, after being processed were left for the internal market, while the message would be published simultaneously in Havana the Foreign Trade Ministry would export the respective quanand Sofia.
During the whole time we were there, comrades in Havana told us that an acute clash Fidel Castro was busy somewhere outside Havana (we saw between the old and the young in the intelligentsia circles. him the last evening at a performance of some visiting The support was for the young.
If one day the USA happens to which we could offer technical help to the revolutionary refuse the supply of petroleum, Cuba’s whole life will die, since government of Cuba. the whole transport is based on petroleum, electrical energy is produced by a petroleum electric station etc.
Cuba’s goods, above all sugar, followed by coffee and tobacco is With view to that the Bulgarian Embassy in Prague another question of vital importance.
Thus the interest towards should be entrusted with Raul Castro’s invitation, if the trade issues is justified.
The threats that if Cuba is detached he happens to go the Prague, which is due by the end from the USA it will fail have been refuted by the facts.
The Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs instance, the revolutionary government found 60 million suggested this invitation. pesos foreign currency.
What had been accumulated during the war was squandered by Batista’s Sofia, 16 June 1960 camarilla.
The country is living in revolutionary condifriendship and cultural cooperation with foreign countries tions and the young people are particularly active.
But this has Lubomir Angelov, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs not disturbed the normal pace of life.
This does not mean translated by Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova, Edited by that the USA has put up with the loss of Cuba.
Jordan Baev] Cuba’s authority with the Latin-American countries is great.
They consider the latter to be prepared by the neighboring Latin-American countries above all the Dominican Republic, Costa Rica and Guatemala.
They have collected Information on VIII Congress of National many facts indicative of that.
Yet the Cuban people rely a lot Socialist party of Cuba, 29 October 1960 on the Latin-American countries’ peoples, on their hatred toward the USA and love for Cuba.
Guevara underscored the huge scale to Fidel Castro to visit Bulgaria, on which the industrialization will develop, as well as the enormous aid which will be received from the 2 June 1961 socialist countries.
Another resolution is the foundation of the Ministry COMMUNIST PARTY FROM 2 JUNE 196119 of Foreign Trade.
The newly created Ministry of Domestic Trade will Comrade Yugov, rule the state trade enterprises, will take care of supplies, and will control the prices and the commercial sector, which at the Our Ambassador in Havana has talked to Cuba’s Minister moment makes up the greater part of trade. of Foreign Affairs Roa, who told him that, if the 5.
The law for the length of service and the social circumstances allow it, Fidel Castro will visit Moscow this insurance for the working class was also important. year in order to receive the international Lenin award “For strengthening the peace among the peoples” for 1960 The task of diversification and increase of the agricultural which has been conferred on him.
If the visit takes place, he production is set together with the issue concerning industriintends to visit the other socialist countries as well.
Lukanov20/ Everybody speaks confidently about the great prospects, which these resolutions open for Cuba.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.77; translated by In all those conversations with the Ministers, while talking Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova; edited by Dr.
The requested 50,000 Mauser carbines––German model, 7.92 caliber are not for their needs but for the needs 2.12.1961 of the revolutionary movements in the Latin American countries.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 64,e.1; translated of this undertaking and the required quantity of carbines by Vanja Petkova, edited by Dr.
Taking into consideration the country’s enormous defense expenses and serious financial difficulties, comrade Lopes demanded that the loan be extended for a 5-year period in exchange for our purchase of special equipment.
He also informed us that the Bulgaria, 1 June 1962 loan request does not refer to our signed contract from this September for the export of special equipment for 1962.
As a result of the From the Minister of National Defense initial agreement with the Cubans, it is expected that an addiCol.-Gen.
Invitation to Raul Castro to visit Bulgaria on 9 about $1,500,000 USD­­, from the stipulated amount ––on September 1962 condition of a 2/3 credit for a 5 year term, starting from 1 January 1963.
PR of Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba, I request approval on behalf of the leadership of the Ministry of Defense and on 1.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.00; translation protocol for the export of special equipment to the Republic by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] of Cuba in 1962.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.39; translation From Ivan Prumov Minister of Agriculture by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] and Ivan Abadzhiev First Secretary of the Central Committee of Dimitrov Communist Youth Union REGARDING sending agriculture specialists to Republic of Resolutions by Bulgarian CP Cuba. organizations in Havana, 18 October 1962 In March this year a secretary of the CC of DCYU took PROTOCOL part in the work of the First Congress of the Union of the Today 18.10.1962 the annual surveyYoung Cuban communists.
How was it done so that an invitation came about for a visit, is a secret to us until this day.
The MEETING countries from Latin America broke diplomatic relations with Of 9 April 1963 Cuba.
Proclaiming of the socialist character of the revolution threw the American imperialists into panic.
He was preparing the conference of the Organization Cuba. of American States whose most important goal was the expulsion of Cuba from this organization.
An attempt was made for the upsetting of the campaign for liquidation of illiteracy.
Politburo agrees on the annual credit for foodstuffs were intimidated with the hanging of the young for the Year 1962 amounting to 1, 5 million dollars to be teacher Manuel Ascunce Domenech . arranged as a long term twelve years credit at 2% interest, The newspapers constantly published schematic maps of the counting from the year 1967.
Ivan Mihailov, Member of Politburo munity, the Cuban people, united around its revolutionary Comrade Ivan Budinov, Minister of Foreign Trade government, continued more confidently along the path it Gen.
RESOLUTION “B” No 9 I Political situation in the country OF POLITBURO OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE BULGARIAN COMMUNIST PARTY FROM 13 1963 was a difficult year for the Cuban people.
After the Cuba for the export of special equipment in 1964. end of the Caribbean crisis, the USA promised not to attack Cuba, yet its aggressive acts and provocations did not stop.
Gives one’s consent to form a governmental delegation Service agents and contra revolutionaries, to import arms in to negotiate with Cuba’s governmental delegation and the country and thus to sustain tensions in Cuba.
The USA sign a protocol for the supply of special property in 1964 undertook new measures for economic repression against in Cuba.
Cuba and exerted influence on the capitalist countries to tighten the economic embargo.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 64,e.4; translated by Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova; Edited by Dr.
January 1964 The USSR and the socialist countries backed up the Cuban revolution, ready to perform their international duty to INFORMATION defend, at any rate, the Cuban peoples’ revolutionary achievements against the imperialists’ aggression.
These circumstanc547 es strengthened the Republic of Cuba’s international position This comprehensive assistance, which was self-evident and increased its authority amongst the Latin American and in all spheres of life, shattered all attempts of the slanderous other countries.
At the basis of this behavior is the Cuban leaders’ will to emphasize their unyielding attitude towards the American We must note that during both visits a lot of political, imperialists and their attempt to assert themselves as the most economic and other issues were discussed; joint declarations ardent defenders of the peoples of Latin America, Africa, and of the two countries on the countries’ attitudes towards even Asia. the international situation and to issues concerning Cuba A positive fact is that recently there have been certain signs were signed.
These are valuable political and state docuof improvement of the situation in this respect, especially after ments on the further activities of the two countries.
These Fidel Castro’s second visit to Moscow, but it is still early to are documents with which the USSR has added to Cuba’s draw conclusions. international prestige as a country and Fidel Castro’s personal As a result of the Cuban government’s policy and the authority as a state leader.
Of considerable importance to the USSR’s and other socialist countries’ fraternal help, the Cuban people is the signed long-term economic agreement “walls” built by American imperialism around Cuba have for the sale of sugar to the Soviet Union that places the ecobeen demolished. nomic relations between the two countries on a new basis and marks a new stage in the economic cooperation between the two.
Similar relations of fraternal solidarity are being estabAs in the preceding years, so in the year that has just ended, lished between Cuba and the other socialist countries.
The the USSR thoroughly backed the Cuban people’s attempts latter saw the great economic difficulties that Cuba was faced to build a socialist society in the country and their heroic with and offered economic and scientific help as far as they struggle against the American imperialists’ aggressive acts. could afford it.
In the current accounts of their balance sheets The USSR would not allow the life of the country to the result was positive balances.
Because of its internal and be interrupted due to the lack of petrol, it would not allow external difficulties, Cuba was not able to make up for them.
It helped Cuba tries helped Cuba in accordance with the fraternal relations to strengthen its defense.
In October 1962 it stopped the and international solidarity that existed among them. campaign to overrun the country.
The USSR paid great When the natural disaster, the cyclone “Flora,” befell attention to and cared for the internal difficulties Cuba was Cuba, the socialist countries were the first to offer not only experiencing when transforming its life, economy, and state symbolic, but effective help so that the damage incurred is organization.
It helped with the training of personnel, and the promptly made up for. education of the army.
Thousands of young people went to the Soviet Union to study in its plants, collective farms, and universities.
A great part of them came back in 1963 and were sent to work at different sites in the country.
This munist parties, Cuba’s leaders undertook a centralist position would have corresponded to both Fidel Castro’s stand on the in the ideological dispute between the CPSU and the other agreement in the beginning and to the Cuban people’s desires. communist and workers’ parties, on the one hand, and the It didn’t do that and practically doubted the correctness Chinese CP, on the other.
They created favorable conditions of the Soviet Union’s and other socialist countries’ peaceful for Chinese propaganda.
It In terms of its foreign policy Cuba has a special underpublished the letters between the CPSU and the ChCP withstanding and attitude toward the Latin American countries out expressing a clear and definite opinion on them, without and their revolutionary struggle.
It takes for granted the acquainting its party members and the people with its stand existence of a revolutionary situation in all Latin American on this important question of the revolutionary struggle.
The party members and the people were given the “freedom” to Cuban leaders declare all Latin American communist parorient themselves alone. ties, not adopting their line of behavior old, defeatist, unable The role of the Chinese embassy in Havana in this respect to undertake a revolutionary struggle and seek other social was very pernicious.
Similar was their attitude to the ditions that were created in order to carry out the basest Costa Rica, Honduras, Ecuador and Peru parties, inflicting anti-Soviet campaign.
The same bulletin also distorted always be created if there exists a group of brave people to the statements of important comrades from the fraternal become partisans /guerrillas/ and lead the people to a revolucountries, caused disputes on definite issues with the aim of tionary struggle. blurring the working class’s political ideas.
Moreover, another widespread view among them is that The Cuban leaders find the “theoretical” works of some Cuba is entitled to lead the revolutionary struggle in Latin Chinese theoreticians especially appealing and they rely on America and that is why they abruptly interfere with the them in their practice.
There is also a tendency to lead the antibuilding of socialism on their own; to the ways the working imperialist struggle not only in America but on other class should seize power etc. continents as well.
So when we talk of Cuba’s “own line of Quite interesting is Cuba’s attitude to the Moscow agreebehavior,” we have to take into consideration these peculiariment on a partial ban of the nuclear weapons experiments. ties of its foreign policy.
On the very next day after the agreement had been signed in In spite of all this we must note that there is a tendency to Moscow Fidel Castro declared in his speech that the agreeeliminate mistakes to clarify the party’s line and foreign ment on stopping the nuclear weapons experiments is “a vicpolicy to the socialist countries.
This was particularly tory of the world conscience of peace, a victory of the Soviet evident after Fidel Castro’s second visit to the Soviet Union.
People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Cuba Political relations We should also mention here that the Soviet Union and The relations between the two countries in the preceding our country were the only ones to send a youth specialist briperiod were constantly developing, expanding and strengthgade to help the Cuban agriculture.
This visit was important ening. not only for the technical support for the Cuban agriculture but for the solidarity expressed by our Youth communist In the first place, our political relations with Cuba develorganization /Comsomol/ to the Cuban Union of young oped under the conditions created after the Caribbean crisis. communists.
A lot of friendship activities took place and the Our country, together with the other Warsaw Pact countries young people came to know each other better in their work showed complete solidarity and support for the Cuban revoactivities.
Some vague points in the events that took place during the two youth organizations, not taking into consideration the crisis were gradually clarified, in spite of the propaganda the Soviet Union.
These relations between Soviet Union during the Caribbean crisis, due to the withthe two youth communist organizations should, in one way drawal of the missiles, was felt towards our country and our or other, continue in the future. specialists here as well.
Life proved the correctness of the way the crisis was resolved and the nuclear war avoided; and what was very important for Cuba – the salvation of the 2.
More and more people were becoming convinced that the socialist countries of the Warsaw Pact had The economic relations between the People’s Republic defended Cuba and helped avoid the immediate threat for of Bulgaria and Cuba improved a lot.
The idea that Cuba’s economic problems had to be amounted to 20,640,000 dollars in the two countries.
First, we should mention our government’s number of specialists sent to Cuba.
The current year laid out support for Cuba against the aggressive North American the basis of a close scientific and technical cooperation, which, imperialist acts in front of the international organizations, from now , will develop on a larger scale.
We should also mention the manifested this is a significant success, a result of the Embassy’s and solidarity with the Cuban revolution in our country; the conCommercial Representative’s efforts to improve the economic tribution of the press and radio in this respect, the delegations relations between the two countries. which were exchanged.
And finally, we should mention the In spite of all that was mentioned above, the economic scientific and technical help and the help offered when the cooperation between the countries did not reach the cyclone struck the eastern part of the country. level the opportunities that Mentioning these solidarity acts the Cuban existed between the two fraternal countries.
Both the trade people and revolution, we should emphasize the positive role and the scientific and technical help to Cuba could be greater, played by some of these in bringing the could be realized on a larger scale. two countries closer and in strengthening and improving the relations between them.
In the second place, we should mention the significant role played by the exchange of delegations in improving the The drawbacks of our practical economic cooperation political relations between the two countries.
The exchange of with Cuba became most evident during the trade negotiadelegations on different levels is extremely important.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.80; translation ables were taken into consideration.
The conclusions, that there are suitable conditions in [Source, TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 51,e.; translated Cuba and more open and purposeful propaganda activities are by Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova; Edited by Dr.
However, establishing a cultural center Baev.] could not achieve our goal in this respect.
G Grozev Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba, it is considered expedient to: 1.
They had established and maintained close Popular de Bulgaria – La Habana contacts with organizations outside the communist parties.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Second Department tunity to take the political power by peaceful means, a matter CC BCP, Department “Foreign Policy & International debated at the 20th Congress of the CPSU as a dogma; thus Relations” they had neglected and discarded all other means to achieve this political goal.
The conference of the Latin American communist parties Almost all delegates were unanimous on the second issue was called upon the initiative of Uruguay’s and Argentine’s of the unity and solidarity of the international workers’ and communist parties.
The proposal to convene was made in communist movement, the danger of it being split up as a July last year, when many representatives of these parties took result of the harmful impact of the activities of China’s party part in the celebrations on the occasion of the tenth annileaders.
According to the available inforunity and solidarity of the international workers’ and commation, this delegation was highly appreciated in the Soviet munist movement, the danger of it being split up in factions Union.
The attitude towards it in China was just the opposite and the measures necessary to preserve and consolidate its it faced an attitude of reservation and formality, which is unity, on the other.
However, the socialist countries to inform of the conference’s work. relations between our parties are unsatisfactory.
The following exchange of views on the conference’s work and results shows that it’s decisions are defined as positive.
Proceeding from the resolution of Politburo for bolsterThe Conference is viewed as an initial attempt to put the ing of the relations with the fraternal countries, we consider struggle against imperialism on a broader and more organized that on our behalf we have to display an initiative for the base using the experience of each party without interfering expansion and consolidation of the relations between our in its internal affairs.
Our ambassador in Havana made a suggestion in Revolution is a common deal, and has to be developed having this spirit, as well.
On behalf of Cuba, Raul Castro demonin mind the concrete circumstances in each country.
It is also strated willingness for such an expansion during his visit to confirmed that the Communist parties are the leading force Bulgaria last year.
Hubenov/ secretary of CC for exchange of experience in the sphere of party construction and agriculture.
Yet the relations Bulgarian Embassy, Havana, Report on the between our parties are unsatisfactory.
In the same lines, a suggestion Havana, 31 March, 196625 was made by our Ambassador in Havana.
A readiness for such an expansion was demonstrated by Raul Castro durCuba was the first Latin American country to free itself of ing his visit last year in our country as well as by Osmani the imperialist yoke and take up the road of socialism.
Apart from that, Cuba proved to be an example to follow by the masses of people in Latin America, and 1.
The “Rabotnichesko delo” newspaper, the “Novo ed and overlooked, and cause our concern.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.64; translated by and quite different from Europe and North America.
CPSS and the international communist movement); he Thus the fears, relating to Cuba’s firm insistence that the also declared that no influence on Latin America was to be Tricontinental Conference be held in Havana, are reinforced. allowed, no matter where it came from.
Union and some other socialist countries discuss the problems of providing assistance to Cuba and outlining the prospects of its economic development.
Fidel Castro has made self-criticism several times ment of powerful united fronts in the countries of Latin before representatives of these parties; he claims that he has America, underestimates the role of the communist parties, not been informed on separate issues and has, therefore, and encourages terrorism in these countries. made wrong judgments and statements.
The Latin American The Latin American communist parties, or least most of parties can best discuss Latin America’s problems in depth, as them, are being blamed for the lack of a pro-active attitude as well as the problems of the revolutionary movements in this well as for being too theoretically-minded, unwilling to start part of the world. a revolution.
It is necessary that the contacts and meetwilling to start an armed struggle without any delay. ings with the Cuban comrades be more frequent, as well as the exchange visits of delegations.
The Cuban will always support such a struggle, in case it is relevant and comrades’ ambitions and infatuation collide with reality; it is appropriate in the context of a country’s particular revolutionreality that will help them overcome these problems.
However, we cannot adopt the view that armed a small country and its economic resources are limited for its struggle is the only means of struggle, and that the action taken leaders to become leaders on a world scale. by the guerrilla forces must start simultaneously in all Latin It is obvious that whatever measures are decided upon to American countries, irrespective of the specific situation in each provide assistance to Cuba’s party, it would take a long time to country.
We cannot maintain that correcting certain istic attitude, which results from the desire to turn the Cuban wrong views will be an easy task.
The Cuban comrades need revolution into an example to follow and an objective law of more time to arrive at the right conclusions.
Even less acceptable is the policy information of this kind will be directed at analyzing Cuba’s adopted by the Cuban leaders to organize the armed struggle positive experience, will hopefully come. abroad, disregarding the communist parties’ stance.
The latter results in substituting the socialist revolution’s objective laws Havana with petty bourgeois views of the revolutionary process.
Jordan Baev.] countries work in all industries of the national economy.
Training Cuban security officers in Bulgaria, 8 June 1966 RESOLUTION “B” No 8 Information on Latin America and Cuba: OF THE SECRETARIAT OF THE CENTRAL delivery of weapons to Cuba and Latin COMMITTEE OF THE BULGARIAN COMMUNIST America, 2 November 1966 PARTY FROM 8 JUNE 1966 To comrade Ivan Bashev The CC BCP Secretariat approves the proposal that Comrade Minister of Foreign Affairs Piňeiro visit our country.
We can accept 30 people for training Sofia only on counterintelligence work.
During my meeting with comrade Mora I told him that I could not attend the· first meeting of the plenum, where the issue about the festival was posed.
He informed me that COMRADE ATANAS KULBOV such a decision was already adopted.
Its sense was that in case MEMORANDUM that a resolution was adopted the festival to be conducted in From Petar Marinkov, Third secretary at the Embassy of PR Europe, in Sofia, Cuba would not take part in it.
Elucidating the reasons which had provoked those Cuban resolutions on that issue, comrade Mora told me that the Comrade Ambassador, meeting of the organization committee would be only a facade and even a farce, because an already adopted resolution Last week, at my request, I met twice comrade Lazaro where the festival will be held would be sanctioned at it.
Long Mora, Secretary for the international relations of the National ago WFDY stopped to be an independent international orgaCommittee of the Union of the Young Communists.
In relation to this the letter to the organization committee, in which they would counselor at the Polish embassy in Havana, comrade Curus, state their position.
He added that one of the reasons not has informed our counselor, comrade Cohen, that the editor to participate in this meeting is that they did not want to of the Polish youth newspaper, who was in Cuba on the occaenter into bitter discussions with the delegations because by sion of the 8th anniversary of the revolution, has accidentally no means would they like to spoil their relations with some attended the first meeting of the plenum, and during the youth unions.
He told me that Cuba wanted to conduct a closed-door meeting a resolution was adopted by voting to festival of the young revolutionaries, who immediately after it the effect that Cuba should not participate in the festival and would be ready to take to arms and to go to fight where the possibly organize a counter-festival. conditions require it.
Once again they suggested the festival I also visited the man in charge for the work with the to be conducted in Vietnam and if this could not be carried Soviet Comsomol in Cuba, comrade Shlyapnikov, who out, that the only other place, where the festival should be was accompanying the Soviet youth delegation led by the conducted, given the current situation, was Cuba.
And also, Secretary of the Soviet Comsomol CC Torsuev that also took that this is the personal wish of Fidel Castro who is the only part in the work of the plenum.
He said that outside the Prime Minister who made a public statement for Cuba to be official treatment of this issue in the report of Crombet, he the host of the festival.
Some issues of the preparation of the Ninth World the life of those students to require the trip of the Minister Festival of Youth and Students of Education and first secretary of the National Committee of the Union of the Young Communists.
In his conversation Comrades, with comrade Georgi Atanassov he announced that he would · visit Bulgaria at the time of the congress of our Comsomol.
As members of the organizing committee for the carrying out of the festival IOC we are also preparing to send a delegation of ours. and to support the position of Cuba.
For more lucidity I am going are two countries Bulgaria and Cuba. to present his opinion about the fulfillment of the separate The talks and the consultations up to date show that the clauses in the agreement. overwhelming majority of the organizations members of IOC made statements in favor of our nomination.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1053, Opis 9,e.; translation by Australia, Canada and Cyprus.
Six or seven organizations support the nomination of Cuba Guatemala, Venezuela, Congo , Japan, Indonesia, in one or other form the youth unions of Finland and Italy give their preference to the nomination of Cuba.
Moreover, as far as behind this conducted at the moment. explicit position stands the communist party of Cuba, as well, We want to note that recently the Cuban comrades display it is not impossible for this to affect the relations between immense activity, sending delegations to the different contiour countriesThe considerations of the majority of the youth nents, manipulating youth leaders and are extremely anxious organizations, including the most influential ones from Latin to stand up for their nomination.
WFDY suggested to us to consider whether it is not expediWhat is our opinion about what should be done in this ent to send a delegation of ours to Africa.
The other brotherly youth Sharing the above considerations, the Central Committee unions could do this.
We think that our nomination does not contradict the In our view, the Ninth festival, with its appeal and mobinomination of Cuba.
We regard it as we do any other one, as lizing power over the youth masses all over the world, based an opportunity.
We could welcome other nominations, which on the ideals for solidarity, peace, and friendship, must be a will present an opportunity for a better choice.
We showed powerful, large-scale political demonstration of the activity that this is so with our positive attitude to the previous two and the unity of the world democratic youth. resolutions of the IOC about Algeria and Ghana.
And now Together with this, we are for a festival open to all powwe are also ready, if the international youth movement decides ers that want to participate in it, a festival that gives a full that it will be more expedient for the festival to be conducted opportunity for broad discussions and numerous meetings of in another country, not to protest and to participate in such different youth powers. a festival.
Therefore, from political point of view we are willing to ensure full success of the festival.
G ATANASSOV requisites needed for such a successful festival are available in our country.
Cuban comrades and to the fact that some youth unions support them at the forthcoming meeting of the IOC for the decision in favor of our nomination not to be adopted unanimously and for some unions to make a statement that they do not support such a festival.
Of course, we do not assume the possibility that the Union of the young communists in Cuba would sever its relations INFORMATION with the WFDY. by G Grozev, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs This depends to a large extent on the position of the youth organizations from Africa.
Cuba’s leadership does not share the views of the USSR and the other socialist countries of the peaceful co-existence It is well known that the Cuban government has adopted policy that these countries have been conducting.
Cuba a strange stance on the issues of party and state construction refused to sign the Treaty on Nuclear Tests Ban; Cuba does and organization in Cuba; similar positions relate to the not approve of establishing diplomatic and trade relations international communist movement and its development in with the capitalist Latin American countries, pointing out the contemporary international situation.
In this respect the resolution of OLAS proponents of the “July 26th” Movement.% of the Central was adopted.
Up to the end of 1965 Fidel of actively assisting Latin America’s revolutionary moveCastro openly opposed the Chinese leaders, for there was a ment, thus facilitating the reactionary regime’s activity conflict of interests between the Chinese and Cuban ambiaimed at enhancing terrorism and establishing the so called tions about playing a central political part in Latin America.
The Chinese leaders’ ideolDespite all mistakes made, there is a general conviction ogy and policies have not been condemned yet.
Even though that the core of Cuba’s leadership consists of frank funcwe cannot maintain, that the Cubans have actually adopted tionaries committed to their people’s cause, unaware of their China’s policies, they have adopted the same positions on mistaken views and sincerely believing that they have adopted certain issues, such as peaceful co-existence, material benefits the right policy in the interest of the revolutionary process. and building up socialism.
A large part of the Cuban leaders’ views of the world revolutionary movement’s strategy and tactics, in general, and Latin America’s, in particular, are contradictory to MarxismPolitical, economic and cultural relations between the Leninism’s basic postulates and principles.
Presuming the People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Cuba false postulate that the conditions for starting a revolution were established after the triumph of the Cuban Revolution.
Bulgarian musicians are also working in Cuba at and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Fidel Castro’s present.
Although they are constantly talking about internationalism, their actions are essentially nationalistic.
Third, without taking into account certain traits of Castro’s All these circumstances affect our relations with Cuba, and personality, it will be difficult to analyze Cuba’s domestic and set up obstacles to the further progress of political relations. foreign policy.
In his activity Fidel Castro is an idealist, and, in many Notes on certain aspects of Cuba’s foreign policy and its atticases, an adventurer.
He would like to establish a new social tude towards the international communist movement order, ignoring socialism’s basic laws, and the CPSU’s experience, and seeking an independent “peculiar” manner of solvFor the last five or six months there has been no visible ing both international and domestic problems. change in Cuba’s foreign policy.
Despite the fact that he calls himself a Marxist-Leninist, he is unable to make a Marxist analysis of all facts and events.
The different opinions relate to almost all basic issues of edness, the over-estimation of his own strengths the communist movement.
Douglas Bravo made efforts to split the party, and these For the last two years the Cuban conceptions about their were attempts to make the party give in.
On the other hand, “own” way of development and the international communist there were unscrupulous/ruthless attacks coming from Cuba. movement have been clearly shaped.
Within a short period of All these attacks against the party––organized by people time the gap between Cuba and the international communist outside Cuba and people within Cuba completely failed. movement has seriously widened, affecting a number of core These attempts proved to be futile.
His guerilla group’s action present-day issues; this gap actually set a new trend in their showed no development or success. relations and was a result of the peculiarities of the Cuban revolution.
That attitude was demonstrated by made by Romania’s delegation were published.
For months on end, the the conference’s closure, there was a special edition Cuban comrades have been putting off answering comrade of the same bulletin, which published all of the Andropov’s request to visit, thus actually canceling it.
Romanian delegation’s materials and documents, [as There have been cases of representatives of the other frawell as] the conference’s resolutions and comments ternal parties, secretaries of the Central Committees of the in favor of the behavior of the Romanian delegation.
Mexican, Columbian or Venezuelan parties, coming to Cuba to have talks on debatable issues; Castro would keep them For the last several years Cuba’s policy has increasingly diswaiting for 10 or 15 days in Havana and finally would not tanced from the international communist movement, have any meetings with them. and has even openly opposed it at times.
Cuba’s policy is • Lenin’s theory can not be further developed; targeted at setting up such a political bloc, comprising of • The international communist movement’s significance smaller socialist countries and of those that tend to distance is refuted, for its strategy and means of struggle are themselves from the standard ideological postulates. considered outdated.
There is evidence that shows that such a policy is adopted to distract our attention from the USSR, and this bloc is B) Here are some facts that attest to these differences. established to oppose the USSR; thus Cuba wants to show Cuba is known to have taken part in the Budapest that it is getting along well with all other countries, except Conference of the fraternal parties; however its press the USSR. gave no releases on this conference.
Cuba’s brutal intervention in their internal affairs and stimulating adventurism, has nothing to do with the brotherly It is well known that the Cuban leaders have undertaken concern about their position and attempts to assist them in a mass-scale attack against Latin America’s communist parties their work. during the preparation of the OLAS conference.
Venezuela’s rate member of the party leadership; another factor that may example was followed.
Then the groups united with Ion Sosa’s provoke adopting such a political course may be the guersquad, when Sosa was elected first officercommander, and rilla groups that have been established within the countries, Montez––second officer-commander.
These attacks against despite the disapproval of the communist party. the party brought about a crisis in their relations with the This threat is more than probable.
The latsome of the parties in the Dominican Republic, Honduras ter are members of the pro-China group in Nicaragua. and Brazil, and some others.
Cuba keeps maintaining that it is much easier to achieve Insinuations about the USSR’s exerting pressure on Cuba understanding with the smaller socialist countries; that we have been maintained in a hidden form.
Insinuations about have many things in common, and that our experience might the USSR’s exerting pressure on Cuba can still be assumed. well be the guiding light for Cuba building socialism.
Some Cuban leaders still argue that Cuba does not conOr as Castro pointed out in his speech of 30th May, the duct an anti-Soviet policy, and that the present situation is countries that are exposed to the danger of imperialism, such transitional and a result of a micro-faction’s action.
However as Cuba and the German Democratic republic, have to work that is not so.
Soviet Union is becoming a well-considered policy of the Cuban leaders.
On our work in Cuba and the further development of dor to Havana and Fidel Castro, the latter maintained that our relations. the Soviet Union is unwilling to help Cuba and that is has adopted an incorrect policy towards Cuba.
He was The development of relations between Cuba and the Soviet very distanced and did not show any willingness to seek ways Union will determine Cuba’s future relations with the socialist to improve contacts and normalize relations.
Moreover, these relations will determine the future press release about this meeting. policy adopted by Cuba’s leaders.
The lack of tribute paid to the USSR’s role and the disThe problems in the relations between Cuba and the gracing of the Soviet Union has lasted for years.
The negative attitudes were supposed to fade leaders insist that the parties adopt their assessments, away and be overcome with time. methods and forms of struggle.
According to the Cuban In 1964 Fidel Castro visited the Soviet Union for a secperspective, the Cuban Revolution will be exposed to the ond time.
The documents signed gave rise to confidence risk of being invaded by imperialism, unless the revolution that problems resulting from the Caribbean crisis were being is triumphant on the whole continent.
This policy totally contradicts Cuba’s policy in Latin On the further development of our relations in the present America.
We have been blamed not only for helping people situation that kill the partisans, but for the regimes that are boycotting Cuba as well.
All circumstances, outlined so far, will obviously determine b) Cuba opposes the policy of peaceful co-existence, the further development of our relations. considering it a form of reconciliation with imperialism.
As we have already pointed out, Cuba’s leaders have manifested a positive attitude towards our country and party.
However, the facts show that the penetration and the Moscow influence of the socialist countries are falling behind the Dear comrade Ponomarev, development of the progressive tendencies in this region of the world.
However, the policy of the USA and the local reactionThe communist parties, the trade unions, the youth, the ary regimes meets bigger and bigger resistance on behalf women’s and the other public and state organizations and of the peoples of Latin America.
They are fighting for true institutes from the socialist countries do not coordinate sufsovereignty, for economic independence and social liberation, ficiently their efforts in Latin America. which Rockefeller, too, was forced to admit after From all this we arrive at the conclusion that the fraternal his tour in Latin America.
The struggles of the working socialist countries should discuss coordinated actions for class, the peasants and the students are growing.
They are ensuring a constantly increasing participation and influence more and more characterized by mass participation, organized in the economics, the politics and the culture of the Latincharacter and political purposefulness.
The social basis of the American countries depending on the interest which they anti-imperialist struggle is broadening and new layers and present for us and for the common struggle against imperialforces join it including certain circles from the army and ism, to develop and to implement a common strategy and the Catholic Church, and in separate cases, from the ruling tactics in relation to Latin America so that these countries and circles.
The communist parties, with all their weaknesses their peoples can gradually be won as our friends.
Above all, its realized that there was a socialist community, that the Soviet decisive advance can very soon be felt in the economic, politiUnion existed in the world, as well as a powerful communist cal and cultural life of Latin America.
But the opportunities with which COMECON be summoned , at which the possibilities for the brotherly socialist countries, and first of all the USSR, coordinating and implementing our policy and [strengthendispose of, are such that even at relatively no big share in the ing] our comprehensive relations with the countries of Latin economic sphere, the coordination and the increase of our America will be discussed.
If you think that it is necessary, participation in all spheres of life in Latin America inevitably we are willing to go to Moscow in order to inform the will yield the results that we wish.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.58; translation aid their policy for wringing themselves out of the paws by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] of imperialism and for independent development of the country.
But, he also empha573 I The information of comrade Boris Velchev about the visit We can consider as unanimous the positive assessment about of the party-governmental delegation led by comrade Todor the work of the delegation and about the results of its visit Zhivkov in the Republic of Cuba from 25 July till 1 August to Cuba. this year is accepted.
The activities of the delegation and the The motion for drafting a special resolution in relation results of the conducted talks and negotiations are approved to the visit of the delegation and the further expansion of and highly valued. the relations and the cooperation of our country with the Republic of Cuba is correct.
The leaders of the fraternal parties in the socialist counof this circumstance in developing our approach to Cuba. tries, besides the Socialist Republic of Romania, to be informed about the visit of our party-governmental delegation in Republic of Cuba. About the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
That is why their hesitation and obscure concepts on a number of basic issues of the revolution and of the construction of socialism are not a coincidence.
However, on the following day he About the visit of our party-governmental delegation in Cuba told us about the production of their state factory for shoes. from 25 July to 1 August 1970 disclosed at a meeting of He boasted that their shoes were very cheap.
However, they Politburo in August 4th sell them three times more expensively and in this way they this year by comrade Boris Velchev collect revenue from the population and effect accumulation.
Like the other Cuban leaders, Castro thinks that coverIn order to assess correctly the results from the visit of our ing money with goods in general is impossible and that delegation in Cuba we should be reminded at what moment this problem can be resolved only with rations, it took place. partially at that.
We can definitely say that we visited Cuba at a favorable In this respect, too, the Cuban friends need assistance moment.
It is in order to gradually adopt the scientific understanding of expressed in the aspirations of the Cuban party and state leadthis matter and to convince themselves that this can be done ers on a number of basic issues of the development of Cuba gradually by the creation of industrial and commodity funds and its international activities to be founded upon Marxistand by the development of the industrial powers and the Leninist principles and to cooperate more closely with the construction of modern socialist economics.
However, these comrades are sensitive of the socialist construction. and, therefore, we have to work very carefully and sincerely and to apply a special approach.
The Cuban leaders adopt a course of rapprochement and we were not working in this way.
Let’s take for example the all-embracing cooperation with the USSR and the other issue with our specialists in Cuba.
The same applies the main prerequisites for the success of socialism in Cuba. to payment of the leaves of these people and their families.
The leaders more and more definitely make statements About our aid and the Soviet aid for Cuba and the develfor unity of the socialist community and of the international oping countries.
The aid is enormous but it is scattered in communist movement, while supporting the claim that this dozens of countries and in a lot of cases it turns into consumshould happen on a bilateral basis.
There is still a reservation ers’ aid, without playing the role of a factor for the developtowards the documents at the meeting in Moscow ment of the productive forces of these countries and and towards the importance and the role of our common being a constructive factor in their economies.
In many cases organizations, for example COMECON. the effect of this aid is diminished and sometimes it is even 4.
It able for them. was obvious that they had not seen the problems of the scienThus, for example, we agreed not to mention anywhere tific and technical progress in such a way.
Their motive was that the sion that the words of comrade Todor Zhivkov sounded to world was well aware of the relations of Cuba and Bulgaria them as if in an unknown language.
Comrade Fidel Castro with the USSR and that it referred to bilateral relations and it displayed keen interest and a few times asked how and when was not necessary to speak about a third party. we had discovered all this and whether it was the same in the Also they made it clear that they will not cede. other socialist countries.
The other Everyone understands that if on this and on some other comrades did the same. issues we had not displayed the necessary flexibility, it could We could not implement fully this scheme in our tactics have only harmed our efforts to attain the major goal, which not to argue with them and not to moralize, but to tell them we sought after. more about our experience (how we overcame the difficulties, We agreed not to mention the communist parties of Latin how we resolved the problems, and so on) because the time America, but as it is said in the Communiqué the Marxistwas not enough.
And obviously, it was necessary to talk with Leninist ideas and the communists. them more about some other very important problems of the Something else, not to speak about the interconstruction of socialism. national meeting of the communist parties, since they were Such are the specifics, which first of all, comrade T. not actual participants in it.
And in these circumstances, we could not included passages that both parties would fight for the unity but attain good results. of the world socialist system and of the international movement, as well as for intensifying the anti-imperialistic struggle.
From our behavior and from the offers we made them, they saw that From the Bulgarian delegation, comrades Todor Zhivkov, we have come with an open heart.
Zhivkov gave them an opportunity to get a better sense of . our intentions.
From the Cuban side the meeting attended comrades Fidel Castro, Osvaldo Dorticos, Raul Castro, Sergio del Valle, Ramiro Valdez, and And something very important comrade Todor Zhivkov Armando Hart. posed the question for assistance on a broader basis.
The numbers, which comrade Zhivkov out a speaker. announced about the role of the foreign trade in the formation of the national revenue of Bulgaria, are very interesting.
The other thing, which interests Cuban friendship. us, is the foundation of trust among the socialist countries.
Nevertheless, but we are small countries and they do not fall in our radius we are improving our relations with the Soviet Union, with of action. which our connections have been developing very well recently, and we would like to develop our relations with Bulgaria.
It is the small pebbles that overturn Generally, our relations with the USSR and the other socialthe cart. ist countries are developing very well.
You told me about the trade, the trusts, and we benefit more from such cooperation.
We are interested in everything about Bulgaria, about do not wish to resolve our problems by creating difficulties for what we talked about and the prospects of COMECON. others, since all socialist countries have their own problems.
About COMECON we know only about the issues, which Bulgaria has no natural resources and you should work a lot in are affecting us directly.
For example, we know that the GDR order to overcome these difficulties.
We would like to cooperwill stop producing busses, that Poland will stop producing ate on issues of mutual interest. airplanes, and so on.
The administrative apparatus hinders the implemenplayed a big role for the development of the socialist countations of the resolutions of the political leadership. tries.
He concentrated on the role of COMECON for the However, we have to say that we are not complaining of victory of socialism in Bulgaria.
However, connection Fidel Castro expressed the position that it would this is already a reality and I want something which I know be better if there were common economics for all socialist is true, since comrade Zhivkov is already a friend of ours in countries and he asked where the crack, which Cuba could COMECON. squeeze in COMECON through, was.
They enjoy the confidence The visit of our party-governmental delegation, led by of the people and have set to build a socialist society with comrade Todor Zhivkov in Cuba in July 1970, marked a new great energy, and strive to develop comprehensive cooperaand higher stage in the development of the all-embracing relation with our countries. tions between Bulgaria and Cuba.
The delegation determined The bilateral Bulgarian-Cuban relations are developing that the positive process of rapprochement with the USSR successfully.
The economic and the scientific-technical coopand the socialist community, which was being observed in eration mark a constant advance.
Cuba occupies fifth place recent years, continued to develop and to intensify.
The in the foreign trade exchange of PRB with the socialist counmain problem of the Cuban leaders is the economic developtries.
The Cuban leaders especially appreciate the work of the ment of Cuba, along with resolving the issues Bulgarian specialists and the assistance, which our country building socialism in the country. renders in the training of personnel for the different sectors of the people’s economics.
The relaThe economic development of the Republic of Cuba after tions between the public organizations of the two countries the revolution in 1959 marks constant advance.
The relations and the cooperation along sector strengthened its basic position in the economy of the the culture line are constantly developing, too. country and the collective state property became leading in However, the opportunities for the further expansion and almost all branches in the national economy. intensification of our bilateral relations at the current success are not fully utilized, which was determined by the party-governmental delegation, led by comrade Todor However, the unresolved problems are many.
The difficulZhivkov. ties are still big and they additionally complicate the severe One of the reasons about this is that the information about conditions in Cuba, resulting mostly from the highly underthe situation in Cuba was incomplete and one-sided.
The developed economics, the economic embargo, the provocaCuban reality was assessed purely from our position. tions, the diversions and the sabotages of the North American It was approached from our viewpoint and experience for the imperialists.
The problem with housing is The positive things, which were done there, were not assessed acute; there is a lack of qualified personnel and so on. sufficiently.
Besides, a lot of mistakes have been made and are being approved by Politburo, the “Foreign policy and internamade on behalf of our economic units and enterprises, while tional relations” Department of CC of BCP and the Foreign fulfilling their obligations towards Cuba with respect to the Ministry suggests to Politburo to approve the enacted meamutual commodity circulation.
The agreed upon deadlines sures for the expansion of the all-embracing relations between are not observed in the shipment of commodities and in [the PR Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba.
The measures are precompletion of ] comprehensive projects, a great deal of our pared in accord with the motions and the recommendations products are sent with lower quality indices than the negotiof the ministries, the departments, the institutions, and the ated ones, the spare parts for the machines which we have sold organizations concerned with the expansion and the intensifiare not delivered on time and so on.
All this creates difficulties cation of the relations between the two countries. for the Cuban comrades and there is a danger that our country may lose the positions already won on the Cuban market, 15 December 1970 especially for agricultural machines.
K Tellalov for the continuation and observation of the clause, agreed upon with the signing of the long-term trade treaty between Foreign Minister: Ivan Bashev PR Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba for 1965-1970, for veto of export and re-export of sugar from Bulgaria.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.27; translation tion of that clause has exerted and will exert restricting influby Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev,.] ence on the development of the relations between Bulgaria and Cuba.
Sometimes in the musical and artistic INFORMATION exchange, the respective institutions are guided mainly by About the visit of the Cuban party-governmental delegation commercial interest and thus create difficulties for the norled by mal development of the cultural relations between the two comrade Fidel Castro in Bulgaria countries.
In the future, the relations between our country and Cuba The Politburo and personally comrade Zhivkov attached should be built and bolstered on the principles of Marxismgreat importance to that first visit of a delegation of such a Leninism and socialist internationalism and on mutual high rank led by comrade F Castro.
Not to insult their self-confidence and national digmore closely with the Soviet Union and the other socialist nity, to take into consideration comrade F Castro’s character countries, and, on the other hand, because of the existing and not to leave the impression that we are edifying them. sympathies and the established good relations between the 2.
To let them understand that we acknowledge their big two countries, and especially because of the friendly relations merits, their heroic deed, to let them feel our warmth, respect, between comrade T Zhivkov and comrade F Castro. and love personally towards comrade F Castro as a leader of the Cuban revolution.
With the correct approach, to create an atmosphere of tive process, which is taking place in Cuba now.
That is why full confidence and brotherhood. we took to the imminent task very seriously and responsibly.
Proceeding from the presented considerations, the particular sites for the visit were carefully chosen.
The program for First of all, the situation in Cuba, which Politburo and the negotiations itself and the work of the two delegations was especially comrade T Zhivkov know very well.
Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba the positive process continues but the problems remain the same.
It is said that it would be done but it On the very first day after the reception – 17 May, by is carried out slowly and it is not felt like something very request of comrade F Castro, outside the approved program, important in the construction of socialism.
Similar things there was a visit to the exhibition of new food products. can be pointed out about the leading role of the party, about After the presentation in the exhibition, an animated disthe bodies of the proletarian dictatorship, about the material cussion among the Cuban comrades, with the participation of interest and others. comrade T Zhivkov and especially comrade F Castro, took Before the visit of the delegation, we got hold of the inforplace.
Despite our efforts to explain to him that the commation that some leading comrades in Cuba were hoping modities are available and are sold in the shops, he [comrade that we would exert influence on comrade F Castro and that F Castro] continued to ask who was distributing the candies, the visit would turn into a lesson to show him the positive for example.
We explained to him that from the industry, experience of PR Bulgaria in the construction of socialism. the commodities were directed to the network of shops and Some Cubans who have been to Bulgaria told our specialists were available and sold to the people.
The Cuban comrades in Cuba – “show comrade F Castro how you built socialism, displayed a great interest how much sugar and we want such socialism in our country as well.” sugar products cost.
After Castro to be introduced to the methods of ruling the that they apologized and said that they had no intention to party and the state, to the role and the place of the party in discuss the price of sugar but they had asked simply for their the social system and, first of all, in the sphere of economics, own information.
It was obvious that they came with some and to the role of planning in the overall life of the country. prejudices, and also that the mechanism of price-formation 2.
On the way Union in the international communist and working-class back to the residence comrade Castro was interested in the movement to be strengthened and reservations in this structure of our export for the Soviet Union and the import respect to be overcome. and asked a lot of questions.
Our economic and scientific-technical cooperation to display a great interest, at that, on a broad range of issues, be improved and made more effective. which was good.
At the meeting between the two delegations, at suggestion made by comrade F Castro, After that comrade T Zhivkov declared that he fully comrade T Zhivkov was the first to speak.
An agreement understood the economic difficulties and that he was willing was reached that the issues of the international situation be to look for a common solution.
The statement of COMECON or something else is required said he, about comrade T Zhivkov evoked great interest.
As far panied with a great deal of questions and it turned into a as Bulgaria is concerned, we will take on our part of the comfriendly talk. mon task, no matter whether on multilateral or bilateral basis.
Because of comrade F the positive experience of Bulgaria and were of interest for Castro’s questions, the statement of comrade T Zhivkov was the Cuban delegation and most of all to comrade Castro. prolonged from one hour to two hours and a half.
Comrade Zhivkov guided all this directly and practically led Comrade Castro related in great detail about the hard those talks, or more precisely, seminars. capitalist legacy left to Cuba, about the country’s poor natural resources, and about the difficulties provoked by the sabotage activities of the American imperialists, who forced them to keep a large army.
Still, they have Comrade F Castro accepted with great interest everything success and they take measures for the further that was said, especially by comrade T Zhivkov.
However, development of their economy. it felt that these things were relatively new and to a certain Comrade Castro pointed out that the main production in extent foreign to him, and made a strong impression on him.
Although nobody insisted on repayment, they think that it is not proper to go on in this way.
Everything was accompanied with a lot of questions and As in the statement at the first meeting, at other occasions, great admiration on behalf of the Cuban comrades. too, comrade F Castro emphasized that the development of their economy had to be assisted, so that the country would be saved from poverty.
Comrade rizing everything learned and seen, and analyzed the Castro expressed very clearly their critical attitude and their results attained, he began to praise our achievements more confusion.
During the visit to our country, they expressed, in and more persistently, emphasizing that no other one way or another, their dissatisfaction with visit but Bulgaria would show best the advantages of the socialist , and they could not understand agricultural system, that the country would reach the it correctly.
During comrade T Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba these issues were The Cuban comrades highly appreciate the fact that the first discussed in detail on a large scale with a view of creating a visit of a leader of such a rank is from Bulgaria.
And what is model for cooperation between the two socialist countries, more important, it has had an extremely favorable effect on employing all possibilities.
At the meeting with Politburo, program for the directions and the prospects of this cooperathey emphasized once again that it was not a coincidence that tion is being developed. their first visit for now in a socialist country was in Bulgaria.
On leaving Bulgaria, comrade Bravo (deputy Prime Minister) and comrade Naranjo (Minister of Food Industry) declared that they were very pleased with the visit It is deemed expedient to explore the possibility for and that they were convinced that it was the best one, which assembling electronic calculators and electronic calculating had left most wonderful impressions on them. machines in Cuba.
We accepted the motion to share our experience in the application of the electronic-calculating About some conclusions and suggestions equipment in the organization and the management of agricultural-industrial complexes.
We pointed out the big The bulk of work completed gave and will give its positive experience of our country in the sphere of non-ferrous metalresults.
Extremely lurgy and we offered to develop our cooperation in the sphere useful work was done for our bilateral relations and for our of geological mining and in the delivery of equipment for common cause.
We created very favorable preconditions for mines, ore-dressing factories and metallurgic works for extracthe meetings of the other brotherly socialist countries with the tion of lead, zinc and copper.
An important Leninism and proletarian internationalism, to cooperate with stage in the singular development of the revolutionary and our countries and first of all, with the USSR, and they are communist movement in Cuba is completed. strongly opposed to imperialism.
Deep qualitative changes in the economy (industry and agriculture), culture, ideological life, which determine the socialist character of the Cuban revolution.
Strengthening and consolidating of the hegemonic stage, it is very important that our countries assist decisively role of the working class and of its union with the rural masses the economic development of Cuba, which will play a posiand the progressive intelligence. tive role for its still closer rapprochement with the socialist community.
It is necessary to start working comprehensively for the main directions in the development of the party, the state, the implementation of the program, and to this end, to look the economy, as well as the political line are outlined. for and to reveal new resources.
In his report Fidel Castro indirectly criticized the Chinese We are representatives not only of communist parties but also leaders and their policy.
The passage in our greeting, in which of states. the Maoists were openly condemned, was loudly applauded by the congress.
It can be said that now we are picking the fruit that we planted in due time.
I have to say that on the documents the Program platform, the project for Constitution, the directives and the Statutes About the prospects of Bulgarian-Cuban relations. which were sanctioned by the Congress and about which we gave positive assessment, have been developed by a group The necessary objective and subjective prerequisites for of Soviet comrades.
It shows strengthening and deepening of these relations exist. that Fidel Castro and the leaders of the Cuban communist About the activities of the Bulgarian-Cuban commitparty do not only make a turn towards us and first of all, to tee for economic cooperation.
We have to take measures to the Soviet Union, but also that they coordinate most closely consolidate it. their foreign and domestic affairs with the Soviet comrades. About some unresolved economic issues (the price of This is very pleasing.
Because it is good that they treat sugar, our late deliveries of equipment and so on). us well, but if they do not treat well the Soviet Union – this Problems in the sphere of culture. would be bad. There is a requirement on behalf of Cuba for new speIn conversation with Fidel Castro I asked him to give the cialists fitters.
We have to discuss this issue and improve the floor first not to me, but to Janos Kadar.
For each of them it has to be is something in our economic cooperation, in our trade, just determined what post he is going to occupy, because when say, and we will arrange it.
We are ready to do everything for they go there, they begin to fight who the leader will Bulgaria, but without declaring it , so that the othbe.
And third, I want to come to Bulgaria, comrades that intercede are, we have to make a check to give but not in order to receive a generous welcome, but to talk them confidentially a note – so that we concern ourselves with you.” very seriously with these intrusions.
We send there people Those were the talks that I had with him on different who discredit our country.
We talked with comrade Stanko Todorov41 and comrade About some new forms of cooperation between Bulgaria and Tano Tzolov42 and we think that we must not dramatize the Cuba. disruption that took place in our trade.
The Soviet Union gives everything. Fidel Castro promised to come to Bulgaria before or after They provide for the whole army.
Now, let’s come to an agreement and when Fidel Castro The expansion and the intensifying of the comprehensive comes, we will move forward to a broader cooperation and we relations with Cuba this is our international and patriotic will find a way to make up for the losses.
We must not lose it because of the trade relaThis is the most important.
Besides, they are on the right path, they have [estabquestions regarding our visit. lished] ties with the Soviet Union and they remain true to the Soviet Union.
Jorge Dimitrov y el movimiento 20 Karlo Lukanov – Minister of Foreign Affairs . revolucionario en América Latina, , 5-61.
London , but in July 1971 was elected a member of 3 TsDA, Fond 1053, Opis 6,e., 92, 237, 388. the State Council , and from 1974 until his death in 4 Dokumenti I materiali za sutrudnichestvoto mezhdu BCP I 1987 served as Vice Chairman of State Council.
Baev, Jordan , Bulgaria in the Cold 27 CC BCP Secretary , Vice Prime Minister and War.
Baev, Jordan 30 First Secretary of Dimitrov’s Communist Youth Union , Bulgarian Intelligence & Security Services in the , head of a CC BCP department , CC BCP Cold War years.
Havana Andrei Apostolov even tried later on to suggest a definition 32 Minister of Foreign Affairs . for the specific model of “tropical bureaucratic socialism” in Cuba.
BCP Secretariat, which in a shorter version was sent in March 1970 15 After Iraqi nationalist revolution on 14 July 1958 there was to Ponomarev.
On 10 June 1970 CC BCP Politburo approved Boris armed split among the new military junta and an attempt on life of Velchev’s final proposal “On activation of the BCP and PRB relations its leader Gen.
Todor Zhivkov was a CC BCP political 42 Deputy Prime Minister and a Politburo member. representative at the brigade.
Ambassador During Fidel Castro’s visit, it was most important that he emphasized the need for unity in the international communist and workers’ movement.
According to the Bulgarian comrades’ evaluation, as a result of the visit the Soviet-Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs alliance has become consolidated to a large extent, and Budapest they think that it was the first time that Fidel Castro had talked so clearly about the rightness of the Soviet Union’s approach to solving the crisis.
For additional translations of Hungarian documents doubt that the great majority of the Cuban leaders repreon Cuba and the missile crisis, see the compilation of such materials sented the correct position in the argument with the Chinese, elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
By equating the two actions, Tito fully identified sympathies towards the Yugoslav President.
Coupled with his with the non-aligned standing, in collision with the Soviet own access to top Cuban leaders through his Ambassador in and Cuban position.
Secondly, Tito emphasized that the UN Havana, an association with Goulart offered Tito an opporwas the only legitimate forum for the resolution of this and tunity to exert more influence on events, albeit indirect, than similar crises.
Again, this reflects the Non-aligned precept—to he would otherwise have had. wrestle global issues away from the exclusive prerogative of the The documents presented here confirm the Yugoslav superpowers to the UN where the Third World has a voice.
Secondly, the Yugoslav President felt strong that Cuban decision-making during the crisis was a result of sympathy towards Goulart, who was perceived as “progreslong discussions and evaluations within a wider collective, sive” and left-leaning but not a communist.
Illustrative convinced that Brazil would have participated at the Belgrade of the irritability and mood swings among the Cubans was Conference had it not been for very strong American presAmbassador’s warning to Belgrade on 29 October that the sure.
As the presented documents much to the later constant rivalry between the Cubans and confirm, Tito was informed of Goulart’s unique access and the Yugoslavs for the soul of the Non-Aligned Movement. continuous communication with Kennedy or his closest adviAmbassador Vidaković was, for example kept informed of sors throughout the crisis.
Tito’s Ambassador in Rio, Barišić, Cuban leadership’s deliberations when drafting a response to as evident from his reports, had intimate access (perhaps U Thant’s message.
He then pride truly suffered and Roa kept emphasizing that Castro’s concluded that only the Soviet aid and assistance could help declaration Cuba escape the catastrophe and that Castro better bear this was really more aimed at the Soviets than at the Americans.
At hard fact in mind. one point, according to the Ambassador, Roa exclaimed, “We Buoyed by the extent to which Cubans heeded their advice exist.
He then kept returning to decisive influence on Havana’s future “behavior,” namely its the theme of how “hard it is for the small ones when the big foreign policy orientation.
However, the “proposals” for the new global initiative of the Third World was evident in the change of “behavior” were certainly also aimed at eliminating congruence of views held between Yugoslavia, and active consistent Cuban radicalism that, in the name of “progresmember of the Movement, and Brazil, whose government siveness” and “socialism,” was undermining Yugoslav efforts was sympathetic to the non-aligned principles but outside the to strengthen the Non-Aligned Movement by increasing its Movement itself.
This, they believed, was possible only through views enabled the two countries to work in synchrony and the broadest inclusivity, regardless of countries’ ideological play a constructive role during the crisis.
The Yugoslav “proposals” also supplemented the gist also provide ample evidence of unknown closeness between of Brazilian President Goulart’s initiative (secretly instigated the Cuban leadership and the Yugoslavs during the crisis, in by Washington) for a longer term resolution of the crisis particular its critical days.
To many, it will be a surprise to that were conveyed to Fidel Castro by his Private Secretary learn how eager the Cubans were to take very seriously Tito’s and special envoy, General Da Silva, on 30 October.
Yugoslav indeed not only part of an effort to obtain a constructive Ambassador Vidaković’s unique access to high-level Cuban Cuba in the Non-Aligned Movement but to support Goulart’s leaders throughout the crisis enabled him to observe and initiative. report on the personal drama, insecurities, and doubts that The Cubans, however, must have perceived these “proposthese people went through as the crisis evolved.
In my opinion, this would certainly be Ambassador’s accounts, as recorded in the documents prean aspect that would plague Yugoslav-Cuban relations for sented, offer an insightful, albeit very limited peak into the the rest of Tito’s life.
Although, as underlined several times dilemmas, frustration, disappointment, and even errors of in the directive, the Ambassador was instructed to commujudgment the Cuban leaders underwent in the face of possible nicate these “proposals” as his “personal opinion,” they were imminent annihilation. certainly seen by his hosts as paternalistic and coming from Perhaps the most illustrative account of the extraordinary the highest authority in Belgrade.
The Ambassador reminded Belgrade that the Cuban tells us so much about the dichotomy and co-existence of, press took note only of Tito’s first message at the beginning of on the one hand, a multi-layered dimensionality and, on the the crisis and that there was only a very brief mention of the other hand, an inexplicable tunnel vision of an ideological Tito-Goulart exchange of messages on 26 October.
Che boasted to have been ready to cause millions of the activities of the Non-aligned countries were hardly noted, deaths in the United States in the name of “defending” the working men while the visit and mission of General Da Silva was not even and women of Cuba, forgetting that the act would sacrifice mentioned in the Cuban press.
At the utter lack of recognition of Yugoslavia’s support during the same time, his loathsome bravado could have simply been crisis, as was vainly hoped for by the Yugoslav leadership, the evidence of an immature adrenalin-driven cockiness of a selfBelgrade’s Ambassador in Rio was able to report the sincerest perceived revolutionary and evidence of boundless fear.
He also underlined a disturbing, however, is the fact that at one point in human feeling of unanimous pride among the Brazilian political and history, during the Cold War, there were people on both sides military elite for the role Goulart and Brazil played in the who spent their days and nights making war calculations resolution of the crisis. aimed at causing millions of deaths or a thousand-year long The documents presented here suggest several concluenvironmental and cultural Dark Age on Earth.
On the sidelines of the big Kennedy-Khrushchev show, were pacified by the “justification” of a higher cause. smaller, non-aligned countries, namely Yugoslavia and Brazil, The documents constitute, in sum, a fitting contribution made a substantive effort to contribute towards the resolution to the memory and commemoration of the most dangerous of the most dangerous crisis of the Cold War.
Immediate crisis of the Cold War when, for far too long, humanity stood inspiration for an active engagement was the new awareon the verge of self-destruction. ness created in the wake of the September 1961 Belgrade Conference of the Non-Aligned.
DDD The last information from the MFA [Ministry of Foreign Affairs] received here from the Ambassador in Washington To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs says that the USA is getting ready for military intervention in Cuba.
The approximate There is a general feeling in Brazil that the military blockplan is that United States planes will start bombing Cuba in the places ade of Cuba, for the first time in the history of the Cold War, where there are alleged bases with nuclear weapons and that has brought the USA and the USSR to the very verge of the will be as soon as Cuba refuses to accept the UN Commission war because of one LA country, making in that way LA and for disarmament.
The Brazilian Government advised Cuba Brazil the center of the Cold War.
The feeling of immediate to invite the Commission itself so as to clear the charges danger mobilized all circles in order to find a way out.
However, Cuba concluded values of their former independent polrejected it.
The Government is of opinion that the USA is icy, especially towards Cuba, enable them to influence more responsible for the instantaneous intensifying of the conflict freely and with more authority in seeking peaceful solutions. and they are very worried about the unyielding attitude of However, there are differences within Government circles the USA towards Fidel’s Government.
Kennedy sent a letter regarding the real intentions of the USA as well as the ways to Goulart from which it can be and means for solving the crisis over Cuba.
The Ambassador concluded that the USA is getting ready not only for disarof the United States here managed quite well to conmament of Cuba but for the military liquidation of Fidel’s vince that the United States option was not the invasion.
Kennedy phoned Goulart explainArinos suggested that Brazil address the General Assembly ing the reasons for the blockade.
He pointed out his intenwith the proposal of deatomization of LA tions and asked for support in which he partly succeeded. including Cuba.
Governor expect that there is a way out from this crisis, especially about Brizola attacked severely the negotiations on Cuba and Berlin and they also believe that the United States imperialism on TV at night on the 24th of October askUSSR will avoid crossing swords at seas and that it will make ing people to stand by the President and Government who are Cuba accept the UNO inspection.
Because of the pressure acting for peace and the preservation of the independence of of the masses Government representatives make more severe Cuba.
Prime Minister Lima Government’s directives that authorized him to vote against made a statement to the unions and students that Cuba had the whole American resolution.
Reactionary forces exert of both the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Hermes pressure asking Lima’s resignation and demand a Parliament Lima9 led to the situation in which the Government lost session to deal with foreign policy. control over the whole situation, letting Americans influence through the MFA supporting their line.
There Barišić are rumors that Santiago Dantas will take over foreign affairs again.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , USA is demanding from all LA countries that voted for the Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder blockade resolution to take part symbolically in the blockade F-67.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and of Cuba with their own ships.
That is the reason why the vottranslated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović.] ing of the Brazilian representative at the Council of OAS is being half-officially denied.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Sending: Havana Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Received: 26.
They have information that there is Kennedy’s need to improve his sheltered image before eleceuphoria in the United States after sending back some of the Russian tions.
If it weren’t like that it could have been timed earlier ships, which he considers equal to the war victory and that and not twenty days before elections.
Havana not only disarmament of Cuba, but also liquidation of Fidel’s Received: 27.
They have the impression that the USA won’t be TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS against and that Cuba also accepts the idea.
Very convinced the interview and what the reaction will be; then both govthat Pentagon prevailed and the attack was inevitable. ernments would make official steps to neutralization He said there would be a great surprise if the attack could be giving guarantees to Cuba. avoided tonight.
American planes fly over many sites ruthlessly photoThe American Embassy is exerting pressure, using its miligraphing again the whole territory.
Consider the attack to tary circles, to bind Brazil stronger to American plans as well as begin with classical weapons focusing at first only on bases. putting pressure on the government.
Military dispositive gave Informed him about the statement and the message of our resistance to various intrigues, so the government reacts more President .10 Extremely grateful and wants me to convey freely to the situation.
Santiago is absolutely convinced that ties, not to become the victims of aggression in future.
Any there will be no invasion, while Goulart is a pessimist. action, no matter the form, and initial steps from our side is looked forward to.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , impression, according to Dorticos, that they were ready to Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder accept many things that were out of discussion in the near F-67.
If they overestimated, it’s difficult for me to judge translated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović.] because of the lack of the outside information, but it is the right moment to hold them to their word.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , October 1962 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67.
In the end he mentioned the wish of his government to expand economic relationships with all countries and especially with us,e. with the country with which Brazil has already had old and traditionally friendly and economic relations.
He said version of the answer. that he would reply to comrade President Tito this very day Your suggestions were passed.
He states that a great deal of and that he sent him his regards. them will be in the above answer.
Rio de Janeiro matter their use could be put in the service of Received: 29.
Havana crisis which worries us, generalizing the right of inspection, it Received: 29.
X 62. at 07.00 represents a great step to the reduction of the world tension.
In that Very urgent case, Brazil had the opportunity in earlier times to propose measures which would implement a special status for Cuba TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS through negotiations, so these proposals could be renewed.
Bernardes Vidaković delivered that he accepted publishing of these messages if we are interested in that.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , to be informed previously so that he could ask for the formal Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder authorization from Goulart.
It seems to Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY me that they believe that the worst has gone away.
Havana once again make sort of a hysterical move like it had been Received: 29.
We had been informed about the previMinistry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY ous ones.
He read me U VERY URGENT Thant’s letter in which he announces his arrival with his assistants on Tuesday.
His trip was put off until U Thant’s Consented and interested in an announcing the messages. arrival.
If they agree, they could be announced today, if impossible – They don’t know what the special envoy to the Brazilian tomorrow morning.
It is not necessary to pinpoint the hour. president Goulart will bring.
In further talks he confirms that they didn’t have time to think about the Chinese and their stupidities.
As far as future behavior and actions of the Cubans are He expressed his readiness to take steps in actions toward concerned we seemed to find best as follows, that you should the Governments of the USA, Cuba, and the USSR which express your statement as your personal opinion. could lead to providing the Cuban people with the right to Independence, security, sovereignty and integrity of Cuba self-determination and the reduction of its armament to a are fundamental.
In connection with this, he reminded of the earlier Guantanamo is legitimate.
In setting out these neither can be nor should be stated in full of each partner, nor demands, resolutely but calmly, they should highlight the it can bring quick results.
Following this line of our action necessity and readiness for negotiations and settling all conwe are offering the greatest help to them.
Nobody has doubts about their readiness to help themselves with their own attitude, making our support defend themselves at any cost, which they showed fully.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY We insist on the style and tone, which they might find especially difficult.
Havana ilege” of being very loud as a part of being directly involved Received: 30.
That proved fic14 tions in the world division and the balance of power.
So, the DDD main point is that they, without their own weapons “equal to American ones,” should be protected by international mechaTo the Ministry of Foreign Affairs nisms as well as by their own policy which would attract active support of a great number of nations, what the highest Yours 435141. guarantee is against and the means of repulsing a possible repeat of American aggression.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Roa’s agreement to keep in touch on everyday basis, I saw Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder him again today.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and They were having conferences all morning in the presitranslated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović.] dential palace.
During the conversation it was emphasized in the proper form that the further development greatly depended on the form and tone of their actions.
It’s not necessary to underline that, but to act wisely and skillfully.
Their attitude is to wait and be absolutely to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 30 quiet until U Thant’s arrival.
U Thant asked that his visit should have only working character (journalists, diplomats, manifestations, etc.
Havana the beginning of the crisis, because of the friendly attitude Received: 31.
I remarked that the whole situation was instructive for TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS the little ones who let them be objects in the games played by the big ones.
His immediate response was that they had never From the talks with the Brazilian ambassador been nor would ever be the object in someone’s game and that Bastian Pinto. they had had and would have their own policy.
Talked to [Brazilian to insist any further, in particular since what he has said barely President João] Goulart’s special envoy, Private Secretary hid his intimate conviction that it is so.
Great support given in the whole world should be appreciDa Silva expressed the standpoint of Brazil on all current ated and kept.
It is especially important for the LA countries. problems and especially on the running crisis.
The essence He fully agrees with that, underlining the role of Brazil. of Goulart’s position defined in P Del Este.
Fidel Goulart’s special envoy [Gen. must consider the course towards neutralization gradually if Albino Silva] with the message for Fidel has just arrived. he takes into account the possibility of final relations with Doesn’t know the content yet. the United States being resolved.
Suggested accepting control [e.g., The above conversation was held in the familiar atmoinspection] as a necessary measure, under the condition of sphere as among friends, with some pranks on the account of lifting the blockade. their “great friends” the Chinese and the others.
Said that he couldn’t accept the conI will slowly try to broaden the circle of the executives for trols, stating all kinds of reasons . contacting.
Besides, the agreement between Russians and Americans All the work done wasn’t intrusive and having the spirit of without him was a matter he couldn’t either understand or your instructions.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , wishing to know the course of the talk.
Further will be performed by the UNO, which would make a details continued. precedent for the overall problem of inspection.
Indar Jit] Rikhye, the first talks of U Thant were carry out any subversive activities. disappointing.
Cuba would be given guarantees for keeping its sovereignty and independence.
Our reputation as well as that of the NATO in LA will not be made either.
See our 814. ible policy is expected from Kennedy, which Brazil will try to make use of, but there will be no big changes in the Alliance Vlahov for Progress.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , balance which was the basis of the Cold War.
The USA came Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder out with strengthened prestige and the possibility of strengthF-67.
Bonds with the UN actions brought great international recognition to Brazil.
Goulart attaches great importance to the exchange of messages with Tito.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67.
XI 62. at 11.20 posed to make concepts for their own policy on that basis.
C didn’t conceal his outrage about to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 31 October Russians.
Thus, he stubbornly refused any control 1962 showing both sides that he must have been consulted as well.
Following his impression Da Silva concluded that F Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY would be very tough and persistent in his talk with U Thant.
He was of the opinion that Fidel was 14 very honest to him and grateful that Brazil had taken such an Very urgent initiative.
TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS Therefore, aspirations of Brazil are too ambitious for this The talks with [Brazilian foreign ministry official Carlos moment.
Bernardes on 31 October. be neutralized following the formula of Yugoslavia.
Expressed his satisfaction excluding Fidel from them. with the Brazilian attitude and actions.
F must these problems now as well as in the near future could be the promise not to interfere in the political life of the neighbors.
Castro as well as all the others should bear in mind this F demands the evacuation of Guantanamo for what, fact and should bear it further, no matter what they said on according to B., Americans stop their ears.
At this moment, this fact is unchangeable dence that the USA would accept disarmament and guarand obstinate. antees through the UNO and the nonintervention of Cuba.
The USA had some minor comments to their proposal about the deatomization for which they are expecting unanimous Vidaković support.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , friendly gestures towards Brazil, which implies that the USA Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder will try a kind of agreement with Cuba.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and expect any stronger engagements of the USA before the 7th translated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović.] of November elections.
He considers Russians counted wrongly, but they that the USSR has lost its prestige and confidence although at withdrew on time.
Nevertheless they are responsible for this the last moment it did much to secure peace.
I stated that they wanted peace and that they were generally right. my opinion that the basic matter now was to make the USA Anyway, the real victors weren’t Americans, but the “third negotiate and achieve guarantees about K Their envoy is side,”e., Brazil and the others who insisted and proved that coming back on the 1st of November, and after his report he a peaceful solution was the only possible one. will work out the further action.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , matter was quickly determined because he didn’t have any Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder support in the Army.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and We would appreciate that, sometime after the solution to translated by Radina Vučetić-Mladenović.] the crisis on Cuba has been found, Tito sends a message to Goulart and even more to the Brazilian people congratulating them on their success.
Then news on Tito-Goulart messages 26 were mentioned in the moment Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY of the culmination of the crisis.
UAR [United Arab Republic; Coded telegram Egypt] and Brazil were only mentioned.
Albino] Da Silva wasn’t mentioned at all in the To the Embassy of the FPRY press, the letter from [Mexican President Alfonzo Havana, Washington López] Mateos.
With with the inspection of the UNO [United bombastic headlines “USSR will respond”, editoriNations Organization], which would make a precedent als about the “great leader”, press full of pictures of C for the general problem of inspection.
Cuba’s commitment that it will not “export” revolution -With regard to Sino-Indian clashes, nothing [in the and make any subversive operations.
About Chinese declarations and manifestations of solidarity , [in the Cuban press there 3. guarantees to Cuba for its sovereignty and independence. is] a lot.
Today, the entire editorial from “Renmin Ribao” related to the Soviet decision to withdraw Allegedly Castro welcomed the idea of the above plan. “offensive weapons” and whole-hearted support Brazilians think that the USA could accept it after negofor Castro’s 5 points. tiations.
The concrete struggle around Cuba 14 represents a loss for the socialist world because of the USSR’s Very urgent policy of retreat.
The decision by the Pentagon and the rest of the military in the USA to attack Cuba on the critical 27 MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS October is an immediate result of previous Soviet steps that showed weakness.
If With regard to Latin America and the support of they had them, they would install them in governments, the position has not changed an inch, on the every centimeter of Cuba and if necessary would fire them contrary, the traditional position of the Second Declaration without a second thought into the heart of the aggressor— , even accentuated.
Very little or nothing is being done. armed struggles] directly, they encourage with all available means.
Talks with Mikoyan are still ongoing and he cannot say anything more specific about the results.
Nikita—appease1 Lecturer in International History, Academic Director of LSE ment; they—fist.
Certain compromises, even shabby , IDEAS Center, London School of Economics and Political Science. they must find.
How 2 Brazil’s status at Belgrade was somewhat awkward and to do it they still don’t know.
They [i.e., “aligned” (through the 1947 Rio Treaty and the Organization Cubans] without Russians couldn’t even move.
Conference, and the Limits of an ‘Independent’ Foreign Policy The Russians are obliged to help the revolution.
See the is known. translation from a copy in the foreign ministry archives in Mexico City, included in the collection of Mexican documents on the Cuban Yugoslavia, as he says, has fully identical positions with Missile Crisis elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin—ed. the Russians on all current issues.
He wanted to say, here you 4 In fact, although some outside observers (including many see we are the only ones fighting for the purity of MarxismBrazilians) attributed Goulart’s mediation efforts at the height of the Leninism, for revolutionary-ness.
Havana—to his collaboration with Tito, it had in fact been secretly He didn’t want to say anything openly.
On this, and Brazil’s efforts to mediate what is the essence of the Sino-Indian conflict and this is the between Havana and Washington in 1960-62, including Yugoslavreason they do not declare their position.
They are considerBrazilian contacts regarding Cuba, see James G Hershberg, “The ing it currently.
The interpretations are almost identical to what we October 26 and succeeding days with his Brazilian colleague, Luis have already heard at different levels.
Previously, we could not Bastian Pinto; see Bastian Pinto’s cables in the collection of translated take these positions too seriously.
However, after this test [i.e., Brazilian documents on the missile crisis published elsewhere in this after this talk with Guevara—ed.], yes.
They firmly believe that the people follow 6 Regarding the Chinese, and Cuban attitudes toward them, them and will follow them even into suicide.
Mittag, Axen, Kiefert blow against freedom of the seas, and against free trade, it is absent : Grotewohl, Neumann, Mückenberger, impudent interference with the very national affairs of Cuba Fröhlich, Pisnik, Baumann, Ermisch Reimann and with all nations entertaining normal relations with Cuba.
Imperialists in the United States are not willing to accept the fact Area administrations and district committees are to be that the Cuban people have cast off the dominance of US monopolists and big land-owners.
In its note the USSR of its right to self-determination. was quite right to emphasize the fact that it had several The United States of America, the most powerful State times suggested to withdraw all foreign troops from foreign of the capitalist world, many times bigger than little Cuba regions.
Thant’s letter and Khrushchev’s response had been made Workers, scholars, and other intellectuals, artists, women, public in the press, Kennedy responded, published in young people, pastors should speak out in public.
Obtained by says that three of their ships are concerned, two en route to Hans-Hermann Hertle, translated for CWIHP by Regina Cuba, one in Havana.
This renders in Washington] thought the Soviets want to test American moot the prospect that Soviet action on a separate resolve.
In case the first offensive expansion of the Cuban base treaty , or on Berlin, might soon provide a is accepted, Moscow will step up further.
If America reacts “pretext” to act against Cuba. , Moscow will retreat.
It would be more important instead, if which the United States is ready to go it alone if it has to world opinion will get the impression that Cuba’s population do so. does not The Chancellor himself voiced the opinion it will not come to a conflict as long one remains firm.
He reiterated again it should not cause any insurmountable problems to stir Knappstein up domestic unrest within Cuba.
Akten zur Auswärtigen Politik der Bundesrepublik pling such an approach.
Translated for CWIHP by Bernd Schaefer.] force, the second one just a blockade without any direct use of force.
There recommendations Furthermore, the President wanted to prevent the European were worked out for submission to the President. allies of the United States from becoming exposed to unexThe Chancellor asked whether it was also considered pected danger by an irrational action from Khrushchev’s side. whether to shake the Cuban regime through triggering The Chancellor called the President’s considerations domestic unrest in Cuba. noble, but he reiterated that the other side is ruthless if it comes to choosing its options.
They October 1962 more time is passing by, the more the danger is growing.
Up to now, about eight to ten missile launch sites Arrived 25 October 1962 4.00 am with priority citissime had definitely been identified plus at least 30 missiles.
United States Herve] Alphand, [UK Ambassador to the United States David] Ormsby-Gore and me to attend a meet9.
Cubans did not play an important role at all in ing where he passed on the following information which was the deployment of the missile system.
The first six Soviet ships had been withdrawn before were hit by ground-defense one of the existing 24 antireaching the quarantine zone.
However, this should not aircraft batteries would be destroyed without any further lead to premature conclusions; the ships might come back hostilities. with escorts, perhaps submarine protection.
If possible this incident should be kept secret, a message would be issued 11.
Up to then Soviet aircraft en route to Cuba had that quarantine was in full force and that there had been been refueled in Dakar and Conakry.
There were further signs that Khrushchev had been Navy there were only few Soviet submarines within range mistaken in his timetable and that the missile sites had to provide cover. been discovered too early.
For the first time that day, six low-flying American in November he had obviously planned to surprise the aircraft had flown over and explored the launching instalPresident by telling him that in the meantime there were lations in Cuba.
They had not come under fire from the 60 operational missiles stationed in Cuba and that the Cubans, although the 14 anti-aircraft batteries around the President consequently had to make the desired concesisland were operational. sions in Berlin.
On his last visit to the President, [on 18 October, keep further nuclear weapons out of the island, should be Soviet foreign minister Andrei] Gromyko had not only attained with a minimum of force.
Therefore, in case of made a general statement that there would be no deployhostile conflict, there would be only one “wounding shot” ment of “offensive weapons,” but had definitely assured after the usual “warning shot” to affect the ships’ maneuthe President that there would be no emplacement of misverability but not to sink them if possible. siles capable of reaching the United States.
According to recent intelligence none of the missile sites were yet operational.
For the near future certain changes were expected possible within hours as they were mobile batteries. in Cuba.
For good reasons, Cable from Federal Republic of Germany though, it is considered as likely with regard to the “operaEmbassy, Washington , 27 tional” missiles.
Telex Nr.26 For the first time, Soviet nuclear missiles are stationed Citissime overseas and at considerable distance from the Soviet heartland.
I Threat to American Security Through a Soviet Base A completion of Cuba’s expansion into a Soviet on Cuba nuclear base would mean a decisive move of the nuclear balance in direction of the Soviet Union.
For the first time, Information we receive here about deployment of Soviet the latter would acquire capabilities to launch a nuclear nuclear missiles and aircraft on Cuba are dispelling any potensurprise attack simultaneously against Europe and the tial misunderstandings about type, scope, and dangerousness North American continent. of the threat.
Until now, the strategic potential of the United States provided a nuclear umbrella for Europe, since the Soviet Union 1.
Official information from inside the administrabase are not the path to be chosen by the government to tion, and official press information since yesterday and espereach its objective. cially over the last hours, bolster the impression that the time factor is of utmost importance.
There is no indication for Castro being willing to accept on-site inspections.
The French side informed that the Canadian and Currently Stevenson and Brazilian governments tried diplomacy to move Cuba U Thant are negotiating about towards an acceptance of inspections.
Alphand reiterated explicitly Nitze’s statement that “another course of action will be chosen,” if developments on a) and a) complete cessation of Soviet maritime imports, b) remain unsatisfactory. b) end of construction work at the missile sites on Cuba, V Discussion of Soviet intentions c) “diffusion” of everything already installed.
Moscow again. has still not yet recovered from the surprising implementation of the blockade.
You might surmise from this that a) whether the procedural process with U Thant, as Soviet embassies did not yet receive instructions from mentioned above, will produce results in due time; Moscow.
Zorin might have been in a similar situation. b) whether Castro will tolerate inspections.
There as well as messages between the American and the Soviet an instruction to government transmitted through the Secretary General of Finletter will be discussed.
For now, I will hold back until after tomorrow’s meeting base provided the United States makes a binding commitment not with further reporting on American assessments of a linkage to launch an invasion against Cuba. between the Cuban crisis and the Berlin problem.. ctually 27] October), where Khrushchev, contradicting his previous statements, suddenly raised condiKnappstein tions again, namely the dismantling of American bases in Turkey.
This might Dowling, Rhöndorf, West Germany, 28 either occur in form of bombing the missile bases with conOctober 1962 ventional arms, or through an invasion where the missiles will be destroyed by American ground forces.
With Khrushchev referring to bases in Turkey, and through involvement of other Soviet troops and facilities, there On 28 October 1962 the Chancellor received Ambassador is now a chance that Europe and NATO might be dragged into Dowling in his house in Rhöndorf together with State the conflict.
Therefore the United States wants to sound out opinions of its NATO allies.
As for Khrushchev, we know he lies Conversation between FRG Chancellor and there is no reason to believe his statements.
For all these Adenauer and United States President Kennedy, reasons, the President is not interested in a new Western iniWashington, 14 November 19627 tiative.
Secret The Chancellor agreed fully with these thoughts and 14 November 1962 underlined that the Soviets had lied shamefully and had At the beginning of their talks at the White House on 14 planned a criminal attack on the US, as never before.
The developments of the last nine years have than ground inspections by UN personnel.
He is a smart, reckless man with635 out conscience, who certainly doesn’t want to lose all he has The President joked that we unfortunately can’t tell from gained up to now.
He is a convinced Soviet patriot. the air, if someone is a missile expert or not.
Khrushchev has now learned in Cuba that the United States is stronMr Smith8 answered “yes” when the Chancellor asked if ger and more decisive than he had thought.
The Chancellor agrees with American experts had no doubts that the missiles have been the President that the solution of the bomber issue should removed.
Until then, one should ships from low altitudes and confirmed the rockets on deck. not offer negotiations… The Chancellor asked how they got the rockets to Cuba.
On the return trip The conversation was then continued with a larger group they were placed in haste on the deck.
Stiftung Bundeskanzler-Adenauer-Haus, Bestand President Kennedy concluded that as far as one could III/61, Akten zur Auswärtigen Politik der Bundesrepublik verify, the missiles have left Cuba… Deutschland 1962: Band III: 1September bis President Kennedy stated that the United States had succeeded in 31Dezember 1962 , having its way on Cuba, because it had superior conventional document 445.
November 1962 The Chancellor then asked the President if he knew anything about Khrushchev’s present state of health.
Sir Frank Roberts [the British ambassador in Moscow] had even reported during their short President Kennedy opened the talk by indicating that the talk that Khrushchev looked tired, but then perked up.
According to American intelThe Chancellor asked again if Khrushchev was drinking ligence, the Soviets have probably removed all their missiles again. from Cuba.
The Americans had confirmed 32 or 33 missiles Ambassador Thompson, asked by President in Cuba, but under the assumption that there could have Kennedy for information, stated that Khrushchev does drink been as many as 48 there.
We should to problems with the Cubans. put his health and psychological state under observation.
Another problem, continued the President, is the bombers The Chancellor continued that he shares the President’s and Soviet personnel.
By the end of the week, we’d like to wish to see the free peoples stronger, both in nuclear and learn a bit more about the bombers. conventional weapons.
Then, turning to NATO… The President answered that we don’t know exactly about the rocket experts.
VS-Bd. ,Akten zur The Chancellor said that the presence of the technicians Auswärtigen Politik der Bundesrepublik Deutschland would be a big issue, since they would want to have some1962: Band III: 1September bis 31Dezember 1962 (Munich: thing to do.
Berlin; Schroeder did not pass any intelligence about Soviet missiles in Cuba, and Kennedy did not confide that the US Notes had discovered them, or even raise the Cuban issue as a matter of renewed concern.
In a 4 November 1962 conversation Press, 2003). with Fidel Castro, Soviet envoy Anastas Mikoyan explicitly 3 Henning Koehler, Adenauer.
I have already spoken Campaign to Isolate East Germany, 1949-1969 (Chapell Hill, about this fact with comrade Fidel Castro.
For the United States record of this conversation, see has surfaced to support this Soviet claim.
To the extent that United States Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United the Soviets believed that FRG Foreign Minister Gerhard States , 1961-1963, Vol.
Berlin Crisis, 1962-1963 Schroeder relayed West German intelligence on Moscow’s , doc. missile deployment to Cuba when he met with JFK in the 153; for brief additional discussion of Cuba between JFK and Oval Office on the morning of 17 October 1962, they were Adenauer, also see doc.4. clearly mistaken.
Not further identified; possibly Abbott E Smith and the West German record of the meeting have surfaced, of the Board of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence and both confirm that the Cuba did not even come up in Agency.
The support of the peasants7 was due also to the fact that the Fidel DOCUMENTS Castro movement adopted as a rallying cry the need to implement agrarian reforms.
Today the United States seeks to intensify the help to the government in the politiINFORMATION ON THE POLITICAL SITUATION IN cal sphere by supporting the rigged elections of November 3rd CUBA and in the economic sphere with the provision of arms for the Supplied from the Foreign Section, 3 December 1958 government troops.
The risk is ever more likely that in the case from Cuban comrade Lazaro Peña, Director of the Latin that Fidel Castro’s troops are pushed into the North American American syndicate nickel mining concessions, the United States would take advantage of this by provoking military intervention.
Cuban executives of monopolistic North American Periodicals such as “Carta seminal,” “Prensa continental” and concessions , elements of the police and repression others are published. apparatus, industrialists financially connected to the United Concerning its political line, it is of note that the Cuban States monopolies, etc.
The “anti-Batista revolution,” as such tion of the INRA is called “Section of Industrialization of Cuba” was deployed behind Fidel Castro, whose name has become and it is responsible for state investments in national industries in from now on a legend.
He is even an object of religious venaccordance with the national sector of private industry.
This seceration and the vast majority of the masses follow him without tion is directed by Ernesto “Che” Guevara, originally Argentine, even reflecting on whether his actions are good or bad.
Regarding relations with the The impression that we got from this conversation is that USSR, a Soviet mission, which recently visited Cuba, held he spoke enthusiastically and honestly when it came to techni641 cal knowledge and organizational capability, but maybe a little For that, the first duty of every anti-imperialist revolutiondisingenuous on the political side.
This last observation comes ary, socialist or Latin American democrat is that of defending from the hurried way with which he responded to questions the Cuban revolution.
One can not be anti-imperialist, patriabout relations with the national bourgeoisie, the danger of a ots, progressives, revolutionary, socialists, communists, without class conflict capable of impeding the revolution, etc. defending, supporting Cuba.
It appears evident that this cadre made miracles during the Defending Cuba means defending national independence, war against Batista and the intense popular and peasant supindependence of politics and economics, national sovereignty, port, above all considering the value brought forth by numerunity of Latin American and the rights and demands of the ous economic and political reforms, is very energizing.
From when the Cuban revoluevery way a good impression and the reflection of a country tion triumphed, every country in Latin America is more free. full of national and social revolution — highly esteemed and Yankee imperialism can not use the same past methods of appeal very friendly to our party. through discount offers, coaxing and blackmail.
Cuba is interested in especially interested in the development Giuliano Pajetta of the national and social liberation movement and vice versa.
Present were the members of the Cuban In Latin America there exists a strong movement against P.S.P. leadership, Che Guevara, Fidel Castro and others. intervention.
The principle of “non-intervention” is defended The discussion unfolded on the basis of a detailed document also by conservative elements.
For that, the defense of national from the B.P. of the P.S.P. and this lasted, I think, five sovereignty and of the right of self-determination of every Latin lively days.
Cuba, defeating the mercenaries, contributed was charged with publishing an editorial in “Fundamentos” for to saving the peace. the May issue, on the basis of the discussion.
In spite of the recent aggression, the Cuban government is in The discussion fundamentally revolved around the problem favor of a method of direct negotiations for peacefully resolving of the pacifism and violence of socialism and of the tangible effievery problem and is prepared to re-establish diplomatic and cacy of guerrilla warfare.
Solidarity between the Latin American countries and between these countries and Cuba, the solidarity The Cuban revolution represents progress for revolution in between socialist countries, continued and unselfish, and the every country in Latin America. solidarity of the whole world with Cuba, is that which makes for a solid base for the struggle for peace.
The request was made on the 21st of September; the We can now lay the foundation for the spread of interview was given, more or less, one week later.
It seems to me that, industrialization and not limit ourselves to develop what before giving the interview the Ché asked some information about me already exists. from the Cuban Institute of friendship with people and to the Foreign At the end of the next four-year-period we’ll gain a big Ministry.
Cuba, when we took sector, will be realized on the basis of a technology equal to it, wasn’t a underdeveloped country but a badly developed the some of the most advanced countries.
Other than the consider we consider on of our main goals; we’ll increase monoculture, everything else was for local market only.
We need to produce with high-level technological processes keep push forward, even far forward.
Even if we need to improve are called it revisionist the growth of productivity, trying to modify the absurd salary system that there was before in Cuba.
At the heart of the new society that we’re building three years the collection of sugar cane will be mechanized, is the working man.
That’s why productivity is of a fundamental with machinery created in Cuba, and constructed in Cuba.
We entrusted to the old party Italy has many products that for us are really interesting, with so much power because we were in need, right away, and already some Italian enterprises came forward, like the of experts and of solid system.
But things didn’t go as we Oronzio di Nora company from whom we bought completely expected, they were accumulating offices, centralizing the equipped factories.
We are ready to buy whatever we need, it’s power, and bureaucratizing the relations with the masses.
I had the chance to talk with some diplomats from the wrong, and we ended up losing control of the situation: misItalian Embassy in Cuba.
Comrade X sumdon’t know how much their opinions can be considered valid. mons the workers so that at 6 in the morning they go to volConcerning our new Ambassador my opinion is different, he’s unteer work.
At six in the morning, all the workers are there a reasonable person (I was referring to the fact that Ambassador but not comrade X He shows up at ten in a government car; Ferretti mentioned to me to a few criticisms he checks the number of those present, and leaves.
We’ll see what is possible to do unblock the situation (the expropriation request, because his home is unsafe. old staff of the Embassy praised the Batista regime to me and had negative things to say about the one of Fidel Castro--ed.
That’s unbelievable in a revolution, like this one, so full of Italian Embassy they say that one of reasons that the commerce strength in the ideals. between Italy and Cuba is not increasing, could be the missing G.: And then there’s the story about people expelled payment by the latter of almost one million dollars, which Italian from the old communist party that revealed themselves, enterprises have had on their books since prior to the revolution. instead, to be good revolutionaries... there are people that just want to boast of thirty years in the party.
I remember perfectly this situation, because at the time i Ok, but then there’s also the years, ‘31, ‘32 , ‘33... was the director of the National Bank.
I don’t referring to what happened in the Committees for the Defense know Europe, but I know it well in Argentina because of the of the Revolution (the neighborhood organisms of the revolution immigrants.
The one that I saw was working Instead the Cuban artisans wouldn’t have any trouble adjustwell, but they told me that in other places the volunteer work, in ing and going to work in a factory, because they are not so a word, that they are pushing toward a sharp proletarianization attached to the work of their workshop. also of the culture.
I did some personal research around the shops of Galiano and San Rafael and I D.L: You mean accepting the proletarian hegemony. found out that they sell many items.
On this question there’s need to be intranwe have been, things for the farmers are much different, they sigent.
Of course the problem depends, also, from the way in which this policy is applied.
In the countryside one has to make do... we have made a parto Miami for the week-end the refrigerator ... ticular effort in Havana, where the counter-revolution is stronger.
Nods, the petit bourgeois was living in a North American way, which in has in many ways different characteristics than that of D.L: The impression that I had during my stay about the three the petite bourgeois in Europe.
Some of our Polish and Hungarian friends, warned us to be prudent with the lower middle class (here he was talking D.L: I’m not talking about the bands coming from the Eastern with a tone that seemed to me pretty upset -ed.
We don’t like Cossacks and talking like Russians from Kharkov [in Soviet force anyone to stay.
There was the case of some technicians Ukraine. who clearly told us that they didn’t want to stay any more.
Both for ethical and a practical reasons: we prefer the D.L: To get back to the topic of a certain kind of “religious” old counter-revolutionary technician to go, so he won’t have manifestations, i have some journalistic impressions that may a bad influence on young people that we are grooming by be superficial: at the Congress of the Federation of the Cuban the tens of thousands.
I’m not talking about an ideological isolation, which it is not, but about a political one.
Because they accuse us of wanting to be the “popes” of field the production is growing.
The farmers are accepting the the revolution, and we don’t want to interfere in the politics of collectivization up to a point, some strata do better accept the the “popular fronts,” that have their different managers of the cooperatives. progressive forces on the Latin America.
Are there different kinds of cooperatives, like in popular Popular” is Chile; where the “Popular Front” could keep going democracies with a certain gradual socialization of the means of on and gain some power.
There’s need for building alliances for the masses of farmers, and to consider the lower middle class.
But I was talking about revolutionary alliances, famers on the “Lunes de Revolución” are written int the “Gaceta de conflicts, starting from the occupation of the land.
Everything started with a film about Havana completely we tried to open up a dialogue with one of the “Frontes made in the old style.
From the new Havana, with the militiaPopulares,” in which there is the lower-middle class, the one men and the militia, there was nothing.
At the door, while saying goodbye, with vague words he just experts in that field.
Togliatti, Longo, Terracini, Roasio, Berlinguer, Nonsense... instead I should be clear about something (while Novella, Colombi, Scheda, Alinovi, Cossutta, Pajetta, flipping through his book that I showed him “Guerrilla Amendola, Macaluso, Romagnoli, Alicata, Bufalini Warfare” translated in Italian by the socialist publisher “Il Absent: Ingrao, Sereni, Scoccimaro Gallo”--ed.
Occhetto, Barontini, Barca the afternoon until 6 in the morning, in company only of two Secretary: Amadesi revolvers and my working documents: I would like to point out that I have just one revolver, and above all that I have my wife.
D.L.: I’ll show you the written text of the interview, and you 1. The fight for peace ; will tell me what can be published and what can’t.. On the Congress of the Italian Communist Youth Federation G.: No, no everything can be published but the two things I ; have told you not to.. The situation of the dailies and other periodicals ; (That means, the disagreements with the Soviets about collective 4. On the organization of the center of the party management problems, and the direct controversy with the “pro. gressive” parties in the Latin America.
On the last point I didn’t get if the veto was limited to just this last The fight for peace. part or over all the judgments about Latin America.
It is difficult today to try and reconstruct the full course we finished the interview and Guevara had already led us to the of events related to the American aggression in Cuba.
I kept the word given about the first topic and I solved the were] surprising actions that only “L’Unita” had forecast.
At the uncertainty about the second one keeping for the piece written bottom of everything, is the United States attempt to invade Cuba, even in “Paese Sera” written hastily, in the editorial office, pushed if the problem of the missles should not have been a pretext. by several sides, and compelled to do, at the same time, the right large resistance in defense of Cuban independence, thing the controversial parts with the Chilean communist party on the part of many countries and the in world public opinion. and with the other parties.
Some days after, since my departure The crucial point of the crisis was the night between Friday and was delayed, through the writer Retamar, Saturday.
The second message of Khrushchev and Kennedy can a friend of mine that was meeting with Guevara, I asked him be explained by the need to exert pressures.
Guevara let me is the affirmation of Zorin [to know that he wasn’t, that I just had done my job of journalist.
He the UN Security Council on October 25] that in Cuba, missile didn’t let me know anything about the check on the written text bases do not exist. that I asked from him.
If one makes other hypotheticals show the Americans what they are not expecting.
They do not and considerations one can arrive at other critical conclusions, understand that its possible to arrive at peaceful coexistence but that does not seem to be the case.
In places where we are strong the movement has Consulenti del Lavoro—trans.] and that it was better to been weak and vice versa.
This is due to the orientation of our take charge of the demonstrations rather than leaving them group of directors.
The whole party apparatus present in Rome is responsible stimulating and organizing the party for Cuba.
There are comrades that undervalue It is critical to the government that their position was not the strength of the USA and therefore do not understand the extremist.
For the India-China conflict, I underline that the need to find a way towards a modus vivendi.
The potential solution would be easier if China was in the United Nations. existed for a bigger battle than that which manifested itself.
There were different positions in the party that were caused by the dramatic, confused and also contradictory manner with which the news of the events unfolded from one hour to the next.
Letter from Italian Communist Journalist We must intervene somehow and present our positions.
We protested in defense of Cuba, exerting pressure with Che Guevara, 26 November 1962 on our government because it modified its foreign policy.
Let’s move forward in Direction PCI the developments of actions for solidarity with Cuba.
Let’s take this into account I’m taking the initiative of sending to you and to the in our propaganda.
On my side About this “atmosphere” and these epithets I don’t give a I already intend to send to Havana the published text with the damn, and I leave them to petit-bourgeois and sectarians, to other articles. tired and frayed ones.
Or maybe, by chance, application of the line of revolutionary action of our party.
I just tried to provide a truthful description of a gress of the C.P.S.U. in which I was the protagonist of a political situation I saw “on-the-spot”; to make further developments battle leaded against the two main tendencies manifested on that understandable.
Guevara, taking advantage of the huge prestige of Cubans, “you can’t take the power without the guns, what’s this pacifist would objectively serve to feed that.
The blockade, the danger of an aggression disrupted my report, I was forced to modify the Italian Communist Ugo Pecchioli, Report tone, to make everything more bitter, and also the interview on Trip to Cuba, 12 August 1963 with Guevara suffered from that.
I had to highlight the reasons behind the position of the Cubans more than my critics.
The initial scheme, that Che approved, was more COMMUNIST PARTY OF ITALY FEDERATION OF critical and distanced.
ROME I want to make it apparent to you that this demonstrates how inefficient, superficial, and nonpolitical the connection between Dear Comrades, the newspaper and your source are, if it’s true that no one pointed out to you which was my real everyday attitude at the newspaper; I send to you the first notes on the results of the trip that my relations with the party from 6 years ago to now have to Cuba in reference to the principal political questions never been for me anything else than a sequences of administraexamined in the meeting with Fidel Castro.
Italiano records, Fondazione Instituto Gramsci, Rome; A job well done, now for Cuba it is necessary above all to take obtained by James Hershberg, translated by Alex Barrow.] into account with a general perspective of the development of the democratic and socialist movement in south-central America.
Soviet protection; they have the conviction that a direct aggression by the United States would mean a world war.
From this the Ugo Pecchioli documented opinion of a new level of relative security is derived.
The government’s decision, announced by Castro, to institute obligatory military service does not contradict this new phase of relative increased security.
Comrade Grobart sustains that The preference to not dive into a position of dissent (and the PURS and the that, as I see it, is even more important than not disturbing government must take positions to limit this fractious effort, he enthusiasm and revolutionary tension of Cubans and other revsees that at this moment it is difficult.
Among all the comrades olutionary movements in Latin American) has also caused the in leadership, there was talk of great indignation toward the Cuban leaders to publish nothing —up to the last few days Chinese comrades. — on the international debate in their media.
Cuban militants, for many of them the actual divergences with On the subject of the divergence he was very rapid and the Chinese comrades go off without actual understanding of all explicit.
He affirmed that he is completely in support the polithe moments that have led to these divergences.
The liberation of the people can not ride on the use of the Chinese in their revolution. thermonuclear arms.
It’s also needed We did not have an inkling of eventual clashes in the group to point out that in his speech on July 26 he really underof Cuban leaders in terms of the present controversy in the lined on the Soviet-Cuban friendship, he emphasized the communist camp.
Comrade Grobart, speaking with me, did agreement with Moscow to partially suspend nuclear experinot exclude the possibility that the inferior level of the cadre of ments, he referred many times, to exalt them, to the politics leaders might necissitate a political struggle, but he said that he of peace of Khrushchev.
Speaking with us he wanted, country by country, to Playa Giròn and during the crisis of ’62. illustrate to us where a peaceful avenue that could be taken and where instead there was no other option but armed struggle.
Castro said that the Castro said he understood and shared our political line given armed conflict in Venezuela could rapidly bring stabilization of that the situation in the West entails a suitable revolutionary democratic liberty and to elections that would signify the broken strategy.
Regarding between the two parties is too meager and occasional and that Chile, and in general in the countries where it is today possible to forms of organic contacts must be added.
To this proposal he advance in a more peaceful way, he parsed that he fundamentally welcomed with enthusiasm the invitation contained in the could identify with a peaceful avenue and with the possibility of letter of Comrade Togliatti to send to Italy a PURS the conquest of the majority in an election. delegation.
Considerations for a democratic route to socialism, that for example, were worked on by us Transmissions in Italian language from Radio Cuba tions, for structural reforms, for the development of democracy, for Latin America where there are tens of millions of links between the different levels of these struggles, electoral Italian emigres; momentum, etc.) seemed still like a very foreign political idea to the Cuban leaders.
His opinion that was books etc; proposed is that in only a brief matter of time there will be other breaks in countries that today are today subjects of the United 4) Organized and permanent sharing of party materials, States.
Relating to defining a period for receiving a certainly not foreign to the view that the experience of Cuba was PURS delegation in Italy it will occur that the Secretary of the outright reproducible everywhere.
Togliatti e la crisi del movimento 1) To find a way to send to Cuba a group of Italian technicomunista internazionale , Carocci, Roma 2007.
In successive meetings with other comWorld ; rades in the Cuban leadership the question was proradchenko, Two Suns in the Heavens.
I consider that the question must be examined with 5 S Pons, La rivoluzione globale.
This is a reference to the United States economic embargo, also for up to two years.
Disarmament and arms Roberto Ducci, I Capintesta control initiatives would become a central feature of United States foreign policy in the following months and years, and while this Agostino Giovagnoli e Luciano Tosi Amintore Fanfani e turn undermined any Italian hope for nominalnuclear status la politica estera italiana through a policy of Atlantic cooperation, it made possible for the new center-left coalition to support the United States in its new Evelina Martelli, L’altro atlantismo.
On the other hand, we once more witness Thursday, 25 October the close interdependence among the different parts of the world as well as the impossibility for a great power to base In fact this morning Lippman is its decisions—in an area that interests it directly—upon the already proposing to obtain the dismantling of the bases in consultation and the doubts of all the other ones.
It’s the usual I talk others I have at lunch the Norwegian Ambassador, who about it with Andreotti who sees the whole situation exclusively from the view point of arrives during the morning.
I go to see Lucet in the afternoon. that Kennedy’s action will have on Europe (bases in Turkey, We also talk about Cuba.
The French are generally satisfied, etc.) and for the influence that the unilateral American deciuncertain about the reasons for Khrushchev’s oscillations sions may have on his interests.
There may be a tacit comand still worpromise between the two colossi, in the sense of tolerating ried, even if less than before, by the development of a direct reciprocal interferences.
They too fail to understand that ence is relative, since for Russia all of Europe is a sphere of Kennedy has half-lost his battle by leaving Castro in power. influence.
All the Americans underrate the cold war. the Italian left of course rises as one man in defense of Cuba, including the intellectuals.
But Kennedy politely declines the offer coning his conditions, U Thant’s mission is failed, [First Deputy tained in Khrushchev’s message.
He is now stronger than ever Premier of the USSR Anastas Ivanovich] Mikoyan is arriving, and it would be a disaster if he does not use it. the Republicans in Washington are asking Kennedy some embarrassing questions.
Nothing can come out of this other Sunday, 28 October than a bad compromise, or a new crisis without tragedies, in which Kennedy will yield a little more and will receive a little The referendum day.
Fenoaltea had informed about it from Washington the Committee that drafted the 1957 Rome Treaties, was Toscano believes there is already an agreement between posted as Ambassador to Helsinki , Belgrade (1964the Soviets and the Americans.
Nenni which fully reflects must know about it and probably is referring to it when he his witty, incisive and lucid understanding of Italian foreign talks about serious foreign policy reasons which advise against policy and international affairs.
Finally the Communists must know In the early pages of the chapter, Ducci describes how by 22 about it as well—through Nenni—because they are starting October 1962, he had just arrived in Brussels as member of their demonstrations in Italy against the bases, to take credit a delegation which included the top echelons of Italian forfor the initiative.
Foreign Minister Attilio Piccioni, Undersecretary a foreign policy that does not exist.
Carlo Russo, Secretary General of the Ministry Attilio Cattani, and a number of other key dignitaries, including Monday, 14 January 1963 himself, who at the time was at the head of the Italian delegation which negotiated the possible accession of the United I go to see Couve [de Kingdom to the European Economic Community.
They Murville] to inform him about the American decision on had all gone to Brussels for a week of meetings between the the bases in Italy and Turkey.
He does not believe it to be a Six members of the EEC, and were engaged in a preparaRusso-American agreement; he believes in technical-military tory meeting for the work ahead, when the news spread that reasons, the obsolescence of the Thor and Jupiter missiles.
I the situation between the United States and Cuba was deteriorating point out that the decision also shows a policy of concentratand that President Kennedy was about to give an important ing nuclear weapons in American hands.
The President of the Council, Amintore Fanfani, days, Kennedy asked [Supreme Allied Commander, Europe was on the line from Rome and wanted to talk to the hon.
Mumbling something in his thick Roman accent, mony) if abandoning the bases in Turkey would have been , Piccioni stood up without catastrophic from a military point of view.
We yes, both from a military and above all a psychological point learned afterwards that Fanfani was furious, as he had placed of view.
Thus he thought about it, but this does not mean that several calls to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs searching for he negotiated with the Soviets, then or afterwards.
Those were the Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs, the secretary general, the days when one talked about it.
In general, the withdrawal the General Director for political affairs, and so on, without of the bases has made a strong and bad impression to the Quai finding any of them; and as a first reaction he unleashed d’Orsay. his wrath on the Minister of Foreign Affairs who had taken all of them with him to Brussels.
He told him that a few minutes before he had received the United States Ambassador, Freddie Roberto Ducci—I capintesta (The Big Reinhardt, who had asked to meet him to deliver him a mesBosses) sage from Kennedy.
Fanfani asked Piccioni to try and get in touch with the authorities of the other European countries Ducci was another of the key Italian diplomats of the postwar to find out how they intended to react to Kennedy’s decision, period.
Luckiest of expensive way for which the Soviet economy has less them all was certainly De Gaulle, who did not hesitate for resources than the American one a moment in placing France side-to-side with the United States in the 2.
After several attempts to improve American territory. the reception, Casardi raised his questioning eyes towards the Minister.
If the initiative had succeeded, the Soviet Russo and Fornari left after three hours of sleep; during the opportunities for an initial atomic strike would have grown rest of the day, others left Brussels as well.
Moscow had not replied to the months. ultimatum, the United States armed forces were being placed in a state The critical mistake the Soviets made in their calculation of alert was about the American reaction, which turned out to be The morning after, I went upstairs to the second floor of much different and much sterner than they had foreseen. the Embassy, where Piccioni’s apartment was located.
In the The Russians realized immediately that an American air corridor I met to my great surprise Mr Pace, the minister’s strike against the bases in Cuba, with the consequent loss of valet, who was carrying two large suitcases.
The Italian Foreign Ministry assesses the The fact that the Soviets gave in, however, must be intercauses and consequences of the crisis preted as a withdrawal but not as a weakening or a substantial change in their military posture or political intentions.
Analysis of the international situation. clearly based on the possible use of these weapons, it is also true that in other areas a conventional balance of power might A 1) Trends of Soviet policy as well turn out to be more favorable to the Russians.
The situation of Soviet inferiority in terms of strategic nuclear weapons, which was at the origin of the Cuban Notes affair, has not been modified.
I would like to thank Renato Moro and Evelina their defense program, which as a consequence will produce Martelli for their help with the Fanfani diaries. a worsening of the population’s economic conditions.
John F Kennedy Library , Boston, President’s relationship with the West.
Coincidentally, the Garibaldi was in the US for testing at the time of the crisis.
In important topics and developments, Boissevain’s letters, the months preceding the crisis, the Dutch government had which took a week to arrive in The Hague by air mail, offered already criticized the American embargo against Cuba, being background information about the internal political and afraid that supporting the United States on this subject would dameconomic situation in Cuba.
More importantly, in August 1962 the Netherlands the Dutch embassy by the Cuban Secret Service and the poshad lost its last colony in Asia, New Guinea.
Luns especially sible construction of underground fortifications to hide offenheld a grudge against President Kennedy for failing to supsive weapons.
In the course of 1963, Boissevain informed the port his country in its long conflict with Indonesia over Dutch government specifically about Fidel Castro’s ongoing Netherlands New Guinea (later renamed Irian Jaya after attempts to strengthen Cuba’s political and economic relations being taken over by Jakarta and sometimes known as West with Western European countries, including the Netherlands.
Besides, the Dutch foreign minister and some of his He repeatedly told the Dutch ambassador that he admired colleagues reasoned that Cuba was outside of NATO terrihis country for its agricultural and industrial achievements. tory and therefore none of their concern.
Castro said that he felt obliged Foreign reactions to the statement are also being published to pursue an agreement with the US, and he asked him to perincluding those from American senators who speak of “bluff,” form as a mediator.
The Hague did not approve, however, and “propaganda,” “no longer be browbeat,” and so forth. the ambassador received instructions to wait and see if Castro If the Cuban leaders earlier addressed the United States provocatively would bring it up at a later date.
It therefore seems apparBoissevain often described the impulsive Cuban leader with ent to the observer there is a risk of a conflict with nuclear irony.
President Kennedy has and Soviet ambassadors about his decision to nationalize the stated that he has no intention of attacking Cuba (although, former building of the United States embassy.
DOCUMENTS4 In order to be prepared for anything the Cuban government is alleging that Washington intends to use legionnaires in its next attempt at invasion.
During the “drôle de guerre” Japan had increasingly come America and Cuba to regard the Yellow Sea and the coastal area of Northern China and of course Manchuria and Korea as part of the In a meeting with the mayor of Berlin, Brandt, Japanese sphere of influence.
World trade and the shipping Assistant Secretary Van Houten received trade had resigned themselves to this and were limited to some information relating to the former’s visit to president China south of Shanghai.
He had the impression, that he [the president— the unwritten rule by paying a commercial visit to northern trans.] was extremely nervous.
England, Italy, and a few other countries have taken a similar standpoint.
The prime The Ambassador, minister adds to this, that the Dutch government has no instruments of power to prevent Dutch ships from transportG.W.Boissevain. ing goods to Cuba.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry in the Netherlands. of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.
I cannot believe it, that would mean Bastiaan Bouwman.] destruction; yet a precarious matter if the West never says ‘Halt’, communism will always carry on.
Washington “In response to press reports regarding intensive 22 October 1962, internal deliberations at the highest level with regard to ‘New Havana, 23 October 1962.
Ernesto Guevara, Minister of Industry, important departments State to acquire at least an indiare worth listening to because he does not mince words.
If the cation of the issue at stake, Berlin, Cuba [Cuba is underlined hard truth needs to be told then “Che” will tell it. with pen—trans.] or India so far have been unsuccessful.
In the past days he addressed the Cuban Youth Movement, On inquiry it became clear that neither British nor French since then changed by Fidel Castro into the “Union of Young embassy has any idea what is going on.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the cism and then the Argentine medic flogged their more than Dutch Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, mediocre labor performance.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and his argumentation the word “trabajo” appeared six translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] times.
NERECODI [Dutch Government Code Service, The Hague] Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 23 October 1962 CONFIDENTIAL DATE OF DISPATCH: 23 October 1962 Provocative speech Fidel offers no news.
NERECODI Brazil has Hague] Ambassador Havana to find out whether government Cuba would permit investigation concerning CONFIDENTIAL “offensive weapons,” after which definitive negative answer.
With this Rio touched the heart of the matter to prevent General mobilization proclaimed, Fidel , who will either fruitless name-calling or war. speak today, probably waits for instructions Moscow.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch department Foreign Affairs.
I have informed Your Excellency with regard to attempts My accusation was an offense to the from the government to move Cuban members of the staff Departamento de Seguridad del Estado which was incaof diplomatic missions and the housekeeping staff to provide pable of doing such a thing.
In the French Embassy this has led to a resolute demarche An oral demarche by the French Ambassador and myself by the Quai d’Orsay to the Cuban Ambassador who no doubt to the vice-minister of Foreign Relations followed which, will have informed his government thereof.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transI addressed a personal letter to Dr.
Foreign Relations, to complain about these practices on behalf of my colleagues (the nunciature had also voiced a complaint) and myself.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Since the period of strict secrecy was ended by Kennedy’s Bouwman.] speech last Monday the press has of course embarked upon extensive speculation regarding both what preceded the quarantine decision and the considerations that laid the foundations for that decision and the further course of events.
In the American reasonLuns, who will return to The Hague this evening. ing for example ICBMs are by definition offensive In the House of Representatives the chairman originally was while those same missiles clearly play a defensive role in the to announce that the government could not yet make a stateWestern strategy.
In the same way the Cubans can posit that ment about the Dutch standpoint, but he called the speaker the Soviet MRBMs and IRBMs are of a purely retaliatory shortly before the start of the meeting to ask if he would do nature and therefore in fact form a deterrent and not a threat. so himself.
Consequently in the group it was said that the United States would have Minister Toxopeus also feels that a much stronger position if they would make the disturbance the statement is too long.
Minister Spaak, of the strategic equilibrium and therefore the status quo the after a meeting with the ministers of foreign affairs of the Six, centrepiece, in other words if they focus the attention on the made a statement.
Whatever one’s opinion of the American unprecedented element brought into the international strateaction toward Cuba may be, the unity of the West demands, gic relations by the Soviets. that it is supported.
Speaker concludes, that the introduction should be greatly The prime minister later in the meeting announces, that reduced in size. has spoken to minister Luns on the telephone and that the Minister [of Transport, Public Works and Water latter agreed with the statement that speaker will now send to Management Henk] Korthals remarks, that Cuba does not the chairman of the House of Representatives. belong to NATO territory.
We shall, of course, do able trump card—been strengthened. what we can to give support to the United States in the Security Council.
At the same time, there may be repercus sions not only in the Caribbean, but also in Europe and elseVan Roijen 910. where.
At the same time I agree with you that developments must be watched closely on account of repercussions which Dutch Prime Minister Jan E de Quay, they might have elsewhere and of possible consequences for Diary, 26 October 1962 the North Atlantic alliance.
Furthermore more effecemphatically stated that the dismantlement of the bases and tive action in the short term would fit well into this line of the removal of the missiles are essential.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry threat to the United States remains in existence and will weaken the of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
Western Europe , confirmed again that the construction of the bases is being continued at a frantic pace and that as time goes on the threat to the United States increases.
As a result of various circumstances Khrushchev sees CONFIDENTIAL himself forced to definitively address the Berlin issue in the short term,e. before the end of this year, of course with the Obviously State Department is showing great interest in intention to make the Soviet position prevail.
To this end it messages from Havana about mood and developments over is necessary for him to strengthen his negotiating position there.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch the Soviet threat lacks the necessary credibility.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and in Cuba, where the missiles are “zeroed in” on the American translated for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar.] retaliation bases.
This threat would be serious in itself but the United States would have been caught in an even more impossible situation if the announcement of the addition to the Russian “first strike capability” would by surprise have coincided with a Soviet initiative to acutely address the Berlin issue.
American action has struck the trump card of surprise from Khrushchev’s hands yet the much more important trump card Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington (Van of the Cuban bases remains in existence and gains in signifiRoijen), 27 October 1962 cance the more those bases near their completion.
Thirdly pirate attacks from United States and Puerto Rico The reason for this about-face can only be guessed at.
Fourthly flights over Cuba My informant put forward the possibility that those close Fifthly dissolving base Guantanamo to Khrushchev,g. the military, pressured him to withdraw his first offer.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch Cuban bases have to the Soviets] that one must wonder what Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. moved Khr to this new move.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transwe are dealing with an attempt to create the greatest poslated for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar.] sible confusion, not as much in Washington as among the allies and sympathizers.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry C U B A: of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
Raúl mentions in passing the decision taken by Khrushchev Whether this fear will prove justified, or whether after to dismantle the missile sites as a Fidel’s grandiloquence his “people” will still be inclined to run-up to new Cuban demands for guarantees, including swallow everything he puts in front of them, remains an open those concerning the evacuation of question.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry of the dismantling. of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.487.
Statement ing out who is taking decisions and announces these in public Roa to the Brazilian and then assures adhesion in the form of slogans, newspaper Ambassador shows 5 points are not so articles, poems, radio shouting, and telegrams from all counmuch directed to the United States but against the SU whose concestries of the Soviet bloc plus Bertrand Russell. sion given around the Cuban government disturbed Fidel The ensuing step is a speech by Fidel wherein he gives the . people a full explanation of what has already taken place.
A third possibility is that after which the minister said that these points are negotiable. he will inform Fidel about some deep game or another that the Soviet Union is playing with the United States.
The without accomplishing his aim, the blockade will probably be rest is part of future settlement Cuban United States conflict resumed, and in Cayo Hueso there is the same military busyness as everywhere in Cuba.
The Indonesian president did have the occasion to do so, such as during a CONFIDENTIAL recent speech to students.
According to informant perhaps this wise forbearance from Sukarno’s side could be read Speech Fidel about as a first indication of the salutary effect the firm and resolute conversations with Thant, of course of action of the Kennedy government regarding Cuba which second confidential, shows that Cuba refuses inspecwill have—according to expectations. tion; If UN accepts American guarantee of non-aggression then promise SU with regard to taking back strategic weaponsecondly The United States government intends to point out to ry without inspection can be accepted.
Mentioned his 5 conJakarta, as they hope superfluously, the way in which the ditions for peace and declared Cuba prepared to cooperate to S U did not hesitate to abandon its friend India reach true peace.
I then gave as my opinion Hinted that global politics which does not concern Cuba that Sukarno would continue untiringly in his attempts to reason for Soviet concession.
Have impression Cuban governplay United States and SU off against one another. ment determined and solution conflict extremely difficult. thirdly Informant said that my colleague [Indonesian Boissevain 71 Ambassador Zairin] Zain will soon pay a four to six week visit to Indonesia.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch new economic support from the United States to his country.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transAccording to informant the United States side is in principle willing to lated for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar.] provide support in order to prevent Indonesia from slipping into chaos any further.
At the same time they are determined only to provide this support if assurances will be obtained that the money for economic development will be usefully spent.
Under no circumstances do they want to run the risk of later Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 2 finding out, as recently happened in the case of Brazil, that November 1962 the support/money ended up in the wrong hands.
I could have written the speech made by Fidel Castro last night to report to the Cuban people about his meeting with U Thant before it was delivered.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry are imposed on them as a result of anti-American policy and of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.487.
The interim by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Secretary General came to sound out the revolutionary govBouwman.] ernment concerning a settlement of the burning issue which threatened the world with war, namely the Russian missile bases and the American blockade.
According to my perception this can be traced back to the non-execution of the indemnification part of the Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington (Van agricultural reform law and the subsequent confiscation of Roijen), 2 November 1962 American property in Cuba, also without indemnification.
Mikoyan although intensive consultations are taking place on the level will have a hard time because the Cuban is as intransigent of the OAS, in the near future probably only a decision to with the one side as he is with the other.
Fidel called the inspection of the dismantling of the misConcerning the attitude of the various Latinos Allen in sile bases an American attempt to humiliate Cuba.
On this the first place mentioned Mexico whose standpoint of course sole point Mikoyan could make a pacifying gesture by giving enjoys great recognition.
About Brazil he remarked that the Washington the solemn assurance that the “strategic weapons” impression is that the Brazilian government displays a differinstalled by Russia will indeed be removed.
This would allow ent attitude towards other countries than it does domestically. for a return to the “status quo ante” the recent crisis.
United States standpoint, without having the assurance that his action “I do not like thee Dr.
Fell, the reason why I cannot tell, would be completely accepted by the Bolivian government. but all the same I know full well, I do not like thee Dr.
It was apparent that Allen possessed very little information concerning the situation in Cuba itself.
He was informed by The Ambassador, me on the basis of Boissevain 69, for which Allen showed himself most appreciative.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the was less sizeable, or at least less active, than is often thought.
Obtained for Incidentally he did not exclude the possibility of a significant CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by role being played by the fact that in the various countries the Bastiaan Bouwman.] police had been warned after the United States embassies in the various capitals had prepared the governments for the possibility of troubles.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington (Van of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
Washington red-handed and having been forced to retreat would now risk SECRET a second fiasco with the purpose of hiding a few weapons inadequate to truly threaten the United States clandestinely.
Since Fidel has brought in the Spartan mothers (he had Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , read a book again) tensions have been rising because of the 20 November 1962 lack of a satisfactory settlement of the dispute.
In the meantime the island has become almost completely CONFIDENTIAL isolated and already practice has shown that orders in Europe cannot be shipped or are received with considerable delays.
Derive from the following firstly presidential farewell dinThis does not however keep the revolutionary government ner for Mikoyan secondly absence Fidel from participating in popular movements elsewhere and the who was supposedly seen drunk elsewhere thirdly Fidel’s letattached badge5 proves this.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch tudes and expressions of admiration for the Cuban people Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. in its struggle against imperialism and its love for world 82.
Time and again he covered himself with the mantle lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] of Khrushchev’s name and he repeatedly mentioned Fidel Castro.
Unless the Soviet Union, which has abantrans.] in which 5 points repeated, inspection doned or been forced to abandon friends in the past, pressures turned down, and the United States provoked.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch C U B A: Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.
During these days for the full 24 hours great activity was observed near the hill of Viñas, located right of the road from Bartolomé to Central Adela, where work has already been going on for months.
Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , At 1 KM. distance right of the road, which leads from 28 November 1962 Bartolomé in southern direction to Zuluete there is another hill of little height named “San Ramón,” where during the VIA AIR MAIL past days there has also been much activity.
The Concerning C u b a cold war with the United States continues as long as on-site inspections are denied.
He confirmed Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington (Van that Khr had conceded withdrawal of the troops, Roijen), 27 December 1962 albeit without committing himself to a definite time limit.
This window had to be shut, who lived in that house, please respond expediently where would Fidel Castro sit at the table, etc.
GWB government too large debt to Soviet bloc, only the United States able to TO: NERECODI [Dutch Government Code Service, The provide aid but nevertheless he was determined to continue Hague] revolution and this is the bottleneck.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch convinced ideals must sometimes tested against reality; Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. he feels obliged pursue agreement with United States yet would like 119.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transuse me as middle man.
Since Fidel, after clear language lated for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar.] from my side, cannot harbor illusions regarding my feelings I personally am willing but of course only if mandated by You.
Should Castro approach You and—before he was unfortunately called to the telephone— directly with similar proposal I should like to be informed. had the air of one who is boasting to a trusted friend about On our part the United States Embassy here will be most confidenhow he has crossed an opponent. tially informed of Your telegrams and the above.
National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch administration of the refinery of Shell and so forth.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transto our country to induce negotiations about such matters.
I lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] repeat my request to be sent a magnificently illustrated work about the Netherlands to present to Dr.
Castro, to ensure that his current appreciation of our country remains undiminished.
Furthermore it does not seem unlikely that Havana, minister of said Ministry asked me if the company Tomassen apart from certain ideological and political objections, will in De Steeg would be willing and able to supply a 3000 horsegladly let Moscow entreat it in the hope of making a positive power gasturbine for the ESSO oil refinery that was nased reaction conditional upon further economic and/or political in 1960.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch “comandante” Félix Paulino Torres González and to an official Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. of the National Institute of Agrarian Reform, Jaime Enrique 119.
This at least according by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan to an announcement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here.
Roa to hand him a copy of my credentials, he emphasized the desirability of strengthening economic ties with the Netherlands.
National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 11 Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.
With reference to letters from our part dd 30 June Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington (Van 1962 and 24 October the same year, resp. no.95/359Roijen), 1 November 1963 GS.67 and no.45/550 confidential, it is my honor to report the following to Your Excellency.
He recognized SECRET one of the passengers because he had been present at a first interrogation which was the subject of aforementioned letter During my meeting with Rusk this morning he on being of 24 October.
Two of the passengers belonged, according asked informed me that currently no military Soviet units to Hernández, to the white race while the other two were remain in Cuba.
There are still some technicians and instrucmulattos. tors but the United States believes that all combat units have departed.
In contrast to the first time Hernández said this time he Over the past forty days two thousand Russians have left was not taken to a secret service office.
During a ride through Cuba and the expectation is that the instructors will likewise town Hernández was, according to him, urged to render leave as soon as the training is completed. certain services for Cuba and his revolution in his capacity Rusk in this context noted the tense relationship between as gardener of the Embassy.
He could make himself truly Moscow and Havana, among other things as a result of the meritorious by closely observing which Cubans and foreigners refusal by Castro to sign the treaty regarding the suspension of frequented the chancellery of the Embassy and by noting the test explosions, only a few days after Gromyko had informed numbers of their automobiles, if any.
As he did the first time, Hernández this time too forcefully The secretary of state emphasized the highly confidential denied the request of his interrogators and stated that he was, nature of the statements set out in the first paragraph of this given his work, not only unable but moreover not willing message and I would request you to use these with utmost to act as a spy against his Dutch principals.
Thereupon they discretion. had offered him money for such services but Hernández said he did not accept this offer either.
Finally they had urged Van Roijen 698. him not to let the Embassy know of this conversation.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry discover this—he would come to regret this.
Reinink he had then made clear to his interrogators that he indeed would be reporting about this matter immediately.
In the back was a soldier with a subreport and his firm attitude yet at the same time advised him machine gun resting on his knee.
We slowed down in front of to be prudent and to avoid that the Cuban agents in question the entrance to a street in the same district that contains the would as a consequence of overly emotional reactions from Dutch and a few other Embassies.
The entrances had, as had his side be more agitated than would be strictly necessary. been established on earlier occasions, been blocked and were For the record it is to be noted that the conversation guarded by sentries.
After the sentries had recognized Vallejo related above took place in the garden of the Embassy. they raised the barrier and a short while later we stopped in front of an apartment building the entrance of which likewise The Ambassador, was guarded by soldiers.
National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch myself in a spacious, but not luxurious, flat, probably previLegation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. ously inhabited by someone from the upper-middle class.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transCastro has several of such apartments.
Primarily out of safety lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] considerations he never stays at the same address for long.
As such he is someone with no regular place of [illegible, presumably “work”] or residence.
Without removing the pipe from Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 17 his mouth Fidel greeted me with an “hola” , slapped March 1964 me on the back, and explained that he was undertaking an attempt to make ice cream.
The Chinese People’s Republic would receive only were also intended as sleeping space for Castro’s bodyguards.0,000 tons in 1964, equal to the amount of the previous Rocking back and forth vigorously Castro began to speak year.
With the exception of the Soviet Union, Cuban trade and started with an account of his economic policy.
Sugar, with the Eastern European countries had now been dramatiagriculture, and cattle breeding were currently priorities in cally changed.
Yet according to Castro, this belonged not only to that he wanted to wait until after the [November 1964 the past, but it was simply part of the “socialist” system.
All presidential] elections in the United States before making a the same, he said, this did not mean that Philips should not concrete proposal.
To do so now could have politically unforbe indemnified for the losses suffered here. tunate consequences.
Washington would probably continue The impression the prime minister made on me during to cross Cuba until the elections.
After that perhaps the conthis long meeting was that of a dynamic, indefatigable man versation could become more pleasant.
In any case he would who is not only aware of his great power but also wishes to have to come to an agreement with the United States sooner or later. exercise it even in areas that would normally belong to the A solution of what he referred to as the “only small remaincompetencies of ministers.
He is conscious of the inexperiing problem” with the United States was vital to secure for ence and the bureaucratic disposition of a large number of Cuba the peace and quiet it needed.
This explains why he urged me to convenient for Cuba to lay the material foundations for such send any possible communications not via the “bureaucratic a solution.
Incidentally it did have to be taken into account apparatus” of Foreign Relations [i.e., the foreign ministry— that, as more time went by, Cuba’s interest in a resumption ed.] but present them directly to him.
It is hard to avoid the of commercial ties with America would decrease.
Trade with impression that one is dealing with a restless, almost chaotic Eastern Europe had now been reasonably well consolidated man.
He hates regularity, fixed working hours. and a fixed and Western Europe would also take an increasingly imporworking place.
A prime minister, also first secretary of the tant position in Cuban foreign trade.
The meaalmost three hours for a conversation with a foreign diplomat sures against the shipping of the United States’ allies would certainly does not seem to attach much value to a normal come to backfire both for Washington and for its allies.
Nor can one ascribe to Fidel Castro an exaggerall, it forced Cuba to build a trading fleet of its own and ated interest in protocol and etiquette; he is more boorish thereby would make it less and less dependent on foreign than informal, more roughly jovial than amiable.
Yet he is tonnage for its overseas connections. by no means naïve but rather a cunning Galician who, when Not only Cuban sugar cultivation but also agriculture and necessary, displays a tough tenacity and is prepared to use any cattle breeding had to be thoroughly modernized.
Thus from the convictions about the “capitalist society” come across as antiperspective of the abovementioned international division of quated.
Incidentally he also seems to have only a superficial labor the Netherlands could take an interesting position here. impression of the reality of the communist world, primarily Castro said that one should not take too literally his remarks shaped by tendentious literature and information from his viz. that Cuba would in a certain amount of time surpass the own Eastern European advisors.
He meant here woken up to the fact that that the one-sided economic oriento take the Netherlands as an example, as a model of an agritation of his country toward the “socialist” camp has serious culturally highly developed country that, although small in drawbacks and that the trading practices of these countries surface area, had managed to secure an important position in cannot always be reconciled with the so loudly proclaimed the world both in the areas of agriculture and cattle breeding principles of “proletarian solidarity.” and the area of industry.
What Cuba was especially lacking The Cuban economic advances are now also directed at was technical-scientific “know-how.” the Netherlands.
By formulating the abovementioned desidAs part of the modernization of the sugar industry and the erata personally Castro wanted to take the shortest route plans to come to a production of ten million tons of sugar and prevent the Cuban propositions from being treated or Castro explained that here too he would like to appeal to dismissed as not being very serious.
From this point of view some of them seem attractive, Next the prime minister suggested that Philips would particularly the suggestions regarding the purchase of Dutch resume its transactions with Cuba, particularly in the area cattle, veterinary medical supplies, and installations for the of radio, television and electronics.
The execution of large projthis company had for many years had a good market here as ects, such as the supply of sugar plants, seem to be of a more well as some commercial and technical branches the latter of complicated nature because these may involve more than only which had however been nationalized by his regime in March commercial and financial factors.
However Perhaps unnecessarily I should like to note that I mostly Vallejo had been sick since about a week, said Fidel, who limited myself to listening to Castro’s discussions and conhad already installed himself in the living room and had also fined myself to remarking that his interesting suggestions already undertaken a search for my cigars.
Under his arm Fidel carried the Spanish translation of André Voisin’s “Sol, herbe, cancer,” a scientific treatise Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 15 intended for veterinarians.
Fidel had made some remarks Secretary of the Embassy] about this at the British Embassy.
NERECODI [Dutch Government Code Service, The however wondered if his remarks might not have offended Hague] the Netherlands, especially because perhaps by now a remedy BY COURIER. had been found for the ailment in question and therefore the problem need not be acute anymore.
It had by no means SECRET been his intention to make offensive remarks with respect to the Netherlands, which he esteemed highly because of its Regarding the visit by Fidel Castro, vide my 30, the following achievements in the areas of agriculture and industry.
I tried to ease the prime minister’s mind by assuring him that the The prime minister arrived unannounced.
The streets Netherlands were not offended and that his remarks at the in the vicinity of my house had been cordoned off for his British Embassy would in no way be considered negative arrival.
Yet Castro urged me to inform him as soon as soldiers armed with submachine guns.
The car in which he possible of the current state of affairs regarding the disease was seated also contained a four-man bodyguard.
He would then make the necessary correached the front door Fidel jumped out of his Oldsmobile rections in public and announce those pieces of information and kept his finger on the bell until the girl who was on duty from the Netherlands that could also be of importance to and had been dozing in the noon heat opened the door.
They could and would learn much from entered and asked if I were at home.
Fidel asked, and, when he heard this was about an of Pines], an island near the south coast of Cuba.
He noted my private phone number and this illness and thus his institutions kept stubbornly resisting said that I need not call him but that he would be in touch. the import of sperm from the Netherlands for the artificial After an hour Fidel Castro said goodbye and left his copy insemination that is practiced here too.
Yet he wanted to of Voisin’s treatment about pathological symptoms in cattle as procure Dutch cattle and said he hoped that the appropria gift.
He does not the Netherlands both in the areas of agriculture and cattleonly want to be the spiritus rector [a Latin expression meanbreeding as in the area of industry.
Perhaps it would also be ing “guiding spirit”—trans.] in the most divergent of areas possible to have a number of Cuban agricultural engineers of his society but also thinks he must gain in-depth knowltake a course in the Netherlands. edge of all related technical and scientific aspects.
He does Fidel requested an extensive briefing about the Dutch not only want to bring his agriculture and cattle-breeding reaction to our talk of March this year.
I pointed out that to a higher level but also master the specialized knowledge the Netherlands does not have state trade and that the govof agronomists, phytopathologists, and veterinarians.
In ernment therefore plays a much more passive role in regular the same way that Khrushchev was for a long time—and trade than for example in the communist world.
Nederlandse reacties op de socialistische dreiging , and short-tempered.
Pos, Dutch Ambassador to Cuba, 1963-1964, and K.W. of our cows and his impatience to apologize for this.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch 6 The joke alluded to the lawyer who was negotiating with Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, Castro terms for the release of Cubans taken prisoner during the inv.0.
Denmark had normality” which showed whenever it was “business as usual” an important geographical position.
This illnesses. provided several opportunities to take good photographs of If the Cold War turned into a confrontation, Danish new Soviet submarines on their way to, for example, the waters were secured with underwater microphones and hydroAtlantic Ocean.
Vessels and planes from the Danish navy phones, which made the intelligence service able to follow all and air force followed them closely.
The service kept a fishing vessels were actively used by the Danish, Swedish, watch over the passing of ships through Danish waters as part and Norwegian intelligence services to obtain information of the Danish Surveillanceand Early-warning Service.
Along Air Force used RF-84F Thunderflash planes to capture the the coasts, several observation posts from which Warsaw Pact Soviet ships on film. vessels could be followed, photographed, and tape-recorded.
On 31 July, the pilot L Poulsen flew over the Soviet cargo Denmark had its own small version of the American SOSUS ship Sovetskaya Gavan in his RF-84F Thunderflash and pho(Sound Surveillance System, underwater listening posts in tographed four crates on the deck.
Danish submarines would sneak their and shape of the crates indicated that they were holding way into the deepest corners of the Baltic Sea and record the torpedo boats of the KOMAR-class.
Soviet vessels as, now and then, the Soviets would rebuild old ships to make them look new.
But the sound of the engines “In UO 41/62 a delivery of 12 missile motorboats to and propellers would give the vessels away and reveal that Cuba is noted.
It has hitherto been established that the boats were build at the PETROVSKIJ shipyard Tracking the Enemy in Leningrad at a fairly limited pace.
The Danes delivered a vast number of photographs P-6 torpedo boats on the deck. of Soviet, Polish, and East German planesm and naval vessels The Danish pilots had reported everything during the throughout the Cold War. summer and fall of 1962 but it was not until United States President Kennedy’s famous TV speech that they realized what they had ”The Danes, who have an excellent reputation within been part of.
Nobody had told them anything about the use NATO for the gathering of intelligence in the Baltic area, of the collected intelligence. have a magnificent collection of photographs of the latest The delivery of intelligence from the Danes has been Soviet aircraft, including various versions of the Tupolev mentioned in United States sources.
On 29 August 1962, the same day Backfire bomber.”8 the first Soviet SA-2 SAM’s were discovered on Cuba, a meeting was held of the United States Intelligence Board on Soviet ships on Danish pilots would now and then act a bit aggressive their way to Cuba.
It was of course surveillance on pilots got a reminder of the existing rules of interception and Soviet vessels in the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea that the two engagement. were interned in and hoped to have delivered more quickly.
Prior to the Cuban Missile Weekly Brief Crisis several dozen Soviet ships passed Denmark on their 25 October 1962 way to Cuba but it wasn’t until last half of October that the Cuban situation found its way into the weekly intelligence briefs.
This is regarded by the United States as a threat, and President Kennedy is given the authority to call in 150,000 Minister of Defence, marshal MALINOVSKIY, reservists in case of a crisis.
This is perceived as a war-threat issued the order on the 23rd of October 1962 to cancel all leave by the Soviet Union, and it is added that an attack on for the armed forces.
Furthermore, the impending returning Cuba will be answered by the Soviet Union with, among home of the personnel of the rocket forces, the air defence and other things, a counter-attack with rockets.
These measures are done as a September, Congress gives Kennedy the authority to use miliquick response to the American actions around Cuba. tary force against Cuba.
Subsequently, the Soviet Union signs It is therefore not a case of a general extension of the a “fishery-agreement” with Cuba on the 25th of September. service-time of the armed forces; it only concerns the forces The agreement includes the construction of a Soviet fishery which—also under normal circumstances—are under maxiharbor in Cuba. mum readiness.
The decision to establish a Soviet “fishery-base” on Cuba Thus, it seems that the demobilization order issued by the provoke a strong reaction in the United States.
During Minister of Defence on the 7th of September 1962 is still his campaign for re-election [sic; actually the mid-term standing for all other personnel of the armed forces.
Congressional elections—ed.], President Kennedy is repeatedly urged to “act” and is accused of being “soft” on the B WARSAW PACT Cuban issue.
The foreign minister of the Soviet fied command, Marshal GRECHKO, gave the order Union, Gromyko, assures President Kennedy durto increase the level of readiness for all Warsaw Pact forces. ing their talks on the 17th that the The increased state of readiness can be seen as a result of Soviet weapons deliveries only consist of weapons for selfthe increased readiness of the American forces. defense.
It is possible that CUBA in 1961 received Mariel two Soviet destroyers, for the time being crewed by Russians, Mendoza/San Julian until a Cuban crew has been trained.
The two destroyers Camaguey might be a mistake, however, and it could just be two coastal Santiago de Cuba patrol vessels.
In May 1962, work on the lengthening of the take-off strips was observed.
BAHIA HONDA A group of technicians, who have manned 1960—a number of motor-torpedo-boats the radar of the air defence missile-battery. (arrived on the -’minesweepers Soviet ship MS “KHABAROVSK”). -’coastal vessels 1961—a floating dry-dock.
MIG-21 CLIMONAR and near the coast 24 MI-4 helicopters at RIO CAMINAR 20 AN-2 air-planes 8 IL transport-planes LAS VILLAS-province 1,000 men 3.
The reported , 1 November 1962 time period is marked by the Cuban-American-Soviet conflict concerning the bases on Cuba.
Perhaps as a consequence of Danish Defense Intelligence Service the crisis, the Soviet Union has furthermore taken a friendlier Weekly Brief stance in the Indian-Chinese conflict.
SUMMARY 24 October, 15:00 hours Danish time: the American naval The only conclusion which can be made with any certainquarantine is initiated.
Several Soviet ships nearing the quarty at the moment following the Cuba-crisis, is that the Soviet antined zone change course.
The ultimate goal, cized message to President Kennedy, in which he supposedly world dominance, has not been abandoned.
This is amply warns the United States and remarks, that the blockade could illustrated by the fact that the Soviets have given up Cuba as trigger a nuclear war.
He simultaneously answers Bertrand a military base, but seek to keep it as a political base.
It should Russell and declares that the Soviet Union does not intend to be noted, that among the reasons for the withdrawal of the act unpremeditated and is willing to participate in a summit Soviet Union from Cuba was the fear, as the situation develconference to avoid a war.
U Thant urges the Soviet Union oped, that the United States should gain unwanted insight to stop its weapons transporters and the United States to lift into Soviet missile data. the quarantine.
A Soviet tanker is stopped, but is then allowed Indian border dispute, be regarded as a wish not to worsen to continue, after it had been ascertained that it did not Soviet-Chinese relations. contain any offensive weapons.
Both the Cuban and the India-China crisis will probably Khrushchev accepts U Thant’s plea.
Kennedy declares that make it more difficult for the Soviet Union to penetrate into the United States is ready to negotiate.
However, according ASIA, AFRICA, and LATIN AMERICA. to a United States spokesman the quarantine is to be maintained, as Four more nuclear test detonations have been conducted long as the construction of the rocket bases continues.
UN Security Council asks U Thant to mediate in the matAn expansion of certain roads in East Germany may have ter.
According to unconfirmed messages, Kennedy has sent a military purpose.
Khrushchev an extremely serious warning and assured him, A certain degree of readiness is maintained in the Eastern that the United States will act, if the construction of the bases Bloc, especially among the strategically important forces is not stopped immediately.
There is a dramatic clash between as well as internal security Zorin and [US UN ambasforces in the Warsaw Pact countries.
Stevenson in the UN Security Council. in order to maintain internal order.
Polish radio and press thank both Khrushchev of the Baltic Sea can be observed. and Kennedy for their positive attitude to U Thant’s request, Apart from this, no abnormal dispositions can be observed. and there is talk about “judicial” consequences in the evenOnly limited training activity has yet been observed in tual boarding of a Polish ship.
East German radio mentions the newly discovered areas, which have been sealed off for Kennedy in positive terms.
Khrushchev agrees that Soviet military purposes. ships must stay away from the forbidden zone.
The United States suspends the quarantine A Soviet Union and aerial reconnaissance during the time U Thant is staying Readiness. on Cuba.
During the afternoon at 4:00 PM Danish time, especially those in the South and South East of the European the negotiations are continued.
India has not taken any direct stand on the exists following president Khrushchev’s radio-broadcast at matter and has only uttered general statements, whereas Cuba 15:00 hours on 28 October. has supported China in the conflict with India.
Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief 31 October: U Thant’s negotiations with Castro ends without , 8 November 1962 results, as Cuba stands firm and refuses to allow any inspection on Cuban soil.
Stevenson negoaccused of having “bowed to the imperialist aggression.” tiates for 5 hours with Kuznetsov and hands him a written note with the demand to withdraw all IL-28 bombers.
How these issues are to be solved the rocket bases is progressing with great speed, but promise, can not be seen at the moment; there are signs, however, that that the situation will be watched closely, until an inspection Moscow—presumably with the promise of increased financial on site has been made.
Most of the people’s719 democracies leaders seem to have accepted his policy.
This was time, first and foremost to the Soviet Union, but also to the expressed among other places in opposition at home.
Competent sources say that that the Gomulka’s article in “Pravda” on 5th and in the Polish government had not been notified about the Soviet statements the other leading Communists gave during the rocket-bases on Cuba.
However, the statements from East Germany the government acted very cautious and with restraint.
American notes were not rejected, no restrictions were put on the American diplomatic corps, and no demonstrations [took The cleansing in Bulgaria can be seen as the place] in front of the American embassy.
On the contrary, underlining of Khrushchev’s position as leader in the Eastern the relations between the representatives of the government Bloc, since the ousted party-leaders all belonged to the and the staff of the American embassy remained on a friendly Stalinist wing of the party.
The press and the propaganda was already removed from the party a couple of weeks ago. apparatus limited itself to only demand for a peaceful solution Stalinist elements can therefore only be found in the parties to the crisis.
The usual reliable sources tell about open demof Czechoslovakia and East Germany; these countries’ someonstrations against the Soviet rocket-bases on Cuba, and in what “lukewarm” attitudes toward Khrushchev’s Cuba-policy several businesses there were even notes of sympathy toward seem to reflect the influence of the Stalinists.
However, the the United States; one case saw students openly express their coming congresses in both countries could—as was the case opinions.
Also Yugoslavia ed with great relief, when the news of Khrushchev’s decision has given absolute support during the crisis period, whereas to back off was received, also because a continuation of the China, North Vietnam, and North Korea (but not Outer crisis would have caused trouble because of the overwhelming Mongolia) have taken a decidedly anti-Khrushchev attitude. amount of hoarding among the population.
Inside the Soviet Union itself, Khrushchev has apparently won great popularity in the wider population with his swift ARMY decision to let the rocket-bases be dismantled (“he has saved the peace”), which can maybe counter potential opposiA WARSAW PACT. tion from the dogmatist-group’s side.
That such a wing probably exists can be seen in an article in “Pravda” from 1.
The article can be a sign that Khrushchev with the help German army is retaining a certain level of readiness. of Voroshilov, whose name resounds well in military circles, will seek support among officers and old Bolsheviks against potential, China-supported, opponents.
Gomulka travelled to Moscow on the 3rd [of Confidential November] and back again on the 4th.
As far as it known, he was contrary to the other leaders alone and he left 1.
The prelude to the crisis. an article in “Pravda”, which strongly supports Khrushchev’s During the first half of the year the United States received policies, especially on the Cuban issue.
It also contains sharp several reports about heavy military construction activity attacks against the United States. on CUBA, including digging, construction of bunkers, roads and the extension of runways on airfields.
The dismantling of the missile-bases But it was not until in September 1962 that reports The missile equipment is now being dismantled by about major fortification works both above and below Soviet personnel, but there has still not been reached ground in isolated areas, where only Soviet personnel was any agreement on a control of this allowed, suggested, that something special was going on. dismantlement and the shipping of the equipment.
It is Soon afterwards reports were coming in about the unloadestimated that at least 6 special ships are needed for the ing in Cuban ports of electronics, cargo-containers for transportation for the missile equipment alone. specialized fuel , “towers” or ramps, which looked like missile launch-ramps, and large It should be noted, that a large amount of the materiel can containers , and in be hidden in large, subterranean tunnels and sites that are one instance an observer saw several parts of a missile known to have been constructed during the last year on during transportation.
Translated for CWIHP by Marked on the following map are the bases for medium Henrik Brandt.] range missiles that were revealed by reconnaissance flights.
For the second day in a row, the Cuban newspapers are quiet about the negotiations between Mikoyan and POLITICAL Castro.
Mikoyan delivers a speech at Havana univerWorld political activity of the Eastern Bloc: The period sity, in which he strongly supports the Cuban point of view covered in the report has once again been marked by Cubanand Castro’s “5 demands” to the Americans.
IL-28 planes, it is stated from Soviet side that the planes are Cuban property.
Washington announces that arrangements are between Stevenson and Kuznetsov, and partly between U being made with the Soviet Union concerning the inspecThant, Kuznetsov, Zorin tion of the Soviet ships that are leaving Cuba on their way and the Cuban delegate, Carlos Lechuga on the other. back with the dismantled rockets.
Continued disagreement After the negotiations Stevenson declare, that his talk with between Stevenson and Kuznetsov has been “constructive,” and a spokesman for U Kuznetsov conThant says that the Soviet Union and Cuba in unison has cerning the inspection of ships sailing to Cuba. proposed a solution to the Cuban-situation.
And as for the removal of the that these planes are of an obsolete model, and that they have Soviet planes, Moscow has expressed itself very negatively, already been taken over by the Cuban air force. since the planes now are regarded as Cuban property.
Vice Defense Minister [i.e., Deputy [Source: Danish State Archive, Copenhagen, Archives of the Defense Secretary Roswell] Gilpatric reports, that 42 of the Danish Defense Intelligence Service.
Translated for CWIHP by rockets have been removed , but that Henrik Brandt.] the American aerial reconnaissance over Cuba will continue; simultaneously, security work on the Guantanamo base continues.
The development around Cuba: Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief 14 November: Stevenson negotiates with U Thant and com22 November 1962 mented after the meeting, that the Cuban-issue must be concluded in the Security Council, where it had started.
The latter is a member of the 1 PhD., Head of the Cold War Museum Langelandsfort.
Hans A Schrøder, Det sku’ være saa godt – Danmarks Luftforsvar under Den Kolde Krig , 278.
For an example regarding an important Soviet vessel, 4 Danish State Archive.
Danish intelligence service went quite far in order to confirm or deny edu/~nsarchiv/nsa/cuba_mis_cri/chron.htm the rumor that Khrushchev suffered from bad kidneys.
The service 14 See telegram number 49 dated 24 October 1962 and had altered the plumbing at the hotel where the Soviet leader stayed telegram number 53 dated 25 October 1962. and was thereby able to secure his urine and feces and analyze them.
The Danish observations regarding Soviet ships The results showed that Khrushchev was rather fit for a man at 70. continued.
It was ECE588747/danske-spioner-stjal-khrusjtjovs-affoering/ photographed when it passed through Danish waters.
Lunding intelligence the Soviet Union would rebuild some of its ships in an and Otto Lippert, Stemplet Fortroligt, Copenhagen , attempt to deceive the Western intelligence services.
Helge Hjortdal, Tre Røde Konger – set fra sidelinjen , the propeller and engine would disclose that it was in fact an old Copenhagen, 225. familiar ship of the Soviet navy that had been rebuilt.
When a Local Danish Newspaper was Able to Report from Cuba by Peer Henrik Hansen1 O n the 28th of October 1962, Danish journalaround in the city.
The Cubans were frustrated about the ist Jørgen E Petersen took off by plane from the outcome of the conflict.
Pelegria Torras, which was printed in the newspaper selves in order to defend the country against an American Demokraten and is reproduced in translation invasion.
The Democrat, Friday 9 November 1962 And then the most incredible thing happened.
She forwarded him to Denmark and he tried to establish contact with his editor Deputy Foreign Minister state the views of the Castroand to his story to the newspaper.
But this did not happen. government He tried several times to repeat the phone call but without any luck.
He eventually got through to Danish national radio HAVANA, Thursday, correspondent of The Democrat, Jørgen and went on the air live for twenty seconds before the Cubans E Petersen cut him off.
Swedish journalist Sven Öste reported how he had been As the very first journalist since the outbreak of jailed for 24 hours and spent time in a Cuban prison cell the Cuban crisis, I have been received by a member of the together with several others.
The Cubans claimed that Öste Cuban government, the 1stt Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. was an American spy and that his passport was forged.
All contact with the outside world was cut Torras should be seen as reflecting the official standpoint of off by the polite but rough prison guards.
While people generto associate with their efforts, in the hope that, if the threat ally love chocolate and cheese, not everyone likes becomes a reality, they will save us, without having wanted to neutrality.
The margin to maneuver will become increasingly narrow. would bar neutrals from joining.
This does not mean Council in 1944 and who led the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that we will renounce our neutrality – but it serves primarily for the next seventeen years, set out to change this hostile to not let us participate in any political or military alliances on international perception of Switzerland.
Solidarity” advocated remaining out of political and military Switzerland’s neutrality rests on two elements: the first is alliances while joining the Western democracies in the conthe voluntary act by which the Confederation proclaimed its tainment struggle.
Under Petitpierre’s auspices, Switzerland neutrality… Switzerland does not want to be mixed up in became more involved internationally, while staying true to foreign countries’ disputes.
The second gives Switzerland’s the principles of political and military neutrality. neutrality its contractual character… it is the declaration Switzerland’s image before the world improved over the of the Vienna Congress … by which Switzerland’s years as a result of its redefined focus that emphasized solineutrality was recognized as being in the true interests of darity.
In October 1960, when US-Cuban relations soured, Europe… there is also the declaration of London , by the United States inquired from Switzerland if it would be willing which Switzerland’s neutrality was recognized again as being to take over United States interest in Cuba if need be.
As a result of the London Declaration, Switzerland had On 27 October, the Swiss Foreign Ministry filed for authoa duty to help where it could to promote peace.
Hence, rization from the Federal Council to inform Washington Petitpierre advocated the nation’s role as a mediator.
In this of Switzerland’s readiness to provide its good offices and manner, Switzerland provided its good offices in the conflict represent the United States in Cuba.
The Foreign Ministry emphasized between France and Algeria and participated in the Neutral that Switzerland customarily accepted such requests and Nations Supervisory Commission that was established at the pointed out that earlier that month Switzerland had approved end of the Korean War. a similar inquiry from the Federal Republic of Germany.
Referring to the threat posed by communism, Petitpierre The Federal Council responded promptly on the following maintained that “we are now in a position where, if we remain day and granted the authorization.
When the United States neutral, we, in fact, take side,” because this would play into withdrew its entire diplomatic corps from Cuba on 3 January, the hands of the Communists.
The Swiss first learned about attending an EFTA conference in Oslo15] and Chief Western the crisis at 6:30m. on Section Probst regard quarantine measure as 22 October when United States Ambassador Robert McKinney met maximum course available short of risking war.
Compared to other greeted as evidence United States not merely reacting or readnations this notification was relatively early.
The fact that justing to Soviet moves but is now taking initiative… the Swiss were representing the United States diplomatically in Cuba Swiss obviously grateful our efforts keep them might explain this peculiar timing.
At the time McKinney visited Micheli, the text I welcome quarantine; personally would be happy with of Kennedy’s speech had not even fully been decoded yet. world “barrage” against Communism.
But objective analysis McKinney was, therefore, able to provide only the first part must be that chances of accidental war now materially of the speech and he returned at 9:00m. with the rest.
I would think that with respect to Cuba Soviets then, he had been specifically instructed to hold on to the might lie low for a while, at least to see what United States actually does. speech until one hour before Kennedy’s public appearance.
Happily I am not a prophet. ing use of the leeway he had been given, went to the Cuban Addressing broader responses, McKinney related that Foreign Ministry on 24 October in the hope of soliciting a “Embassy officers have received unanimous congratulatory meeting with Castro.
It did not, however, express any sador free reign to seize the opportunity to influence Castro serious or concrete opposition to a meeting.
It is noteworthy that the Foreign the Cuban had learned of the reaction to the invitation he Ministry highlighted which passage would be a particularly had extended to U Thant.
The ambassador, as per his own fitting reference point for a conversation with Fidel Castro.
It statements, followed the orders and did not further pursue an appears that the Foreign Ministry was not disinclined to see audience with Castro, that is, for a while at least. such a meeting materialize.
Wahlen’s response to Loginov was thus another manifestaRusk’s proposal is significant because it illustrated the tion of Switzerland’s redefined foreign policy. effort of the Kennedy administration to pursue a diplomatic The same day, the Swiss ambassador to Moscow, Max solution to the crisis with Cuba directly.
Talking about the various courses Khrushchev’s Cuba policy and its evaluation of the situation of action that were available to Kennedy during the Cuban in the Soviet Union.
He outlined other possible readings of evidence presented here demonstrates that secret feelers were Khrushchev’s actions in Cuba and explored potential conseextended to Castro, not only through the Brazilians, but also quences of the Soviet premier’s response to the United States blockade through the Swiss.
Over Two days later Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with the course of the ensuing conflict, Switzerland, still trying to the Soviet ambassador to Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, prove the worth of its neutrality, showed a disposition to lend and offered him a secret Cuba-Turkey missiles swap.
Another example was the question about the following morning, on Sunday, 28 October, Khrushchev makeup of the UN’s inspection team that was to examine announced that he would withdraw the missiles from Cuba the missile bases in Cuba.
Neutral Switzerland would also Missile Crisis had thus already abated when on 7 November, have been a fitting match, but it had not yet been approached the eager Ambassador Stadelhofer was invited to a reception by the UN. at the Soviet embassy in Havana.
Thalmann had heard from Agda Rössel, the Stadelhofer’s dismay, there were too many people around to Swedish ambassador to the UN, that the final composition conduct a serious conversation.
He was particularly discomof the team had not been determined yet and that it was forted by the company of President Osvaldo Dorticós and possible that the Swiss would also be asked to help with Che Guevara, minister of industries, who, as Stadelhofer felt, the inspection.
Rössel, however, had also mentioned that were eavesdropping on his discussion with Castro.
Thalmann hoped to learn more details about that Pier Spinelli, director-general of United Nations Office the makeup of the teams once U Thant returned from his in Geneva, had approached Boissier and asked him for the trip to Cuba.
Accordingly, Thalmann merely related this help of the ICRC in the Cuban crisis.
To this, Thalmann information without much additional comment on his part. related, Boissier responded with general acceptance, under Later that same day, he followed up with another message.
At the meantime, Thalmann had heard rumors that the inspecthe time, there was some confusion as to how this demarche tion team was to be made up of Swedish, Mexican and Swiss to the ICRC came about.
In the evening of 25 October, Roger Gallopin, at the meeting of the International Red Cross in Prague in the delegate general of the ICRC, went to see Martin Hill, 1961.43 This declaration now provided the organization with Personal Representative of Secretary-General to Specialized enough leeway to provide its good offices in this case.
Ernesto sion and its officials were a little uncomfortable with their Thalmann cabled Berne the following day that Chakravarthi potential new role.
The Red Cross and he advanced the termination date of the Red Cross misunderscored the need to comply with international law and sion to 10 November. accordingly declared it would not force the boarding of any An additional complicating factor was the ICRC’s insisships that did not voluntarily submit to inspection.
Some necessary Sov ships are already in Cuba At the Federal Council meeting on 9 November, Wahlen and remainder will arrive during current week.
There is thereshowed the true reason behind his opposition to the ICRC fore no reason for continuing Red Cross system more than mission.
The US, in it would be better to address Switzerland than the ICRC.”68 contrast, underscored that “no specific date for the terminaWahlen’s comments demonstrate that he was not generally tion of Red Cross system could be fixed at this time.
In document number 18, Stadelhofer described though Stadelhofer in Cuba was highly enthusiastic, and the mission in detail.
The Swiss ambassador related that the they ultimately decided to proceed cautiously.
The Swiss negotiations with the Cubans about the details of Anderson’s government would also have been willing to consider helping transport were quite onerous.
He, for instance, had to contact with the inspection of the missile dismantling, as it related the Cuban authorities nine times to get everything lined up. to Thalmann.
The Federal Council, likewise, would have Likewise, Stadelhofer kept in close touch with Ambassador liked to see the UN ask Switzerland for its good offices in Lindt in Washington and together the two managed to sucthis regard.
In accord with the policies put forward by Max cessfully organize the undertaking.
Petitpierre, Switzerland did not turn down a single entreaty Initially it was planned that the Swiss would bring Major when asked and when it was not, it expressed sincere regret.
At the same time, point out to the American State Protocol excerpt to the Foreign Ministry and to the Department that it goes without saying that the Federal Federal Chancellery for execution.
Protocol excerpt to the Foreign Ministry and to the Federal Chancellery for execution.
Blumberg’s visit at the house of the signatory on dodis.ch, doc.974, Petition from the Ministry of Foreign 22 October between 2300h and midnight.
Ambassador Micheli briefs the President of the Federal Council on 23 October between FYI Hans Schmidlin 8 and 9h on the basis of the received texts and dispatches, p.B.73.
U’Ch.PO/mh so that he can report on this to the Federal Council at this Berne, October 24, 1962 morning’s meeting.
To Lindt regarding briefing by Assistant Secretary of simplify the matter it is agreed that Mister Blumberg will visit State William Tyler the signatory between 2300h and midnight to hand over the 23 October 1962 speech.
Khrushchev possibly believed that the Washington 23.10.61 Americans would take the affront 12.45 without protest.
This raises the question, Swiss Embassy, Havana , why Moscow, if it in fact means war, warned the Americans 23 October 1962 by erecting the missile bases, which foils the surprise effect.
Personally X believes that Khrushchev is trying to practice diplomacy by military means.
In his meeting with Gromyko [on October 18], Kennedy read the part from his speech where he Embassy of Switzerland stated that he cannot tolerate an offensive buildup in Cuba.
Embassy in Havana , “I am talking to you on a purely personal basis, and what 26 October 1962 I say should not be associated with my name.
Secret. – For Ambassador Stadelhofer. wishes, insofar as Castro is still able, to break away from Your 34 and 35.
We absolutely want to avoid the impression “Cuban government condemns the naval and aerial blockof inappropriate and hasty demarche that could lead to ade, it considers it a criminal act that infringes on human misunderstandings.
But believe that we cannot keep Secretary rights and violates the charter of the United Nations.
In our opinion, you know that people are willing to give their life to defend you should not take a conspicuous initiative to strike up such the sovereignty and integrity of the homeland.
If, however, the opportunity should arise to these times, when the United States pose more than ever a do so without causing a sensation, or if Castro, which cannot threat of war to Cuba, government solemnly declares that it be ruled out completely, possibly brought up problems desires peace and is always willing to negotiate any dispute by pertaining to the future by himself, you could, insofar as the peaceful means as long as they do not damage its sovereignty. atmosphere seems appropriate to you, personally and without Paragraph.
Berne Havana, 25.10.1962. 12h45 Mister Ambassador, Foreign Ministry Berne In reference to the possibility that was mentioned on 22 Flash October in the form of a question to Ambassador Lindt, I am taking the liberty to supplementary report to the earlier quick Today at 10h00 I had a conversation with [Cuban Foreign exchange of messages that I first went to the Foreign Ministry Minister Raúl] Roa, who promised to do everything to make on the 24th of the previous month, without, however, being a meeting with Castro happen quickly.
Everybody, who would have come into cally that this was my own initiative with the goal to enhance consideration to arrange talks with Fidel Castro, was at the and improve my reporting on Castro’s relevant explanations Presidential Palace for an urgent meeting.
The following day, in public speeches to Berne and to, given the current situaon 25 October, I had the conversation with Foreign Minister tion, get an authentic interpretation.
Roa is not familiar with Roa that you already know about, where I, while noting that Kennedy’s statements that you mentioned.
I am reserving I was acting on my own initiative, cautiously mentioned a more flashes. few points, which might be interesting to address if a meeting were to materialize.
On Friday, 26 October, the Chief of Embassy of Switzerland Protocol, whom I had visited formally for a different matter, mentioned that he had been asked by Dr.
Roa to pick me up Communicated over the phone to M Probst, 21.h30 BZ from the Embassy with his car and to bring me to the location E.2474 of the talks, should the situation arise.
Afterwards, in accord 25.10.62. o with your instructions, I took no further steps. 21h30 T.lo.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, Russian Ambassador introduced me to First Deputy Chairman Geheim.
So far, no such visit has Foreign Ministry occurred and until proven otherwise, I am not expecting one.
In the face of these new developments we recommend you to act with the utmost caution.
Rather wait, until Castro potentially seizes Politische Auswirkungen nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy the opportunity himself to start a conversation with you, vom 22.
Letter from Stadelhofer to Micheli, which would have to be conducted with much restraint.
Cuban statements are following the Russian line takes a position on the prompting to receive me. completely, they even go beyond by denying the existence of nuclear bases.
It appears to me that Rusk’s initiative was made Embassy of Switzerland based on preconditions that have changed in the meantime.
In this superpower confrontation, Cuba has more and more B 2503 lost its right of self-determination.
It should be noted that the Russian Secretary General of the Federal Foreign Ministry declaration was already known to him and that he had given Berne it his attention.
Cuba The Chargé d’Affaires said that, given the seriousness of the situation, his government had found it necessary to give notice of this statement to the Federal Council.
He hopes that Mister Ambassador, Switzerland will do its best to maintain peace.
Mister Wahlen reminded him of Switzerland’s policy of I have the honor to herewith give you for your informapeace.
This hopes that a solution will be tion, the text of the declaration of the Soviet government of found between the two parties.
The Chargé d’Affaires said that he was well aware of In addition to the commentaries that I have already cabled Switzerland’s policy of peace.
He hopes that the declaration to you, I am adding that this declaration demands that the will help to better underCuban crisis be submitted to the Security Council.
He alluded to the American editorial of Pravda of 23 October is even more insistent on bases in the proximity of the Soviet border.
The question is, whether they will an excuse to establish a blockade around that country.
He fulfill the mission that was given to them by the people and added that Cuba conquered its independence and that it did whether they will justify it, otherwise they will suffer the fate not pose a threat to the United States.
In return, the United of the League of Nations and will face the widespread conStates have threatened Cuba’s independence continuously.
Political letter * * * Going back to the declaration of the Soviet government, Destroy confidentially you will find that its legal argumentation is solid.
The population of Moscow is calm in the face It also seems, from the meager echoes of the public opinof the Cuban crisis. no signs of a ion that I could gather, that the Soviet population does not panic, but worried faces everywhere. understand why the crisis has suddenly worsened.
As a consedemonstrators over loudspeakers not to disturb the traffic. quence it seems more depressed than exalted.
In the big companies, the workers appear to have been * * * asked, given the situation, to stick together and to increase I am under the impression, as I have already told you, that performance, without inflaming the national sentiments by the Caribbean is not a terrain favorable to the Soviet Union underscoring an imminent threat of war.
This impression is shared by assumption that the Soviet government does not intend to the majority of Western diplomats.
Moscow will seek to win “march.” the second round in Berlin, this is in my opinion probable.
Troendle Referred to annexes 3. a) S ome diplomatic missions in Moscow tend to think that the Soviet government could intend to sell their position in Cuba for Western concessions in Europe and elsewhere will strike a Moskau, Politische Berichte und Briefe, Militärberichte, 1962. blow against Berlin or against Turkey.
Political letter from Ambassador Max Troendle to Secretary General of the Federal Foreign Ministry, Pierre Micheli, b) I srael’s newly arrived ambassador, J o s e p h T e k o a 10/25/1962.
The fact that Sweden has been asked, does not mean that the team will be made up solely of Swedes.
Since the Soviet government is keeping its ships out Misses Roessel was welcomed first by the Secretary General of the danger zone to avoid incidents and last night, because the team of 6 people that will accompany it appears in principle to be willing to settle the dispute in the U Thant to Cuba tomorrow, includes a Swede, who, in this forum of the United Nations or might case, holds the position of a UN functionary.
Roessel does not tend towards a summit meeting, it is possible that its yielding exclude the possibility that the appeal could also be made to will be interpreted as weakness by the opposite side and that us, he is, however, under the impression that U Thant seems those will appear to have been correct, who advocate a policy to be thinking more in terms of consulting with observers of strength.
An aggravation of the situation could result out of from onuc and unef.
A definitive decision will possibly not be this due to Moscow’s desire for prestige.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, Beteiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur e.91 Aufhebung der Sovietischen Basen in Kuba.
Cable no.1, from 26.10.1962 19h00 lo Thalmann to Foreign Ministry, 10/29/1962.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2300 : 1000/716, Moskau, Politische Berichte und Briefe, Militärberichte, 1962.
I would appreciate it, if Mr Diaz you could inform me of your position on this matter.
I have just learned from NewYork Narasimhan that Spinelli contacted Boissier last night Berne 30.10.1962 and this morning to negotiate ICRC participation in Cuba. 18h45lo.
In connection with the removal of the quarantine, the Soviet cable no.3 Union has declared that it would be willing to let representatives of the ICRC inspect its ships bound for Cuba.
Although interlocutor that if UN Secretary General asked for the initiative could set a precedent, Boissier expressed general participation of Swiss officers in a surveillance team for the willingness, on condition that Castro agrees as well.
U Thant dismantling of the Soviet bases in Cuba, and if the conditions will negotiate with him about this today.
About 30 ICRC of the mandate are acceptable, we will examine the request representatives ,e. for the 5 ports of entry, would with benevolence in the framework of our constant policy of be required to carry out this plan. lending our services wherever they may be of use.
B will recommend accepting the mission if the In consultation with Misters Micheli and Burckhardt, conditions are met.
The mission was a matter that serves to Campiche will call B , so that we are uphold peace and from which the Committee could hardly up to date.
Note on the potential ICRC mission 31 October 1962 I will call B again with the purpose of correcting the statement of this morning and to inform him of Mister Federal o.BJK/etc Councilor Wahlen’s opinion, while emphatically remarking October 31, 1962 that the Head of Department does not want to intervene in the decision of the Committee.
Phone call with Mister L Boissier, President of the any case, if the ICRC decided to accept the mission, be underICRC. taken with all the necessary precautions and with emphasis that this was an exception.
BAR, 2001 : 1976/17, Inspizierung russiB confirmed the information, as Thalmann had reported scher Schiffe die nach Kuba fahren durch Vertreter des IKRK. it to us.
Settling the matter required 8 audiences with the Report from the Swiss Ambassador to Cuba Foreign Ministry, three of which were to the Division of Political Affairs, with Dr.
Roa, plus one long phone conversation with him, Swiss Foreign Ministry, about the transfer of the as well as six phone conversations with Washington.
The local press gave wide Service that would have been in sufficiently good conditions. publicity to the affair and also printed the Cuban version of the record of delivery.
Decisive was that, which various discussions showed with clarity, the Cuban government for political reasons 5.
The point that the upper part of the plane was newly painted and endued with the Swiss Cross During our discussion, Dr.
Amstein, Chief of made a strong impression on the Foreign the federal police, mentioned the notifications the ICRC Ministry and moreover on the public. received, according to press releases, over the last weeks from numerous Swiss, who wanted to volunteer for the Cuba inspection.
Amstein’s opinion, it would be expedient if the ICRC would, in the event, forward the names of such The Swiss Ambassador candidates prior to appointment to the federal police for a “screening” either directly or through your division.
Conformation note of 3 November, 1962 Although the Cuba mission no longer seems an issue at the 2.
Informally submitted questions moment, I wanted to inform you just in case of this thought 3.
Draft of the record of delivery from the Embassy which you probably have considered yourself already.
Copy for Mister Ambassador Micheli 7 Paragraph after DoDiS, doc.974, Request from the Swiss Foreign Ministry Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Federal Council, 12/28/1962.
Center for International Studies, Political Affairs Zurich, Beiträge, no. , 12. p.B.Cuba.O.U’Ch.
Washington time, an hour before Kennedy Note for the Division of International Organizations went on television.
As pointed out by Maurice Vaïsse, the French intelligence services were among the first DOCUMENTS to provide hints of the arrival of nuclear missiles in Cuba to the United States.
The French authorities then contacted the United States Air Force, which overcame its doubts Meeting between General Charles de Gaulle and and decided to send spy planes to investigate the claim.
First, it be withdrawn; but it seems that the weapons systems being is likely that he is trying to use this affair to force the United currently built are not finished.
France Moreover, the Russians will not fail to launch a massive cannot object, since it is normal for a country to defend itself, propaganda campaign, especially towards the neutral couneven with preventive measures, once it is threatened and it has tries – Africans or Asians – in order to push their public the means to defend itself. opinions to call on their governments to pressure the United The planned measure is a blockade.
In State will speak tomorrow to the Organization of American any case, it should prevent any new weapons from arriving.
States, in view of guaranteeing Latin American moral support General de Gaulle cannot appreciate the result of a presenfor the United States.
It is normal in any case that the United could break out in their countries, and they have been promStates consult them. ised that American forces could be put at their disposal to put As for the Security Council, a referral is in line with down these riots.
For his part, the General sees no practical In addition, M Stevenson will refer matters value as there will be debates, discussions, and nothing else. to the United Nations Security Council in order to pass a The only positive fact remains the blockade. resolution condemning Soviet policy in Cuba.
M Acheson If there is a blockade – and once again France is not objectpointed out that in his mind this was a “prophylactic” step, ing as the United States are threatened – the Soviets will react. whose sole outcome could be to prevent the Russians from Maybe they will react in Cuba, more likely they will do so taking the initiative. elsewhere and in particular in Berlin.
In concrete terms, planning for a possible extension of If they blockade Berlin, the three responsible powers will the operations in Cuba, the American air forces are in a state have to take the needed measures.
Counter-measures have of alert, the navy is mobilized to organize the blockade, and been planned.
He appreciates M Kennedy’s message, even though it Roger Robert du Gardier, French Ambassador in is a notification and not a consultation, since the decision Havana, to Maurice Couve de Murville, French has already been taken.
I C B M are operaOn the opposition side – or at least the few people tional the United States, the installation in who dare to claim to be – the declaration of the American Cuba could improve by 50% the arsenal aimed towards the President caused a strong feeling of relief.
Thus M Roger Robert du Gardier, French Ambassador in Khrushchev would, to a certain extent, have been victim of Havana, to Maurice Couve de Murville, French the carelessness of his generals.
Does Soviet behavior in Cuba already amount, as some Department a general impression on the Cuban crisis up to commentators claim, to an important turning point on the now.
We can speculate, obviEuropean colleagues and I, indeed, are facing imprecision and ously, that the key elements of the missiles – combustible liquncertainty regardless of our efforts to get clear and verifiuids and launching devices – or even nuclear warheads – have able information.
The meetings of M Mikoyan11 are taking remained on the island, and only frames have left.
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers has run out Maybe there is in this case, on the part of certain Cubans of arguments and topics of conversation, and that he is only who are tired of the regime, a more or less tacit desire to see kept here as a sort of “shield” against an eventual American a serious international inspection of the island’s territory.
Many facts are still unknown. opposition since their leader officially declared last December We ignore whether the Soviet military reinforcement to Cuba that he was a “Marxist-Leninist”. was in response to a Cuban demand or a Soviet initiative.
We In terms of the relations between the government and do not know whether the works were kept hidden until early the Western embassies, the situation remains tense and my October and then hurriedly led into the open, or if they were European colleagues and I have the feeling that the regime always led without great precaution.
I would even mention cases of members of we can put forward the following hypotheses. the famous “Committees for the Defense of the Revolution” a) The decision to install medium range missiles in Cuba who were friendly or helpful towards certain Westerners who cannot be solely explained by the desire to defend the were labeled as particularly pro-Americans: these are likely island.
A strong anti-aerial defense, and if need be a naval some simple “counter-insurance plans” in case a still possible defense, would have been sufficient for that end.
If one day we have to face a crowd that is aniresort to force in a very dangerous context. mated by hostile intentions towards us, it will only be, and c) The Soviet installation in Cuba was not aiming, it seems, I am convinced of this, on the basis of precise orders from to capture an opportunity to launch a devastating war; authorities… the missiles did not sufficiently change the balance of Lacking any serious information on the evolution of M power to allow the destruction of the opponent without Mikoyan’s mission or on the eventual removal of the 42 any retaliation.
Illyushin 28 that are claimed to be here, I am giving these d) The Soviet bases in Cuba seemed to aim, first and indications to the Department, through this ‘summary of the foremost, to improve the political and military situation general atmosphere,’ in response to the request that was made of the USSR, either in view of a great debate with the by its message on 2nd November.
Translation by Garret J Martin.] cannot understand, in particular, why no potential maneuver was ever planned, a case where the United States reacted.
To those who, for a long time, have claimed had been mentioned several times.
It is at this moment that the Soviet Union has traded its old military threats that a delay of two months had been granted by M. with political and economic challenges, the Cuban Khrushchev.
All of this indicates that between the 24 crisis provided a strong rebuke.
The political-economic and 28 of October, the Soviet leaders improvised when challenge complements the military threat.
It remains that, if as was feared for a while, a blockade and to avoid, at least in the initial phase, a the USSR had created even minor difficulties in Berlin, direct confrontation with the USSR through a surprise the Alliance would have faced far greater strains that it attack against the bases, is inspired by the strategic did.
It thus appears that political consultation between doctrine of flexible response.
The blockade was merely the fifteen members is a tool that does not work the symbol of American will.
The two key elements government, while clearly stating that it would not be of deterrence were combined in the American attitude deterred from its actions, was careful not to hurt the pride in Cuba, that is to say incrementalism and continuity. either of the organization or of the non-aligned world.
By taking calculated risks, the American leaders sent It clearly showed that it considered the acting Secretary a clear ‘message’ to Moscow.
No doubt the current General a useful tool for communication and administration will reach conclusions that reinforce dialogue, as long as his action took place within a clearly its belief that the nuclear game is only possible with a defined framework. minimum number of actors.
These considerations cannot be action in Cuba profoundly shocked the non-aligned systematically applied to other situations or theaters. world.
The USSR b) The Soviet government clearly showed that, in a situation revealed how it views smaller countries.
These episodes where the other camp has the initiative and events are will have profound consequences which do not seem to moving fast, it loses some of its confidence.
Soviet have been analyzed in Moscow. diplomatic action struggled to follow the train of events.
The missiles are being sent Khrushchev contradicted himself in his correspondence back to the USSR, under American naval surveillance. with M Kennedy.
He Soviet ships going to Cuba are inspected by the Red Cross, had not informed his communist allies. acting under United Nations authority.
This inspection More importantly, the Russians proved incapable of will likely not last long.
The American promise the Cubans are opposed to their inspection, and we can not to invade, regardless of its value, is only a promise, imagine that M Mikoyan is butting heads while the missiles are already on the boats.
The United States will thus with the exception of the unexplainable Turkish episode15, maintain their aerial surveillance and their ‘quarantine.’ did Moscow try to trade.
We must, moreover, be b) The Organization of the American States was conscious of the role that strategic considerations have strengthened, the Atlantic Alliance was reassured, played and play for the Soviet leaders.
The current period American prestige has increased, even though the legal should be used to draw common conclusions from this basis of the American action was greatly criticized at the crisis.
Future problems can then be considered, noticeably beginning. during the meetings in Paris in mid-December. c) The ‘socialist’ camp, on the other hand, faces a new crisis.
See Charles de Gaulle-Roland Margerie meeting, 4 June d) Khrushchev’s situation in the USSR does not seem 1963, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Français, Cabinet du Ministre, Couve De Murville, Vol.5; Maurice Couve de Murvilleweakened for the moment.
We noted no signs of discord Gerhard Schroeder meeting, 12 November 1965, Ministère des during the 7th November celebrations.
It is true that in Affaires Etrangères Français, Cabinet du Ministre, Couve De the USSR, internal crises only emerge slowly.
Without Murville, Vol.1. more precise information, we can attribute little value to 3 Jean Lacouture.86.
The Foreign Office believed that military material that came from the bases that were being the Soviet diplomat had received instructions to convince currently dismantled. the British government to act as a mediator and propose a 13 This circular telegram was sent by courier to the posts meeting between Khrushchev and Kennedy.
Faced with the in Abidjan, Bangui, Brazzaville, Buenos-Aires, Cotonou, attitudes of Douglas-Home, who had stuck to the question of Fort-Lamy , Libreville, Luxembourg, New the nuclear weapons in Cuba, his interlocutor had given up Delhi, Niamey, Nouakchott, Ouagadougou, Rio de Janeiro, on fulfilling his instructions.
He did not believe that a summit conference was needed and created a title of admiral of the navy, awarded to Admiral for the moment.
On 21st May, General Alexei Epichev was 18 On 28th October, the letters essentially addressed the named as the head of the central political administration of Cuban affair. the Soviet armed forces.
This explains why some of the most revealing documents in this short section originated from contacts with Brazilian Report from Cultural Attaché at the Israeli diplomats.
The US The Brazilian attempt to mediate between Cuba and foreign minister, Santiago Dantas, presented the proposal the United States during the crisis—which followed nearly three years during a meeting of Brazilian ambassadors that took place at of efforts to play the middleman between Washington and the ministry.
In contrast to the abundance of information that Israel received from the Brazilians, Israel knew very little about the [During a meeting of Brazilian ambassadors held at the internal Cuban deliberations in Havana.
On the The PM-Barbour [Israeli Prime Minister David Benother hand, Cuba would commit to certain things regarding Gurion—US Ambassador to Israel Walworth Barbour] conthe sources of its weapons and propaganda in the continent. versation was devoted to the crisis in Cuba.
Barbour did not Viz. would not sign agreements with add much to what you already had heard from the Secretary non-continent countries and would . ...did not succeed in discussnot try to spread its ideology in the continent.
In Brazil’s ing issues in US-Israeli relations; he felt the Prime Minister’s opinion, the granting of neutral status to Cuba is better than concern of the international situation… any other proposal that might bring about interference in The PM told Barbour that with regard to the Cuban Crisis Cuba’s domestic politics that, in turn, might create a situation we had nothing better to do than pray. of constant lack of trust between Latin American countries.
Barbour reiterated the State Department’s instruction askAfter hearing foreign minister’s presentation, Cuba’s ing Syria and Israel to maintain order along their border in ambassador to Brazil, Joaquin Hernandez Armas, said that view of the situation.
The PM replied the proposal was “splendid and brilliant” and emblematic of that Israel is trying to maintain peace.
Jose Carlos de Macedo, Joao Neves de Fontoura, Vincente Paulo Francisco Rao , and Horacio Lafer, wrote a memo to the Foreign Minister (for submission to the Prime Minister) proposing that the government together with other Cable from Israeli Embassy, Prague, to countries in Latin America take a position which would isoIsraeli Foreign Ministry, Jerusalem,25 late Cuba by severing diplomatic relations.
This position should isolate dictatorial Castroist Cuba from the OAS because it was The Crisis in Cuba is causing public panic.
Yesterday until wrong to shirk commitments that had already been taken late hours there were long lines in front of the stores.
Cultural attaché In the American embassy they expect a demonstration in front of their gate.
Kural thanked me and told me it , to Israeli Foreign Ministry, was a very important piece of news.
In view of his refusal, several other proposals were aired which were not prepared in advance just to keep Bodrov met with the the negotiations going, but all for naught.
The content of the Foreign Minister and submitted to her meeting on the 31st was secret and both sides promised not the Soviet announcement on Cuba from the 23rd.
During the to leak any details. ensuing conversation, he said that Soviet ships were ordered not to get into the crisis zone.
But Khrushchev in his last C U Thant said that the Americans insisted on sending letter to Kennedy pointed to the need to end the quaranobservers, and the Cubans did not fully understand this fact. tine within a month at the latest… the Soviet government appealed to the Israeli government to use its D On the night between the 27th and the 28th , the influence to forestall a military holocaust.
The minister said President called the Brazilian that Israel had a well-known position that supported peace ambassador to tell of an imminent United States attack within the next negotiations.
Israel’s influence in the current circumstances 24 hours and asked for Brazil’s intervention.
Nevertheless, Israel would do whatever it can as night, the ambassador received a cable from Goulart repeata United Nations member to encourage negotiations and avoid military ing the same story.
Following an instruction to approach the confrontation… Cubans, he asked them to accept observers as the only alternative to an American invasion, but the Cubans were not willing Lvavi [Head of the East European Desk at, Foreign to agree.
Such an arrangement would allow Castro to admit Foreign Minister explicitly said so to the inspectors without losing face. ambassador and added that they would not agree to any settlement that did not involve Cuba even if the Soviets supBernardes said that their embassy in Havana was unable ported that arrangement.
So far for what the ambassador had to lift the veil of secrecy that currently surrounded the discussaid.
Castro’s rigid position possibly emanates sions between the Soviet and the Cubans.
He also said that either from a sense of despair or a feeling of strength.
After they planned to pass a resolution at the Security Council he understood that the Soviets were unwilling to confront the declaring Latin America, Africa and the Middle East nuclear US over Cuba, he was trying to exploit their [i.e. the free zones but were unable to do so due to French opposiSoviets’] interest in reaching a compromise and extort them tion.
They now intend to bring this issue before the General by putting forward extreme Assembly.
The Brazilians think that the Americans would be positions which foil their plans. willing to take their bases out of Turkey; a step which would aid in declaring the Middle East a nuclear free zone.
Castro in its deal with the United States This was a propaganda victory for Castro.
The game is very dangerous right now because there is no way of telling Castro’s response.
Naval British attaché told me that at the height of the crisis the United States was making preparations to conquer the island and by his assessment the Soviet Union would not have responded.
I had a meeting today with ambassador Bernardes deputy minister of foreign affairs.
I started by expressing our appreciation for Brazil’s valiant A Letter from Arie Meyron, Counselor, efforts to mediate in the Cuban crisis and asked him how the Embassy in Rio de Janeiro, to the they saw things.
Bernardes said that although the immediate Head of the Latin American Desk at the danger of a military confrontation had passed, a formula still Israeli Foreign Ministry, “Brazil-Cuba”, 7 needed to be found to tackle Castro’s wounded pride and November 1962 anger over the deal that the United States and the Soviet Union made behind his back.
The Brazilians are working on an initiative … I am most interested in your query regarding Brazil’s according to which all Latin American countries would agree initiative to create a nuclear-free-zone in Latin America.
This pulls the rug under the pated in the council meeting on 23 October 1962, allegedly idea of Brazil conducting “an independent foreign policy.” voted for the joint decision although he received no instrucAmerican aid money would, from now on, be conditioned tions from his government as to how to vote.
MFA 3394\19, Israel State Archive , Jerusalem, council] – they said that he was summoned in Israel; obtained and translated from Hebrew by Guy Laron.] order to be reprimanded – and explained publically that he had acted under instructions and in full coordination with Notes the government.
Moreover, sources close to the ambassador had explained that he would not have dared voting without 1 Jacob Abadi, Israel’s Quest for Recognition and Acceptance in instructions from the prime minister and foreign minister.
The rumors had been evidently spread because of the contra2 Edy Kaufman, “Israel’s Foreign Policy Implementation in diction in which Brazil found itself in.
From the Cuban to stand with the rest of Latin America to support the West.
Besides these various international issues, bilateral allies in Eastern Europe.
The journey came at a sensitive Soviet-Cuban discussions also had now perennial subjects to moment in both the communist world (and in Cuba’s relacover—the parlous state of the Cuban economy and the level tions with it) and in the broader Cold War.
In Moscow, it and nature of Soviet-bloc aid, and the continuing rift between was still a time of transition following the October 1964 Havana and Moscow over the best means to promote revoluoverthrow of Nikita Khrushchev, and this was the most tion in Latin America , senior Cuban figure to come to meet the new leadership with the Cubans favoring armed guerrilla struggle, after their since then.
However, the Sino-Soviet schism coincided with a plunge in Sino-Cuban CWIHP Bulletin is pleased to present translated records of relations, burying Havana’s hopes of not only improving their exchanges with the Cuban defense minister from three of own bilateral relations with Mao but even, perhaps, trying to Moscow’s Warsaw Pact allies—the Poles, the Bulgarians, and mediate between Mao and the post-Soviet Khrushchev leadthe Czechoslovaks.
In particular, in February and March 1965—followfigure Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and a top Czechoslovak party ing communist guerrilla assaults against United States forces in Pleiku official.
The his own July 1962 trip to Moscow), the crisis itself, and its question of the communist world’s response to this building consequences.
We did not have a clear picture as has long been recognized as one of the revolutionary regime’s to your position regarding the controversy 6 within the most powerful figures—a status confirmed more than four international workers’ movement.
When this dispute manidecades after the events recounted here, when he formally fested itself in the harshest ways, it seemed to us that you were succeeded his ailing brother in 2008 as Cuba’s president.-positioning yourselves somewhere in the middle and that you J.H. were not declaring yourself clearly.
This speech was directed against the aggression of the United States imperialists Minutes from a Conversation between Cde. towards Vietnam.
We now know know a lot and we are well-informed, even though some mat765 that the course towards such an abrupt liquidation of monoregard to establishing international inspection whose task was culture was a mistake. to monitor whether everything was withdrawn.
How could it have been possible when of peace, its defender, and we instead became advocates of this placed the world at the brink the thermonuclear war.
Kennedy is not alive, and We agreed in absolute confidence without demanding Rusk has recently stated that any detailed definition of its causes.
Here we demonstrated nothing like this exists. a total lack of experience.
After signing the agreement with We had never placed and will not place our national interthe USSR regarding this issue, Khrushchev was to visit Cuba ests before general interests; that is, the interests of the socialwithin 6 months and to disclose, to legalize this fact publicly, ist camp.
We are separated from you by 6 thousand km; we do as this was to assume an official nature.
We had many doubts. not have any alliance of a broader nature, or even a bilateral I went to Moscow at that time in order to one.
Our security is contingent on an oral agreement with a clear up the matter.
We were convinced that we could not president who is already dead. hide this fact from foreign intelligence, which was conductA big misunderstanding arose when our nation found out ing activities on our soil, and that this fact would be known about the withdrawal of the Soviet troops.
We said that we would clear answered at that time that we had nothing to fear.
This position of Union is surrounded by United States military bases and if Americans ours was not met with any understanding either, but if we did start acting up we will send in the entire Baltic fleet to your not do this, it could have been worse.
Besides, this was a very visible transport, a Dorticos to Moscow , but at the same time line of trucks whose cargo reached 20 meters in length.
This fact was explained demanded that an agreement with regard to this matter be to Cde.
Dorticos with regards to health; we announced officially at an earlier date.
Fidel sudthat they could not talk at the time and that they would denly found out at breakfast from the explain later, but not like this.
This matter was explained to American press about the decision of the USSR to withdraw us at a later time. the missiles as well as about Khrushchev’s proposition with We do not want to talk about Khrushchev.
In my opinion, many communists in Cuba also did not, and Looking at your conditions, this is not comparable, even still do not, understand this.
We are in a difficult situation. despite the fact that although we are not most advanced relaWe cannot even publicly state that China does not allow the tive to our neighbors, there is no possibility in our country passage for the planes and they know about this. to go back to capitalism under any conditions.
There are no We are divided by a large precipice; we have no chances for people, there is no one worker, who would say that a factory unity.
Much depends on the which was either made into a public property or built by him position of the entire communist movement.
Each country should contion arose in which out of 81 parties, 80 or 79 parties would duct such a policy that would take advantage of its reserves to come to the conference while 2 or 3 parties, including China, the maximum.
Such a course of industrialization during the would not participate, this would force the CPC into changfirst years, while neglecting agriculture, was false.
Politics is not a free-art type of issue, it has to has to industrialize a country.
The Chinese do not understand. agriculture, and it is good that Cuba is following such a line.
They have a large We know how much of an effort this takes, but perhaps it tradition of statehood.
They think that as long as they can will be faster given your conditions.
It seems to me that unless continue this line, they will do so. appeasing the need of the people is not resolved, then there There is no point to play at prophesizing.
Discontent you say, and that is, that a joint conference with the Chinese is grows precisely on such grounds.
This is an opposite pole of their policy. carried out under a great emotional impulse, but even under I understand you.
I read the most recent speech by Fidel such emotionalism which characterizes Cubans and in genCastro in which he states that one has to give all the assistance eral the nations of Latin America, it is not an inexhaustible to Vietnam.
As a matter of fact, the Chinese are saying exhausted. the same thing on the outside.
I would not exclude the fact In 1960 a Cde. came to that some day the United States would try to encroach on China’s terrivisit us.
At the time, Cde. answered that this was not necessary, and that in your country, as well as in other Gomułka countries in Latin America, there is no parliamentary tradition, that there were still bribes, corruption, and that these I do not have any reservations on this issue. were complex issues, etc.
R Castro Clearly, each party decides on its own as to its policy and it learns from its own mistakes.
We are also not copying anyone The Americans reacted to our refusal in such a way that they indiscriminately.
After all it is known that every country has conducted their own inspection from the air.
Nevertheless, this poses a problem and the there are all these U2 planes.
All our reservations are with strengthening of a revolution, internally and externally, is not regard to a group of methods with which we do not agree. without any meaning.
I agree that there were, and still are, comrades in Cuba who either had or still have a I personally agree with most of your views.
In addition, your experiences offer a an evolution after recent events.
Our party is still young and immature, a party makes a decision then everyone is in agreement. although the CP had existed for 30 years.
When an old party comes to power it then confronts entirely new problems.
Of all things that are valuable within it, only W Gomułka one remains, namely a valuable discipline.
I consider continuing this type of contacts, either in Warsaw or in Havana, as indispensable.
I will explain in conversations what you had especially during Fidel Castro’s visit in the USSR [in May inquired about.
Raul Castro Poland was the first champion of the idea of denuclearization.
They are, however, adhering to the position that one should not isolate oneself from other 1.
From the conversations, which were conducted by the Cuban delegation with other Asian parties,e.
He asked about the assessment of the Italian policy from the side of the PUWP, for which he 4.
The Matter of a Former Member of the National received an answer that the program of this party is not clear Leadership UPSR – J Ordoqui for the Polish side, particularly with regard to the question of establishing a uniform workers’ party.
R Castro, on his own initiative, explained the situation agreed that unity can be solely hewn 16 based on the of the suspension of the activities of J Ordoqui, a activity of the lower organizations on the subject of concrete former member of the Nationwide Leadership of the UPSR problems.
R Castro stated that the justification [arguand the former vice-president of the Armed Forces.
Rodriguez, who turned in to the police a group of young revolutionaries from the former so-called Revolutionary 2.
R Castro was very interested in knowing who would sabotage which resulted in the subsequent recruitment become the new First Secretary of the Romanian Workers’ of Ordoqui.
The activity of Ordoqui made it imposMarch 1965] and he was asking how a new Romanian policy sible for many years to institute an inquiry against the traitor. would be shaped under new conditions.
Both interlocutors After the former had been arrested, Ordoqui made the inquiagreed that in recent years the RWP17 had been employing ry difficult.
When, after a long inquiry, Rodriguez admitted a policy characterized by nationalism.
This that sometimes the need arises when one has to give up one’s forced the Cuban leaders to undertake special cautionary narrowly understood interests in the name of unity and the steps.
The meetings of the War Council had not been called mutual welfare of the camp as a whole.
It was also at that time that the Sanchez, through the ambassador [Edmund Cuban leadership acquired evidence in Mexico which testified Pszczolkowski] of the PPR to the ties of Ordoqui with foreign intelligence.
Raul Castro The Cuban specificity contributed to the fact that the Ruz, and a member of the PB CC PUWP, leadership of the UPSR does not have to21 attach such great Cde.
Castro, one should not talk about the legalization of the revolution, since it is a legal act if the situation as a whole is The conversation took place on the initiative of Cde.
It is true, however, that the lack of Castro, who wished to return to certain matters which were firm local authority is palpable, thereby causing additional not exhaustively discussed during the meeting in the CC troubles for the revolution.
Such a situation will possibly PUWP with the participation of the 1st Secretary of the CC change only after the process of establishing a new party has PUWP, Cde.
A typical thing is that if the consolidation of revolutionary forces in Cuba had materialized in the years 1.
R Castro asks that copies of notes 1959-1960, it would have to be carried out based on a multiprepared by the Polish side from the abovementioned party system.
The solution of this matter at the end of 1960 meeting be delivered to him.
He justified his request and 1961 made possible for the attainment of integration on mainly by wanting to have at his disposal the identical the basis of the existence of one party.
The Situation in Vietnam In order to illustrate to what degree the situation in Venezuela has become complicated, Cde.
As a result, the Soviet government will d) Whether and, possibly how, will the PPR react to the not establish relations with Venezuela. situation in Vietnam.
The guest announced that Cuba was providing aid to the Venezuelan comrades.
R Castro agreed that the lack of readiness of both the Cuban comrades were sending weapons to Venezuela.
As a sides regarding a political solution of the problems must lead result of carelessness of the Venezuelan guerrillas, part of these to a complicated situation and to the intensification of the weapons found itself in the hands of the Venezuelan authoridanger of deepening the feeling of impunity on the side of the ties.
This fact served as a base for putting forth a well-known US imperialism, which, in the face of the above, could aim at accusation against Cuba.
However, these weapons were, in expanding further military actions in this region.
He listened their entirety, American, and were introduced in great quanto the opinion regarding serious and negative consequences, tities into Cuba’s territory by American intelligence.
R Castro stated, will never withdraw its moral support from it), which would have to result in long-lasting military for the Venezuelan guerillas. actions against North Vietnam.
The guest also listened with interest to the fact that the PPR has reasons to believe that the 6.
The position of the PUWP with regard to the conference US would withdraw from Vietnam if it were possible to do so of 81 parties with saving face.
At the same time, he seemed to agree with the view that the setback of the United States in South Vietnam is more Cde.
R Castro asked, once more, for the explicitness of the of a political, and not military, nature as well as that the US’s position of the PUWP regarding this matter.
Following the material resources are too great and it has too many broad reply of Cde.
Z Kliszko, the guest stated that the positions of interests in South-East Asia for it to withdraw from Vietnam both parties on this subject are in agreement. in the role of the defeated.
The attitude of the socialist camp towards Cuba last speech of Fidel Castro, in which he talked about comprehensive aid which Cuba would give to Vietnam had it been Cde.
W Gomułka had in neighbors with this country, was directed against the PRC. mind when, during the meeting in the CC PUWP, when he talked about the lack of a mutually-worked-out policy of the 5.
Cuba and the Current Situation in Latin America socialist camp regarding Cuba’s defense.
The struggle assumed a particularly harsh 22 character in Venezuela due to the increase of a revolutionary wave, the extent of the influences of the party as well as thanks to the At the end of the conversation, Cde.
One expressed interest in continuing this type of honest should not exclude the fact that as soon as the fight assumes exchange of opinions. a more severe character, the United States can use repressions against Cuba, just as they are doing currently against North Vietnam.
R Castro, a referral Revolutionary government and Minister of the Armed Forces was made to the position assumed by the Minister of Industry of Cuba in Cuba, Ernesto Guevara, at the economic seminar of AfroAsian countries in Algeria in February this year.
T Zhivkov: On behalf of the Central Committee of our party, on behalf of the Politburo and the government of the People’s Cde.
Guevara had recently spent a long time outside of Republic of Bulgaria, I most warmly welcome comrade Raul the country and the position taken by Castro in our country as our highly valued guest, comrade him should be treated as personal view; and brother.
In the tour that Raul Castro will make in the country he One should search for some kind of a solution regarding will see and feel the great love that our people cherish towards world prices which are unfair the heroic people of Cuba, how popular the Cuban revolution 24 to the developing countries.
On behalf of the leaders of our country I would discussion of the matters raised by E Guevara; like to express our gratitude for the attention paid to me by inviting the current delegation.
As far as I am concerned, this E Guevara is an unusually valued member of the UPSR visit is an longstanding obligation of mine which I had to leadership and he commands general respect.
He is, perform. however, marked by obstinacy, which was a cause of When we were at the meeting in Moscow, we received serious discussions within the Cuban leadership; invitations from the Polish and Hungarian parties.
We wanted to make a visit and exchange opinions with the leaders of One of the biggest merits of the UPSR leadership is these parties.
This seems clear judging by the fact that the freedom of discussion and an unrestricted atmosphere time we have at our disposal here, in Bulgaria, is limited.
The a decision that was once made is observed without situation in the world does not allow a person to be outside exception by all comrades who comprise the Nationwide his country for long.
Dobri] Djurov pointed out in Moscow, this should be treated as the first part of my visit.
On another conDrafted by R Czyżycki venient occasion I will have to come back to Bulgaria again Prepared in 5 copies so that I can make a tour of the country and see more things.
It is also our will to see as As you know, the Chinese accuse us of being modern many things as possible in your country. revisionists.
We find it difficult to say exactly what our reviAs far as our visit to exchange opinions with the Bulgarian sionism is like.
Of course, engagements and the little time you have at your disposal. all of this is not true.
Both the Turks and the Greeks know our I’m not aware of the exact nature of the questions that would army is better equipped than theirs. interest you regarding our country.
We international communist movement with regard to the new cannot respond to it, cannot disprove it.
But the Algerian conditions created in Vietnam now. friends and /Ahmed/ Ben Bella know well whether or not we Our country’s stand on the international communist have offered support to them.
The headquarters for supplying movement is, to a certain extent, known.
It was our organization er the comrades would like me to elaborate more on it.
As evident that our party is interested in our Bulgarian comrades’ far as the supply with clothing etc. is concerned, we created an opinion on these issues.
I suppose that the Bulgarian party’s organization in a capitalist country, I think it was Switzerland, stand coincides with that of the Cuban party. that bought the goods and materials we couldn’t get from the socialist countries, for the Algerian army.
We would be extremely glad to listen to some Let them ask in the Congo about the arms that Bulgaria information on the situation in Cuba. supplies for the nationalliberation movement in that country.
Probably we could first Let them ask the same in Cyprus, the South African Republic of all state our opinion. etc.
Our partisan leaders even are in want to dwell on some problems concerning our internal Venezuela. development.
There is a special organization in our country now that tackles these issues and whenever the people rise up we offer help on the spur of the moment.
The Chinese have still said nothing on the thanks to our party’s great underground experience, we have Romanian problem. had almost no failures when transferring arms.
As soon as the events in Cyprus started, they are seriously courting the Romanians now.
The people of Cyprus armed themselves this is the fact that the leader of their delegation at [former with our own, Bulgarian arms.
It is more convenient to get arms from us We must admit that the contemporary Romanian leaders, instead of the Soviet Union.
But we do not make declarations as well as the previous ones headed by Gheorghiu-Dej, do on these issues. not fully share the Chinese views.
We would not say anything on this matter, and on the basis of the Moscow declaration.
Yet now they folit’s not necessary to talk. low a policy of cooperation and balance with all.
But we are worried about what’s going on now in the interOn the whole, our relations with Romania are normal.
Yet national communist movement, in the socialist countries. practically they aren’t.
The intertions with the Soviet Union are the same as are our relations national communist movement, which has a rich experience with the other socialist countries. and tradition, is diverse and cannot be characterized by a Many times we have declared in public that we agree single political platform as the Chinese leaders propose.
What to argue with the Americans, of course, on the basis of a is most important and most dangerous in our opinion is not preliminary program, on an equal footing.
If they want to the ideological dispute, although it is of great importance. establish diplomatic and trade relations we also agree on the But our government relations are complicated.
The Americans say that make it possible for the American imperialists to become even they will be closer to us if we break our ties with the socialmore aggressive. ist community countries.
Our response is that they would have to wait for 10 thousand years and moreover we have Now, after being granted this loan we can say we are relyno intentions of making deviations from the road we’re foling on our own efforts and abuse the Soviet Union for interlowing.
But, how are convinced that if there were no differences and splitting shall I put it, sometimes our relations with Cuba are depenin the socialist community, these facts wouldn’t exist.
This dent on certain bodies which frequently view things from means killing a small people like the Vietnamese.
So that siveness of the Americans is increasing, that’s what concerns probably at a summit meeting in the future we will be able to us.
This is a precedent and we are worried about the way the clarify some issues and to better determine the directions and problem will be solved.
My personal opinion is, since I haven’t rate of our cooperation. taken my party’s opinion, that the problem cannot be solved Excuse me for having spoken too much.
You took up the whole time, so that none is left South Vietnam should stop the struggle so that it won’t be for me now. attacked, we would rather be attacked but let South Vietnam continue the struggle.
We invited selves in Vietnam’s mirror, because the outcome depends on you, yet we did the talking, not even listening to all that you the way the problem will be solved. had to say.
In this respect you resemble the Cubans quite we do not approve of not importing nuclear weapons into a lot.
That is why we cannot sign such an agreement while there are such weapIn the past our party used to have great public speakers, ons on our territory.
We had public speakers that On the other hand the war in Latin America continues, would start speaking in the morning and continue in the in Venezuela, Columbia, Guatemala, and Honduras.
There are mountains of ore, for which there including Chile, appropriate. in no need to go underground, they only have to be loaded.
We told him we thought the same, we even told him The imperialists, the monopolists, have a plan to use these that a coup d’état was possible in the USA, although they have riches.
They have an Alliance for Progress in Latin America other methods there¾they kill one president and put another and send their overstock there.
Less than six months had passed after we there would be less bread today, more tomorrow.
This surwhat the Americans plunder in Venezuela is enough to cover prised the party, it was not prepared for the coup d’état.
We also have an organization to help other countries, of Imperialism cannot do the same things in Venezuela as it did which comrade T Zhivkov already spoke, but having in mind in Vietnam – send some people there and rely on puppet your experience, we have made some mistakes in this respect. governments.
Because Venezuela’s present army would not We prepared partisans and the enemy knew that.
We have a like to fight against the partisans, as was the case in Cuba. full right to do this but they are preparing counter-revolutionBecause what happens then is the following¾when a military aries against us in all these countries.
To tell you in private, unit is sent there to fight, the general remains in a given town we sent a huge quantity of weapons at a convenient time to while the soldiers are in another, so that nobody reaches the Venezuela, but it was not from the socialist countries.
It is clear that the National were weapons left in Cuba and we sent them into Venezuela.
Liberation Front had no support among the peasants in the The weapons were American-made.
When we arrived in Cuba there were not objecVenezuelans to stop the fight but on the contrary, to intensify tive conditions for us to win the peasants, it was not until one the struggle.
That is why we are even more interested in the year had passed that such conditions were created––when the way the problem is solved in South and North Vietnam. struggle became more acute.
Under the chairmanship of comrade Fidel, the main The authority of the party of Venezuela in Latin America General Staff leaders, some members of our party’s secretariat is great.
Although some accused it of adventurism not long started checking our defense plans, our defense strategy someago, it is the party that has the greatest support.
In spite of there have been about 5,000 provocations of various nature the existence of 1,000 dens where it could be prepared, a against Cuba,. counter-revolution would be crushed, since our country is For instance, one or two airplanes are circulating above an island and it would be difficult for the contra revoluCuba’s territory.
We cannot take them down due to varitionaries to come to our country without the interference ous considerations; they fly at a low altitude.
The pirate attacks against us will think they have the right to inspect our country.
With our security organs we have been fighting consequence of Khrushchev’s declaration that each territory with greater success.
Attacks, such as the ones at Playa Giron should be inspected but we cannot allow our country to be are possible.
The Yankees say they have the right to fly over such an attack or a number of simultaneous attacks with the our country in order to check whether it has nuclear weaphelp of the Soviet Union, of Bulgaria and some other socialons.
We must admit that when the attack at Playa defense¾to have airplanes fly over the country and inspect it.
Giron took place , the tanks had just arrived Of course, we could take these airplanes down and thus not and we didn’t have people to use them.
There were tankers allow them to make such inspections, but Khrushchev has and artillerymen, who learned how to maneuver with these told us not to do it, otherwise he wouldn’t give us anti-aircraft weapons on their way from Havana to Playa Giron.
We have to reach an agreement as to whether or not on the experienced leadership of comrade Fidel.
This should happen at an there because of the heroism of the workers and peasants appropriate moment. who fought there.
The fact that many lives were lost there Hundreds of provocations take place monthly.
We took a whole brigade as captives but we have taken the form of people hiding near the border at the suffered heavy losses.
Attacks such as those at Playa Giron are Guantanamo Base and shooting at our border guards.
An American invasion against us I think is our people have been wounded and one has been killed.
We know we have the duty to avoid we managed to buy some quantities from China.
A few complications in the international relations, we all know months later exactly this incident in the gulf took place after what these provocations mean.
At some places we let trained which we started preparing our defense more intensely. dogs kill people.
We are already experiRecently there was a meeting of the Latin American enced; we do not make as many mistakes.
We discussed our differences, agricultural specialists are being qualified.
A prospects to be very good in the latter respect.–member delegation that insisted on stopping the disputes Regarding the state of the international communist movein public was sent to Moscow.
Our comrades from the CPSU ment and relations with other parties. understood these issues well and agreed with us.
The delegaWe completely share T Zhivkov’s opinion regarding tion then went to China with the same aims.
We have some experience and we are willing to there was ironic from the very beginning to the end when the gain more.
Rather, was preparing an attack against Cuba we wanted to buy weapcriticism against all parties and hysteric fits by Mao Zedong ons from wherever possible.
There were many cases of but the imperialist circles interfered and the supply failed. tactlessness and insults.
We sent a delegation to Uruguay has 2. million inhabitants, but comrade /Rodney/ Yugoslavia to buy mine-throwers.
You is a small deal for you, while as far as we are concerned, it will can join some other people.
You do not deserve to live on cause us great problems with the Americans, so that the deal your own.
Moreover, there were some attacks issued We insist on stopping the public discussion.
Although there in their theoretical journals, but we hadn’t interfered in them was one delegate from our country among these 9 delegates, since we had thought that it would not be to the benefit of some things against our party were also said.
That was not only due to the fact stand, we¾ours. that they had been attacked and beaten at a demonstration Regarding trade relations¾we have good relations with in front of the United States Embassy.
That was also needed anti-aircraft defense and some other things, which we not due to the fact that the students had been refused the wanted to buy from them.
They gave them to us for nothing. hall that they had been traditionally given to celebrate their Afterwards, the Albanian press published an elaborate article, anniversary.
That was a political measure undertaken by attacking all Latin American parties as revisionist.
But we must emphasize that our views on that appeared everywhere, the untruthfulness of many facts. international problems, on the problems relating to the unity All this made it seem to us, on the one hand, that everything of the socialist countries, of the international communist is really that way, on the other¾that not everything is the movement coincide. way it seems to be.
On this basis we were not able to make As far as the situation in your country is concerned, we are a concrete, correct analysis.
Now we are witnessing the aware of the difficulties, the difficult conditions in which you attack against the American Embassy, the aim of which is to work and that is why I will once again take advantage of this challenge the Soviet Union.
Many Cuban students particimeeting to declare that we will be on your side now, tomorpated in this demonstration.
I have direct information from row, under any conditions and circumstances, even if a war them.
Chinese and some Vietnamese students have invited becomes necessary, if a defense of Cuba is necessary.
This is Cuban students to sign a letter¾a protest and to send it to not a disputable question in our country, this is a firm stand. the Soviet government.
We already know of your decision. newspapers, radio etc. started spreading these things, the way each of them grasped them.
You should never doubt that we will always about the obstacles created by the Chinese to the quick be together with you, even under the most difficult circumarrival of Soviet airplanes with arms for Vietnam.
We do not doubt the fact that it is hard for you not comrades never deal with this question, to go and spread to yield to these provocations.
Even if these provocations propaganda in the way the Chinese do. were not present, it would have been surprising if they Fidel Castro’s last speech mentioned something about that. weren’t there.
They do their best to overAkt Nowych , Warsaw, Poland. come these difficulties.
It is clear that they are no longer Obtained by the National Security Archive and translated for victims of Khrushchev’s typical earlier ferocity.
There are a CWIHP by Margaret K Gnoinska.] lot more facts such as these that contribute to bringing us closer, to strengthening our relations.
We Trip to Cuba, 30 March9 April 1965 wanted to clarify our positions on these issues.
We sent a delegation, led by comrade Dorticos, but it arrived [in Presidium of the CPCZ Central Committee Moscow in mid-October 1964] on the day after Khrushchev was ousted.
When we do not agree on some issues, we go to settle the issue with them.
P 5490/ 7 Resolution From 30.3-9. 1965, a delegation of the Czechoslovak on the issue Peoples Army visited Cuba; the Information about a friendly visit of the Czechoslovak military delegation submits a brief report delegation in Cuba about the stay and talks with leading representatives of Cuba.
Lomsky The CPCZ CC Presidium accepts the information of 16th April 1965 Lomsky about the friendly visit of the Cs. military delegation in Cuba.
B Lomsky Based on the CPCZ CC Presidium’s resolution from 10th November 1964, a Cs. military delegation, headed by Minister of National Defense, Army General Bohumir Lomsky, visited Cuba after several invitations from the Deputy Chairman ATTACHMENT I of the Government and Minister of Revolutionary Armed Forces, Commander Raul Castro Ruz.
Attachment I The visit occurred at the time of heightened acts of aggresDraft of the resolution sion of the USA against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, and thus it was regarded as highly important in Cuba.
It contributed to strengthening of Cs.-Cuban friendship and to Attachment III strengthening of the friendship in arms of our armies.
I Stage – before arrival of Raul Castro from a trip in Attachment IV Europe and a visit of the Cuban provinces outside of Havana.
Report of talks with the Deputy Chairman of the Havana Cuban Revolutionary Government and Minister of the Revolutionary Armed Forces Raul Castro The delegation held a number of cordial and unofficial meetings with troops of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces and with workers.
The Cuban side emphasized Ambassador’s report of the talks – see Attachment IV/1. that the current situation warranted strengthening of the anti-aircraft defense.
There was no concrete discussion about Before the departure, Fidel Castro authorized an imporconditions for delivery of these weapons, especially payment tant discussion with Raul Castro and the Joint Chief of Staff conditions.
C Langer’s report – see the Attachment IV/2. was not present, C Langer asked Almeida about delivery conThe friendly visit accomplished its objective. ditions but the Cuban side did not specify these conditions, According to the CPCZ CC resolution of November 10, and did not do so later either.
The delegation did not revisit 1964, Raul Castro with a delegation of the Revolutionary the issue.
Relations and cooperation with the USSR are continuously improving and developing.
It appears to him Forces, Commander Raul Castro, 9 April that the current political leadership of the USSR, particu1965 larly Brezhnev and Kosygin, applies a sophisticated and scientific approach to tackling important issues.
Their approach to issues such as the unity of the ICM On 9 April 1965, Cde.
He stressed that once 4 million the Minister of National Defense of the CSSR Cde.
Army tons was harvested in the last days, there was General B Lomsky, and with the Joint Director of a real possibility of reaching 6 million tons harvested this year. the Main Technical Administration of the Ministry of Foreign Cuba will preferentially develop agricultural production.
The talks took place in the villa value of other production beside sugar may exceed the value where the Cs. delegation was staying, in the morning from of today’s sugar production by 1970.
They will particularly 8:50 till 9:45. focus on increasing citrus and livestock production for export.
Last declarations of the Cs. government Deputy Chairman of the Government and Minster of the and positions of the CPCZ CC on the results of the Moscow Revolutionary Armed Forces consultations of communist parties were mentioned, as well Cde.
Sergio de Valle, Joint Chief of Staff as the issue of the upcoming talks about a long-term agreement on further economic cooperation between the CSSR Cde.
Fidel Castro expressed interest in these issues and of Armaments for the Cuban Peoples Army; he expects that negotiations can be successfully concluded as soon as possible.
Ambassador in Havana measures to defend the missile batteries against low-flying Cde.
F Langer, Joint Director of the Main Technical aircraft had to be taken.
Administration of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFAAll these measures are very, very expensive.
They are MTA) taking them while fully aware that even their completion canCde.
Military Attaché in Havana not guarantee Cuba a permanent capability to resist, to repel permanently any aggression from the USA or their minions.
He said he was ashamed that they were not able to to Cuba’s dependency on imports of fuel for its air force and fulfill their obligations better.
The above-mentioned shipmilitary equipment, they are also building, for instance, large ments, including ammunition and priced the same as the first underground storage facilities for fuel. shipments, would cost about 6 million pesos, and they could They have built quite good anti-aircraft defense.
Beside start making payments from 1966 by 1 million pesos a year modern equipped air force, they also have surface-to-air misin goods. siles; however, these weapons are effective especially from In his response, Cde.
Raul Castro that 1000 meters up. he would pass the submitted request to the Cs.
Government, Since the USA focused on airspace violations and attacks and explained that we shared like brothers with the Cuban from lower altitudes, their anti-aircraft defense was augarmy even the first shipments of these cannons, and if the mented last year against low-flying aircraft.
He also said that, for instance, the requested 30 mm cannons were not delivered to any other country.
Prague, 25 May 1965 However, we fully understand the requests of the Cuban Revolutionary Government, and will pass them to the Cs.
Minister Castro’s remark that the refurbished cannons were sold at a discount in the past, Cde.
Langer For Information explained that this time, a delivery of practically new cannons 5781/ 7 is being considered, as Cde.
These are, therefore, weapons in the same quality as those that were sold for full price before.
Of course, if refurbished cannons are delivered, their price Rodriguez, member of the national leadership of the Unified would be adjusted accordingly.
Langer also said that our government at that time did not assess the delivery from the credit point of view.
It Carlos Rafael Rodriguez first said he was pleased to be followed from previous, quite open talks about these quesable to talk with comrade Koucky confidentially and to contions, which let us assume that should the Cuban side ask for tribute to the elimination of misunderstandings that could credit, it would also state its repayment capabilities, much possibly arise because the reasons were not explained for like Cde.
The Cuba’s positions on issues of the international communist original request was assessed like number of other requests in movement, and for speeches and statements of some leading return for immediate repayment, which were negotiated and Cuban comrades.
At that he emphasized that Fidel Castro was realized in the past. happy to accept an invitation for a UPSR delegation to visit As for the future, Cde.
Langer conveyed a request that Czechoslovakia, because he as well is very much interested in important questions, above all payment conditions, be openly better and more frequent relations of our two parties.
He also discussed from the very beginning, so that the capabilities keenly agreed with Koucky’s remark that due to extensive of the Cuban side can be considered during talks.
That will economic and state cooperation of our two countries, contact expedite negotiations and solutions of all problems. between the parties is insufficient.
Castro then talked He further said that the UPSR strives for better conabout other questions, like training of officers, sending study tacts with fraternal parties.
In C Minister Lomsky then repeated an invitation for order to improve relations with fraternal parties and to inform Castro and his military delegation to visit the CSSR, and the UPSR leadership better, the apparatus of the UPSR expressed an opinion that the visit should occur as soon as national leadership will be augmented by a Secretariat for possible, so that other issues regarding development of relaInternational Affairs.
Carlos Rafael remains now in Cuba, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez said that Rodriguez fully trusts Osmany Cienfuegos and will help him Anibal Escalante asked for an approval of his return to Cuba. in every way.
It is definitely an Asian; even his physiognomy There are also other kinds of difficulties with him. is typical of an Asian, not of a Latin American.
Guevara is a Cuban national and a member of the Cuban When asked about Minister of Communications government.
As such, he was involved in Argentine affairs too Chomon ’s current attitude, Carlos Rafael much.
On his own, he organized in Argentina Rodriguez replied that still from his college times, Chomon is guerrilla units, which were easily destroyed.
He also sent there literally surrounded by a group of negative people with whom with this mission Masseti, his personal he is closely linked.
Chomon has a revolutionary past; he protégé and former director of Prensa Latina, Massetti (who participated as one of the commanders in the second guerilla is known as a former Peronist). section in Escambray , and led terrorThe Ministry of Industry is currently managed by a group ist actions against the people of the Batista regime in Havana. of young professionals.
They are fully aware of the depth Carlos Rafael believes that it is possible to influence Chomon of and relations among economic problems.
He talks especially Soviet ambassador, they found out that in Cuba, there is $200 well about the Soviet Union, where he was an ambassador. million worth of various uninstalled and partial or complete However, it is necessarily to keep him away from the group investments, delivered from socialist countries.
His positive development would surely was simply doing whatever he wanted.
It will take a long accelerate under the conditions of collective leadership. time to correct the consequences.
It is true that Fidel’s perseverance and his extraorficulties, the first positive results are already appearing.
Sugar dinary ability can correct many mistakes but it cannot prevent production this year will reach almost 6 million tons.
He mentioned Che other hand, however, a decrease in world prices of sugar will Guevara as an example. have an impact.
Also, volume of industrial production will To Koucky’s remark that Guevara’s Algerian speech was not increase in 1965. incomprehensible to us, and left a very uncomfortable impresCarlos Rafael did not give even an approximate date sion, Carlos Rafael said that President when the founding congress of the UPSR of Cuba would Dorticos and he were also very surprised.
He again expressed hope that the visit of the Cuban was in Moscow , emphatically rejected this party delegation in Czechoslovakia would be very beneficial. speech.
Fidel Castro said that he agrees with some parts of the Fidel Castro’s visit in the CSSR would be beneficial as well. speech, however, neither the form of the speech nor the place However, it is absolutely necessary to act directly with Fidel, where Guevara delivered it was appropriate. without any diplomatic protocol.
Socialism must be reflected experts. in practice by increasing production and living standards because only that has a meaning for workers.
When asked how Guevara’s absence in May Day celebra1 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos had actually been in the Soviet tions in Havana is explained, and what Guevara is doing now, capital when the Kremlin coup occurred, but he was not able to Carlos Rafael Rodriguez said that Guevara does not want to meet those who had ousted Khrushchev, or even learn fully what had occurred, before he left the city. go back to the Ministry anymore or to lead any administrative 2 Sino-Soviet tensions at this juncture, and the February 1965 or economic department.
However, they are not sure how to Kosygin-Mao conversations in particular, see Lorenz M Luthi, arrange his departure.
It is most likely that the word is Escalation of War in Vietnam --trans.
The spór refers to the Sino26 It is unclear to which incident Raul Castro is here referring, Soviet split or rift. though he may have been alluding to the August 1964 Gulf of 7 Rozbieżnosci could also mean disagreements and clashes.
Romanian delegation was led by Prime Minister Ion Gheorghe 10 [On this episode, see Yinghong Cheng, “Sino-Cuban Maurer.
Relations during the Early Years of the Castro Regime, 1959-1966,” 29 Reference is to Sino-Soviet differences.
April 1964, and to his brother-in-law Leonel Brizzola, the governor 12 “This fact” appears to refer either to the Sino-Soviet rift or of Rio Grande do Sul province whom United States officials considered a the occurrence of the Cuba Missile Crisis. dangerous leftist with communist connections and tendencies.
Kosygin’s blood must have been boiling, President Dwight D Eisenhower, saying he told Kosygin that because this was precisely the posture he was sent to Cuba to in Latin America re-adjust.
But he remarks coldly, “I have not heard that he had been invited by the Bolivians.” there were 6 or 7 hot spots, that they are using Soviet Kosygin’s meaning was clear to Castro.
The “Bolivians” to material—Cuba was—that we caught a bunch of them whom the Soviet leader was referring was Mario Monge, head the other day in Venezuela, that they were giving us hell in of Bolivia’s communist party.
Monge had complained to the the Dominican Republic and Haiti and Bolivia and half Soviets about Che’s expedition.
He ought to realize Bolivia, and an endorsement would have violated orders he that we thought this was very serious and we were going had received from Moscow.
In this regard, Kosygin expressed the A Report from the Mexican Embassy in Havana, 4 total disapproval of his government with what Cuba had July 1967 done, and warned Mr Castro of the risks of persisting in such a policy for relations in Moscow and Havana.
By seeming more Catholic than the Pope, Castro is possibly seeking to acquire prestige among Secretary of Foreign Relations, Mexico City the forces of the so-called Third World and become its leader, a very inopportune situation for the Soviet Union, On the 26th of last month , in a way surprising presently quite worried about situations that they face in to the public and without prior notice of any kind, Soviet the case of China and Vietnam, Cambodia, etc. in southeast Premier Alexei Kosygin arrived in this city, after his visit to the Asia.
It dealt with all international problems ment included in National Security Archive Electronic Briefing and relations with the socialist countries, set out our position.
We argued that we could not agree by Christopher Dunlap.] with its policy of exporting revolution to the countries of Latin America.
A lack of industrial products, allocation of people-revolutionary parties, which in Bolivia are created of fabrics 8 m per person annually, shoes—1 pair annually, by Che Guevara.
Thus, you learned that I gave information on the situation in the Middle East, on we were under threat and you sent out to us such letter to Vietnam, on the economic situation of the Soviet Union and wash your hands of this matter. came up to the question of our mutual relations.
The ambassador writes that on the basis relivacation in a year, which they devote to work.
Then Fidel put forward his officially telling you that this is a provocation. grudges.
I asked for the name of that informer, the more so that the He explained to us why he maintains diplomatic relations ambassador wrote that his informer was someone close to the with Spain, Portugal, has not broken relations with Israel.
He said he would ask him and if with us, that almost nobody is left. he agrees, then he will give his name.
These departures are not information transmitted by third persons. being restrained.
It is mostly intelligentsia that is leaving, and The Cubans became visibly cheerful.
Fidel was expressthat the cable from their ambassador was correct and was ing dissatisfaction about some socialist countries, among correlated with our letter.
They began to be more interested in our policy, our successes, probproduce over 6 million tons of sugar.
The Czechs have built lems, began talking about their economic situation, etc.
Thus, a shoe factory in Cuba, which is idle, because they lack skins. after a sharp exchange of views, everything began to go well.
We For the Cubans, the main question right now is agriculshould think of injecting some live stream into the Cuban ture.
They have our tractors working at it—250 KM, tied in debt, but they will develop agricultural production and will together.
They will be chose the right people—enthusiasts. approaching to these questions more prudently, trying to They created tens and tens of citrus plantations—lemons, prevent such divergences among us. mangos, and also of coffee and been plants.
They estimate that in 1970 they will have at least 1 opinions in detail on questions dealt with in your letter and million tons of citrus fruits.
They still don’t think what they have explained some problems, we will not respond to this are going to do with all this.
We will assume that the matter has been closed by our are not going to sell such quantities.
Thus, there is going on a huge work and with great I have to say that Raul was trying to help us and somehow enthusiasm. smooth the situation.
Fidel has stated that he accepts all our wishes of military For Information nature, they will permit to build in Cuba our observatory stations for rockets, cosmic vehicles, etc.
He said that our rifles and motor boats had gotten into American hands.
At the very beginning of his visit with V Koucky, Carlos Fidel asked to convey greetings for de Gaulle.
I did this in Rafael Rodriguez indicated that he had also other worries my talk with de Gaulle.
He thanked for a gift sent by visit in Havana , relations with the Soviet Fidel.
And continued talking for a few more minutes about Union began to improve rapidly, but later deteriorated again, Cuba.
I argued with de Gaulle that that is important for us to which was reflected in composition of the delegation to the have in this area of the world a socialist country, which would celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Great October reflect some European problems.
The talks According to Carlos Rafael, Castro holds Kosygin were sharp but amicable, party-like, friendly and have ended in very high esteem for his honest and firm attitude.
The whole of was indeed apparent in the fact that much more attention Havana took to the streets.
Present were all official personaliwas given to Kosygin’s departure from Havana than to his ties.
The farewell, from the point of official protocol was very arrival. well organized.
On behalf of all of when the Moscow Pravda published articles of comrades us I thank you very much.
Minister of Health Machado Ventura, CWIHP by James Hershberg and translated for CWIHP by Jan MD, was then appointed as the head of the delegation, Chowaniec .] and Carlos Rafael was told that he was not to participate in the celebrations.
Carlos Rafael expressed regret that he was not in the homeland; he thought that he would have been able to persuade Fidel not to change the delegation.
The attiRafael Rodriguez, Prague, 24 November 1967 tude of the delegation put all participants in the celebrations in Moscow in a very awkward situation.
Congress. ed in Cuban press as well, and for instance the chief editor of As an example, he mentioned false information about “Granma”, Malmierca , was removed due to a the relationship of the Cuban leadership with China.
Only questionable stance of the magazine on the importance of the 4 members of the Cuban government were at the reception USSR. held at the Chinese Embassy in Havana, and none of the Carlos Rafael Rodriguez also expressed the view that leaders came.
Additional publications have been with the CP of Venezuela even at the time when its leaders, announced. such as Gallegos Mancera, were enthusiastic supporters of the Cuban position.
We thought this was the affair In this speech, comrades from the CPSU, the SED, and of only Venezuelan comrades.
If the CP of Venezuela now the CPCz were directly attacked in connection with the holds a different opinion, and decided to change its position, measures of the CC against a “micro faction” and openly we consider it again its inalienable right. accused of conspiracy against the Cuban party leadership Carlos Rafael Rodriguez countered that people like and of collaboration with the penalized Cuban comrades.
Assessment announced not to participate in the consultative meeting in Budapest.
The Second Secretary of the CP of Cuba and head of the Commission for the Armed Forces and Security Questions, 2.
It is being openly demonstrated that any opinion that Comrade Raoul Castro, dealt with this issue in an deviates from the views of the Cuban party leadership extensive presentation.
Thus anti-Soviet, anti-Marxist behavior is de facto wards had been the Organization Secretary of the “United elevated to the official state view in Cuba.
The internal Revolutionary Organizations of Cuba” until 1962. opposition evidently reaches beyond the 36 identified Escalante was expelled from the party in 1962 as a “sectarian.” persons.
The tendency already evident in the actions of Cuban to the Anibal Escalante group.
These measures are the sharpest public attacks yet against existed in the leadership of the CP of Cuba which hurt the CPSU, the SED, and other fraternal parties.
They the Cuban revolution and that the USSR was the country are a continuation of the anti-Marxist and nationalist that should exercise dominance” (Quotes from the speech line which was developed at the three-continent of Raoul Castro). conference and the “International “They welcomed the departure of Cmdte Ernesto Intellectual Congress” in Havana as well as in the attacks Guevara Serna as they were of the opinion that Cmdte on the fraternal parties of Latin America.
The severe splittist provocation of the 3rd Plenum of “They were of the opinion that the small bourgeoisie the CC of the CP of Cuba is aimed directly against the was the predominant force within the policy of the consultative meeting in Budapest and the successful revolution.” preparation of the world conference.
One has to say, that special conceptions on questions of the building of 1.
The Cuban ambassador in the GDR is to be invited communism, ways of development of the world revolutionby the head of the International relations Department of the ary process, which are currently actively counter-posed to the CC for a discussion.
It should be attempted to convey views of the CPSU and other fraternal parties, were advanced to the CC of the CP of Cuba the deep sense of reservation of by Fidel Castro several years ago.
The SED CC expects a coridea about the possibility of implementing the construction of rection in the form of a public confirmation of the flawless socialist and even communist society on an expedited tempo, and correct behavior of the GDR citizens who were named basing oneself merely on revolutionary enthusiasm. in the report to the CC of the CP of Cuba.
Obtained Maintaining appropriate tact, we have strived to help for CWIHP by Piero Gleijeses and translated for CWIHP by Cuban comrades also in making them understand the falChristian Ostermann.] lacy of their conceptions.
This letter, tion to the fact that there are aspects of the international in particular, said, “In the conditions when Cuba, on many policy of Cuban leaders with which we cannot agree.
Moreover, difficulties with which the are striving to isolate your country, to compromise its foreign Cuban comrades are faced in the implementations of plans policy in the eyes of the world public, including progressive of expanding the production of sugar are unambiguously circles of Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
We don’t want to ascribed to the fact that allegedly the Soviet Union “insufhide from you that in our efforts to hammer together a wide ficiently” meets the requests of the Cuban side.
Here you front of states and democratic forces in support of Cuba can already see a direct calculation to put the blame for the against the anti-Cuban actions by the USA, we more and difficult economic situation of Cuba on the Soviet Union. more often have to face difficulties.
We are forced to hear In response to the Cuban memorandum, we sent a letthat Cuba itself aggravates its own situation.
It is not pleasant ter in which, on the basis of facts, showed that the for us to say that, but Cuba’s own interests in our conviction reproaches of the Cuban side to not have any basis.
Having require this.” remarked that our policy in relation to Cuba has always been We, of course, understood that such a frank conversation built on the basis of internationalism, fraternity, and commay not be to comrade Fidel Comrade Castro’s liking.
But we radely cooperation, we pointed out that the extent of Soviet considered it necessary to explain our principled position to supplies to Cuba should be considered in connection with separate ourselves from the policy which is going against the our real capabilities and our obligations in relation to other interests of peace and socialism. socialist countries.
Then we invited Castro to come to the USSR for , in the course of the conversations, all main the discussion of these questions. questions of Soviet-Cuban relations were discussed.
What is In his letter of response, Fidel Castro in reality repeated more, Cuban comrades seemingly leaned to the understandthe claims contained in the memorandum and in a sharp ing of the necessity of putting an end to the aggravation of form rejected the proposal to discuss the aforementioned relations with the Soviet Union. questions at a high level.
However, subsequent actions by the Cuban leadership As you see, comrades, there are may difficulties between in a different direction.
One should think, however, that criticism of the main tenets of the economic policy and forone should not hurry with final conclusions.
Emotions are eign policy course determined by the 23rd Congress of the a bad advisor in politics.
Written a will base ourselves on our principled Marxist-Leninist line. sharp tone, this memorandum advances an absurd accusation against the Soviet Union in “constraining” the development of the Cuban economy.
It became particularly clear that great strides were lated for CWIHP by Sergey Radchenko.] being made specifically in the area of agriculture.
Comrade Verner asked that the delegation’s gratitude be conveyed to the leaderships of the provincial committees.
It was important Comment by Defense Minister Marshal Andrei that we close ranks more closely.
Gretchko to CPSU CC, 10 April 1968 Comrade Verner underlined that it was particularly important to strengthen the relations between the socialist countries and to strengthen the entire socialist community.
Specifically it was important to strengthen the international As is known, on a series of military-political questions, a communist movement. special position is also advanced by the leaders of Cuba, who, In the international arena, several new problems had in the sphere of foreign policy, show clear elements of political emerged which had to be analyzed and mastered.
That was adventurism. particularly the case with regard to the necessity to develop We provide all-sided aid to Cuba, including considerable and implement a common strategy of the communist parties military aid.
Thousands of Soviet military specialists,e., offiagainst the global strategy of imperialism. cers, sergeants, and soldiers, are stationed in Cuba, protecting There were also new problems in the development of its security, training its forces.
However, all of this does not socialism and in the struggle against state-monopolistic capimeet with appropriate recognition on the part of the Cuban talism.
In particular it was necessary to carry out the struggle leaders. against revisionism in the international workers movement.
Our officers, sergeants, soldiers, despite the anti-Soviet For these reasons and several others already mentioned splittist activity of the leaders of Cuba, steadfastly and selfour party favors holding a world council of communist and sacrificingly carry out their service, honestly carry out their workers’ parties.
The decisive point is to demonstrate the duty, of envoys of the Soviet country. unity of all anti-imperialist forces and their closing of ranks on a global scale.
Obtained and Comrade Castro explained that the division of the intertranslated for CWIHP by Sergey Radchenko.] national communist movement was an unfortunate occurrence which had weakened the movement.
Imperialism had managed to penetrate Yugoslavia and to turn the League of “Note on the Final Talk with the CP Cuba Delegation Communists of Yugoslavia into its puppet.
Certainly the intervention of the socialist countries had The differences in opinions have sharpened.
Various types heightened tensions in a certain sense and the imperialist of resentments have formed which can only be eliminated forces were very angry because developments had not gone with difficulty.
They now speak a more aggressive language. necessary to analyze the experiences in this area and to draw The situation had shown that with regard to certain deciconclusions in order to advance to the common goals.
Surely sions, which are also associated with difficulties, one should none of the communist parties were entirely correct in their not overestimate but also not underestimate imperialism. stance, and everybody carried a certain degree of responsiComrade Verner emphasized that although imperialism bility for the development of the international communist had become more aggressive, it had not become stronger. movement.
Everybody had the duty to fight, even if it was With the growth of our successes its aggressiveness had even difficult.
It was important to increase the Comrade Verner declared that the views of Comrade fighting spirit of the parties, although, as Comrade Castro Castro essentially coincided with those of our party.
The emphasized, the Cuban CP was not in fact a bellicose party. problem was that we had a joint point of view, one we also It was far away from adventurism and only interested in shared with other countries.
The task of the parties which had supporting truly revolutionary spirit.
It on the other hand a correct and positive point of view was to fight against false, opposed all tendencies of revolutionary impatience, that is, revisionist, and other faulty assumptions.
That in particular it opposed adventurist tendencies as well as excessive concould be clarified at a consultation of the communist and ciliation and reformism.
Therefore we have to participate in it, this act realistically, decisively, and firmly, to consider the realities will help to have the correct positions prevail. [handwritten and correctly assess the dangers.
In doing corrected from “The more we are part of it, the better it is for so it is important to proceed in a very principled manner our correct positions to prevail.”] within the communist movement.
It was particularly imporComrade Tisch interjected that the struggle of revolutiontant to deepen the consciousness within the revolutionary ary Cuba was very much present in our country and had movement.
And the enterprises carried the name of Comrade Castro a o experiences of the international communist movement have Cuban revolutionaries.
The forms and methods differ from country to country. our party plenum.
We have understood that some have not But they are not the basic problem.
There had been a few incidents after the against imperialist domination.
One can argue about what is betagainst imperialism. ter, either to participate and raise problems or to participate Fidel Castro elaborated that the struggle for peace could out of courtesy.
Our experiences have shown that participanot be separated from the struggle for the revolution. tion in such party plenums always led to frictions with other Therefore certain risks had to be taken.
This general attitude of the communist party of Cuba sions were necessary, sometimes they were not possible. has nothing to do with its attitude toward the SED specifiDuring the events in the CSSR two positions were evident. cally.
Opening relations with Algeria Comrade Castro explained that there were still certain led to certain decline in relations with Morocco, which had tensions with the Soviet Union at this time but recently relabeen one of Cuba’s most important sugar buyers.
Both party and state leaderships wanted not waver in its principled policy. to overcome the differences, which surely was in everyone’s interest.
Obtained the SED party plenum had been the same one they had taken for CWIHP by Piero Gleijeses and translated for CWIHP by towards other party plenums.
SED CC Department of International Relations, The great measure of empathy with the GDR results in “Note on a Conversation with Com.
Carlos Rafael particular from the similarities of the situation in which both Rodriguez on 22 November 1968 at the Havana countries find themselves.
The Cuban party is quite capable Airport,” 25 November 1968 of differentiating in this respect.
Not all the socialist countries took the same attitude as the GDR, which is steadfast and Gen.
In those days a certain critical expected that for example the role of the Soviet Union and atmosphere came about.
The Central Committee plenum the necessity of the common struggle of the communist of the Cuban CP did not accuse the GDR technical personparties against imperialism would have been mentioned. nel; instead the accusations were directed at the respective Gen.
If the Cuban party leadership had intended the Soviet Union, he continued, in the ring [the meaning of to criticize the fraternal parties it would have addressed them ring is unclear—trans.] of Havana.
That’s after all why the foreign Comrade Verner emphasized that this matter between our trade minister and other delegations had gone to the USSR. parties had meanwhile been resolved and was not impairing In response to the question whether Cuba would send a our relations, even though we had to take the treatment of delegation to the USSR at the highest level in the foreseeable this issue on the part of Cuba as an attack against our party future, Gen.
Rodriguez responded that they expected that and in fact viewed is as such. a high Soviet delegation would come to Cuba since Comrade Castro stated that his party, moreover, did Fidel Castro had already been to the USSR several times. not have internal documents attacking other parties.
This was worse than public criticism. been impressed by Khrushchev—except for the matter of the He preferred public criticism.
But the best thing is when it is missiles—because he had done a lot for Cuba; even today the not necessary to criticize at all.
Cuban CP considered the USSR as an important guarantor [Verner invites a Cuban delegation to visit the GDR in for the maintenance of peace.
Rodriguez 5, report 47, RFE/RL collection, Open Society Archives, Prague, said that this question was difficult to answer.
The translation of the Czechoslovak record of the had not attended as they feared strong attacks by the frater24 November 1967 conversation between Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and CPCz official Vladimir Koucky was received after Philip Brenner nal parties of Latin America.
For an analysis, see,g., R Salloch, three, many Vietnams” to struggle for revolution in Asia, “Old Principles and the Future of Unity,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Africa, and Latin America—ed.
