Cartoons were published, such as the one on the right, featuring Khrushchev and Kennedy arm wrestling whist sitting on nuclear warheads with their fingers aimed at the fire buttons.
Newspaper placards with lines like WAR INEVITABLE were hanging up all over the place.
Everyone thought that the USA and the USSR would launch into a nuclear war at any second.
In 1959, the leader of Cuba, Fulgencio Batista, was overthrown by Fidel Castro, a Communist revolutionary.
Batista was unpopular and corrupt, but he was not Communist, so the USA had supported his reign.
The missiles that Khrushchev placed in Cuba The USA was very angry and immediately made moves to bring Castro down.
They gave money and equipment to Cubans who wanted to take Castro down.
Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the USSR, was very happy that there was a Communist country in the USA’s back yard.
Khrushchev realised that if the USA invaded Cuba and took down Castro, all his work would go to waste, so he installed nuclear missiles in Cuba to scare the Americans off.
During September 1962, Khrushchev sent 40 nuclear missiles to Cuba, along with missile launchers, experts to construct them and troops, jet fighter planes and anti-aircraft missiles to protect the nuclear warheads.
President Kennedy forms The U2 photograph that revealed the Soviet missiles EXCOMM to advise him.
Some of his advisors wanted to order a strategic airstrike to take out the missiles.
Still others wanted to either put diplomatic pressure on the USSR or do a deal with them in secret.
The USA announces that they are going to blockade Cuba to prevent any more missiles from being delivered.
The United States army starts preparing to invade Cuba to get rid of any missiles that remain.
President John F Kennedy goes on President Kennedy and EXCOMM national television to inform the nation about what is happening in Cuba.
Meanwhile, Soviet leader Khrushchev tells his advisors to expect an American invasion and fight back when it happens.
Khrushchev condemns the USA for blockading his ships from reaching Cuba.
American People panic and race to the shops to stock up on goods in case of a nuclear war.
The Secretary General of the UN called on both the USA and the USSR to reach a compromise.
Khrushchev orders his ships to stop heading for Cuba, but not to turn back.
The United States armed forces went up to DEFCON 2, against the President’s orders.
An American warship stops a Soviet vessel , but because she was only carrying oil, they allowed her passed.
President Kennedy receives a letter from Khrushchev saying that if the USA promises not to invade Cuba, he will remove his missiles.
A United States U2 spy plane is shot down by Cuban anti-aircraft missiles.
Khrushchev sent another letter to Kennedy, offering to remove the missiles from Cuba if the USA does not invade Cuba and removes her missiles from Turkey.
President Kennedy agrees to this, but makes sure that the removal of the missiles from Turkey will be secret.
Khrushchev announces that he will remove his missiles from Cuba to protect world peace.
The results of the Crisis The USA promised to leave Cuba alone and around six months later, her missiles were removed from Turkey.
President Kennedy could claim victory in that his policy of containment had worked and saved the world from nuclear war.
Still, as a precaution, a hot line was set up between President Kennedy and Khrushchev.
In 1963, both countries signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, one small step towards ensuring that the threat of nuclear destruction would be reduced.
