However, prior to Autumn 1962 uncertainty remained in Washington over Beijing’s willingness to break with the Kremlin in pursuit of its ideological objectives and national ambitions.
Following developments in Autumn 1962 officials in the Kennedy Administration found cause to believe that China was not only the more militant of the two communist powers, but also that it was the more dangerous.
This shift in threat perception had a significant impact on the United States national security discourse, reinforcing the conviction of senior officials in Washington that the containment of China required a continued policy of non-engagement.
On 20 November 1962, three weeks after Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove Soviet missile installations from Cuba, and only hours after China declared a unilateral ceasefire in their month-long border war with India, President John F Kennedy held a news conference to discuss, inter alia, the changing international environment.
Asked to comment on the connection between the increasingly apparent—and increasingly acrimonious—Sino– Soviet dispute and the crises in the Caribbean and the Himalayas, the president suggested it was too early to gauge the exact meaning of the growing rift in the communist camp.
Turner was emerging as a national security concern of the first order, surpassing the Soviet Union as the most clear and present danger to American interests in Asia and beyond.
Earlier studies have noted—albeit in passing—how the crises in the Caribbean and Himalayas served to underline the gravity of Sino–Soviet discord for American officials and, in the process, throw the militancy of Beijing’s foreign policy into sharp relief.
This analysis offers the most detailed investigation yet of this process, arguing that even as American policy-makers inched toward a proper appreciation of the Sino–Soviet dispute from the late 1950s onward, uncertainty remained prior to Autumn 1962 over Beijing’s willingness to countenance an irrevocable break with Moscow.
On one level, the majority of interested analysts in the Kennedy Administration recognised that China had attacked India in pursuit of limited objectives in a localised dispute, and one wherein neither party had proven a paragon of virtue.
Yet when interpreted in reference to growing Sino–Soviet differences on foreign policy, China’s offensive assumed a portent transcending the conflict’s local dimensions, becoming, in the American analysis, a troubling manifestation of a militant foreign policy line determined by an admixture of national ambition and ideological zeal, and defined in opposition to the Kremlin’s policy of peaceful co-existence with the West.
By the beginning of 1963, American officials not only found cause to believe that Mao’s China was the more militant of the two communist powers—a widespread, long-founded, and, it could be added, entirely well-founded assumption—but also that it posed the greater immediate danger to United States interests.
The Sino–Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance, concluded in February 1950, was one of the more predictable corollaries of the communist victory in the Chinese Civil War.
Beyond their obvious ideological affinity, Moscow and Beijing were united by a pronounced anti-American and—inasmuch as both powers set themselves in opposition to a post-war international order dominated by the United States—anti-systemic animus.
It seemed altogether logical, therefore, that the Soviet Union and the newly created People’s Republic of China should seek common cause in the struggle against US–led world imperialism.
While recognising the basic convergence of Chinese Communist and Soviet interests in the emerging Cold War environment, Kremlinologists and “China-watchers” in the American foreign policy bureaucracy were at once alert to what in February 1949 the United States ambassador to China, Leighton Stuart, called “something less than comradely trust” in the nascent Sino–Soviet partnership.
As the Chinese Civil War approached a dénouement in the late 1940s and as the Chinese Communist and Soviets moved to formalise their alliance in the latter half of 1949 and early months of 1950, these officials posited that the ligature of strategic and ideological interest that bound the two parties together would weaken in time as national priorities diverged and traditional Russo–Chinese tensions re-emerged.
As has been documented at length elsewhere, there was a strong—if neither universal nor uniform—awareness of this discord at all levels of the Truman Administration.
Turner by the Korean War—a war wherein Chinese “volunteers,” cheered on by Moscow, had joined with the North Korean Army to fight United States forces and their allies to a bloody stalemate.
Given the American public’s almost visceral antipathy toward Mao’s regime in the years following the 1953 Korean Armistice Agreement, it is hardly surprising that in its public rhetoric the Eisenhower Administration consistently placed China on the wrong side of a Manichean contest between the Free World and a Soviet-directed International Communist movement that, Yugoslavia notwithstanding, was inherently monolithic.
Privately, however, the Administration acknowledged the potential for and even sought to foment divisions in the communist camp.
Indeed, the Administration’s “closed door” policy was predicated, at least in part, on the notion that latent Sino–Soviet animosities might be fostered by forcing China’s continued dependence on the Soviet Union.
Beijing, it was reasoned, would chafe at its junior status in the alliance and grow to resent the inevitable failure of Moscow to provide political and economic support on a level commensurate with China’s national ambitions.
At once, Beijing’s excessive demands for such support, and ingratitude for the support it received, would engender comparable levels of resentment in the Kremlin.
At the same time, there was no shortage of American officials in the 1950s who thought a Sino–Soviet split improbable.
Even as reports of Sino– Soviet tensions began filtering through to Washington in the late 1950s, it was initially unclear if these tensions were significant enough to damage the alliance.
Still, over the first eighteen months or so of Kennedy’s presidency, uncertainty remained as to the capacity of the communist powers to maintain a functioning—if imperfect—alliance in spite of these differences.
Kennan—then ambassador to Yugoslavia—countered that Beijing’s economic difficulties and Soviet frustration with the uneven returns of peaceful co-existence might compel both sides to seek a temporary accommodation.
While American officialdom did not speak with a single voice on the causes of the dispute, it is nonetheless possible to make several broad observations about how these officials generally characterised Sino–Soviet differences and, in turn, how these characterisations informed American perceptions of the Chinese threat relative to the Soviet threat.
In this analysis, long-standing Sino–Russian border tensions and the troubled history of inter-party relations since the 1920s formed the principal pillars of the Sino–Soviet relationship’s historical framework.
More immediately, Beijing had apparently concluded that Moscow was thwarting its efforts to assume a more prominent international role, while sacrificing China’s national interests—particularly on nuclear weaponry and Taiwan—by exploring détente with the West.
Operating within a political bloc that only allowed for a single source of authority, yet unwilling to temper its national ambitions, Beijing had decided to challenge Soviet leadership of the communist camp on ideological grounds; in doing so, it cast itself as the guardian of the Marxist-Leninist faith against the Kremlin’s revisionist apostasy.
Of particular note, much of the recently declassified analysis produced by the CIA’s Sino–Soviet Studies Group , a research unit in the Office of Current Intelligence, demonstrates a sophisticated understanding of the importance of ideologically based differences over the “correct road” to Communism at home and abroad.
Rather than pulling the relationship in opposite directions, questions of ideology and national interest were generally seen as mutually reinforcing determinants of Sino–Soviet relations.
The Chinese, it was reasoned, resented their subordinate position in the “partnership” with Moscow, along with their failure to secure recognition for China as a great power on the world stage.
Added to these largely nationalistic considerations, the broadly shared view in Washington was that the Chinese were in an earlier, more radical, and, in a word, angrier stage of revolution than the Soviets.
Some American analysts suggested Beijing’s hubris on this score was simply an abstract attempt to reconcile Yan’an-era Maoist theory on protracted warfare with the realities of the nuclear age, belying a healthy respect for the destructive capacity of nuclear weapons.
Such nuance, however, was lost on senior policy-makers, not entirely surprising given Beijing’s broader ambivalence—and, increasingly, opposition—toward peaceful co-existence.
At once, a successful Chinese test of even the most primitive nuclear device would place considerable pressure on governments in Asia to accommodate Beijing’s ambitions of regional hegemony.
While Beijing’s foreign policy line was more incendiary than Moscow’s in 1961 and 1962, it was the nuclear-capable and politically formidable Soviet enemy that kept American policy-makers awake at night.
Khrushchev’s references to peaceful coexistence aside, in a period of essentially unbroken U.S.–Soviet confrontation—centred on Berlin and Cuba, but spilling into other areas of the nuclearised global contest between the two superpowers—Mao’s China was only occasionally front-and-centre in Washington’s Cold War concerns.
Further, American estimates of the Chinese threat were not only informed by readings of Beijing’s foreign policy objectives, but also, as might be expected, readings of Beijing’s willingness and ability to pursue those objectives.
Over the first eighteen months or so of Kennedy’s presidency, there was a growing view in Washington that the failure of the Great Leap Forward had seriously undermined Beijing’s capacity to project its power beyond China’s borders.
The United States Consul-General in Hong Kong from November 1961, Marshall Green, had arrived in the Crown Colony—Washington’s “keyhole” into a country to which it lacked direct access—perceiving China as “a powerful threat to its neighbors, purposeful and single minded in its expansionist design”—Hong Kong was Washington’s “keyhole” into a country to which it lacked direct access.
Seen from Washington, China remained a fundamentally hostile power, possessed by an explosive combination of arrant national chauvinism and ideological dogmatism, and acting in pursuit of objectives anathema to American interests in Asia and beyond.
And while Rusk may have noted a new “degree of moderation” in Chinese diplomacy, it is by no means clear that this moderation registered in Kennedy’s mind.
Yet the small measure of confusion occasioned by Beijing’s “campaign of smiles” is indicative of broader uncertainty in Washington at this juncture over Beijing’s willingness to temper its foreign policy radicalism to avoid both a showdown with the Soviet Union and direct confrontation with the United States.
On the one hand, the nature of Sino–Soviet differences were such that Beijing could not make meaningful concessions to Moscow without seriously compromising basic—and closely interrelated—national and ideological interests.
On the other, Beijing’s preoccupation with stabilising the Chinese economy following the Great Leap Forward might, some argued, leave it reluctant to pursue these interests to their fullest extent, lest doing so force a break with the Soviet Union and compound China’s already substantial difficulties.
China’s victory in the month-long Sino–Indian border war, which began on 20 October with a Chinese assault on Indian positions at both the eastern and western ends of the disputed 2400-mile border, played a key role in shaping the Administration’s understanding of China’s post–Great Leap Forward foreign policy.
Beijing’s decision for war was likely intended to forestall India’s “forward policy” on the border, a policy based on New Delhi’s apparent belief that a show of military assertiveness could force a weakened China into settling the border dispute on Indian terms.
China’s devastating display of military force in the war shattered New Delhi’s illusions about India’s strength relative to China’s; it also undercut the emerging imagery in Washington of a militarily vulnerable and potentially passive post–Great Leap China.
At least some officials in Washington recognised that China’s claims in the border dispute were not entirely illegitimate.
Moreover, New Delhi had sometimes seemed the more intransigent party to the border dispute.
This would be in exchange for an Indian accommodation of China’s claim to the unpopulated Aksai Chin plateau in Ladakh to the west, which provided the Chinese with a strategically important passage from Xinjiang to Tibet.
The general conclusion of Administration analysts was that Beijing’s objectives were likely limited to embarrassing the Soviets, who had been working to improve relations with New Delhi; to projecting an image of strength and determination in the region; to boosting PLA morale; and, most importantly, to securing the Aksai Chin, while at once providing New Delhi with a punitive demonstration of the PLA’s ability to capitalise on Indian vulnerabilities in the east if New Delhi proved unwilling to accommodate Beijing’s strategic interests in the west.
Concerns that the Chinese might broaden the offensive and, as the United States Ambassador to India John Kenneth Galbraith put it, “really come down the mountain in force,” became particularly pronounced when India’s lines of defense collapsed after a second wave of Chinese attacks in mid-November.
At a meeting between Kennedy and his national security advisors on 19 November, Rusk reported that the state of Assam—in 1962, incorporating most of India’s territory east of the Siliguri Corridor—could be in Chinese hands within the week; American military aid to India, participants agreed, should be sent immediately to arrest the Chinese march.
It should be noted that the Administration’s decision to extend emergency military aid to India was part of an attempt—ultimately unsuccessful—to effect a realignment of neutral India’s position in the Cold War;53 readings of Beijing’s objectives in the war were, in this sense, immaterial to this larger strategic objective.
What was notable about the 19 November meeting was not so much the decision to expedite emergency military assistance to India, but rather the sense of urgency that pervaded the discussion—an urgency indicative of a genuine anxiety in Washington at this juncture over the threat an unchecked China posed to the subcontinent.
Immediate fears of a larger Chinese offensive eased following Beijing’s announcement of a unilateral ceasefire on 20 November, and the withdrawal thereafter of Chinese troops behind the McMahon Line in the east—which India claimed represented the legal boundary—and to the “November 7, 1959 line of control” in the west—thereby ensuring Chinese control of Aksai Chin.
In May 1963, six months after the ceasefire took effect, the weight of his concern was apparent at a meeting of the National Security Council.
Any large Chinese Communist attack on any part of that area would require the use of nuclear weapons by the U.S., and this is to be preferred over the introduction of large numbers of United States soldiers.
While both scenarios seemed improbable, the latter particularly so, Kennedy appeared willing to accept the costs broached by his advisors.
In part, this was a result of the efficacy of the Chinese assault, which suggested a politically astute adversary with an impressive capacity to project its military power in a highly calculated fashion.
More than anything else, however, because China’s attack was interpreted in reference to the increasingly divergent foreign policy lines of Moscow and Beijing, it assumed a portent it would not otherwise have possessed.
Locating the attack within the broader context of the Sino– Soviet dispute, the Bureau argued that “Peiping is now testing its strategy of risk-taking against that of Moscow.
And it could not have helped that the American consulate in Hong Kong, while stressing Beijing’s underlying caution, was also reporting that Beijing had “actively intervened to obstruct critical Soviet– United States negotiations” on the removal of the missiles by circulating counter-proposals within the communist camp designed to circumscribe Khrushchev’s freedom of manoeuver in resolving the crisis.
Ironically then, while the Soviet decision to install missile facilities in Cuba had taken the world to the nuclear brink, and the Sino–Indian conflict was understood by American analysts as a localised conflict with little threat of escalation, the approximately concurrent crises in the Himalayas and the Caribbean, interpreted in reference to pre-existing understandings of Sino–Soviet differences, led key American policy-makers to believe that the danger posed by Chinese militancy was greater than that posed by the Soviet Union.
As a result, to the minds of these policy-makers, the Chinese threat rose relative to the Soviet one.
The “two curves crossed,” Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense William Bundy recalled, and the threat of Chinese expansion into peripheral areas now loomed as more immediate than that posed by Soviet power.
Nonetheless, three broad observations can be made about how American readings of the international environment following events in Autumn 1962 informed Washington’s China policy calculus in the Kennedy years and beyond.
First, starting in early 1963, Washington took several tentative steps toward effecting an alignment with Moscow aimed—quite narrowly—at checking Chinese militancy.
In large part, this simply meant more direct efforts to demonstrate that whereas China’s foreign policy line was dangerous and counter-productive, the Kremlin’s pursuit of peaceful coexistence could prove mutually beneficial.
Prior to developments in Autumn 1962, the Kennedy Administration had refrained from articulating a clear policy on Sino–Soviet differences, concerned that any explicit “intervention” in the dispute might inadvertently push Moscow and Beijing to seek a new modus vivendi.
More importantly, events in Autumn 1962 served to highlight an apparent need to demonstrate that Khrushchev’s policy of peaceful co-existence promised better returns than Mao’s alternative of aggression and subversion.
As such, in direct contrast to the reticence that he and other senior policy-makers had displayed in 1962, Rusk argued in 1963, both publicly and privately, that engagement with the Soviets on the basis of peaceful co-existence would help underline the false logic of Mao’s eponymous dogma.
Second, with the crises of 1962 serving to underline the Chinese threat, questions pertaining to China’s military capabilities, and in particular China’s nuclear development, were now afforded a higher priority by senior policymakers.
While Kennedy had always been troubled by the prospect of a nuclear-capable China, over the first two years of his presidency he displayed little sense of urgency on the matter.
The president would occasionally turn to the question of China’s nuclear programme—including a reference at a National Security Council meeting in early 1962 to China’s nuclear development as one of the “special unsolved problems” of the world73 —yet it was only in early 1963, after developments in Autumn 1962 seemed to underline the dimensions and immediacy of the Chinese challenge, that Kennedy moved the foreign policy bureaucracy into gear in a search for means to arrest China’s nuclear development.
The document offers no hint as to what “action” Kennedy might have had in mind.
However, several historians have argued that Kennedy and his senior advisers seriously contemplated undertaking preventive military strikes against China’s nuclear programme.
These two increasingly pronounced themes in the American national security discourse—limited alignment with Moscow against Beijing, and the perceived need to stop China’s nuclear development—intersected in 1963 in Washington’s pursuit of a test ban treaty.
Kennedy had multiple reasons for wanting to securing this treaty in 1963, not least his interest in reversing the momentum of the nuclear arms race and, more broadly, making progress toward détente with Moscow.
However, in 1963 the anti-proliferation connection, particularly as it related to China, assumed a new measure of importance in Kennedy’s interest in a test ban.
Beyond the broader failure of détente in the 1960s, the shared antipathy toward Maoist militancy proved an insufficient basis for Soviet–American co-operation.
And, of course, the United States never did undertake preventive action against Chinese nuclear facilities.
In this sense, just as developments in Autumn 1962 gave new—if ultimately insufficient—force to the logic of a Soviet–American détente, it is equally the case that China’s emergence as the more dangerous of the two communist powers reinforced the logic of the American policy of non-engagement with a recalcitrant, as yet “untamed” Beijing.
Soviet and American leaders, confronted with the central reality of the Cold War—namely, their shared capacity to bring catastrophe down upon their own heads and, lest it be forgotten, upon the rest of humanity—and more than ever before alert to the profound danger inherent in direct challenges to the other side’s sphere of influence, shifted course and “slowly accustomed themselves” to the existing international system.
Although lacking the drama of the turn in Soviet–American relations, these other—inter-related—corollaries of events in Autumn 1962 nonetheless had a significant impact on the direction of American policy toward China in the decade prior to the Sino–American rapprochement, and, more broadly, on the Cold War concerns and priorities of American policymakers in the 1960s.
Odd Arne Westad, “The Sino–Soviet Alliance and the United States,” in idem., ed.
United States Policy Against the Sino–Soviet Alliance, 1949– 1955 , 37.
However, available SSSG studies demonstrate a strong understanding of the importance of Sino–Soviet ideological differences.
Intimate Recollections of Twelve American Presidents from Theodore Roosevelt to Richard Nixon , 358.
Improved Sino–American dialogue was partly due to Washington’s assurances to Beijing in June 1962 that the United States would not support a Nationalist attack against the mainland.
Grant to Yager, 1 August 1962, RG59, CF:1960–63, microfilm; Grant to Bacon, 18 August 1962, Ibid.; memorandum of conversation, Grant and Ruzic, 21 August 1962, Ibid.
Some senior Chinese officials in the first half of 1962 thought China’s difficulties recommended a less confrontational foreign policy.
Robert J McMahon, “Choosing Sides in South Asia,” in Paterson, Kennedy’s Quest, 215.
The Impact of China’s Nuclear Weapons Program on U.S.–China Relations during the 1960s,” Journal of Contemporary China, 12, 741.
Several Administration insiders and scholars have rejected these arguments.
The Domestic Context of America’s China Policy in the 1960s,” in Robert S Ross and Jiang Changbin, eds., Re-examining the Cold War: U.S.–China diplomacy, 1954–1973 , 266.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
