He was a polarizing figure to be sure—you either loved or hated the guy.
One year he shaved off his beard and walked around with his fly down the entire evening.
Raul didn't think it was very funny, but Fidel and I sure got a kick out of it.
Fidel always talked about opening an all-you-can eat BBQ place called the Bay of Pigs.
He loved bringing people together for food and fun at a price that wouldn't break the bank.
In fact, his dream was to one day walk away from the whole dictator thing and open a jet ski rental place in Boca Raton.
Hardly a day goes by when I don't think about the time when Fidel walked into a Banana Republic and spent two hours asking the staff if each and every item came in olive.
Another time he paid a wedding DJ $50 to play ""Semi-Charmed Life"" by Third Eye Blind over and over again until the entire bridal party completely lost it.
And when Fidel showed up at my place in a salmon jumpsuit instead of his usual military garb one time, I asked him what gives.
And I'll never forget the time Fidel got us tickets to see Phranc, the Jewish lesbian folk singer, thinking we were seeing Sinatra.
I never saw Fidel more conflicted than when I told him Le Pain Quotidien, his favorite because of the communal tables, was a chain restaurant.
Every Friday night Fidel and I would order two large pizzas with everything.
Fidel came out over for Taco Tuesday one night recently and I had completely forgotten to pick up the necessary ingredients.
And I can't stop thinking about the time I noticed Fidel's footprints in the sand in front of Senor Frog's in Cabo San Lucas.
When his health began to fail, I asked Fidel what he'd like to be remembered for most.
I keep thinking Fidel will roll up my driveway in his beat up Geo Tracker any minute and tell me it was all a joke.
His second collection of essays, Dave Hill Doesn't Live Here Anymore is out now.
Studying newly declassified documents at a conference on the crisis, Cuban, American and Russian protagonists were told the most dangerous day of all was Oct., 1962 --when a United States Navy destroyer dropping depth charges off the Cuban coast almost accidentally hit the hull of a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear warhead.
The historic papers underscored the danger of a nuclear attack --accidental or deliberate --that existed during those tense October days.
Cuban President Fidel Castro participated in the conference's closed-door sessions Friday and Saturday, as did former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and other key advisers from the Kennedy administration.
Scholars hoped for the release of the letters in time for a Moscow conference next weekend that for the first time will feature missile crisis participants from the United States, Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Among the 19 United States representatives will be Robert McNamara, who was secretary of defense; McGeorge Bundy, ex-national security adviser; Ted Sorensen, special counsel to Kennedy; Pierre Salinger, Kennedy's press secretary; and Gen.
Georgi Bolshakov, courier of the Khrushchev letters, will be among the 12 Soviet delegates.
The Cubans promise their three to six representatives will include people directly involved in the crisis, but they would not disclose names of their delegates.
He said Soviet leaders were enthusiastic about the idea of releasing the letters.
Other ""people very close to (current Soviet leader Mikhail) Gorbachev and the Central Committee"" also embraced the idea, he said.
But Blight said the Soviets would not release the correspondence without United States approval.
While the State Department has not announced its decision, Byrd said George Shultz, President Reagan's secretary of state, told Sen.
Kennedy and Khrushchev exchanged 22 letters from Oct. to Dec., 1962, concerning the missile crisis.
Ten of the letters were declassified in 1973 by the State Department, and the 11th was released in 1979.
The remaining letters, written by Kennedy and Khrushchev from Oct. through Dec., have remained sealed at the Boston library despite periodic requests by the library on behalf of scholars to have them released.
He acknowledged that world leaders may be reluctant to have frank correspondence if they fear the documents might be released later.
Scali's journalistic career included many years with Associated Press and ABC News, punctuated with government service as ambassador to the United Nations, replacing George Bush, and as a White House media consultant.
He covered Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's visit to the United States and Richard Nixon's trips as vice president to Russia and Poland.
In 1962, when Scali was a diplomatic reporter for ABC News, President Kennedy disclosed the existence of offensive missile sites in Cuba and warned that if any were fired at the United States, the United States would retaliate against Moscow, not Havana.
Two days later, Scali was contacted by Alexandr Fomin, a KGB official in Washington and a personal friend of Khrushchev's.
The following day, Khrushchev added a stipulation to the proposal that the United States abandon its missile bases in Turkey.
The United States ignored the Turkey-base proposal and concluded the negotiations through Scali.
He went to work for the AP in Washington on April 12, 1945 the day Franklin D Roosevelt died and covered the State Department until 1961.
Scali's journalistic career included many years with The Associated Press and ABC News, punctuated with government service, as ambassador to the United Nations replacing George Bush and as a White House media consultant.
Two days later, Scali was contacted by Alexandr S Fomin, a KGB official in Washington and a personal friend of Khrushchev.
He was diplomatic correspondent for ABC News for 10 years, and returned as a senior correspondent for the network after his White House and United Nations assignments.
His first marriage to Helen Glock ended in divorce in 1973 and he married Denise St.
He stood between Mr Khrushchev and Mr Nixon during the famous ""kitchen debate"" in which the two leaders traded barbs on the relative merits of democracy and communism.
Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr Fomin, a KGB official in Washington and a personal friend of Mr Khrushchev.
Over lunch, Mr Fomin outlined a proposal under which the Soviets would dismantle the Cuban missile bases if the American government would pledge not to invade Cuba.
The following day, Mr Khrushchev added a stipulation to the proposal that the United States abandon its missile bases in Turkey.
The United States ignored the Turkey-base proposal and concluded the negotiations through Mr Scali.
ABC planned to disclose the account after Mr Kennedy's assassination, but The Los Angeles Times and Newsday published the story first.
Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr S Fomin, a KGB official in Washington and a personal friend of Khrushchev.
The following day, Khrushchev added a stipulation that the United States abandon its missile bases in Turkey.
The United States ignored the Turkey proposal and concluded the negotiations through Mr Scali.
Mr Scali's career included many years with The Associated Press and ABC News, punctuated with government service, as ambassador to the United Nations replacing George Bush, and as a White House media consultant.
In 1962, when Mr Scali was a diplomatic reporter for ABC News, President Kennedy disclosed the existence of offensive missile sites in Cuba and warned that if any missiles were fired at the United States, the United States would retaliate against Moscow, not Havana.
Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr S Fomin, a KGB official in Washington and a friend of Khrushchev.
The next day, Khrushchev added a stipulation to the proposal that the United States abandon its missile bases in Turkey.
ABC planned to disclose the account after Kennedy's assassination, but the Los Angeles Times and Newsday published the report first.
Russia bitterly opposes including former Soviet allies in the Western alliance but tacitly concedes it cannot stop the move.
Yeltsin, under tough criticism from nationalist and communist opponents at home, has been trying to limit the expansion.
NATO wants an agreement with Russia before its July 8-9 summit in Madrid, where it plans to name its first new members from Central and Eastern Europe.
Negotiators have agreed to create a new Russia-NATO council that will allow Moscow to have a direct voice but not a vote in decisions made by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
NATO says it has ``no plan, no need and no intention'' to move nuclear weapons or combat troops to the territories of new members but doesn't rule out such a move in the future.
Moscow wants stronger assurances, but NATO says it can't make firm promises and still preserve its security guarantees to member states.
The Western alliance also declines to promise that it won't build military infrastructure on the territory of new member states, including airfields, communications centers and air defense installations.
At the latest talks this week, both sides reported progress but acknowledged problems remained and the prospects of Russia and NATO signing a charter this month remained shaky.
Le Monde said Castro's account of the crisis just 90 miles from United States shores was provided to the newspaper by Vincent Touze, a French academic and expert on the missile crisis.
The missile crisis became public Oct., 1962, when President Kennedy revealed to the American people that the Soviet Union had secretly deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Six days later, after the crisis brought the two superpowers nearer to a nuclear confrontation than at any other time during the Cold War, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the weapons.
Castro, who had little control over the situation, said he dearly wanted to keep the missiles, which he saw as a super weapon for any battle with the United States, Le Monde said.
We were fighting for the first time almost on equal terms with an enemy that had threatened and provoked us unceasingly,'' Castro said in his report to the Central Committee.
When Soviet advisers came to Cuba in summer 1962 to discuss the deployment, Castro suggested that the Kremlin deploy 1,000 missiles and was chagrined when told that only about 40 would be installed, according to Le Monde's account of Cuban documents.
As the tension mounted and it appeared the Soviets would capitulate, Castro argued that a nuclear strike should be launched if the United States attacked Cuba.
According to the documents, Castro said the country was calm and he admitted to laughing even as the possibility of nuclear war loomed.
It was a very interesting fact because we were in the antechamber of the holocaust and we were telling jokes,'' the documents quoted Castro as saying.
The Marucla was a test to see how the Soviets would respond when directly confronted with the U.S. blockade.
During the pre-dawn hours of Oct., 1962 30 years ago today the Kennedy signaled the Marucla that a United States search party would try to board at daybreak.
The Marucla, which had loaded its cargo at the Soviet port of Riga, did not object.
A whaleboat with five unarmed Navy men motored over to the freighter, where a rope ladder was dropped.
In the hold, they found 12 trucks, rolls of toilet paper and a crate marked Precision Instruments.
The Americans opened the crate but found nothing that looked like it had a military use.
After three hours on board, the Navy party left, giving the freighter permission to sail on to Cuba.
In South Florida, people were wondering how much longer the tension could last before the the crisis erupted into war.
The Miami Beach police chief was afraid that Castro secret agents might be at work.
He ordered a ban on nighttime fishing on the causeways, because main water pipes ran alongside the bridges, and he didn't want saboteurs tampering with the drinking water.
Meanwhile, in Washington, FBI agents observed that the staff at the Soviet embassy were burning large quantities of documents generally the last act of an embassy before its country goes to war.
At the White House, top officials were worrying that the only way to get the missiles out of Cuba was either an air strike or to make a reciprocal deal, agreeing to remove United States nuclear missiles from Turkey.
The military leaders in the high-level ExComm meetings were advocating an air assault.
Three massive air strikes a day 1,190 bombing sorties would destroy the Cuban air force, as well as the missile sites.
Air attacks would be fairly quick and low-risk at least compared to an invasion.
At 6m., the State Department began receiving a rambling, emotional letter from Nikita Khrushchev.
The final section of the letter didn't arrive until 9m. 12 hours after the text was delivered to the U.S. embassy in Moscow.
Members of ExComm had a hard time figuring out what the Soviet leader was driving at.
Others thought it was another stall tactic, as the Soviets tried to buy time until all their Cuban missile sites were operational.
Kennedy, reluctant to order military action, decided to apply more pressure by increasing the number of low-level reconnaissance flights over Cuba from once every 12 hours to once every two hours.
In Havana, Fidel Castro thought the low-level flights were a prelude for a United States attack.
That's why he ordered Cuban anti-aircraft batteries to open fire on any United States plane flying over the island.
The Cuban leader also sent an astonishingly bellicose message to Khrushchev in which he estimated that the United States military was planning to invade Cuban within the next three days.
Mr Lundahl, who later received a Presidential medal for his CIA work and was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II, died Monday at the age of 77.
He died of respiratory failure at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda, Md., where he lived, a hospital spokeswoman said.
In his career at the CIA, Mr Lundahl briefed presidents Dwight D Eisenhower and Kennedy, as well as top military experts.
He was the founding director of the agency's National Photographic Interpretation Center.
His discovery of the Cuban missile sites in 1962 took military and political analysts by surprise and was considered a major intelligence feat.
Castro will make his presentation Thursday in Havana before a gathering of prominent Soviet, American and Cuban officials who took part in the event that gave the world perhaps its closest brush with a nuclear confrontation.
Cuban officials described Castro's plans to Americans involved in organizing the conference.
In recognition of the intimate ties that developed between Moscow and Havana for more than two decades after the crisis, Castro has generally muted his feelings about the bystander role that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev forced on him at the time.
Castro was outraged when Khrushchev in October 1962 agreed without consulting him to dismantle Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in return for President Kennedy's promise not to invade the Caribbean island.
A conference in Moscow in January 1989 explored the U.S.-Soviet dimension of the crisis, and Cuba subsequently agreed to play host to a follow-up meeting to offer its own perspectives of that period.
Castro is scheduled to give a lengthy presentation Thursday afternoon and to answer questions from the participants on Saturday.
