The Indus River Valley Civilization Cities of the Indus Valley Civilization Harappan Culture Disappearance of the Indus Valley Civilization Attributions 2.
Baron de Montesquieu Voltaire Jean-Jacques Rousseau Marquis de Condorcet Mary Wollstonecraft Attributions 4 20.
Pre-French Indochina The French Protectorate in Indochina Economic and Social Impacts of Imperialism in Indochina Resistance to French Rule Attributions 23.
Historians draw conclusions from the past approaches to history but in the end, they always write in the context of their own time, current dominant ideas of how to interpret the past, and even subjective viewpoints. e All events that are remembered and preserved in some original form constitute the historical record.
Western Historical Periods The common general split between prehistory (before written history), ancient history, Middle Ages, modern history, and contemporary history (history within the living memory) is a Western division of the largest blocks of time agreed upon by Western historians and representing the Western point of view.
Some historians have also noted that the 1960s, as a descriptive historical period, actually began in the late 1950s and ended in the early 1970s, because the cultural and economic conditions that define the meaning of the period dominated longer than the actual decade of the 1960s.
Learning Objective Compare and contrast different calendars and how they affect our understanding of history Key Points The first recorded calendars date to the Bronze Age, including the Egyptian and Sumerian calendars.
A great number of Hellenic calendars also developed in Classical Greece and influenced calendars outside of the immediate sphere of Greek influence, giving rise to the various Hindu calendars, as well as to the ancient Roman calendar.
Julius Caesar effected drastic changes in the existing timekeeping system.
The Gregorian calendar, also called the Western calendar and the Christian calendar, is internationally the most widely used civil calendar today.
It shares many aspects with calendars employed by other earlier Mesoamerican civilizations, such as the Zapotec and Olmec, and with contemporary or later calendars, such as the Mixtec and Aztec calendars. anno Domini The Medieval Latin term, which means /n the year of the Lord but is often translated as in the year of our Lord.
It is used to date events in many Muslim countries , and is used by Muslims everywhere to determine the proper days on which to observe the annual fasting, to attend Haj/, and to celebrate other Islamic holidays and festivals.
It is named after Pope Gregory XIIl, who introduced it in October 1582.
Julian calendar A calendar introduced by Julius Caesar in 46 BCE (708 AUC), which was a reform of the Roman calendar.
The natural units for timekeeping used by most historical societies are the day, the solar year, and the Iunation.
It is named after Pope Gregory XIll, who introduced it in October, 1582.
Solu, rian IR MEE ET ONa eS At gue sitwad gueidens 1 6ek rabjolar sistas sarenit .atgne edidis.
Le ewe naltare tempore » bi gent ta cad cams dacebrazionces adhe. bail ene, Opel. os ramt% serene , qua ot Pecemtierna % cudiger Cong rai ites.at dilveeas ss ifiiawe perpenfer incer fe contusyfent ne er des ‘Foruen hominem, ger deca refer rpferent, tudes tu bums pracaters a elegr. reat Epallaram Cel fant , ce mention lle ¢ eriam adice ral, qua cx accurads tercumsipectione wae fans ad Crlend sry perfectiomten maxiive fertinert. sertintxts retegny apes SL The first page of the papal bull ""Inter Gravissimas' by which Pope Gregory XIll introduced his calendar.
The common feature of all regional Hindu calendars is that the names of the twelve months are the same (because the names are based in Sanskrit) although the spelling and pronunciation have come to vary slightly from region to region over thousands of years.
The CE/BCE designation uses the Same numeric values as the AD/BC system so the two notations are numerically equivalent.
Learning Objective Explain the consequences of the imperfect historical record Key Points In the study of history as an academic discipline, a primary source is an artifact, document, diary, manuscript, autobiography, recording, or other source of information that was created at the time under study.
History as an academic discipline is based on primary sources, as evaluated by the community of scholars for whom primary sources are absolutely fundamental to reconstructing the past.
While some sources are considered more reliable or trustworthy than others, historians point out that hardly any historical evidence can be seen as fully objective since it is always a product of particular individuals, times, and dominant ideas.
Historical method comprises the techniques and guidelines by which historians use primary sources and other evidence to research and write historical accounts of the past.
Primary sources may remain in private hands or are located in archives, libraries, museums, historical societies, and special collections.
Historians use various strategies to reconstruct the past when facing a lack of sources, including collaborating with experts from other academic disciplines, most notably archaeology.
In some cases, historians are forced to speculate (this should be explicitly noted) or simply admit that we do not have sufficient information to reconstruct particular past events or processes.
History textbooks in most countries have been tools to foster nationalism and patriotism and to promote the most favorable version of national history.
Germany attempts to be an example of how to remove nationalistic narratives from history education.
The history curriculum in Germany is characterized by a transnational perspective that emphasizes the allEuropean heritage, minimizes the idea of national pride, and fosters the notion of civil society centered on democracy, human rights, and peace.
Despite progress and increased focus on groups that have been traditionally excluded from mainstream historical narratives (people of color, women, the working class, the poor, the disabled, LGBTQI-identified people, etc.), bias remains a component of historical investigation.
Voltaire, a French author and thinker, is credited to have developed a fresh outlook on history that broke from the tradition of narrating diplomatic and military events and emphasized customs, social history and achievements in the arts and sciences.
As the 20th-century history of Germany is filled with events and processes that are rarely a cause of national pride, the history curriculum in Germany (controlled by the 16 German states) is characterized by a transnational perspective that emphasizes the all-European heritage, minimizes the idea of national pride, and fosters the notion of civil society centered on democracy, human rights, and peace.
In the United States after World War I, a strong movement emerged at the university level to teach courses in Western Civilization with the aim to give students a common heritage with Europe.
Learning Objective To understand the process and timeline of human evolution Key Points Humans began to evolve about seven million years ago, and progressed through four stages of evolution.
Research shows that the first modern humans appeared 200,000 years ago.
Although they had larger brain capacity and interbred with humans, they eventually died out.
A number of theories examine the relationship between environmental conditions and human evolution.
The main human adaptations have included bipedalism, larger brain size, and reduced sexual dimorphism.
Key Terms aridity hypothesis The theory that the savannah was expanding due to increasingly arid conditions, which then drove hominin adaptation. turnover pulse hypothesis The theory that extinctions due to environmental conditions hurt specialist soecies more than generalist ones, leading to greater evolution among specialists.
Various divergences among apes, gibbons, orangutans occurred during this period, with Homini (including early humans and chimpanzees) separating from Gorillini about 8 millions years ago.
Humans and chimps then separated about 7. million years ago. q 4 ‘9 A ral Att Gibbon Human Saas Gorilla Orangutan Skeletal structure of humans and other primates.
The turnover pulse hypothesis states that extinctions due to environmental conditions hurt specialist soecies more than generalist ones.
While generalist species spread out when environmental conditions change, specialist soecies become more specialized and have a greater rate of evolution.
Learning Objective Explain the significance of the Neolithic Revolution Key Points During the Paleolithic Era, humans grouped together in small societies and subsisted by gathering plants, and fishing, hunting or scavenging wild animals.
There are several competing (but not mutually exclusive) theories as to the factors that drove populations to take up agriculture, including the Hilly Flanks hypothesis, the Feasting model, the Demographic theories, the evolutionary/intentionality theory, and the largely discredited Oasis Theory.
Humankind gradually evolved from early members of the genus Homo— such as Homo habilis, who used simple stone tools— into fully behaviorally and anatomically modern humans during the Paleolithic era.
This eventually resulted in humans spreading out from Africa and into Eurasia, Southeast Asia, and Australia.
Learning Objective To understand the history and accomplishments of the Sumerian people Key Points e The Sumerians were a people living in Mesopotamia from the 27th-20th century BCE. e The major periods in Sumerian history were the Ubaid period , the Uruk period (4100-2900 BCE), the Early Dynastic period , the Akkadian Empire period , the Gutian period , Sumerian Renaissance/Third Dynasty of Ur , and then decline. e Many Sumerian clay tablets have been found with writing.
Epic of Gilgamesh An epic poem from the Third Dynasty of Ur (circa 2100 BCE), which is seen as the earliest surviving great work of literature. anthropomorphic Having human characteristics.
Second, trade goods began to flow down waterways in southern Mespotamia, and large, temple-centered cities (most likely theocratic and run by priests-kings) rose up to facilitate this trade.
Sumerian culture began to spread from southern Mesopotamia into surrounding areas.
Sumerian Necklaces and Headgear Sumerian necklaces and headgear discovered in the royal graves, showing the way they may have been worn.
The Sumerian Renaissance/Third Dynasty of Ur (2047-1940 BCE) saw the rulers Ur-Nammu and Shulgi, whose power extended into southern Assyria.
Learning Objective Describe key characteristics and notable events of the Assyrian Empire Key Points e Centered on the Upper Tigris river in northern Mesopotamia, the Assyrians came to rule powerful empires at several times, the last of which grew to be the largest and most powerful empire the world had yet seen. e At its peak, the Assyrian empire stretched from Cyprus in the Mediterranean Sea to Persia, and from the Caucasus Mountains to the Arabian Peninsula and Egypt.
These periods roughly correspond to the Middle Bronze Age, Late Bronze Age, and Early Iron Age, respectively.
Assyria is mainly remembered for its military victories, technological advancements (such as using iron for weapons and building roads), use of torture to inspire fear, and a written history of conquests.
Karl August Wittfogel, the German scholar who first developed the notion of the hydraulic empire, argued in his book, Oriental Despotism , that strong government control characterized these civilizations because a particular resource was both a central part of economic processes and environmentally limited.
Learning Objective Describe the key political characteristics of the Akkadian Empire Key Points e The Akkadian Empire was an ancient Semitic empire centered in the city of Akkad and its surrounding region in ancient Mesopotamia, which united all the indigenous Akkadian speaking Semites and the Sumerian speakers under one rule within a multilingual empire.
Sargon and His Dynasty Sargon claimed to be the son of La'ibum or Itti-Bel, a humble gardener, and possibly a h/erodule, or priestess to Ishtar or Inanna.
The economy was dependent on irrigated farmlands of southern Irag, and rain-fed agriculture of Northern Iraq.
Some centralized authority may have been restored under Shu-Durul (21682154 BCE), but he was unable to prevent the empire collapsing outright from the invasion of barbarian peoples, known as the Gutians, from the Zagros Mountains.
Learning Objective To understand the significance of the city-state of Ur Key Points e Ur was a major Sumerian city-state located in Mesopotamia, founded circa 3800 BCE. e Cuneiform tablets show that Ur was a highly centralized, wealthy, bureaucratic state during the third millennium BCE. e The Ziggurat of Ur was built in the 21st century BCE, during the reign of Ur-Nammu, and was reconstructed in the 6th century BCE by Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon.
Nineveh Qattara Dar-Katlimmu Arrapha Assur Terqa Nuzi Mari Eshnunna Dur-Kurigaizu Sippar Der Babylon Kish Susa Borsippa Nippur Isin Uruk Larsa Ur The City of Ur This map shows Mesopotamia in the third millennium BCE, with Ur in the south. lr was located at the side of modern-day Tell el-Muqayyar in south Iraq's Dhi Qar Nasiriyah.
The Ziggurat of Ur This temple was built in the 21st century BCE, during the reign of U-Nammu, and was reconstructed in the 6th century BCE by Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon.
Ziggurats were massive structures built in the ancient Mesopotamian valley and western Iranian plateau, having the form of a terraced step pyramid of successively receding stories or levels.The Ziggurat of Ur measured 64 m in length, 45 m in width and over 30 m in height.
Babylon remained a minor territory for a century after it was founded, until the reign of its sixth Amorite ruler, Hammurabi , an extremely efficient ruler who established a bureaucracy with taxation and centralized government.
Hammurabi also enjoyed various military successes over the whole of southern Mesopotamia, modern-day Iran and Syria, and the old Assyrian Empire in Asian Minor.
The armies of Babylonia under Hammurabi were welldisciplined, and he was able to invade modern-day Iran to the east and conquer the pre-Iranic Elamites, Gutians and Kassites.
At the end of Hamurrabi's reign, the Babylonian empire had extended south to the Persian Gulf and north along the Euphrates to Mari, which was located in modern-day Abu Kamal, Syria, near the Syria/Irag border.
Learning Objective Evaluate the extent and influence of Babylonian culture Key Points Babylonian temples were massive structures of crude brick, Supported by buttresses.
Such uses of brick led to the early development of the pilaster and column, and of frescoes and enameled tiles.
Certain pieces of Babylonian art featured crude threedimensional statues, and gem-cutting was considered a high-perfection art.
The Babylonians produced extensive compendiums of astronomical records containing catalogues of stars and constellations, as well as schemes for calculating various astronomical coordinates and phenomena.
Medicinally, the Babylonians introduced basic medical processes, such as diagnosis and prognosis, and also catalogued a variety of illnesses with their symptoms.
Both Babylonian men and women learned to read and write, and much of Babylonian literature is translated from ancient Sumerian texts, such as the Epic of Gilgamesh.
The Babylonian GU text arranges stars in ""strings"" that lie along declination circles , and also employs the stars of the zenith, which are also separated by given right-ascensional differences.
The Reign of Nebuchadnezzar I and His Sons Nebuchadnezzar | was the most famous ruler of the Second Dynasty of Isin.
After 1180 BCE, the empire came to an end during the Bronze Age collapse and splintered into several independent ""Neo-Hittite""” city-states, some of which survived until the 8th century BCE. e The Hittite language was a member of the Anatolian branch of the Indo-European language family. e The Hittite military made successful use of chariots and advanced iron working technologies.
After 1180 BCE, amid general turmoil in the Levant associated with the sudden arrival of the Sea Peoples, the kingdom disintegrated into several independent ""Neo-Hittite"" city-states. e The head of the Hittite state was the king, but other officials exercised independent authority over various branches of the government. e Storm gods featured prominently in the Hittite religion, which was heavily influenced by Hattic, Mesopotamian, and Hurrian religions.
The Hittite Empire reached its height during the mid-14th century BCE under Suppiluliuma I, when it encompassed an area that included most of Asia Minor as well as parts of the northern Levant and Upper Mesopotamia.
At its peak, during the reign of Mursili Il, the Hittite Empire stretched from Arzawa in the west to Mitanni in the east, many of the Kaskian territories to the north including Hayasa-Azzi in the far north-east, and on south into Canaan approximately as far as the southern border of Lebanon, incorporating all of these territories within its domain.
The Hittites are usually depicted as a people living among the Israelites—Abraham purchases the Patriarchal burial-plot from ""Ephron HaChiti"" (Ephron the Hittite), and Hittites serve as high military officers in David's army.
A league of independent city-state ports, with others on the islands and along other coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, was ideally suited for trade between the Levant area and the rest of the ancient world.
Evidence of the influence of Minoan civilization outside Crete can be seen in Minoan handicraft on the Greek mainland, likely the result of a connection between Mycene and Minoan trade networks.
The Minoans were also connected to Egypt and the Canaanite civilization.
The Minoan civilization declined due to natural catastrophe, but the Dynasty of Knossos was able to spread its influence over Crete until it was overrun by the Mycenaean Greeks.
Minoan culture is known best for its pottery and handiwork, and its religion was based primarily on the worship of female goddesses.
But with the start of the Neopalatial period (the 17th and 16th centuries BCE), population increased again, palaces were rebuilt on a larger scale, and new settlements Sprung up all over the island.
Learning Objective Explain Carthage's culture and the Punic Wars Key Points Ancient Carthage was the empire born of the Phoenician city-state Carthage.
The military of Carthage was one of the largest military forces in the ancient world; its navy was its strongest force.
Carthage eventually extended across northern Africa and into the south of modern-day Spain.
Culture Carthaginian religion was based on Phoenician religion , a form of polytheism.
According to Aristotle, the Carthaginians and others had treaties of commerce to regulate their exports and imports.The empire of Carthage depended heavily on its trade with cities of the Iberian peninsula, from which it obtained vast quantities of silver, lead, copper and— most importantly —tin ore, which was essential for the manufacture of bronze objects by the civilizations of antiquity.
Carthaginian trade-relations with the Iberians (and the naval strength that enforced Carthage's monopoly on Iberian trade and that with tin-rich Britain), made it the sole significant broker of tin and maker of bronze in its day.
A geoglyph of a human with long hair and open mouth was discovered in 2000 by Marco Machacuay and Rocio Aramburu just west of Caral. e At its peak, approximately 3,000 people are believed to have lived in Caral. e Norte Chico civilizations are pre-ceramic cultures of the pre-Columbian Late Archaic; they completely lacked ceramics, and apparently had almost no art.
Chavin had a small, powerful elite that was legitimized through a claim to divine authority.
The chief example of Chavin architecture is the Chavin de Huantar temple, the design of which displays a complex and innovative adaptation to the highland environment of Peru.
The Chavin people showed advanced knowledge of acoustics, metallurgy, soldering, and temperature control.
The Chavin produced ch'arki, or llama jerky, which was commonly traded by camelid herders and was the main economic resource for the Chavin people.
The Old Temple featured the Lanz6n, which was housed in a central cruciform chamber in a labyrinth of underground passages.
The Lanz6n functions as axiS mundi, or a pivot point linking the heavens, earth, and underworld.
The Lanzon at Chavin Shown here is the most important stela statue of the central deity of the Chavin, called the Lanz6n.
Valdivian pottery are the oldest in the Americas, dating to 2700 BCE. e Valdivians created rafts with sails, and built a maritime trade network with tribes in the Andes and Amazon. e A main trading item was the red shell of the thorny oyster, called Spondylus.
Map of Valdivian Culture Shown here is the location of the Valdivia culture.
The prehistory of Egypt spans from early human settlements to the beginning of the Early Dynastic Period of Egypt (c.
They appeared to be settled people, descended from the Khormusan people, and spawned the Ibero-Marusian industry.
Naqada Il Pottery This pottery has a ship theme, and is done in the style of Naqada Il.
Protodynastic Period (3200 3000 BCE) During this period, the process of state formation, begun in Naqada II, became clearer.
The Old Kingdom is the name commonly given to the period from the Third Dynasty through the Sixth Dynasty (26862181 BCE), when Egypt gained in complexity and achievement.
Third Dynasty (c.50-2613 BCE) The first notable king of the Old Kingdom was Djoser of the Third Dynasty, who ordered the construction of the step pyramid in Memphis' necropolis, Saqqara.
Funerary prayers on royal tombs (called Pyramid Texts) appeared, and the cult of the deity Osiris ascended in importance.
The Sixth Dynasty (2345-2181 BCE) The power of the king and central government declined during this period, while that of nomarchs (regional governors) increased.
The First Intermediate Period The First Intermediate Period, the Seventh to Eleventh dynasties, spanned approximately one hundred years (21812055 BCE), and was characterized by political instability and conflict between the Heracleopolitan and Theban Kings.
One was the extremely long reign of Pepi Il , and the resulting succession issues.
The founder of the Ninth Dynasty, Wahkare Khety lI, is often described as an evil and violent ruler who caused much harm to the inhabitants of Egypt.
His successor, Kheti lll, brought some degree of order to the Delta, although the power and influence of these Ninth Dynasty kings were still insignificant compared to that of the Old Kingdom kings.
Intef II began the Theban assault on northern Egypt, and his successor, Intef III, completed the attack and moved into Middle Egypt against the Heracleopolitan kings.
The Middle Kingdom 4.3.1: The Middle Kingdom The Middle Kingdom was a period of Egyptian history Spanning the Eleventh through Twelfth Dynasty (2000-1700 BCE), when centralized power consolidated a unified Egypt.
The height of the Middle Kingdom came under the rules of Sensuret III and Amenemhat Ill, the former of whom established clear boundaries for Egypt, and the latter of whom efficiently exploited Egyptian resources to bring about a period of economic prosperity. e The Middle Kingdom declined into the Second Intermediate Period during the Thirteenth Dynasty, after a gradual loss of dynastic power and the disintegration of Egypt.
The End of the Eleventh Dynasty and the Rise of the Twelfth Dynasty Toward the end of the First Intermediate Period, Mentuhotep Il and his successors unified Egypt under a single rule, and commanded such faraway locations as Nubia and the Sinai.
The reign of Amenemhat II, Successor to Senusret I, has been characterized as largely peaceful.
He reigned only fifteen years, and was succeeded by his son, Senusret Ill.
Height of the Middle Kingdom Senusret Ill was a warrior-king, and launched a series of brutal campaigns in Nubia.
Statue head of Sensuret Ill Statue head of Sensuret Ill, one of the kings in the Twelfth Dynasty.
The reign of Amenemhat Ill was the height of Middle Kingdom economic prosperity, and is remarkable for the degree to which Egypt exploited its resources.
Contemporary records of the Nile flood levels indicate that the end of the reign of Amenemhet lll was dry, and crop failures may have helped to destabilize the dynasty.
Learning Objective Explain the dynamics between the various groups of people vying for power during the Second Intermediate Period Key Points e The brilliant Twelfth Dynasty was succeeded by a weaker Thirteenth Dynasty, which experienced a splintering of power. e The Hyksos made their first appearance during the reign of Sobekhotep IV, and overran Egypt at the end of the Fourteenth Dynasty.
They ruled through the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Dynasties. e The Abydos Dynasty was a short-lived Dynasty that ruled over part of Upper Egypt, and was contemporaneous with the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Dynasties. e The Seventeeth Dynasty established itself in Thebes around the time that the Hyksos took power in Egypt, and co-existed with the Hyksos through trade for a period of time.
The Fourteenth Dynasty The Thirteenth Dynasty proved unable to hold onto the long land of Egypt, and the provincial ruling family in Xois, located in the marshes of the western Delta, broke away from the central authority to form the Fourteenth Dynasty.
Famine was an issue during this period, most notably during the reign of Neferhotep Ill.
The Seventeenth Dynasty Around the time Memphis and Itj-tawy fell to the Hyksos, the native Egyptian ruling house in Thebes declared its independence from Itj-tawy and became the Seventeenth Dynasty.
With the creation of the Eighteenth Dynasty around 1550 BCE, the New Kingdom period of Egyptian history began with Ahmose |, its first pharaoh, who completed the expulsion of the Hyksos from Egypt and placed the country, once again, under centralized administrative control.
This was possibly a result of the foreign rule of the Hyksos during the Second Intermediate Period, The Eighteenth Dynasty contained some of Egypt's most famous pharaohs, including Hatshepsut, Akhenaten, Thutmose Ill, and Tutankhamun.
Hatshepsut concentrated on expanding Egyptian trade, while Thutmose III consolidated power.
Akhenaten's devotion to Aten defined his reign with religious fervor, while art flourished under his rule and attained an unprecedented level of realism.
Due to Akenaten's lack of interest in international affairs, the Hittites gradually extended their influence into Phoenicia and Canaan.
Ramesses II attempted war against the Hittites, but eventually agreed to a peace treaty after an indecisive result. e The heavy cost of military efforts in addition to climatic changes resulted in a loss of centralized power at the end of the Twentieth Dynasty, leading to the Third Intermediate Period.
Ramesses II The third pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt, who made peace with the Hittites.
The Nineteenth Dynasty New Kingdom Egypt would reach the height of its power under Seti | and Ramesses II, who fought against the Libyans and Hittites.
The severity of the difficulties is indicated by the fact that the first known labor strike in recorded history occurred during the 29th year of Ramesses Ill's reign, over food rations.
Despite a palace conspiracy which may have killed Ramesses Ill, three of his sons ascended the throne successively as Ramesses IV, Ramesses VI and Ramesses Vill.
The power of the last pharaoh of the dynasty, Ramesses XI, grew so weak that, in the south, the High Priests of Amun at Thebes became the de facto rulers of Upper Egypt.
Hatshepsut Hatshepsut ruled Egypt in the Eighteenth Dynasty (14781458 BCE), and brought wealth and a focus on large building projects.
She ruled longer than any other woman of an indigenous Egyptian dynasty. e Hatshepsut established trade networks that helped build the wealth of the Eighteenth Dynasty. e Hundreds of construction projects and statuary were commissioned by Hatshepsut, including obelisks and monuments at the Temple of Karnak.
While not the first female ruler of Egypt, Hatshepsut's reign was longer and more prosperous; she oversaw a peaceful, wealthy era. e The average woman in Egypt was quite liberated for the time, and had a variety of property and other rights. e Hatshepsut died in 1458 BCE in middle age, possibly of diabetes and bone cancer.
Hatshepsut's husband, Thutmose II, was also a child of Thutmose |, but was conceived with a different wife.
This included a successful mission to the Land of Punt in the ninth year of her reign, which brought live myrrh trees and frankincense (which Hatshepsut used as kohl eyeliner) to Egypt.
She installed twin obelisks at the entrance to this temple, one of which still stands.
Hieroglyphs of Thutmose III and Hatshepsut Hatshepsut, on the right, is shown having the trappings of a greater role.
After her death, mostly during Thutmose Ill's reign, haphazard attempts were made to remove Hatshepsut from certain historical and pharaonic records.
The Third Intermediate Period of Ancient Egypt began with the death of the last pharaoh of the New Kingdom, Ramesses Xl in 1070 BCE, and ended with the start of the Postdynastic Period.
The Third Intermediate Period was one of decline and political instability. lt was marked by a division of the state for much of the period, as well as conquest and rule by foreigners.
The Twenty-First Dynasty The period of the Twenty-first Dynasty was characterized by the country's fracturing kingship.
After the death of Ramesses XI, his successor, Smendes I, ruled from the city of Tanis, but was mainly active only in Lower Egypt.
Shoshenq | descended from Meshwesh immigrants originally from Ancient Libya.
In Thebes, a civil war engulfed the city between the forces of Pedubast |, a self-proclaimed pharaoh.
Eventually Osorkon B defeated his enemies, and proceeded to found the Upper Egyptian Libyan Dynasty of Osorkon III, Takelot II], and Rudamun.
The Twenty-Fourth Dynasty The Nubian kingdom to the south took full advantage of the division of the country.
The Twenty-Fifth Dynasty Following his military conquests, Piye established the Twenty-fifth Dynasty and appointed the defeated rulers as his provincial governors.
Pharaoh Psamtik Ill succeeded his father, Anmose II, only six months before he had to face the Persian Empire at Pelusium.
Learning Objective Describe the religious beliefs and practices of Ancient Egypt Key Points The religion of Ancient Egypt lasted for more than 3,000 years, and was polytheistic, meaning there were a multitude of deities, who were believed to reside within and control the forces of nature.
His role was to sustain the gods so that they could maintain order in the universe.
The Egyptian universe centered on Ma'at, which has several meanings in English, including truth, justice and order.
Egyptians were very concerned about the fate of their souls after death.
Artistic depictions of gods were not literal representations, as their true nature was considered mysterious.
Temples were the state's method of sustaining the gods, since their physical images were housed and cared for; temples were not a place for the average person to worship.
Certain animals were worshipped and mummified as representatives of gods.
Symbolism meant order, shown through the pharaoh's regalia, or through the use of certain colors.
In Egyptian art, the size of a figure indicates its relative importance.
Paintings were often done on stone, and portrayed pleasant scenes of the afterlife in tombs.
Ancient Egyptians created both monumental and smaller sculptures, using the technique of sunk relief.
Ka statues, which were meant to provide a resting place for the ka part of the soul, were often made of wood and placed in tombs.
Faience was sintered-quartz ceramic with surface vitrification, used to create relatively cheap small objects in many colors.
Papyrus was used for writing and painting, and and was used to record every aspect of Egyptian life.
Architects carefully planned buildings, aligning them with astronomically significant events, such as solstices and equinoxes.
The Amarna period represents an interruption in ancient Egyptian art style, subjects were represented more realistically, and scenes included portrayals of affection among the royal family.
Learning Objective Describe the impressive attributes of the monuments erected by Egyptians in the Old Kingdom Key Points e Ancient Egyptian architects carefully planned buildings, aligning them with astronomically significant events, such as solstices and equinoxes, and used mainly sunbaked mud brick, limestone, sandstone, and granite.
The Luxor Temple was constructed in the 14th century BCE by Amenhotep Ill in the ancient city of Thebes, now Luxor.
Hypostyle halls In ancient Egypt, covered rooms with columns. equinoxes Either of the two times in the year when the sun crosses the celestial equator, and day and night are of equal length. solstices Either of the two times in the year when the sun reaches its highest or lowest point in the sky at noon. ma'at The ancient Egyptian concept of truth, balance, order, harmony, law, morality and justice. obelisks Stone pillars, typically having a square or rectangular cross section and pyramidal top, used as monuments or landmarks.
The Great Sphinx of Giza This limestone statue of a reclining sphinx (a mythical creature with a lion's body and a human head) is located on the Giza Plateau to the west of the Nile.
Decoration included reliefs (bas relief and sunken relief) of images and hieroglyphic text and sculpture, including obelisks, figures of gods (sometimes in sphinx form), and votive figures.
Learning Objective Examine the artistic and social developments of the Middle Kingdom Key Points e The Middle Kingdom was a time of prosperity and stability, as well as a resurgence of art, literature, and architecture.Block statue was a new type of sculpture invented in the Middle Kingdom, and was often used as a funerary monument. e Literature had new uses during the Middle Kingdom, and many classics were written during the period.
Learning Objective Describe the Nubian kingdoms, emphasizing their relationship with Egypt Key Points e Nubia consisted of two major regions along the Nile River, from Aswan to Khartoum. e Nubian history can be traced from 2000 BCE onward to 1504 AD, when Nubia was divided between Egypt and the Sennar sultanate and became Arabized. e Nubia and Ancient Egypt had periods of both peace and war.
The Yellow River and the Huai and Yangtze Rivers, created fertile land, ripe for experimentation with agriculture.
These phenomena took place in China about 1000 years later than in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the Indus River valley. y a . iN \\ a \\\\ \ (iy ttt Wi | il (ss a ‘« Pangu Portrait of Pangu, the creator of the universe according to Chinese mythology.
Fuxi and his wife, NUuwa, were credited with introducing domesticated animals and creating the basic social structure of family life.
A TS Map of Shang Dynasty This map shows the location of the Shang Dynasty in the Yellow River valley.
Jie, the last king of the Xia Dynasty (the first Chinese dynasty), was overthrown 1760 BCE by Cheng Tang.
In particular, the Shang kings, who considered themselves divine rulers, consulted the great god Shangdi for advice and wisdom.
ADE oy Oracle Bone This oracle bone from the Shang Dynasty dates to the reign of King Wu Ding.
GhSOgnsseO Ties Shang Dynasty Bronze This bronze ding vessel dates to the Shang Dynasty.
They used this Mandate to justify their overthrow of the Shang, and their subsequent rule.
Some scholars think the earlier Xia Dynasty never existed—that it was invented by the Zhou to support their claim under the Mandate that there had always been only one ruler of China.
Di Xin (the final king of the Shang Dynasty) had become cruel, spent state money on drinking and gambling, and ignored the state.
RREK The Chinese Character for ""Tian"" The Chinese character for ""Tian,"" meaning ""heaven,"" in Bronze script, Seal script, Oracle script, and modern simplified.
Learning Objective Describe the main accomplishments of the Western Zhou period Key Points e The first period of Zhou rule, during which the Zhou held undisputed power over China, is known as the Western Zhou period. e During the Western Zhou period, the focus of religion changed from the supreme god, Shangdi, to ""Tian,"" or heaven; advances were made in farming technology; and the feudal system was established.
Under the feudal system, the monarchy would reward loyal nobles with large pieces of land.
Learning Objective Identify some of the art forms prevelant under the Zhou Dynasty Key Points e Work in bronze, including inscriptions, continued and expanded in the Zhou Dynasty. e Few paintings have survived from this period, but we know that they were representations of the real world. e The production of lacquerware expanded during this period.
The text records the appointment of a man named Song as supervisor of the storehouses in Chengzhou, and is repeated on at least 3 tripod pots ( ding), 5 tureens and their lids, and 2 vases and their lids.
The Spring and Autumn Period of Eastern Zhou The first part of the Eastern Zhou period is known as the Spring and Autumn period, named after the Soring and Autumn Annals, a text that narrated events on a year-byyear basis, and marked the beginning of China's deliberately recorded history.
Gulf of Jili J Yellow Sea A Map of the Warring States of China This map shows the Warring States late in the period.
Large-scale works, including the Dujiangyan Irrigation System and the Zhengguo Canal, were completed and increased agricultural production.
Iron Sword from the Warring States Period This iron sword is an example of the metal work done during this period.
The crossbow was invented, and its low cost and easy use (as Compared to the expensive chariot) resulted in the increased conscription of peasants as expandable infantry.
Daoism Another important philosopher in this period was Lao-tzu , who founded Daoism during the same period as Confucianism.
The first was concerned with shi, or the investment of the position of ruler with power and the necessity of obtaining facts to rule well.
Mohism Mohism emerged around the same time as the other philosophies discussed here, under the philosopher Mozi (c.
Shi Huangdi also built the Great Wall of China, roughly 1,500 miles long and guarded by a massive army, to protect the nation against northern invaders. e The Qin Dynasty collapsed after only 15 years.
KR i Hh im A Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty Emperor Gaozu, formerly known as Liu Bang, founded the Han Dynasty.
Other innovations included the first use of negative numbers in mathematics, the recording of stars and comets, the armillary sohere, which represented star movements in three dimensions, the waterwheel, and other engineering feats.
Through Emperor Wu's southern and western conquests, the Han Dynasty made contact with the Indian cultural sphere.
Learning Objective Describe the importance of the Silk Road Key Points The Silk Road was established by China's Han Dynasty through territorial expansion.
Establishment of the Silk Road Through southern and western conquests, the Han Dynasty of China made contact with the Indian cultural sohere.
As China pushed its borders further, trade contacts were established with lands to the west, most notably via the Silk Road. e ae Pe UF China + { — Q Somaliag Map of Silk Road In this map of the Silk Road, red shows the land route and blue shows the maritime route.
During the Shang and Zhou (1050-250 BCE) dynasties, bone, bamboo, and sometimes silk were used as writing tablets.
Portrait of Cai Lun This portrait of Cai Lun depicts the invention of paper.
The ruins of Harappa were first described in 1842 by Charles Masson in his book, Narrative of Various Journeys in Balochistan, Afghanistan, the Panjab, & Kalat.
There is no conclusive evidence of palaces or temples (or even of kings, armies, or priests), and the largest structures may be granaries.
During the Early Harappan period (about 3200-2600 BCE), cultural similarities in pottery, seals, figurines, and ornaments document caravan trade with Central Asia and the Iranian plateau.
Key Terms Indo-Aryan Migration theory A theory suggesting the Harappan culture of the Indus River Valley was assimilated during a migration of the Aryan people into northwest India.
Monsoon Seasonal changes in atmospheric circulation and precipitation; usually winds that bring heavy rain once a year.
The Aryan Invasion Theory The Indus Valley Civilization may have met its demise due to invasion.
Archaeological evidence shows that the site, which had been a major city before the downfall of the Indus Valley Civilization, continued to be inhabited by a much smaller population after the collapse.
These Indo-Aryans were a branch of the Indo-Iranians, who originated in present-day northern Afghanistan.
Ceramic goblet from Navdatoll, Malwa, 1300 BCE As the Indo-Aryans developed an agricultural society during the Later Vedic Period , they further developed crafts, such as pottery.
Learning Objective Explain the history of the caste system Key Points The institution of the caste system, influenced by stories of the gods in the Rig-Veda epic, assumed and reinforced the idea that lifestyles, occupations, ritual statuses, and social statuses were inherited.
Aryan society was patriarchal in the Vedic Period, with men in positions of authority and power handed down only through the male line.
Castes in India A page from the manuscript Seventy-two Specimens of Castes in India, which consists of 72 full-color hand-painted images of men and women of the various castes and religious and ethnic groups found in Madura, India at that time.
As indicated on the presentation page, the aloum was compiled by the Indian writing master at an English school established by American missionaries in Madura, and given to the Reverend William Twining.
Origins Sanskrit traces its linguistic ancestry to Proto-Indo-lIranian and ultimately to Proto-Indo-European languages, meaning that it can be traced historically back to the people who spoke Indo-Iranian, also called the Aryan languages, as well as the Indo-European languages, a family of several hundred related languages and dialects.
Kalidasa’s play, Abhi/nanasakuntalam, is generally regarded as a masterpiece and was among the first Sanskrit works to be translated into English, as well as numerous other languages.
In the medieval era, Sanskrit continued to be spoken and written, particularly by Brahmins for scholarly communication.
According to the hymns of the Rig Veda, the most important deities were Agni, the god of Fire, intermediary between the gods and humans; Indra, the god of Heavens and War, protector of the Aryans against their enemies; Surya, the Sun god; Vayu, the god of Wind; and Prthivi, the goddess of Earth.
Saeraseereret er Sen Agni, God of Fire Agni, the Indian God of Fire from the ancient Vedic religion, shown riding a ram.
Learning Objective Explain the evolution of hinduism Key Points The Vedic religion was influenced by local cultures and traditions adopted by Indo-Aryans as they spread throughout India.
Over time, Buddhism declined but some of its practices were integrated into Hinduism, with large Hindu temples being built in South and Southeast Asia. ae ge _— sd win © 10 0228 Gi The Swaminarayan Akshardham Temple in Delhi, the world's largest Hindu temple Hinduism evolved as a combination of various cultures and traditions, including Vedic religion and the Upanishads.
In the 19th century, the Indian subcontinent became a western colony during the period of the British Raj (the name of the British ruling government) beginning in 1858.
They are commonly known as monks. e The Sramana movement gave rise to Jainism and Buddhism.
Learning Objective Understand the development of Buddhism as a major world religion Key Points Sramanas were those who practiced an ascetic, or strict and self-denying, lifestyle in pursuit of spiritual liberation.
They are commonly known as monks. e The Sramana movement gave rise to Jainism, which is considered an independent, pre-Buddhist religion with possible roots in the Indus Valley Civilization. e The predominance of karma is one of the key features of Jainism.
Sramana traditions later gave rise to varying schools of Hinduism, as well as Yoga, Buddhism, and Jainism.
Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. {e) ""Akbar."" httos://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akbar.
The empire covered lands that included portions of modernday Abkhazia, Agfhanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Egypt, Georgia, Greece, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Macedonia, Moldova, Oman, Nagorno-Karabakh, Northern Cyprus, Pakistan, Palestien, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saudia Arabia, South Ossetia, Sudan, Syria,Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.
Government and Trade in the Achaemenid Empire Emperors Cyrus Il and Darius | created a centralized government and extensive trade network in the Achaemenid Empire.
Learning Objective Discuss how the central government provided cultural and economic reform Key Points Cyrus the Great maintained control over a vast empire by installing regional governors, called satraps, to rule individual provinces.
Researchers were able to compare the scripts and use it to help decipher ancient languages, in this way making the Behistun Inscription as valuable to cuneiform as the Rosetta Stone is Behistun Inscription A section of the Behistun Inscription on a limestone cliff of Mount Behistun in western Iran, which became a key in deciphering cuneiform script.
The contesting force to Ahura Mazda was called Angra Mainyu, or angry spirit.
Darius |, and later Achaemenid emperors, acknowledged their devotion to Ahura Mazda in inscriptions (as attested to several times in the Behistun inscription), and appear to have continued the model of coexistence with other religions.
In the Cappadocian kingdom (whose territory was formerly an Achaemenid possession), Persian colonists who were cut off from their co-religionists in Iran proper continued to practice the Zoroastrianism of their forefathers.
Chandragupta then defeated the invasion led by Seleucus I, a Macedonian general from Alexander's army, and gained additional territory west of the Indus River.
Conquest of Magadha and foundation of the Maurya Empire According to several legends, Chanakya traveled to Magadha, a kingdom that was large and militarily powerful and feared by its neighbors, but was insulted by its king Dhana Nanda, of the Nanda Dynasty.
Apart from these southern states, Kalinga was the only kingdom in India independent from Bindusara's empire.
As a young prince, Ashoka was a brilliant commander who crushed revolts in Ujjain and Taxila.
For this, the Edicts of Ashoka are known as an early document that promoted religious tolerance.
The map shows the empire covering all of modern-day India, as well as portions of modern-day Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Iran, Nepal, Pakistan, and China.
Learning Objective Discuss the effects of Ashoka the Great's conversion to Buddhism Key Points While the early part of Ashoka's reign was apparently quite bloodthirsty, he became a follower of the Buddha's teachings after his conquest of Kalinga.
In one source, his conversion is presented as a gradual process coming from intense personal anguish, rather than spurred by a specific event.
As a Buddhist emperor, Ashoka believed that Buddhism is beneficial for all human beings, as well as animals and plants, so he built a number of stupas.
He sent his only daughter, Sanghamitra, and son, Mahindra, to spread Buddhism in Sri Lanka (then known as Tamraparni). ee hone er MS ANTE ae * ee ee ee el Le 4 Stupa Great Stupa , Sanchi, India.
Learning Objective Describe the factors that contributed to the decline of the Maurya Empire Key Points Ashoka the Great's rule was followed by 50 years of weak kings who did not retain strong central authority.
The commander-in-chief of his guard, Brahmin General Pusyamitra Sunga, killed Brihadratha during a military parade and ascended the throne.
FE Seated Buddha statue showing Greek influences Buddhism was favored in the Indo-Greek Kingdom.
Kushan Origins (30-375 CE) The Kushans were one of five branches of the Yuezhi confederation, an Indo-European nomadic people.
Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. o ""Kanishka."" httos://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanishka.
Under Gupta rule, a number of notable scholars thrived, including Kalidasa, considered the greatest poet and dramatist of the Sanskrit language; Aryabhata, the first of the Indian mathematician-astronomers who worked on the approximation for Pr Vishnu Sharma, thought to be the author of the Panchatantra fables, one of the most widelytranslated, non-religious books in history; and the Hindu philosopher Vatsyayana, author of the Kama Sutra.
The period of Gupta rule, especially the reign of Chandragupta II, is still remembered as the Golden Age of India.
The Gupta Empire flourished, in military and territorial conquests as well as cultural and scholastic advancements, during the reign of Emperor Chandragupta Il.
Learning Objective Understand the characteristics of the Greek Dark Ages Key Points e The Late Bronze Age collapse, also Known as the Age of Calamities, was a transition in the Aegean Region, Eastern Mediterranean, and Southwestern Asia.
Historians believe this period was violent, sudden, and culturally disruptive. e Many historians attribute the fall of the Mycenaeans, and overall Bronze Age collapse, to climatic or environmental catastrophe combined with an invasion by the Dorians . e During the Dark Ages, Greece was most likely divided into independent regions according to kinship groups, and the oikoi, or households. e Toward the end of the Greek Dark Ages, communities began to develop that were governed by elite groups of aristocrats, as opposed to singular kings or chieftains of earlier periods.
The Homeric Question The Homeric Question concerns the doubts and consequent debate over the identity of Homer, the author of the //iad and the Odyssey, it also questions the historicity of the two books.
The //iad, however, has been placed immediately following the Greek Dark Age period.
Poleis were different from ancient city-states in that they were ruled by bodies of the citizens who lived there.
The city's administrative geography was reworked, the goal being to have mixed political groups—not federated by local interests linked to the sea, the city, or farming—whose decisions (declaration of war, etc.) would depend on their geographical situations.
Learning Objective Understand the key characteristics of Sparta’s society Key Points e Sparta was an oligarchic city-state, ruled by two hereditary kings equal in authority. e Spartan society was largely structured around the military, and around military training.
At the age of 20, Spartiates were initiated into full citizenship and joined a syssitia. e Helots were granted many privileges, in comparison to enslaved populations in other Greek city-states.
The Helot population outnumbered the Spartiate population, and grew over time, causing societal tensions. e Female Spartans enjoyed status, power, and respect that was unequaled in the rest of the classical world.
HELOTS | coregewet nites word ene 2 hee @ Caveten vatiey ret Mirearee to te meet 9 Structure of Spartan society Spartan society was highly regimented, with a clearly delineated class system.
Typically only men who were to become Spartiates underwent military training, although two exceptions existed to this rule.rophimoi, or ""foster sons,"" from other Greek city-states were allowed to attend training as foreign students.
For example, the Athenian general Xenophon sent his two sons to Sparta as trophimol.
Finding the lonians difficult to rule, the Persians installed tyrants in every city, as a means of control.
At its greatest extent, the Achaemenid Empire included all of the territory of modern-day Iran, Turkey, Iraq, Kuwait, Syria, Jordan, Israel, Palestine, Lebanon, Afghanistan, all significant population centers of Ancient Egypt as far west as eastern Libya, Thrace-Macedonia and Paeonia, the Black Sea coastal regions of Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine, and Russia, all of Armenia, Georgia , Azerbaijan, parts of the North Caucasus, and much of Central Asia; encompassing around 5. million square kilometers, making it one of the largest empires in history.
Learning Objective Understand the effect the Persian Wars had on the balance of power throughout the classical world Key Points After the second Persian invasion of Greece was halted, Sparta withdrew from the Delian League and reformed the Peloponnesian League with its original allies.
Many Greek city-states had been alienated from Sparta following the violent actions of Spartan leader Pausanias during the siege of Byzantium.
Following Sparta’s departure from the Delian League, Athens was able to use the resources of the League to its own ends, which led it into conflict with less powerful members of the League.
The Persian Empire adopted a divide-and-rule strategy in relation to the Greek city-states in the wake of the Persian Wars, stoking already simmering conflicts, including the rivalry between Athens and Sparta, to protect the Persian Empire against further Greek attacks.
Athens 7.4.1: Athens Athens attained its Golden Age under Pericles in the 5t century BCE, and flourished culturally as the hegemonic power of the Hellenic world.
Learning Objective Understand the factors contributing to the rise and fall of Athens Key Points Cleisthenes overthrew the dictator Hippias in 511/510 BCE in order to establish democracy at Athens.
This money funded the building of the Athenian Acropolis, put half the Athenian population on the public payroll, and allowed Athens to build and maintain the dominant naval power in the Greek world.
With the empire's funds, military dominance, and its political fortunes as guided by statesman and orator Pericles, Athens produced some of the most influential and enduring cultural artifacts of the Western tradition.
Tensions within the Delian League brought about the Peloponnesian War , during which Athens was defeated by its rival, Sparta.
These victories enabled Athens to bring most of the Aegean, and many other parts of Greece, together in the Delian League, creating an Atheniandominated alliance from which Sparta and its allies withdrew.
Greek-Persian Duel The artwork shows a Greek hoplite and Persian warrior fighting each other.
As Athens' ruler, he helped the city to prosper with a resplendent culture and democratic institutions. 5th century Athenian Political Institutions The administration of the Athenian state was managed by a group of people referred to as magistrates, who were submitted to rigorous public control and chosen by lot.
The resulting tensions brought about the Peloponnesian War , in which Athens was defeated by its rival, Sparta.
By the mid4th century BCE, the northern Greek kingdom of Macedon was becoming dominant in Athenian affairs.
Athenians tn the Age of Pericles The Athenian elite lived modestly and without great luxuries compared to the elites of other ancient societies.
Key Terms allegory of the cave A paradoxical analogy wherein Socrates argues that the invisible world is the most intelligible, and the visible world is the least kKnowable and obscure.
When he was on trial, he used his method of e/enchos, a dialectic method of inquiry that resembles the scientific method, to demonstrate to the jurors that their moral values are wrong-headed.
Learning Objective Explain how epic poetry influenced the development of classical Greek historical texts Key Points The formative influence of the Homeric epics in shaping Greek culture was widely recognized, and Homer was described as the teacher of Greece.
The /liad, sometimes referred to as the Song of Ilion or Song of Ilium, is set during the Trojan War and recounts the battles and events surrounding a quarrel between King Agamemnon and the warrior Achilles.
Herodotus is referred to as ""The Father of History,"" and is the first historian known to have broken from Homeric tradition in order to treat historical subjects as a method of investigation arranged into a historiographic narrative.
Thucydides, who had been trained in rhetoric, provided a model of historical prose-writing based more firmly in factual progression of a narrative, whereas Herodotus, due to frequent digressions and asides, appeared to minimize his authorial control.
Key Terms Homer A Greek poet of the 7"" or 8 century BCE; author of the lliad and the Odyssey. dactylic hexameter A form of meter in poetry or a rhythmic scheme.
Homer In the Western classical tradition, Homer is the author of the Iliad and the Odyssey, and is revered as the greatest of ancient Greek epic poets.
Idealized portrayal of Homer dating to the Hellenistic period; located at the British Museum.
The Iliad The /liad (sometimes referred to as the Song of Ilion or Song of Ilium) is an ancient Greek epic poem in dactylic hexameter.
Set during the Trojan War (the ten-year siege of the city of Troy by a coalition of Greek states), it tells of the battles and events surrounding a quarrel between King Agamemnon and the warrior Achilles.
The likely historicity of the //iadasa piece of literature, however, must be balanced against the creative license that would have been taken over years of transmission, as well as the alteration of historical fact to conform with tribal preferences and provide entertainment value to its intended audiences.
Marble bust of Aeschylus Marble bust of Aeschylus According to Aristotle, Aeschylus also expanded the number of actors in theater to allow for the dramatization of conflict on stage.
The Corinthian Order The Corinthian Order grew directly from the lonic in the mid5th century BCE, and was initially of a very similar style and proportion, with the only distinguishing factor being its more ornate capitals.
Learning Objective Describe the various scientific advancements made during the Hellenistic period Key Points e Great seats of learning rose during the Hellenistic Period, including those at Alexandria and Antioch. e Scientific inquiries were often sponsored by royal patrons. e The discoveries of several Greek mathematicians, including Pythagoras and Euclid, are still used in mathematical teaching today.
The Peloponnesian War 7.6.1: Introduction to the Peloponnesian War The Peloponnesian War provided a dramatic end to the 5t century BCE, shattering religious and cultural taboos, devastating vast swathes of countryside, and destroying whole cities.
Learning Objective Describe the events of the Peloponnesian War Key Points e The Peloponnesian War was fought between Athens and its empire, Known as the Delian League, and the Peloponnesian League, led by Sparta. e During this conflict, Greek warfare evolved from an originally limited and formalized form of conflict, to allout struggles between city-states, with large-scale atrocities.
The Peloponnesian War provided a dramatic end to the 5th century BCE, shattering religious and cultural taboos, devastating vast swathes of countryside, and destroying whole cities.
As a result, the two powers were relatively unable to fight decisive battles.The Spartan strategy during the Archidamian War was to invade the land surrounding Athens, depriving Athenians of the productive land around their city.
Agesilaus II was one of two Spartan kings during the period of Spartan hegemony, and is remembered for his multiple campaigns in the eastern Aegean and Persian territories. e Agesilaus’s loss at the Battle of Leuctra effectively ended Spartan hegemony throughout the region.
Macedonian Conquest 7.7.1: The Rise of the Macedon Philip Il’s conquests during the Third Sacred War cemented his power, as well as the influence of Macedon, throughout the Hellenic world.
Macedon ’s rise is largely attributable to the policies during Philip Il’s rule.
A Macedonian Phalanx Depiction of a Macedonian phalanx armed with sarissas.
Alexander the Great Formally Alexander IIl of Macedon, a Macedonian king who was undefeated in battle and is considered one of history's most successful commanders. phalanx A rectangular mass military formation, usually composed entirely of heavy infantry armed with spears, pikes, Sarissas, or similar weapons.
He overthrew the Persian King Darius Ill, and conquered the entirety of the Persian Empire.
Taking advantage of this, Chandragupta Maurya (referred to in Greek sources as Sandrokottos), of relatively humble origin, took control of the Punjab, and with that power base proceeded to conquer the Nanda Empire.
Eventually the two sides reconciled, and after the birth of Alexander IV, Perdiccas and Philip III were appointed joint kings, albeit in name only.
They allied with Rome again under Eumenes II against Perseus of Macedon, during the Third Macedonian War.
Macedon The Kingdom of Macedon at the death of Philip II ina eCity Macedonian garrison Important battles Kingdom of Macedonia Dependent territories Kingdom of the Molossians Thessaly Members of the League of Corinth Neutral states Persian Empire © The Kingdom of Macedon at the death of Philip Il Macedon, or Macedonia, was the dominant state of Hellenistic Greece.
During the reigns of Philip V and his son Perseus , Macedon clashed with the rising Roman republic.
During the 2"" and 15t centuries BCE, Macedon fought a series of wars against Rome.
The Etruscans 8.1.1: The Origins of Etruria The Etruscans were a Mediterranean civilization during the 6th to 3 century BCE, from whom the Romans derived a great deal of cultural influence.
The twelve Etruscan league citiies were Felathri, Arretium, Curtun, Perusia, Fufluna, Clevsin, Vetluna, Velzna, Velch, Tarchna, Caisra, and Veil.
It is believed that the Etruscan government style changed from total monarchy to an oligarchic republic (as the Roman Republic did) in the 6 century BCE, although it is important to note this did not happen to all city-states.
The Etruscan name for family was /autn, and at the center of the /autn was the married couple.
The hypothesized etymology for Tusci, a root for ""Tuscan"" or ""Etruscan,"" suggests a connection to the Latin and Greek words for ""tower,"" illustrating the 7Jusc/ people as those who built towers.
The criterion for deciding whether or not an object originated in Rome or descended to the Romans from the Etruscans is the date of the object and the opinion of ancient sources regarding the provenance of the object’s style.
Although Diodorus of Sicily wrote, in the 15t century, of the great achievements of the Etruscans, little survives or is known of it.
Etruscan beliefs concerning the afterlife were influenced by a number of sources, particularly those of the early Mediterranean region.
Etrusca Disciplina The Etruscan scriptures were a corpus of texts, termed the Etrusca Disciplina.
Tin or Tinia, the sky; Uni, his wife Juno); and Cel, the earth goddess.
Souls of ancestors are found depicted around Etruscan tombs, and after the 5th century BCE, the deceased are depicted in iconography as traveling to the underworld.
Some deceased individuals were laid out on stone benches, and depending on the proportion of inhumation, versus cremation, rites followed, cremated ashes and bones might be put into an urn in the shape of a house, orina representation of the deceased.
Learning Objective Explain how the founding of Rome is rooted in mythology Key Points The national epic poem of mythical Rome, the Aene/d by Virgil, tells the story of how the Trojan prince, Aeneas, came to Italy.
Recent studies suggest that the wolf may be a medieval sculpture dating from the 13th century CE; Romulus and Remus were purported to be sons of Rhea Silvia and Mars, the god of war.
The hero, Aeneas, was already well Known within Greco-Roman legend and myth, having been a character in the //iad.
Tullus Hostilius had little regard for the Roman gods, and focused entirely on military expansion.
He constructed the home of the Roman Senate, the Curia Hostilia. e Ancus Marcius ruled peacefully and only fought wars when Roman territories needed defending.
Lucius Tarquinius Priscus increased the size of the Senate and began major construction works, including the Temple to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, and the Circus Maximus.
Servius Tullius built the first pomerium— walls that fully encircled the Seven Hills of Rome.
He also made organizational changes to the Roman army, and implemented a new constitution for the Romans, further developing the citizen classes.
Lucius Tarquinius Superbus's reign is remembered for his use of violence and intimidation, as well as his disrespect of Roman custom and the Roman Senate.
Numa Pompilius After the death of Romulus, there was an interregnum for one year, during which ten men chosen from the senate governed Rome as successive /nterreges.
Many slaves descended from debtors or prisoners of war, especially women and children who were captured during foreign military campaigns and sieges. lronically, many slaves originated from Rome’s conquest of Greece, and yet Greek culture was considered, in some respects by the Romans, to be superior to their own.
Nonetheless, many worked under harsh conditions, and/or suffered inhumanely under their owners during their enslavement.
Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. ""220pxTogato, | sec dc. con testa di_restauro da_un _ ritrat to_di_nerva, inv.
The comitia tributa, or assembly of the tribes (the citizens of Rome), was presided over by a consul and composed of 35 tribes.
Dictators were sometimes elected during times of military emergency, during which the constitutional government would be disbanded.
Senators were usually appointed by Roman censors, but during times of military emergency, such as the civil wars of the 15* century BCE, this practice became less prevalent, and the Roman dictator, triumvir, or the Senate itself would select its members.
Citizens on these assemblies were organized further on the basis of curiae , centuries (for military purposes), and tribes , and each would each gather into their own assemblies.
Learning Objective Describe the relationship between the government and the people in the time of the Roman Republic Key Points e A number of developments affected the relationship between Rome’s republican government and society, particularly in regard to how that relationship differed among patricians and plebeians.
The passage of Lex Trebonia forbade the co-opting of colleagues to fill vacant positions on tribunes in order to Sway voting in favor of patrician blocs over plebeians. e Throughout the 4th century BCE, a series of reforms were passed that required all laws passed by the plebeian council to have the full force of law over the entire population.
However, authors diversified their genres as the Republic expanded. e Cicero is one of the most famous Republican authors, and his letters provide detailed information about an important period in Roman history. e Romans typically produced historical sculptures in relief, as opposed to Greek free-standing sculpture.
Bust of Pompey the Great The portraits of Pompey the Great were neither fully idealized, nor were they created in the same veristic style of Republican senators.
By the middle of the 3rd century and the end of the Pyrrhic War, Rome had effectively dominated the Italian peninsula and won an international military reputation.
Over the course of the three Punic Wars, Rome completely defeated Hannibal and razed Carthage to the ground, thereby acquiring all of Carthage's North African and Spanish territories.
In 264, at the start of the lst Punic war, the territory expanded to include large portions of present-day northern Italy, as far north as Pisae and Ariminium.
While Beneventum's outcome was indecisive, it led to Pyrrhus's complete withdrawal from Italy, due to the decimation of his army following years of foreign Campaigns, and the diminishing likelihood of further material gains.
Learning Objective Explain how crises in the 1st century BCE further destabilized the Roman Republic Key Points Though the causes and attributes of individual crises varied throughout the decades, an underlying theme of conflict between the aristocracy and ordinary citizens drove the majority of actions.
The Gracchi brothers, Tiberius and Gaius, introduced a number of populist agrarian and land reforms in the 130s and 120s BCE that were heavily opposed by the patrician Senate.
Crassus was promised the consulship later. e The triumvirate crumbled in the wake of growing political violence and Crassus and Caesar’s daughter’s death. e A resolution was passed by the Senate that declared that if Caesar did not lay down his arms by July 49 BCE, he would be considered an enemy of the Republic.
Meanwhile, Pompey was granted dictatorial powers over the Republic. e On January 10, 49 BCE, Caesar crossed the Rubicon and marched towards Rome.
When Tiberius sought re-election to his one-year term (an unprecedented action), the oligarchic nobles responded by murdering Tiberius, and mass riots broke out in the city in reaction to the assassination.
As dictator, he instituted a series of reforms and, most notably, created the Julian calendar. e Caesar was assassinated in 44 BCE by his remaining enemies in the Senate, throwing Rome into another period of chaos and civil war.
In 60 BCE, Caesar, Marcus Licinius Crassus, and Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) formed a political alliance, known as the First Triumvirate, that was to dominate Roman politics for several years.
Learning Objective Explain the key features of Augustus's reign and the reasons for its successes Key Points e Following the assassination of his maternal great-uncle Julius Caesar in 44 BCE, Caesar's will named Octavian as his adopted son and heir when Octavian was only 19 years old. e By ingratiating himself with his father's legions, Octavian was able to fulfill the military demands of the Roman Senate.
The Pax Romana The Pax Romana, which began under Augustus, was a 200year period of peace in which Rome experienced minimal expansion by military forces.
Thus, Augustus had to persuade Romans that the prosperity they could achieve in the absence of warfare was better for the Empire than the potential wealth and honor acquired when fighting a risky war. e The Ara Pacis is a prime example of the propaganda Augustus employed to promote the Pax Romana, and depicts images of Roman gods and the city of Rome personified amidst wealth and prosperity.
As a result of this, Augustus retained /mperium over the provinces where the majority of Rome's soldiers were stationed.
At this time, Augustus was given honorifics that made his full name /mperator Caesar divi filius Augustus. [mperator stressed military power and victory and emphasized his role as commander-in-chief.
Augustus renounced his ten-year consulship, but in return, secured the following concessions for himself. e A seat on the consuls’s platform at the front of the Curia e The right to speak first in a Senate meeting, or /us primae relationis e The right to summon a meeting of the Senate, which was a useful tool for policy making e Care of Rome’s grain supply, or cura annonae, which gave him sweeping patronage powers over the plebs Augustus was also granted the role of tribunicia potestas, which enabled him to act as the guardian of the citizens of Rome.
Claudius’s appointment as emperor by the Praetorian Guard damaged his reputation.
Learning Objective Analyze how Vespasian consolidated control over the empire Key Points e Vespasian, a general for the Roman army, founded the Flavian Dynasty, which ruled the Empire for 27 years. e While Vespasian besieged Jerusalem during the Jewish rebellion, emperor Nero committed suicide and plunged Rome into a year of civil war, known as the Year of the Four Emperors.
After Galba and Otho perished in quick succession, Vitellius became the third emperor in April 69 CE. e The Roman legions of Roman Egypt and Judaea reacted by declaring Vespasian, their commander, emperor on July 1, 69 CE. e In his bid for imperial power, Vespasian joined forces with Mucianus, the governor of Syria, and Primus, a general in Pannonia, leaving his son, Titus, to command the besieging forces at Jerusalem; Primus and Mucianus led the Flavian forces against Vitellius, while Vespasian took control of Egypt.
Almost simultaneously the Senate had declared Galba, then governor of Hispania Tarraconensis , as Emperor of Rome.
The ancient historians who lived through the period, such as Tacitus, Suetonius, Josephus, and Pliny the Elder, soeak suspiciously well of Vespasian, while condemning the emperors who came before him.
Learning Objective Describe some of the military achievements and challenges of the Flavian emperors Key Points e The most significant military campaign undertaken during the Flavian period was the siege and destruction of Jerusalem in 70 CE by Titus; it was a response toa failed Jewish rebellion in 66.
Contemporary estimates claimed that 1,100,000 people were killed during the siege, of which a majority were Jewish. e Substantial conquests were made in Great Britain under command of Gnaeus Julius Agricola, between 77 and 83.
Eruptions of Vesuvius and Pompell The eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 CE was one of the most catastrophic volcanic eruptions in European history, with several Roman settlements obliterated and buried, and thereby preserved, under ash.
Learning Objective Describe the events surrounding the Eruption of Mount Vesuvius Key Points e The eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 CE, during the reign of Emperor Titus, was one of the most catastrophic volcanic eruptions in European history.
Historians have learned about the eruption from the eyewitness account of Pliny the Younger, a Roman administrator and poet. e Mount Vesuvius spewed a deadly cloud of volcanic gas, stones, and ash to a height of 21 miles, ejecting molten rock and pulverized pumice at the rate of 1. million tons per second, ultimately releasing a hundred thousand times the thermal energy of the Hiroshima bombing. e Several Roman settlements were obliterated and buried underneath massive pyroclastic surges and ashfall deposits, the most well known of which are Pompeii and Herculaneum.
The preserved remains of about 1,500 people have been found at Pompeii and Herculaneum, but the overall death toll is still unknown.
Casualties In Pompeli, the eruption destroyed the city, killing its inhabitants and burying it under tons of ash.
Pompeii's ""Garden of the Fugitives’ Plaster casts of victims still in situ; many casts are in the Archaeological Museum of Naples.
Although Nerva's brief reign was marred by financial difficulties and his inability to assert his authority over the Roman army , his greatest success was his ability to ensure a peaceful transition of power after his death, thus founding the Nerva-Antonine Dynasty.
Learning Objective Describe the characteristics of the Golden Age and the achievements of the Five Good Emperors Key Points e The first five of the six successions within the NervaAntonine Dynasty were notable in that the reigning emperor adopted the candidate of his choice to be his successor, rather than choosing a biological heir.
Hadrian was known to be a humanist and a philhellene, renowned for his building projects and commitment to his military lifestyle. e Marcus Aurelius, the philosopher-emperor, enjoyed not only military successes during his reign, but also authored a defining Stoic tome on equanimity in the midst of conflict.
Officially declared by the Senate as optimus princeps , Trajan is remembered as a successful soldier-emperor who presided over the greatest military expansion in Roman history, and led the empire to attain its maximum territorial extent by the time of his death.
Officially declared by the Senate as optimus princeps (""the best ruler""), Trajan is remembered as a successful soldier-emperor who presided over the greatest military expansion in Roman history, leading the empire to attain its maximum territorial extent by the time of his death.
Although his coins showed military images almost as often as peaceful ones, Hadrian's policy was peace through strength, even threat, with an emphasis on discipline, which was the subject of two monetary series.
Hadrian's Wall Sections of Hadrian's Wall remain along the route, though much of it has been dismantled over the years, in order to use the stones for various nearby construction projects.
Learning Objective Describe trends in art and culture under the NervaAntonines Key Points e Trajan was known for his philanthropic rule, overseeing extensive public building programs and implementing social welfare policies, as well as hosting major public festivals in the Colosseum. e Emperor Hadrian had a major influence on Roman culture through his love of Greek culture. e He patronized the arts, building and rebuilding important and influential structures, such as Hadrian's Villa.
He also introduced Greek styles into public use, such as wearing a beard instead of being clean-shaven. e As acultural Hellenophile, Hadrian was familiar with the work of the philosophers Epictetus, Heliodorus, and Favorinus, and used their ideas to improve social welfare in Rome.
Notwithstanding his philhellenism, however, in all other everyday life matters, Hadrian behaved as a Roman civic traditionalist, wno demanded the use of the toga by senators and knights in public, and strict separation between the sexes in the public baths and theaters.
Learning Objective Describe the change in attitudes towards Christians and their statuses within the Roman Empire Key Points Diocletian secured the empire's borders and purged it of all threats to his power.
Diocletian also restructured the Roman government by establishing the Tetrarchy, a system of rule in which four men shared rule over the massive Roman Empire.
The empire was effectively divided in two, with an Augustus and a subordinate Caesar in each half.
Diocletian established administrative capitals for each of the Tetrarchs, which were located closer to the empire's borders.
Though Rome retained its unique Prefect of the City, it was no longer the administrative capital.
The Tetrarchy The first phase of Diocletian's government restructuring, sometimes referred to as the diarchy , involved the designation of the general Maximian as co-emperor— first as Caesar in 285, then Augustus in 286.
ITALIA Dioceses and boundary a * vim , Zones of Influence in the Roman Tetrarchy This map shows the four zones of influence under Diocletian's tetrarchy.
After an abortive attempt to placate both Constantine and Maximinus with the meaningless title fi/ius August (""son of the Augustus,"" essentially an alternative title for Caesar), they both had to be recognized as Augusti in 309.
Constantine and Christianity While the Roman Emperor Constantine the Great reigned , Christianity began to transition to the dominant religion of the Roman Empire.
Learning Objective Explain why Constantine moved the capital of the empire to Constantinople, and the consequences that had for the empire as a whole Key Points e After defeating Maxentius and his rebellion, Constantine gradually consolidated his military superiority over his rivals in the crumbling Tetrarchy, in particular Licinius.
Licinius' defeat came to represent the defeat of a rival center of Pagan and Greek-speaking political activity in the east, and it was proposed that a new eastern capital should represent the integration of the east into the Roman Empire as a whole; Constantine chose Byzantium. e The city was thus founded in 324, dedicated on May 11, 330, and renamed Constantinople. e The Byzantine Empire considered Constantine its founder, and the Holy Roman Empire reckoned him among the venerable figures of its tradition.
Constantine and his Franks marched under the standard of the /abarum Chi-Rho, and both sides saw the battle in religious terms.
Learning Objective Analyze, broadly, the causes of the fall of the Roman Empire Key Points Throughout the 5th century, the empire's territories in western Europe and northwestern Africa, including Italy, fell to various invading or indigenous peoples, in what is sometimes called the Migration Period.
In 476, after being refused lands in Italy, Odacer and his Germanic mercenaries took Ravenna, the Western Roman capital at the time, and deposed Western Emperor Romulus Augustus.
Although the eastern half still survived with borders essentially intact for several centuries (until the Muslim conquests), the Empire as a whole had initiated major cultural and political transformations since the Crisis of the Third Century, with the shift towards a more openly autocratic and ritualized form of government, the adoption of Christianity as the state religion, and a general rejection of the traditions and values of Classical Antiquity.
According to this school, drawing its basic premise from the Pirenne thesis, the Roman world underwent a gradual (though often violent) series of transformations, morphing into the medieval world.
After the Eastern Roman Empire's much later fall in 1453 CE, western scholars began calling it the ""Byzantine Empire"" to emphasize its distinction from the earlier, Latin-speaking Roman Empire centered on Rome. e The ""Byzantine Empire"" is now the standard term used among historians to refer to the Eastern Roman Empire.
Nomenclature The first use of the term ""Byzantine"" to label the later years of the Roman Empire was in 1557, when the German historian Hieronymus Wolf published his work, Corpus Historiee Byzantine, a collection of historical sources.
However, it was not until the mid-19th century that the term came into general use in the western world; calling it the ""Byzantine Empire"" helped to emphasize its differences from the earlier Latin-speaking Roman Empire, centered on Rome.
His more immediate political legacy was that, in leaving the empire to his sons, he replaced Diocletian's tetrarchy (government where power is divided among four individuals) with the principle of dynastic succession.
Leo | managed to free himself from the influence of the non-Orthodox chief by supporting the rise of the lsaurians, a semi-barbarian tribe living in southern Anatolia.
Accomplishments tn Byzantium Justinian also undertook many important projects at home.
The Hagia Sophia is a massive basilica with four minarets and a large central dome.
The Justinian Code Justinian | achieved lasting fame through his judicial reforms, particularly through the complete revision of all Roman law that was compiled in what is known today as the Corpus juris Civilis.
Learning Objective Explain the historical significance of Justinian's legal reforms Key Points Shortly after Justinian became emperor in 527, he decided the empire's legal system needed repair.
Early in his reign, Justinian appointed an official, Tribonian, to oversee this task.
It consists of the Codex /ustinianus, the Digesta, the Institutiones, and the Novellae.
Many of the laws contained in the Codex were aimed at regulating religious practice. e The Corpus formed the basis not only of Roman jurisprudence , but also influenced civil law throughout the Middle Ages and into modern nation states.
Phocas was already alienating his supporters with his repressive rule , and the Persians were able to capture Syria and Mesopotamia by 607.
The arrival of another large Byzantine army outside Antioch (some 80,000 troops) forced the Arabs to retreat.
Learning Objective Diagram the Byzantine military and social structure under Heraclius Key Points e In the Byzantine-Arab wars of the Heraclian Dynasty, the Arabs nearly destroyed the Byzantine Empire altogether. e In order to fight back, the Byzantines created a new military system, known as the theme system, in which land was granted to farmers who, in return, would provide the empire with loyal soldiers.
Under constant threat of attack, Constantinople had dropped substantially in size, due to relocation, from 500,000 to 40,000-70,000.
The Isaurian Dynasty The Isaurian Dynasty is characterized by relative political stability, after an important defeat of the Arabs by Leo Ill, and Iconoclasm, which resulted in considerable internal turmoil.
By the end of the Isaurian Dynasty in 802, the Byzantines were continuing to fight the Arabs and the Bulgars for their very existence, with matters made more complicated when Pope Leo Ill crowned Charlemagne /mperator Romanorum , which was seen as making the Carolingian Empire the successor to the Roman Empire, or at least the western half.
Leo II], who would become the founder of the so-called Isaurian Dynasty, was actually born in Germanikeia in northern Syria 685; his alleged origin from Isauria derives from a reference in Theophanes the Confessor, which may be a later addition.
Leo IilI's Rule Having preserved the empire from extinction by the Arabs, Leo proceeded to consolidate its administration, which in the previous years of anarchy had become completely disorganized.
The Arab failure was chiefly logistical, as they were operating too far from their Syrian bases, but the superiority of the Byzantine navy through the use of Greek fire, the strength of Constantinople's fortifications, and the skill of Leo Ill in deception and negotiations, also played important roles.
The Byzantine capital's survival preserved the empire as a bulwark against Islamic expansion into Europe until the L5th century, when it fell to the Ottoman Turks.
Learning Objective Understand the reasoning and events that led to iconoclasm Key Points Isaurian Emperor Leo III interpreted his many military failures as a judgment on the empire by God, and decided that it was being judged for the worship of religious images.
Leo HT The seventh century had been a period of major crisis for the Byzantine Empire, and believers had begun to lean more heavily on divine support.
Leo Ill interpreted his many military failures as a judgment on the empire by God, and decided that they were being judged for their worship of religious images.
Learning Objective Analyze the significance of Emperor Irene Key Points e Irene of Athens was an orphan from a noble family, and was married to the son of the current emperor, Leo IV, in 768. e When Leo died in 780, Irene became regent for their nine-year-old son, Constantine, who was too young to rule as emperor, thereby giving her administrative control over the empire.
As imperial regent, Irene subdued rebellions and fought the Arabs with mixed success.
When Constantine became old enough to become emperor proper, he eventually rebelled against Irene, although he let her keep the title of empress.
Soon after, Irene organized her own rebellion and eventually killed her son, thereby claiming sole rulership over the empire as empress, the first woman to have that title in the empire.
Although it is often asserted that, as monarch, Irene called herself ""emperor"" rather than ""empress,"" in fact she used ""empress"" in most of her documents, coins, and seals.
The pope would not recognize a woman as ruler, and in 800, crowned Charlemagne as imperial ruler over the entire Roman territory, including Byzantium.
Charlemagne did not attempt to rule Byzantium, but relations between the two empires remained difficult. lrene was eventually deposed by her finance minister.
Irene next had to subdue a rebellion led by Elpidius, the strategos of Sicily.
She used the title ""basi/issa"" in all other documents, coins, and seals.
In 800, Charlemagne was crowned emperor by Pope Leo III, on Christmas Day.
Finally, it shows that part of the population of Croatia and the Byzantine Empire were Bogomiils.
Ending 80 years of peace between the two states, the powerful Bulgarian tsar Simeon | invaded in 894, but was pushed back by the Byzantines. e In 971, John | Tzimiskes, the Byzantine emperor, subjugated much of the weakening Bulgarian Empire. e In 1185, however, Bulgarians Theodore Peter and Ivan Asen started a revolt, and the weakening Byzantine Empire, facing internal dynastic troubles of its own, was unable to prevent the revolt from being successful. e In 1396, Bulgaria fell to the Ottoman Turks, and in 1453, Constantinople was captured.
Byzantine Emperor Basil Il completely conquered Bulgaria in 1018, as a result of the 1014 Battle of Kleidion.
In 1186, the rebels suffered a defeat, but Isaac II Angelos failed to exploit his victory and returned to Constantinople.
Learning Objective Identify the Double Disasters and their consequences Key Points A number of wars between the Normans and the Byzantine Empire were fought from 1040 until 1185.
In 1071, the Byzantines were defeated by the Normans during their conquest of Italy, thereby driving the Byzantines from southern Italy.
The Battle of Manzikert was fought between the Byzantine Empire and the Seljug Turks on August 26, 1071, and proved a decisive defeat of the Byzantine army.
The premature death of the former, and the overthrow of the latter, led to further collapse as the Normans consolidated their conquest of Sicily and Italy.
On November 27, 1095, Pope Urban II called together the Council of Clermont, and urged all those present to take up arms under the sign of the cross, and launch an armed pilgrimage to recover Jerusalem and the east from the Muslims.
In 1182 CE, these tensions spilled over into riots and a massacre of Latins (the people from western Europe) by an angry mob.
They found the city a Shell of its former self, soarsely populated and largely ruined.
This sparked riots among the eastern Orthodox populace, who hated the western Catholics for the sack of Constantinople. e Meanwhile, the Ottomans defeated most of the empire except for Constantinople. e The east ultimately capitulated and accepted Catholicism, but it was too late.
In the century after the death of Osman |, Ottoman rule began to extend over the eastern Mediterranean and the Balkans.
Following the conquest of Constantinople by the Ottoman Turks in 1453, Sultan Mehmed II took the title ""Kaysar-i Ram"" , since he was determined to make the Ottoman Empire the heir of the Eastern Roman Empire.
An aerial view of Byzantine Constantinople and the Propontis Religion Orthodoxy now occupies a central position in the history and societies of Greece, Bulgaria, Russia, Serbia, and other countries.
They brought to western Europe the far greater preserved and accumulated knowledge of their own civilization.
Kav abraber, ay hayr ns ) wea Se, wpay & Copa merve To A mara xeuaie 4 pear ie ru x ha pase he Fp wide Queene. iadade wer where) & ta. doje towyse. oe 7 ikot deere win L ee Called Pa drde A cae Ke whom pr vevivah deed aye ve Cenmmep spacer, ACardony were Dyerewbe bar wenipens irene year eee Foodie 9 rvapee inet wor tut Sealy bpm aaptip bveley )eCaf tps Chewy ior.
ACE, d oreevag.ct Ay wm Amins, indday wera dy day Of cides Agrenar.dt Medeis. bay + Yyricee . a naprvela FegasaAwe A 5 eCayre.eCacide Tor aCaned ar ny Bi kanener aie fn ta # foi Gar tap rit arte wedlsee, ACar Guede seeped sieee cone fron Le ate 35 nt gen pop footed Lirenvesteodia deveiptoos 4sdgoer’Carnnwoe res ¢ somityeles Sale ikeve,b ewipormn a athe adaddiden, A eed Cyainn tyne Byzantine Encyclopedia A page from a 16th-century edition of the vast Byzantine encyclopedia, the Suda.
Pre-Islamic Arabia Pre-Islamic Arabia refers to the Arabian Peninsula prior to the rise of Islam in the 630s.
Nomadic Tribes in Pre-Islamic Arabia One of the major cultures that dominated the Arabian Peninsula just before the rise of Islam was that of the nomadic Bedouin people.
The difficult living conditions in the Arabian Peninsula created a heavy emphasis on family cooperation, further strengthening the clan system. “al Bedouin shepherd in the Syrian desert While most modern Bedouins have abandoned their nomadic and tribal traditions for modern urban lifestyles, they retain traditional Bedouin culture with traditional music, poetry, dances, and other cultural practices.
The most important of these cities was Mecca, which was an important center of trade in the area, as well as the location of the Kaaba (or Ka'ba), one of the most revered shrines in polytheistic Arabia.
The nature of this document as recorded by Ibn Ishag and transmitted by lbn Hisham is the subject of dispute among modern Western historians.
Overview Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia was a mix of polytheism, Christianity, Judaism, and Iranian religions.
Polytheism in Pre-Islamic Arabia Before the rise of Islam, most Bedouin tribes practiced polytheism, most often in the form of animism.
Animists believe that non-human entities (animals, plants, and inanimate objects or phenomena) possess a Spiritual essence.
Monotheism in Pre-Islamic Arabia Judaism The most well-known monotheists were the Hebrews, although the Persians and the Medes had also developed monotheism.
Women in Pre-Islamic Arabia Women had almost no legal status under tribal law in preIslamic Arabia.
Learning Objective Assess the role and rights of women in Islamic and preIslamic Arabia Key Points In the nomadic Bedouin tribes, tribal law determined women's rights, while in the Christian and Jewish southern Arabian Peninsula, Christian and Hebrew edicts determined women's rights.
These areas of the body are known as ""awrah"" and are referred to in both the Quran and the Hadith.
Modern-day female art students tin Afghanistan In many modern Islamic countries, Sharia combines politics and religion.
Marriage by capture, or ""Ba‘al,"" was also a common preIslamic practice.
Under Islam, polygyny (the marriage of multiple women to one man) is allowed, but not widespread.
In some Islamic countries, such as Iran, a woman's husband may enter into temporary marriages in addition to permanent marriage.
Muhammad stayed with his foster mother, Halimah bint Abi Dhuayb, and her husband until he was two years old.
After Khadija's death, Khawla bint Hakim suggested that Muhammad that should marry Sawda bint Zama, a Muslim widow, or Aisha, daughter of Um Ruman and Abu Bakr of Mecca.
He was concerned with the ""ignorance of divine guidance"" , social unrest, injustice, widespread discrimination , fighting among tribes, and abuse of tribal authorities prevalent in preIslamic Arabia.
The initial revelation was followed by a pause of three years during which Muhammad felt depressed and further gave himself to prayers and spiritual practices.
She was followed by Muhammad's ten-year-old cousin Ali ion Abi Talib, close friend Abu Bakr, and adopted son Zaid.
Zakat consists of soending a portion of one's wealth for the benefit of the poor or needy, like debtors or travelers.
The fast is meant to allow Muslims to seek nearness to and look for forgiveness from God, to express their gratitude to and dependence on him, to atone for their past sins, and to remind them of the needy.
The main rituals of the Haj/ include walking seven times around the Kaaba, termed Tawaf; touching the Black Stone, termed /sti/lam; traveling seven times between Mount Safa and Mount Marwah, termed Sa'yee; and symbolically stoning the Devil in Mina, termed Ramee.
Sumayyah bint Knhabbab, a slave of the prominent Meccan leader Abu Jahl, is famous as the first martyr of Islam; her master killed her with a spear when she refused to give up her faith.
After a fourteen-days stay at Quba, Muhammad started for Medina, participating in his first Friday prayer on the way, and upon reaching the city was greeted cordially by its people.
The pagan cities are—from north to south along the Red Sea —Qudayd, Jeddah, Mecca, Nakhla, Taif, Dnul-Khalash, and San'a.
Learning Objective Discuss the rise of Islam under Muhammad Key Points Muhammad created the first Islamic state when he wrote the Constitution of Medina, a formal agreement between Muhammad and all of the significant tribes and families of Medina, including Muslims, Jews, Christians, and pagans.
The Battle of Badr was a key battle in the early days of Islam and a turning point in Muhammad's struggle with his opponents among the Quraysh in Mecca.
After eight years of fighting with the Meccan tribes, Muhammad gathered an army of 10,000 followers and conquered the city of Mecca, destroying the pagan idols in the Kaaba.
They were joined by the Banu Thagif, who adopted an antiMeccan policy due to the decline of the prestige of Meccans.
Muhammad defeated the Hawazin and Thagif tribes in the Battle of Hunayn.
The Rashidun Caliphate was led by Abu Bakr, then by Umar ion Khattab as the second caliph, Uthman lbn Affan as the third caliph, and Ali as the fourth caliph.
After a series of successful campaigns, Abu Bakr's general Khalid ion Walid defeated a competing prophet and the Arabian peninsula was united under the caliphate in Medina.
The followers of all four Rashidun caliphs (Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and Ali) became the majority Sunni sect.
The Abbasid victors desecrated the tombs of the Umayyads In Syria, sparing only that of Umar II, and most of the remaining members of the Umayyad family were tracked down and killed.
One grandson of Hisham, Abd al-Rahman I, survived and established a kingdom in AlAndalus , proclaiming his family to be the Umayyad Caliphate revived.
Umayyad Dynasty tn Cordoba, Spain The revival of the Umayyad Caliphate in Al-Andalus (what would become modern Spain) was called the Caliphate of Cérdoba, which lasted until 1031.
Abd-ar-Rahman Ill united al-Andalus and brought the Christian kingdoms of the north under control through force and diplomacy.
The library of AlHakam II was one of the largest libraries in the world, housing at least 400,000 volumes, and Cérdoba possessed translations of ancient Greek texts into Arabic, Latin and Hebrew.
Mosque Interior of the Mezquita , one of the finest examples of Umayyad architecture in Spain.
According to one common view, the Umayyads transformed the caliphate from a religious institution (during the Rashidun) to a dynastic one.
Learning Objective Discuss the spread of Islam and identify how the caliphs maintained authority over conquered territories Key Points e The expansion of the Arab Empire in the years following the Prophet Muhammad's death led to the creation of caliphates, who occupied a vast geographical area and sought converts to Islamic faith. e The people of the Islamic world created numerous sophisticated centers of culture and science with farreaching mercantile networks, travelers, scientists, hunters, mathematicians, doctors, and philosophers.
Historians distinguish between two separate strands of converts of the time.
In Africa it soread along three routes—across the Sahara via trading towns such as Timbuktu, up the Nile Valley through the Sudan up to Uganda, and across the Red Sea and down East Africa through settlements such as Mombasa and Zanzibar.
Learning Objective Identify the causes of, and developments during, the Islamic Golden Age Key Points The Islamic Golden Age started with the rise of Islam and establishment of the first Islamic state in 622.
The introduction of paper in the 10th century enabled Islamic scholars to easily write manuscripts; Arab scholars also saved classic works of antiquity by translating them into various languages.
The Arabs assimilated the scientific knowledge of the civilizations they had overrun, including the ancient Greek, Roman, Persian, Chinese, Indian, Egyptian, and Phoenician civilizations.
Scientists advanced the fields of algebra, calculus, geometry, chemistry, biology, medicine, and astronomy.
Many forms of art flourished during the Islamic Golden Age, including ceramics, metalwork, textiles, illuminated manuscripts, woodwork, and calligraphy.
During the Golden Age, the major Islamic capital cities of Baghdad, Cairo, and Cérdoba became the main intellectual centers for science, philosophy, medicine, and education.
Islamic scholars also absorbed ideas from China and India, and in turn Arabic philosophic literature contributed to the development of modern European philosophy.
Ibn Rushd lbn Rushd, also Known by his Latinized name Averroés (April 14, 1126-December 10, 1198), was an Al-Andalus Muslim polymath, a master of Aristotelian philosophy, Islamic philosophy, Islamic theology, Maliki law and jurisprudence, logic, psychology, politics, Andalusian classical music theory, medicine, astronomy, geography, mathematics, physics, and celestial mechanics.
Averroes was born in Cérdoba, Al-Andalus, present-day Spain, and died in Marrakesh, present-day Morocco.
Both Ibn Rushd and the scholar Ibn Sina played a major role in saving the works of Aristotle, whose ideas came to dominate the non-religious thought of the Christian and Muslim worlds.
Persian scientist Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi significantly developed algebra in in his landmark text, Kitab al-Jabr wa-l-Muqabala, from which the term ""algebra"" is derived.
WL Vg Y Detail of arabesque decoration at the Alhambra in Spain Arabesque in Islamic art is often used to symbolize the transcendent, indivisible, and infinite nature of God.
Hamdanid gold dinar 1Oth-century Syria By the 10th century, the Persians, who had converted to Islam, began weaving inscriptions on elaborately patterned silks.
The Abbasid dynasty descended from Muhammad's youngest uncle, Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib , from whom the dynasty takes its name.
Within 50 years, the Idrisids in the Maghreb, the Aghlabids of Ifriqiya, and the Tulunids and Ikshidids of Misr became independent in Africa.
By the 860s governors in Egypt set up their own Tulunid Emirate, so named for its founder Ahmad ibn Tulun, starting a dynastic rule separate from the caliph.
The Fatimid Caliphate Several factions challenged the Abbasids’ claims to the caliphate.
The caliph himself was under ""protection"" of the Buyid Emirs, who possessed all of lraq and western Iran, and were quietly Shi'a in their sympathies.
Learning Objective Explain the importance of battle and military strength to the Germanic tribes Key Points The Germanic people were a diverse group of migratory tribes with common linguistic and cultural roots who dominated much of Europe during the Iron Age.
When the Roman Empire lost strength during the 5th century, Germanic peoples migrated into Great Britain and Western Europe, and their settlements became fixed territories.
Various Germanic tribes migrated into Italy, Gaul, Spain, and North Africa.
Three settlement patterns and solutions come to the fore; the first being the establishment of an agricultural base in a region that allowed them to support larger populations; the second being that the Germanic peoples periodically cleared forests to extend the range of their pasturage; and the third (and the most frequent occurrence) being that they often emigrated to other areas as they exhausted the immediately available resources.
Theoderic the Great Bronze statue of Theoderic the Great, king of the Ostrogoths, by Peter Vischer the Elder at the tomb of Emperor Maximilian | in the Court Church in Innsbruck, Austria.
Western Roman Empire The western provinces of the Roman Empire at any one time during which they were administered by a separate independent imperial court, coequal with (or only nominally subordinate to) that administering the eastern provinces.
At around this time, the foederati, wno had been quartered on the Italians all of these years, had grown weary of this arrangement.
Theoderic had plotted to have a group of his followers kill Odoacer while the two kings were feasting together in the imperial palace of Honorius ""Ad Laurentum"" ; when this plan went astray, Theoderic drew his sword and struck Odoacer on the collarbone.
Emperor Zeno subsequently gave Theoderic the title of Patrician and the office of Magister militum (master of the soldiers), and even appointed him Roman Consul.
Theoderic the Great Bronze statue of Theoderic the Great (by Peter Vischer, 1512-13), from the monument of Emperor Maximilian | in the Court Church at Innsbruck.
It was the longship that allowed the Norse to ""go Viking"" (on an expedition), which might explain why this type of ship has become almost synonymous with the concept of Vikings.
Learning Objective Outline the role of the Catholic Church in Medieval Europe Key Points e Christianity spread throughout the early Roman Empire despite persecutions due to conflicts with the pagan state religion. e When the Western Roman Empire fell in 476, the Catholic Church competed with Arian Christians for the conversion of the barbarian tribes and quickly became the dominant form of Christianity. e Monastic communities were centers for learning and preservation of classical culture.
Once the cultural and political boundaries of Rome were weakened, Catholicism spread throughout Europe to the Irish, English, Franks, and Goths.
In 313, the struggles of the early church were lessened by the legalization of Christianity by the Emperor Constantine I In 380, under Emperor Theodosius I, Christianity became the state religion of the Roman Empire by the decree of the emperor, which would persist until the fall of the Western Empire, and later with the Eastern Roman Empire until the fall of Constantinople.
The Catholic Church tn the Middle Ages After the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476, the Catholic faith competed with Arianism for the conversion of the barbarian tribes.
Beginning in the 5th century, a unique culture developed around the Irish Sea, consisting of what today would be called Wales and Ireland.
Soon, Irish missionaries such as Saints Columba and Columbanus spread this Christianity, with its distinctively lrish features, to Scotland and the Continent.
During the lst century of the church , the Roman capital became recognized as a Christian center of exceptional importance.
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, barbarian tribes were converted to Arian Christianity or Catholicism; Clovis |, king of the Franks, was the first important barbarian ruler to convert to Catholicism rather than Arianism, allying himself with the papacy.
This attack soawned the protracted civil and ecclesiastical strife in Germany and Italy Known as the Investiture Controversy.
The conflict ended in 1122, when Emperor Henry V and Pope Calixtus Il agreed on the Concordat of Worms, which differentiated between the royal and spiritual powers and gave the emperors a limited role in selecting bishops.
Such powerful popes as Alexander Ill , Innocent Il , Gregory IX , and Innocent IV wielded a primacy over the church that attempted to vindicate a jurisdictional Supremacy over emperors and kings in temporal and spiritual affairs.
Key Terms Benedict's Rule A book of precepts written by Benedict of Nursia (c.0550) for monks living communally under the authority of an abbot. mendicant Certain Christian religious orders that have adopted a lifestyle of poverty, traveling, and living in urban areas for purposes of preaching, evangelization, and ministry, especially to the poor; more generally an ascetic lifestyle that includes poverty and begging.
Their life was extremely ascetic, though such practices were apparently not prescribed by the first rule that Francis gave them , which seems to have been nothing more than a collection of Scriptural passages emphasizing the duty of poverty.
Learning Objective Explain the events that led to the Western Schism, as well as its eventual resolution Key Points e From 1309 to 1377, the seat of the papacy resided in Avignon, France, rather than Rome.
Gregory XI returned to Rome in 1377, thus ending the Avignon Papacy, at which point Romans rioted to ensure the election of a Roman for pope. e Urban VI, born Bartolomeo Prignano, the Archbishop of Bari, was elected in 1378. e As pope, Urban VI proved suspicious, reformist, and prone to violent outbursts of temper, and thus many of the cardinals who had elected him soon regretted their decision and moved to Anagni, where they elected Robert of Geneva as a rival pope on September 20 of the same year.
Robert took the name Clement VII and reestablished a papal court in Avignon.
France, Aragon, Castile and Leén, Cyprus, Burgundy, Savoy, Naples, Scotland, and Owain Glyndwr's rebellion in Wales recognized the Avignon claimant.
Resolution Finally, a council was convened at Constance by Pisan pope John XXIill in 1414 to resolve the issue.
This was endorsed by Gregory XIl, Innocent VII's successor in Rome, thus ensuring the legitimacy of any election.
Archbishops loyal to Benedict XIII subsequently elected Antipope Benedict XIV , and three followers simultaneously elected Antipope Clement VIII, but the Western Schism was by then practically over.
Clement Vill resigned in 1429 and apparently recognized Martin V Habemus Papam 1415 Habemus Papam at the Council of Constance, 1415.
Although one of the aims was ostensibly to reunite the entire Roman Empire, given that many at the time did not recognize Empress Irene of the Byzantine Empire as a legitimate ruler, the two empires remained independent and continued to fight for sovereignty throughout the Middle Ages. e The Pope's motivation for crowning Charlemagne was to give the papacy and the church implicit authority over the empire, since with this act Leo set a precedent for crowning emperors, which subsequent popes would do throughout the reign of the Holy Roman Empire.
Charlemagne's coronation as emperor, though intended to represent the continuation of the unbroken line of emperors from Augustus to Constantine VI, had the effect of setting up two separate empires and two separate claims to imperial authority.
Learning Objective Discuss the political and territorial achievements of Charlemagne Key Points Charlemagne was determined to improve education and religion and bring Europe out of turmoil; to do this he launched a thirty-year military campaign of conquests that united Europe and spread Christianity.
First he conquered the Lombards in Italy, Supporting Pope Adrian I In the Saxon Wars, spanning thirty years and eighteen battles, he conquered Saxony and proceeded to convert the conquered to Christianity.
Saxons A group of Germanic tribes first mentioned as living near the North Sea coast of what is now Germany (Old Saxony) in late Roman times.
Engria was between these two kingdoms, and to the north, at the base of the Jutland peninsula, was Nordalbingjia.
Learning Objective Describe the significance of Charlemagne's reforms Key Points e Charlemagne is known for his many reforms, including the economy, education, and government administration. e Charlemagne's rule spurred the Carolingian Renaissance, a period of energetic cultural and intellectual activity within the Western church.
Charlemagne established a new monetary standard, the livre carolinienne, which was based upon a pound of silver, as well as a universal accounting system.
Charlemagne expanded the reform program of the church, including strengthening the church's power structure, advancing the skill and moral quality of the clergy, standardizing liturgical practices, improving on the basic tenets of the faith and moral, and rooting out paganism.
Charlemagne's improvements on governance have been lauded by historians for instigating increased central control, efficient bureaucracy, accountability, and cultural renaissance.
During this period, the /ivre and the sou were counting units; only the denier was a coin of the realm.
FE, SET Se NES IIT Kloster Lorsch Lorsch Abbey gatehouse, 800, an example of the Carolingian architectural style, a first, albeit isolated classical movement in architecture.
Learning Objective Explain the significance of Charles Martel's victory at the Battle of Tours Key Points Charles Martel was the de facto ruler of Francia who defeated the Umayyad Caliphate in the Battle of Tours.
The Battle of Tours was historically significant because it stopped the advance of the Muslim empire, which had successfully conquered much of Europe; many historians believe that had Charles failed, no power in Europe would have been able to halt Islamic expansion.
After Carloman retired to religious life, Pepin became the sole ruler of the Franks and continued to consolidate and expand his power to become one of the most powerful and successful rulers of his time.
Battle of Tours A battle that pitted Frankish and Burgundian forces under Charles Martel against an army of the Umayyad Caliphate led by 'Abdul Rahman AI Ghafigi, GovernorGeneral of al-Andalus.
Pope Gregory III, whose realm was being menaced by the Lombards, offered Charles the Roman consulship in exchange for becoming the defender of the Holy See, but Charles declined.
Abdul Rahman Al Ghafigi was killed, and Charles subsequently extended his authority in the south.
Charles further took the offensive after Tours, destroying fortresses at Agde, Béziers, and Maguelonne, and engaging Islamic forces at Nimes, though ultimately failing to recover Narbonne or to fully reclaim the Visigoth's Narbonensis.
In 743, they ended the Frankish interregnum by choosing Childeric II], who was to be the last Merovingian monarch, as figurehead king of the Franks.
The Carolingian Dynasty and Its Decline Charlemagne, who was crowned Emperor by Pope Leo III at Rome in 800, was the greatest Carolingian monarch.
The traditional Frankish practice of dividing inheritances among heirs was not given up by the Carolingian emperors, though the concept of the indivisibility of the Empire was also accepted.
By this treaty, Lothair received northern Italy and a long stretch of territory from the North Sea to the Mediterranean, essentially along the valleys of the Rhine and the Rh6ne; this territory includes the regions of Lorraine, Alsace, Burgundy, and Provence.
He soon ceded Italy to his eldest son, Louis, and remained in his new kingdom, engaging in alternate quarrels and reconciliations with his brothers and in futile efforts to defend his lands from the attacks of the Northmen (as Vikings were known in Frankish writings) and the Saracens.
Learning Objective Describe the rise of the Holy Roman Empire Key Points In 800, Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne Emperor of the Romans, reviving the title in Western Europe after more than three centuries, thus creating the Carolingian Empire, whose territory came to be known as the Holy Roman Empire.
The Rise of the Empire After Charlemagne died in 814, the imperial crown was disputed among the Carolingian rulers of Western Francia and Eastern Francia, with first the western king (Charles the Bald) and then the eastern attaining the prize.
Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor Henry the Fowler died in 936, but his descendants, the Liudolfing dynasty, would continue to rule the eastern kingdom for roughly a century.
Upon Henry's death, Otto |, his son and designated successor, was elected King in Aachen in 936.
To resolve this conflict, the Byzantine princess Theophanu married Otto's son, Otto Il, in April 972.
Learning Objective Explain the relationship between the Holy Roman Emperor and the other German nobles Key Points The Holy Roman Empire was made up of many small principalities that were governed by local rulers who had authority over their land that mostly superseded the power of the emperor.
The emperor could not simply issue decrees and govern autonomously over the empire; his power was severely restricted by the various local leaders.
The power of the emperor declined over time until the individual territories operated almost like de facto sovereign states.
The Imperial Diet was the legislative body of the Holy Roman Empire and theoretically superior to the emperor himself; it included positions called prince-electors who elected the prospective emperor.
The Emperor's Loss of Centralized Authority After the reign of Otto I, the centralized power of the emperor began to fade and local rulers, as well as the Catholic Church, gained more and more power in relation to the emperor.
The 1232 document marked the first time that the German dukes were called domini terree, owners of their lands, a remarkable change in terminology as well.
The Holy Roman Empire, 12th century The Hohenstaufen-ruled Holy Roman Empire and Kingdom of Sicily.
Earlier, the empire's strength greatly relied on the empire's own lands, the so-called Re/chsgut, which always belonged to the king of the day and included many imperial cities.
The direct governance of the Re/chsgut no longer matched the needs of either the king or the dukes.
It therefore proved somewhat damaging that Sigismund of Luxemburg (king 1410, emperor 14331437) and Frederick III of Habsburg (king 1440, emperor 1452-1493) neglected the old core lands of the empire and mostly resided in their own lands.
Territories in which secular authority was held by a clerical dignitary, such as an archbishop, bishop, or abbot.
Examples are the princearchbishoprics of Cologne, Trier, and Mainz. e Free imperial cities, which were subject only to the jurisdiction of the emperor.
A brief but significant struggle over investiture also occurred between Henry | of England and Pope Paschal Il in the years 1103-1107, and the issue also played a minor role in the struggles between church and state in France.
It was essential for a ruler or nobleman to appoint (or sell the office to) someone who would remain loyal.
Since a substantial amount of wealth and land was usually associated with the office of a bishop or abbot, the sale of church offices was an important source of income for leaders among the nobility, who themselves owned the land and by charity allowed the building of churches.
Learning Objective Describe what Anglo-Saxon life was like before 1066 Key Points The Anglo-Saxons were comprised of people from Germanic tribes who migrated to Great Britain from continental Europe; they inhabited the island from 4501066.
The 9th century saw the rise of the Wessex kingdom, especially with King Alfred the Great, who fashioned himself ""King of the Anglo-Saxons"" and oversaw an increasing unity of the English people and improved the kingdom's legal system and military structure and his people's quality of life. e During the course of the 10th century, the West Saxon kings extended their power first over Mercia, then over the southern Danelaw, and finally over Northumbria, thereby imposing a semblance of political unity.
Key Terms Hadrian's Wall A defensive fortification that ran from the banks of the River Tyne near the North Sea to the Solway Firth on the lrish Sea, and was the northern limit of the Roman Empire.
Shortly after he was crowned king, Harold faced invasions by his brother Tostig, the Norwegian King Harald III of Norway, and Duke William II of Normandy. e Harold defeated Tostig and Harald III at the battle of Stamford Bridge on September 25, 1066. e Harold's army marched south to confront William at the Battle of Hastings on October 14, 1066.
Background The Norman conquest of England was the 11th-century invasion and occupation of England by an army of Norman, Breton, and French soldiers led by Duke William II of Normandy, later styled William the Conqueror.
Sad XP] h LEKFEG are — ‘ wf < 4.520 ete; as Veen The Bayeux Tapestry: The controversial panel depicting Harold II's death The tapestry depicts the loss of the Anglo-Saxon troops to the Norman forces.
After stating the assessment of a manor, the record sets forth the amount of arable land, and the number of plough teams available for working it, with the additional number that might be employed; then the river-meadows, woodland, pasture, fisheries , water-mills, salt-pans (if by the sea), and other subsidiary sources of revenue; then the number of peasants in their several classes; and finally a rough estimate of the annual value of the whole, past and present.
After Stephen's death in 1154, Henry II succeeded as the first Angevin king of England, so-called because he was also the Count of Anjou in northern France.
When Richard died, his brother John—Henry’s fifth and only surviving son—took the throne Magna Carta Over the course of King John's reign , a combination of higher taxes, unsuccessful wars, and conflict with the pope had made him unpopular with his barons.
John had lost most of his ancestral lands in France to King Philip Il in 1204 and had struggled to regain them for many years, raising extensive taxes on the barons to accumulate money to fight a war that ultimately ended in expensive failure in 1214.
He died of dysentery contracted whilst on campaign in eastern England during late 1216; supporters of his son Henry Ill went on to achieve victory over Louis and the rebel barons the following year.
Learning Objective Discuss the three phases of conflict in the Hundred Years' War and Joan of Arc's role in it Key Points The root causes of the conflict can be found in the demographic, economic, and social crises of 14thcentury Europe.
Treaty of Brétigny A treaty signed on May 25, 1360, between King Edward Ill of England and King John II of France.
Background In the 13th century, after the Magna Carta failed to prevent the Baron Wars, King John and his son King Henry Ill's reigns were characterized by numerous rebellions and civil wars, often provoked by incompetence and mismanagement in government.
The reign of Henry III's son Edward | (12721307), was rather more successful.
The Edwardian War was driven by Edward Ill's ambition to maintain sovereignty in Aquitaine and assert his claim as the rightful king of France by unseating his rival, Philip VI of France.
English, and later British, monarchs would continue to claim the French throne until 1800.
Joan said she received visions of the Archangel Michael, Saint Margaret, and Saint Catherine of Alexandria instructing her to support Charles Vil and recover France from English domination late in the Hundred Years' War.
On May 23, 1430, Joan was captured at Compiegne by the English-allied Burgundian faction.
Twenty-five years after her execution, an inquisitorial court authorized by Pope Callixtus Ill examined the trial, pronounced her innocent, and declared her a martyr.
Thereafter, Christians were permitted to visit parts of the Holy Land until 1071, when Christian pilgrimages were stopped by the Seljugq Turks.
Key Terms Seljugq Empire A medieval Turko-Persian Sunni Muslim empire that controlled a vast area stretching from the Hindu Kush to eastern Anatolia and from Central Asia to the Persian Gulf.
At the western edge of Europe and of Islamic expansion, the Reconquista (recapture of the Iberian Peninsula from the Muslims) was well underway by the 11th century, reaching its turning point in 1085 when Alfonso VI of Leén and Castile retook Toledo from Muslim rule.
It became acceptable for the pope to utilize knights in the name of Christendom, not only against political enemies of the papacy, but also against Al-Andalus, or, theoretically, against the Seljug dynasty in the east.
Historians have argued that the desire to impose Roman church authority in the east may have been one of the goals of the Crusades, although Urban Il, who launched the First Crusade, never refers to such a goal in his letters on crusading.
In response to the defeat at Manzikert and subsequent Byzantine losses in Anatolia in 1074, Pope Gregory VII had called for the milites Christi to go to Byzantium'’s aid.
The Seljuk Empire covered portions of modern-day Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, China, Egypt, Georgia, Iran, lrag, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Nagorno-Karabakh, Oman, Palestine, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, UAE, Uzbekistan, and Yemen.
Learning Objective Evaluate the events of the First Crusade Key Points e The First Crusade , called for by Pope Urban Il, was the first of a number of crusades that attempted to recapture the Holy Lands.
Pope Urban II Pope from March 12, 1088, to his death in 1099, he is best known for initiating the First Crusade.
Overview The First Crusade , called for by Pope Urban Il, was the first of a number of crusades intended to recapture the Holy Lands.
Capture of Jerusalem On June 7, the Crusaders reached Jerusalem, which had been recaptured from the Seljugs by the Fatimids only the year before.
In the ensuing panic, the defenders abandoned the walls of the city at both ends, allowing the Crusaders to finally enter.
Capture of Jerusalem A depiction of the capture of Jerusalem in 1099 froma medieval manuscript.
Learning Objective Explain the successes and failures of the Second Crusade Key Points e The Second Crusade was started in 1147 in response to the fall of the County of Edessa the previous year to the forces of Zengi; Edessa was founded during the First Crusade.
The Second Crusade was led by two European kings— Louis VII of France and Conrad III of Germany.
The German and French armies took separate routes to Anatolia, fighting skirmishes along the way, and both were defeated separately by the Seljug Turks.
Louis and Conrad and the remnants of their armies eventually reached Jerusalem and participated in an illadvised attack on Damascus in 1148. e The Second Crusade was a failure for the Crusaders and a great victory for the Muslims.
Conrad Ill First German king of the Hohenstaufen dynasty, who led troops in the Second Crusade.
The Second Crusade was announced by Pope Eugene Ill, and was the first of the crusades to be led by European kings, namely Louis VII of France and Conrad III of Germany, who had help from a number of other European nobles.
After crossing Byzantine territory into Anatolia, both armies were separately defeated by the Seljug Turks.
Crusade in the East Joscelin Il had tried to take back Edessa, but Nur ad-Din defeated him in November 1146.
The Germans had already decided to travel overland through Hungary, as the sea route was politically impractical because Roger Il, king of Sicily, was an enemy of Conrad.
Ottokar III of Styria joined Conrad at Vienna, and Conrad's enemy Géza II of Hungary allowed them to pass through unharmed.
In Asia Minor, Conrad decided not to wait for the French, and marched towards Iconium, capital of the Seljug Sultanate of Ram.
Spurred by religious zeal, King Henry Il of England and King Philip Il of France ended their conflict with each other to lead a new crusade.
After the Crusaders had driven the Muslims from Acre, Philip and Frederick's successor, Leopold V, Duke of Austria , left the Holy Land in August 1191.
As in the Second Crusade, these disagreements and divisions within the European armies led to a weakening of the Christian forces.
King Louis VII and Conrad III led armies from France and Germany to Jerusalem and Damascus without winning any major victories.
According to Benedict of Peterborough, Pope Urban III died of deep sadness on October 19, 1187, upon hearing news of the defeat.
Fourth Crusade Innocent IIl began preaching what became the Fourth Crusade in 1200 in France, England, and Germany, but primarily in France.
In August 1203, following clashes outside Constantinople, Alexios Angelos was crowned co-emperor (as Alexios IV Angelos) with Crusader support.
Medieval Life 11.7.1: Feudalism Feudalism was a Set of legal and military customs in medieval Europe that was determined by the ownership of land.
Below the king in the feudal pyramid was a tenant-in-chief , who was a vassal of the king.
Learning Objective List the factors that led to a change in commerce and trade in the Late Middle Ages Key Points Explorers opened up new trade routes to the south of Africa, India, and America due to the dominant position of the Ottoman Empire impeding trade routes to the west.
Ottoman Empire Empire founded by Oghuz Turks under Osman Bey in northwestern Anatolia in 1299 and dissolved in 1923 in the aftermath of World War |, forming the new state of Turkey. usury The practice of making unethical or immoral monetary loans intended to unfairly enrich the lender. bullion Gold bars, silver bars, and other precious metals bars or ingots.
At the same time, wealthy magnate consumers in England began to use the new fairs as a way to buy goods like spices, wax, preserved fish, and foreign cloth in bulk from the international merchants at the fairs, again bypassing the usual London merchants.
Ht Tl THT @nuh ZZ Bridgnorth marketplace The market place at Bridgnorth, one of many medieval English towns to be granted the right to hold fairs, in this case annually on the feast of the Translation of St.
Learning Objective Compare and contrast the lives of different groups of the population during the Middle Ages Key Points During the High Middle Ages, the population of Europe grew from 35 to 80 million between 1000 and 1347, probably due to improved agricultural techniques and a more mild climate. 90% of the European population remained rural peasants gathered into small communities of manors or villages.
Towns grew up around castles and were often fortified by walls in response to disorder and raids.
Women were subordinate to men, in both the peasant and noble classes, and were expected to ensure the smooth running of the household.
In Europe, young men proceeded to university when they had completed their study of the trivium—the preparatory arts of grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic or logic —and the guadrivium—arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy.
Other works were more clearly pure history, such as Otto von Freising's Gesta Friderici Imperatoris, detailing the deeds of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, or William of Malmesbury's Gesta Regum, on the kings of England.
Astronomy advanced following the translation of Ptolemy's A/magest from Greek into Latin in the late 12th century.
Learning Objective Write about the scientific and artistic advancements of the High Middle Ages and how these advancements were influenced by certain technological advancements and changes in thinking Key Points e After the fall of the Roman Empire, the Middle Ages was a time of little scientific and artistic advancement until the renaissance of the 12th century, when increased contact with the Islamic world and Byzantium revived the arts.
William of Ockham insisted that the world of reason and the world of faith had to be kept apart, and this new approach liberated scientific speculation from the dogmatic restraints of Aristotelian science, paving the way for new approaches.
After the renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth.
The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder, the invention of vertical windmills, soectacles, and mechanical clocks, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques , and agriculture in general . e In northern European countries, Gothic architecture remained the norm, and the Gothic cathedral was further embellished.
His E/ements is one of the most influential works in the history of mathematics.
During the 13th century, scholastics expanded the natural philosophy of these texts by commentaries (associated with teaching in the universities) and independent treatises.
It soread from central Asia on rat fleas living on the black rats that were regular passengers on merchant ships, and traveled towards Europe as people fled from one area to another.
The Great Famine of 1315-1317 and subsequent malnutrition in the population likely caused weakened immunity and susceptibility to disease.
Medieval doctors thought the plague was created by air corrupted by humid weather, decaying unburied bodies, and fumes produced by poor sanitation. e The aftermath of the plague created a series of religious, social, and economic upheavals, which had profound effects on the course of European history. e As people struggled to understand the causes of the Black Death, renewed religious fervor and fanaticism bloomed in its wake, leading to the widespread persecution of minorities.
Flagellantism, the practice of self-inflicted pain, especially with a whip, became popular as a radical movement during the time of the Black Death, and was eventually deemed heretical by the church. e The great population loss wrought by the plague brought favorable results to the surviving peasants in England and Western Europe, such as wage increases and more access to land, and was one of the factors in the ending of the feudal system.
The plague initially soread to humans near the Black Sea and then outwards to the rest of Europe as a result of people fleeing from one area to another.
The followers would fall to their knees and scourge themselves, gesturing with their free hands to indicate their sin and striking themselves rhythmically to songs, known as Geiss/erlieder, until blood flowed.
These regulated what people (particularly of the peasant class) could wear so that nobles could ensure that peasants did not begin to dress and act as higher class members with their increased wealth.
Learning Objective Understand the key aspects of Rurik's rise to power and the establishment of Kievan Rus' Key Points e Rurik and his followers likely originated in Scandinavia and were related to Norse Vikings. e The Primary Chronicle is one of the few written documents available that tells us how Rurik came to power.
Local leaders most likely invited Rurik to establish order in the Ladoga region around 862, beginning a powerful legacy of Varangian leaders.
The capital of Kievan Rus' moved from Novgorod to Kiev after Rurik's successor, Oleg, captured this southern city.
This moment in history is known as the Invitation of the Varangians and is commonly regarded as the starting point of official Russian history.
Kievan Rus a 4 me 19 comtery Kievan Rus’ in 1015 The expansion and shifting borders of Kievan Rus' become apparent when looking at this map, which includes the two centers of power in Novgorod and Kiev.
Learning Objective Outline the shift from pagan culture to Orthodox Christianity under the rule of Vladimir | Key Points e Vladimir | became the ruler of Kievan Rus' after overthrowing his brother Yaropolk in 978.
Vladimir | formed an alliance with Basil Il of the Byzantine Empire and married his sister Anna in 988. e After his marriage Vladimir | officially changed the state religion to Orthodox Christianity and destroyed pagan temples and icons.
He built the first stone church in Kiev in 989, called the Church of the Tithes.
In this version of the story, Viadimir demanded a royal marriage in return for his military help.
In either version of events, Vladimir vied for the hand of Anna, the sister of the ruling Byzantine emperor, Basil Il.
Monument of Saint Viadimir in Kiev This statue sits close to the site of the original Baptism of Kiev.
However, Viadimir became a symbol of the Russian Orthodox religion, and when he died in 1015 his body parts were distributed throughout the country to serve as holy relics.
Learning Objective Outline the key elements of Yaroslav the Wise's reign and cultural influence Key Points Yaroslav | came to power after a bloody civil war between brothers.
He captured the Kievan throne because of the devotion of the Novgorodian and Varangian troops to his cause.
Grand Prince Yaroslav was the first Kievan ruler to codify legal customs into the Pravda Yaroslava.
He bolstered borders and encouraged political alliances with other major European powers during his reign.
Facial reconstruction of Yaroslav I by Mikhail Gerasimov He was set as vice-regent of Novgorod in 1010, as befitted a senior heir to the throne.
Building the Saint Sophia Cathedral and the first monasteries in Russia, named Saint George and Saint lrene.
Founding a library and a school at the Saint Sophia Cathedral and encouraging the translation of Greek texts into Church Slavonic.
Developing a more established hierarchy within the Russian Orthodox Church, including a statute outlining the rights of the clergy and establishing the sobor of bishops.
Learning Objective Describe the attacks by th Mongols on the Russian principality Key Points e The major principalities of Kievan Rus' became increasingly fractured and independent after the death of Yaroslav the Wise in 1054. e The first Mongol attempt to capture Kievan territories occurred in 1223 at the Battle of the Kalka River. e The Mongol forces began a heavy military campaign on Kievan Rus' in 1237 under the rule of Batu Khan. e Kiev was sacked and taken in 1240, starting a long era of Mongol rule in the region.
He was born around 1288 and died in either 1340 or 1341, still holding the title of Grand Prince of Vladimir.
Kievan Rus’ 1220-1240 This map illustrates the power dynamics at play during the 13th century shortly before lvan | was born.
Sarai, the capital of the Golden Horde, sat to the southeast, while Moscow was tucked up in the northern forests of Viadimir-Suzdal.
The Grand Duchy of Moscow 12.2.1: The Formation of Russia Ivan IIl became Grand Prince of Moscow in 1462 and proceeded to refuse the Tatar yoke, collect surrounding lands, and consolidate political power around Moscow.
Learning Objective Outline the key points that led to a consolidated northern region under Ivan III and Vasili III in Moscow Key Points e Moscow had risen to a powerful position in the north due to its location and relative wealth and stability during the height of the Golden Horde. e Ivan Ill overtook Novgorod, along with his four brothers’ landholdings, which began a process consolidating power under the Grand Prince of Moscow. e Ivan Ill was the first prince of Rus’ to style himself as the Tsar in the grand tradition of the Orthodox Byzantine Empire.
Vasili Ill followed in his father's footsteps and continued a regime of consolidating land and practicing domestic intolerance that suppressed any attempts to disobey the seat of Moscow.
Ivan Ill and the End of the Golden Horde Ivan III Vasilyevich, also Known as Ivan the Great, was born in Moscow in 1440 and became Grand Prince of Moscow in 1462.
Ivan lll He held the title of Grand Prince of Moscow between 1462 and 1505.
Portrait of Ivan III However, one of Ivan the Great’s most substantial accomplishments was refusing the Tatar yoke (as the Mongol Empire’s stranglehold on Rus’ lands has been called) in 1476.
Moscow refused to pay its normal Golden Horde taxes starting in that year, which spurred Knan Ahmed to wage war against the city in 1480.
Moscow’s primary rival, Novgorod, became Ivan the Great’s first order of business.
In addition to capturing his greatest rival city, Ivan III also collected his four brothers’ local lands over the course of his rule, further expanding and consolidating the land under the power of the Grand Prince of Moscow.
Ivan III also levied his political, economic, and military might over the course of his reign to gain control of Yaroslavl, Rostov, Tver, and Vyatka, forming one of the most unified political formations in the region since Vladimir the Great.
Ivan IIl’s power was partly due to his alliance with Russian Orthodoxy, which created an atmosphere of anti-Catholicism and stifled the chance to build more powerful western alliances.
Vasili Il This piece was created by a contemporary artist and depicts Vasili Ill as a scholar and leader.
Portrait of Vasili Ill Vasili Ill also followed in his father’s oppressive footsteps.
Learning Objective Outline the key points of Ivan IV's policies and examine the positive and negative aspects of his rule Key Points Ivan IV is often known as Ivan the Terrible, even though the more correct translation is akin to lvan the Fearsome or lvan the Awesome.
Ivan IV was the first Rus’ prince to title himself ""Tsar of All the Russias"" beginning the long tradition of rule under the tsars.
The persecution of the boyars during Ivan IV's reign began under the harsh regulations of the oprichnina.
Rise to Power Ivan IV was born in 1530 to Vasili Ill and Elena Glinskaya.
This army would help him in future military conquests. e Developed the Zemsky Sobor, a Russian parliament, along with the council of the nobles, known as the Chosen Council.
Regulated the Church more effectively with the Council of the Hundred Chapters, which regulated Church traditions and the hierarchy.
Established the Moscow Print Yard in 1553 and brought the first printing press to Russia.
This new proclamation also started a wave of persecution and against the boyars.
Ivan IV executed, exiled, or forcibly removed hundreds of boyars from power, solidifying his legacy as a paranoid and unstable ruler.
Dynastic Uncertainty and False Dmitris The troubles did not cease after the famine subsided.
Feodor Ivanovich’s younger brother was reportedly stabbed to death before the Tsar’s death, but some people still believed he had fled and was alive.
Shuisky was still on the throne, both the second False Dmitri and the son of the Polish king, Wtadystaw, were attempting to take control.
The new Romanov Tsar, Michael I, quickly had the second False Dmitri's son and wife killed, to stifle further uprisings.
The Romanov name stayed in power until the abdication of Tsar Nicholas Il in 1917.
Learning Objective Explain the rise of power of the House of Romanov and the first major Russian Tsars of this dynasty Key Points The Romanovs were exiled during the Time of Troubles but brought back when Romanovs Patriarch Philaret and his son Michael were politically advantageous.
Michael | was the first Romanov Tsar and began a long line of powerful rulers. e Alexis | successfully navigated Russia through multiple uprisings and wars and created long-lasting political bureaus.
Patriarch Philaret's son, Michael |, was voted into power by the zemsky sober in July 1613, ending a long dynastic dispute.
Alexis | of Russian tn the 1670s His policies toward the Church and peasant uprisings created new legal codes and traditions that lasted well into the 19th century.
However, Ivan V and Peter shared the throne until Ilvan’s death in 1696.
High Middle Ages A time between the 1Oth and 12th centuries when the core cultural and social characteristics of the Middle Ages were firmly set.
At its greatest extent it included all of modern-day Mongolia, China, parts of Burma, Romania, Pakistan, Siberia, Ukraine, Belarus, Cilicia, Anatolia, Georgia, Armenia, Persia, Iraq, Central Asia, and much or all of Russia.
It also ensured that it was easy to create an army in short time and gave the khans access to the daughters of local leaders.
Rersia eS ee we india The Silk Road At its height these trade routes stretched between Europe, Persia, and China.
This route allowed commodities such as silk, pepper, cinnamon, precious stones, linen, and leather goods to travel between Europe, the Steppe, India, and China. jor Marco Polo in a Tatar costume This style of dress, with the fur hat, long coat, and saber, would have been popular in regions in and around Russian, Eurasia, and Turkey.
After long rivalries and civil war, Kublai Khan took power in 1271 when he established the Yuan Dynasty, but civil war ensued again as he sought unsuccessfully to regain control of the followers of Genghis Khan's other descendants.
By the time of Kublai's death in 1294, the Mongol Empire had fractured into four separate empires, or khanates.
Genghis Khan led merciless conquests of the Western Xia Dynasty, the Jin Dynasty in 1234, the Kara-Khitan Khanate, and the Knwarazmian Empire.
Proclaiming a new law of the empire, called the Yassa, which outlawed the theft of property, fighting amongst the population, and hunting animals during the breeding season, among many other things. e Forbidding the selling of women.
Unlike other leaders in the region, Ghengis allowed his wives to sit at the table with him and encouraged them to voice their opinions. e Appointing his adopted brother as supreme judge, ordering him to keep detailed records of the empire.
Because of this, Muslims, Buddhists, and Christians from Manchuria, North China, India, and Persia were more likely to acquiesce to Mongol intrusions and takeovers. e Encouraging literacy and adopting the Uyghur script, which would form the Empire's Uyghur-Mongolian script.
Key Points e Under Genghis Khan, the Mongol Empire conquered the Tanguts' Western Xia Dynasty in 1209. e Afterward, Genghis Khan began the conquest of the neighboring Jin Dynasty in 1211. e The Jin Dynasty would finally be successfully conquered by Genghis' son, Ogedei Khan, in 1234.
The Mongol Empire's conquest of the Knwarazmian Empire saw huge numbers of civilians massacred and enslaved.
Used by Genghis Khan during the Mongol invasion of the Knwarazmian Empire.
Samarkand The capital of the Knwarazm region, which was captured by Mongol forces around 1221. gunpowder An explosive substance; can be used to form bombs.
While he was fighting the Western Xia and Jin Dynasties in the east, he was also attempting to gain more land to the west in the Kara-Khitan Khanate and the Khwarazmian Empire, regions that comprise modern-day Iran, Irag, and Uzbekistan.
The Kara-Khitai attracted Genghis Khan's attention when they besieged Almalig, a city belonging to vassals of the Mongol Empire.
The Mongols now had a firm outpost in Central Asia directly bordering the Khwarazmian Empire, in Greater Iran.
Relations with the Khwarazms would quickly break down, leading to the Mongol invasion of that territory in 1219.
Conquest of the Khwarazmian Empire In the early 13th century, the Khwarazmian Empire was governed by Shah Ala ad-Din Muhammad.
Genghis Khan saw the potential advantage in Knwarazmia as a commercial trading partner using the Silk Road, and he sent a caravan to establish official trade ties with the empire.
Legend tells that the often flamboyant Genghis Khan executed the Knwarazm governor by pouring molten silver into his ears and eyes.
Invasion and Conquest of Russian Lands Ogedei Khan ordered his nephew (and grandson of Genghis Khan) Batu Khan to conquer Russia in 1235.
The Battle of Legnica A depiction of the Battle of Legnica by Matthaus Merian the Elder, painted 1630.
Administrative Reform in the Mongol Empire Mongke was generally a popular ruler of the Mongol Empire; he met debts, controlled soending, conducted a census, and protected civilians.
Learning Objective Choose the best summary of Mongke's achievements Key Points After Ogedei's death, Genghis Khan's descendants Guyuk and Batu Khan fought about who would rule until Batu Khan's death, at which point Genghis' grandson Mongke took control.
He generously met all GUyuk's outstanding debts, an unprecedented move.
Mongke also forbade extravagant spending, imposed taxes , and punished the unauthorized plundering of civilians.
He established the Department of Monetary Affairs and standardized a system of measurement.
From Ogedei's death in 1241 CE until 1246 CE the Mongol Empire was ruled under the regency of Ogedei's widow, Toregene Khatun.
He and Ogedei's nephew Batu Khan (both grandsons of Genghis Khan) fought bitterly for power; Guyuk died in 1248 on the way to confront Batu.
Painting of the Battle of Mohi in 1241 Mongke might have been present at this battle, which took place in the kingdom of Hungary, during one of the many Mongol invasions and attacks that expanded the Mongol Empire.
This region was clearly Islamic and functioned as an outlying region of the central Mongol government until 1259, when Mongke died. e IIkhanate was the major southwestern khanate of the Mongol Empire and encompassed parts of modern-day Iran, Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Turkey and the heartland of Persian culture.
MoOngke's brother, Hulagu, ruled over this region and his descendants continued to oversee this khanate into the 14th century.
Learning Objective Identify Kublai Khan's most significant achievements Key Points e Mongke's death led to civil war between his two younger brothers; ultimately, Kublai Khan emerged victorious and renamed the empire as the Yuan Dynasty in 1271.
Mongke's death in 1259 led to civil war (often referred to as the Toluid Civil War) between his two younger brothers, Kublai Khan and Arig Boke.
Establishment of the Yuan Dynasty After Kublai took over control of the Chinese territories with the blessings of MOngke Khan around 1251, he sought to establish a firmer hold on these vast regions.
This new powerful position allowed Kublai to oversee uprisings and wars between the western khanates and assist rulers to oversee these regions.
Yuan Dynasty circa 1292 The sheer scale of this khanate required extensive military support and often strained the Mongol treasury in order to keep populations under its influence.
Conversely, Mongol invasions of Japan (1274 and 1280) and Java under Kublai Khan ultimately failed and illustrated the costly effects of constant invasive military tactics.
Yuan Dynasty Administration Kublai Khan made significant reforms to existing institutions under the Yuan Dynasty.
Marco Polo, Marco Polo's father (an Italian merchant), and his father's trade partner traveled to China during this time.
Some historians also speculate that trade was so accessible between the empire and Europe, that it may have contributed to the flow of disease, especially the black plague in the mid-1300s. \ be ea in > Trebuchet The scheme of the ""Muslim trebuchet"" , invented during Kublai Khan's rule.
For the next hundred years, several Tang leaders ruled, including a woman, Empress Wu, whose rise to power was achieved through cruel and calculating tactics but made room for the prominent role of women in the imperial court. e During the forty-four-year reign of Emperor Xuanzong, who came to power in 712, the Tang dynasty reached its height, a golden age with low economic inflation and a toned down lifestyle for the imperial court.
Its territory, acquired through the military campaigns of its early rulers, rivaled that of the Han dynasty, and the Tang capital at Chang'an (present-day Xi'an) was the most populous city in the world.
There was great contact with and interest in India as a hub for Buddhist knowledge, with famous travelers such as Xuanzang visiting the South Asian subcontinent.
During the Tang dynasty, thousands of foreigners came and lived in numerous Chinese cities for trade and commercial ties with China, including Persians, Arabs, Hindu Indians, Malays, Bengalis, Sinhalese, Knmers, Chams, Jews and Nestorian Christians of the Near East, and many others.
Chinese alchemy, Chinese astrology, Chan Buddhism, several martial arts, traditional Chinese medicine, feng shui, and many styles of qigong have been intertwined with Taoism throughout history.
There were also many famous Chan monks from the Tang era, such as Mazu Daoyi, Baizhang, and Huangbo Xiyun.
A Christian monastery was established in Shaanxi province where the Dagin Pagoda still stands, and inside the pagoda there is Christian-themed artwork.
Before the persecution of Buddhism in the 9th century, Buddhism and Taoism were accepted side by side, and Emperor Xuanzong invited monks and clerics of both religions to his court.
In 655, Wu Zetian graduated forty-four candidates with the Jinshi degree, and during one seven-year period the annual average of exam takers graduated with a /inshi degree was greater than fifty-eight persons per year.
Wu lavished favors on the newly graduated //nshi degree-holders, increasing the prestige associated with this path of attaining a government career.
Eventually the /iedushi ushered in the political division of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, a period marked by continuous infighting among the rival kingdoms, dynasties, and regional regimes established by rival /iedushi.
The power of the /iedushi, or provincial military governors, increased greatly after imperial troops crushed the rebels, taking administrative power away from the scholar-officials.
Collapse of the Tang Dynasty In addition to natural calamities and /iedushi amassing autonomous control, the Huang Chao Rebellion resulted in the sacking of both Chang'an and Luoyang, and took an entire decade to suppress.
Zhao Kuangyin, later known as Emperor Taizu (r.0976), usurped the throne from the Zhou dynasty with the support of military commanders in 960, initiating the Song dynasty and ending the Five Dynasties period. e Upon taking the throne, his first goal was the reunification of China after half a century of political division.
Heavy losses on both sides prompted the Ly commander Thuodng Kiét to make peace overtures, allowing both sides to withdraw from the war effort; captured territories held by both Song and Ly were mutually exchanged in 1082, along with prisoners of war.
Western Xia p organg Tibetans Dali “Ge Dai Viet Northern Song dynasty The extent of the land holdings of the Northern Song dynasty in 1111.
Learning Objective Compare and contrast the Southern Song era with the Northern Song era Key Points After the Jins captured the Northern Song capital of Kaifeng, they went on to conquer the rest of northern China, while the Song Chinese court fled south and founded the Southern Song dynasty.
To protect and support the multitude of ships sailing for maritime interests into the waters of the East China Sea and Yellow Sea , Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean, and the Red Sea, it was necessary to establish an official standing navy.
Financial matters were made worse by the fact that many wealthy, land-owning families—some of which had members working as officials for the government—used their social connections with those in office to obtain tax-exempt status. aa Datong ry, . xin Western Xia > at i] z mg “. ax ; eggne Tibetans Tan Dai Viet _ Southern Song in 1142 The extent of the land holdings of the Southern Song dynasty, significantly reduced from Northern Song's holdings by the Jin dynasty.
Under the leadership of Ogedei Khan (r.291241), Mongol forces conquered both the Jin dynasty and Western Xia dynasty.
Kublai made preparations to take Ezhou, but a pending civil war with his brother Ariq Boke—a rival claimant to the Mongol Khaganate—forced Kublai to move back north with the bulk of his forces.
Learning Objective Explain cultural aspects of the Song dynasty Key Points The Song dynasty was an era of administrative sophistication and complex social organization that brought rise to a rich and diverse social life and culture.
Chinese literature during the Song period contained a range of different genres and was enriched by the social complexity of the period. e The visual arts during the Song dynasty were heightened by new developments in areas such as landscape and portrait painting.
Women in the Song Dynasty Although women were on a lower social tier than men , they enjoyed many social and legal privileges and wielded considerable power at home and in their own small businesses.
The Wusing Zongyao manuscript of 1044 was the first book in history to provide formulas for gunpowder and their specified use in different types of bombs.
Yang's contemporary Qin Jiushao was the first to introduce the zero symbol into Chinese mathematics; before this blank spaces were used instead of zeroes in the system of counting rods.
The enhancement of widespread printing and print culture in the Song period was thus a direct catalyst in the rise of social mobility and expansion of the educated class of scholar elites, the latter of which expanded dramatically in size from the 11th to 13th centuries. TT Bas.
Bt 43 t # hy onaie #0 . > ket be a of tr ey oe g x ; ‘es SO on Oar B iD 2S aie een sh lk ae me 5.48 eRe it oe Fo Biche ""an ¥ fecdicai “up ne ete an.
In 1272, Kublai Khan founded the Yuan dynasty in the style of a traditional Chinese dynasty.
Eventually, Kublai won over the Song, both militarily and through adopting Chinese customs and practices. e The Yuan dynasty is traditionally given credit for reuniting China after several hundred years of fragmentation following the fall of the Tang dynasty.
Méngke Khan succeeded Ogedei's son GuyUk as Great Khan in 1251, and he granted his brother Kublai control over Mongol-held territories in China.
Kublai convened a kurultai in Kaiping that elected him Great Khan, but a rival kurultai in Mongolia proclaimed Arig Boke Great Khan, beginning a civil war.
All of the three western khanates became functionally autonomous; only the IIkhans truly recognized Kublai as Great Khan.
Founding of the Yuan Dynasty Kublai readied the move of the Mongol capital from Karakorum in Mongolia to Khanbaligq in 1264, constructing a new city near the former Jurchen capital Zhongdu, now modern Beijing, in 1266.
Marco Polo on the Silk Road A closeup of the Mallorquin Atlas depicting Marco Polo traveling to the East on the Silk Road during the Pax Mongolica.
Indian muslins, cotton, pearls, and precious stones were sold in Europe, aS were weapons, carpets, and leather goods from lran.
The IIkhanate government issued paper money in 1294, but public distrust of the exotic new currency doomed the experiment.
Rashid-al-Din's view was not shared by other chroniclers in the Middle East, who were critical of the experiment's disruptive impact on the II-khanate.
In 1253, Mongke established a Department of Monetary affairs to control the issuance of paper money in order to eliminate the overissue of the currency by Mongol and nonMongol nobles since the reign of Great Khan Ogedei.
During the reigns of Ogedei, GuyUk, and Mongke, Mongol coinage increased with gold and silver coinage in Central Asia and copper and silver coins in Caucasus, Iran, and southern Russia.
Ghazan's fiscal reforms enabled the inauguration of a unified bimetallic currency in the IIkhanate.
Emperor Toghun Temur defeated the Red Turban Rebellion, but was weakened and needed to rely more heavily on local warlords, and therefore central government control dissipated. e Toghun fled north to Shangdu from Khanbaligq (presentday Beijing) in 1368 after the approach of the forces of the Ming dynasty , founded by Zhu Yuanzhang in the south, thereby ending the Yuan.
After trying to regain Khanbaliq, an effort that failed, he died in Yingchang (located in presentday Inner Mongolia) in 1370.
The Ming army pursued the ex-Yuan Mongol forces into Mongolia in 1372, but were defeated by the Mongol forces under Biligtu Khan Ayushiridara and his general KOoke Temur.
Explanations for the demise of the Yuan include institutionalized ethnic discrimination against Han Chinese that stirred resentment and rebellion, overtaxation of areas hard-hit by inflation, and massive flooding of the Yellow River caused by the abandonment of irrigation projects.
These issues led to a popular revolt called the Red Turban Rebellion, led in part by a peasant named Zhu Yuanzhang.
With the Yuan dynasty crumbling, competing rebel groups began fighting for control of the country and thus the right to establish a new dynasty, which Zhu did in 1368 after defeating his rivals in the largest naval battle in history and marching toward Beijing, the capital of the Yuan, causing Yuan leaders to flee.
Zhu Yuanzhang drew on both past institutions and new approaches in order to create jiaohua as an organic Chinese governing process.
The government even resumed use of paper currency amid Li Zicheng's rebellion.
Spring Morning in a Han Palace by Qiu Ying Excessive luxury and decadence marked the late Ming period, spurred by the enormous state bullion of incoming silver and by private transactions involving silver.
Learning Objective Explain the significant role foreign trade played under Ming dynasty Key Points e In the early Ming, after the devastation of the war that expelled the Mongols, the Hongwu Emperor imposed severe restrictions on trade, called the haijin. e The trade ban was completely counterproductive; by the 16th century, piracy and smuggling were widespread. e After Hongwu Emperor's death, most of his policies were reversed by his successors.
Although the bulk of imports to China were silver, the Chinese also purchased New World crops from the Spanish Empire, many of which became staple crops. e The thriving of trade and commerce was aided by the construction of canals, roads, and bridges by the Ming government.
This included sweet potatoes, maize, and peanuts, foods that could be cultivated in lands where traditional Chinese staple croos—wheat, millet, and rice—couldn't grow, hence facilitating a rise in the population of China.
He taught the Chinese how to construct and play the spinet, translated Chinese texts into Latin and vice versa, and worked closely with his Chinese associate Xu Guanggi on mathematical work.
Literature and Poetry Short fiction had been popular in China as far back as the Tang dynasty , and the works of contemporaneous Ming authors such as Xu Guanggi, Xu Xiake, and Song Yingxing were often technical and encyclopedic, but the most striking literary development during the Ming period was the vernacular novel.
Chen Hongshou painting from the Ming period Painting of flowers, a butterfly, and rock sculpture by Chen Hongshou ; small leaf aloum paintings like this one first became popular in the Song dynasty.
Natural Disasters In this early half of the 17th century, famines became common in northern China because of unusual dry and cold weather that shortened the growing season; these were effects of a larger ecological event now known as the Little Ice Age.
Rebellion, Invasion, Collapse The Qing conquest of the Ming was a period of conflict between the Qing dynasty, established by the Manchu clan Aisin Gioro in Manchuria (contemporary Northeastern China), and the ruling Ming dynasty of China.
Shortly afterwards, Nurhaci began to force the Ming out of Liaoning in southern Manchuria.
Nurhaci of the Manchu Nurhaci's conquest of Ming China's northeastern Liaoning province laid the groundwork for the conquest of the rest of China by his descendants, who founded the Qing dynasty in 1644.
On April 24, 1644, Beijing fell to a rebel army led by Li Zicheng, a former minor Ming official who became the leader of the peasant revolt and then proclaimed the Shun dynasty.
Battle of Shanhai Pass A drawing of the mountainous battlegrounds of the decisive Battle of Shanhai Pass.
Learning Objective Explain how the Bantu Migration impacted the Swahili cultures Key Points e The Bantu expansion is the name for a postulated millennia-long series of migrations of speakers of the Original proto-Bantu language group.
KwaZulu-Natal A province of South Africa that was created in 1994 when the Zulu bantustan of KwaZulu (""Place of the Zulu"" in Zulu) and Natal Province were merged.
Between the 13th and L5th centuries, the relatively powerful Bantu-speaking states on a scale larger than local chiefdoms began to emerge in the Great Lakes region, in the savanna south of the Central African rainforest, and on the Zambezi river where the Monomatapa kings built the famous Great Zimbabwe complex.
Learning Objective Discuss the effects of the Islamic conquest on Egypt Key Points At the onset of the Muslim conquest of North Africa, Egypt was part of the Byzantine/Eastern Roman Empire, with the capital in Constantinople.
Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Cyprus, Egypt, Georgia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Oman, Pakistan, Palestine, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, and Yemen.
In the Middle Ages, soon after the mamluks took up the practice of chivalry, or furusiyya in Arabic, they came to be known as knights , though un-free until after their service.
Learning Objective Discuss the effects the Islamic conquest of the Maghreb had on the area Key Points The Muslim conquest of North Africa continued the century of rapid Arab Muslim military expansion following the death of Muhammad in 632.
Egypt with its governor at al-Fustat, Ifriqiya with its governor at Kairouan, and the Maghreb (modern Morocco) with its governor at Tangiers.
Historically, they spoke Berber languages, which together form the Berber branch of the Afro-Asiatic family.
Consequently, the history of the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb and the history of the Muslim conquest of a greater North African region (reaching far into the Middle East) cannot be sharply distinguished.
At its greatest extent, the Umayyad Caliphate covered 15 million square kilometers and 62 million people , making it the fifth largest empire in history in both area and proportion of the world's population.
Next came a force of 10,000 led by the Arab general Ugqba ibn Nafi and enlarged by thousands of others.
After this, Uqba ibn Nafi moved forward until reaching the Atlantic coast.
The map shows that under Muhammad, the caliphate expanded to cover most of the Arabian Peninsula from 622632.
Learning Objective Explain some of the sources of wealth that the Kingdom of Kush had access to Key Points Nubia is a region along the Nile river located in what is today northern Sudan and southern Egypt.
After brief military successes, Taharga's successor, Tantamani, was chased back to Nubia, and never threatened the Assyrian Empire again.
A native Egyptian ruler, Psaammetichus |, was placed on the throne as a vassal of Ashurbanipal.
Key Terms Nubia the A region along the Nile river located in what is today northern Sudan and southern Egypt.
Middle Kingdom The period in the history of ancient Egypt between about 2000 BCE and 1700 BCE, stretching from the establishment of the Eleventh dynasty to the end of the Twelfth dynasty, although some writers include the Thirteenth and Fourteenth dynasties in the Second Intermediate Period. the Twenty-fifth dynasty The last dynasty of the Third Intermediate Period of Ancient Egypt.
Mentuhotep II is recorded to have undertaken campaigns against Kush in the 29th and 31st years of his reign.
It was during the 25th dynasty that the Nile valley saw the first widespread construction of pyramids since the Middle Kingdom.
Esarhaddon's successor, Ashurbanipal, sent a 7urtanu with a small but well-trained army that once more defeated Taharga and ejected him from Egypt, and he was forced to flee back to his homeland in Nubia, where he died two years later.
Historians believe that the Kushite rulers may have chosen Meroé as their home because, unlike Napata, the region around Meroe had enough woodlands to provide fuel for iron working.
Learning Objective Locate the Bornu Empire Key Points The Kanem Empire at its height encompassed an area covering much of Chad, parts of southern Libya and eastern Niger, northeastern Nigeria, and northern Cameroon.
The capital of Njimi grew in power and influence under the Duguwa dynaty.
By the end of the 14th century, internal struggles and external attacks had torn Kanem apart.
Around 1460, a fortified capital at Ngazargamu, to the west of Lake Chad (in present-day Niger), was built, but in the early 16th century Mai Idris Katakarmabe retook Njimi, the former capital. e With control over both capitals, the Sayfawa dynasty became more powerful than ever.
Its history is mainly known from the Royal Chronicle, or Girgam, discovered in 1851 by the German traveler Heinrich Barth. the Sefuwa dynasty The name of the kings (or mai, as they called themselves) of the Kanem-Bornu Empire, centered first in Kanem in western Chad, and then, after 1380, in Borno . mai A term that in the history of the Kanem-Bornu Empire was used to roughly refer to a king.
Usman dan Fodio led the Fulani thrust and proclaimed a jihad on the irreligious Muslims of the area.
Learning Objective Describe the Ghana Empire and the source of its wealth Key Points e The Ghana Empire, called the Wagadou Empire by its rulers, was located in what is now southeastern Mauritania, western Mali, and eastern Senegal.
According to the description of the town left by Al-Bakri in 1067/1068, the capital was actually two cities, but ""between these two towns are continuous habitations,"" so they might have merged into one. e The Ghana Empire lay in the Sahel region to the north of the West African gold fields, and was able to profit by controlling the trans-Saharan gold trade, which turned Ghana into an empire of legendary wealth. e Ghana appears to have had a central core region and was surrounded by vassal states.
The Ghana Empire at its greatest extent When the Gold Coast in 1957 became the first country in sub-Saharan Africa to regain its independence from colonial rule, it was renamed in honor of the long-gone empire from which the ancestors to the Akan people of modern-day Ghana are thought to have migrated.
It was the largest empire in West Africa and profoundly influenced the culture of the region through the spread of its language, laws, and customs along lands adjacent to the Niger River, as well as other areas consisting of numerous vassal kingdoms and provinces. e Modern oral traditions recorded that the Mandinka kingdoms of Mali or Manden had already existed several centuries before unification.
Those not living in the mountains formed small citystates. e The combined forces of northern and southern Manden defeated the Sosso army at the Battle of Kirina in approximately 1235.
The empire's total area included nearly all the land between the Sahara Desert and the coastal forests. e The 1599 battle of Dijenné marked the effective end of the great Mali Empire and set the stage for a plethora of smaller West African states to emerge.
In 1203, the Sosso king Soumaoro of the Kanté clan came to power and reportedly terrorized much of Manden, stealing women and goods from both Dodougou and Kri.
Provinces picked their own governors via their own custom , but governors had to be approved by the mansa and were subject to his oversight.
Ibn Battuta, a Medieval Moroccan Muslim traveler and scholar, observed the employment of slave labor.
During most of his journey, Ibn Battuta traveled with a retinue that included slaves, most of whom carried goods for trade but would also be traded themselves.
The number and frequency of conquests in the late 13th century and throughout the 14th century indicate that the Kolonkan mansas inherited and/or developed a capable military.
It soanned modern-day Senegal, southern Mauritania, Mali, northern Burkina Faso, western Niger, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, the Ivory Coast, and northern Ghana.
He launched an attack on the city of Djenné in 1599 with Fulani allies, hoping to take advantage of Songhai's defeat.
Hamana (or Amana), southwest of Joma, became the southern sphere, with its capital at Kouroussa in modern Guinea.
Learning Objective Explain the importance of Timbuktu after locating the Songhai Empire Key Points The Songhai Empire was a state that dominated the western Sahel in the 15th and 16th centuries.
In the second half of the 14th century, disputes over succession weakened the Mali Empire and in the 1430s Songhai, previously a Mali dependency, gained independence under the Sonni Dynasty. e Sonni Ali reigned from 1464 to 1492.
Under his rule, Songhai reached a size of over 1,400,000 square kilometers. e The internal political chaos and multiple civil wars within the empire allowed Morocco to invade Songhai.
Towards the end of the 13th century, it became part of the Mali Empire, but in the first half of the 15th century the town regained its independence and with the conquests of Sonni Ali (ruled 1464-1492) it became the capital of the Songhai Empire.
Other important cities in the empire were Timbuktu and Djenné, conquered in 1468 and 1475 respectively, where urban-centered trade flourished.
Imperial Songhal In the second half of the 14th century, disputes over succession weakened the Mali Empire and in the 1430s, Songhai, previously a Mali dependency, gained independence under the Sonni Dynasty.
He annexed Timbuktu in 1468, after Islamic leaders of the town requested his assistance in overthrowing marauding Tuaregs (Berber people with a traditionally nomadic pastoralist lifestyle) who had taken the city following the decline of Mali.
At its peak under his reign, the Songhai Empire encompassed the Hausa states as far as Kano (in present-day Nigeria) and much of the territory that had belonged to the Songhai empire in the west.
The /u//a would form partnerships, and the state would protect these merchants and the port cities of the Niger.
It is known worldwide for its ancient and naturalistic bronze as well as stone and terracotta sculptures, which reached their peak of artistic expression between 1200 and 1400. e The mythical origins of the Oyo Empire lie with Oranyan, who made Oyo his new kingdom and became the first oba with the title of Alaafin of Oyo.
The key to Yoruba rebuilding Oyo was a stronger military and a more centralized government.
In the second half of the 18th century, dynastic intrigues, palace coups, and failed military campaigns began to weaken the Oyo Empire.
Therefore, his younger brother, Oduduwa, took the three items of creation from him, climbed down from the heavens on a chain, and threw a handful of earth on the primordial ocean, then put a cockerel on it so that it would scatter the earth, thus creating the land on which Ile-lfe would be built.
By the 8th century CE, Ile-lfe was already a powerful Yoruba kingdom, one of the earliest in Africa south of the Sahara-Sahel.
Almost every Yoruba settlement traces its origin to princes of Ile-Ife.
Until today, the Ooni (or king) of Ife claims direct descent from Oduduwa.
The city was a settlement of substantial size between the 12th and 14th centuries, with houses featuring potsherd pavements. lle-Ife is known worldwide for its ancient and naturalistic bronze as well as stone and terracotta sculptures, which reached their peak of artistic expression between 1200 and 1400.
Bronze head from Ife, probably a king, dated around 1300 lle-lfe is known worldwide for its ancient and naturalistic bronze, stone, and terracotta sculptures, which reached their peak of artistic expression between 1200 and 1400.
The empire traded with Roman traders as well as with Egyptian and Persian merchants.
Furthermore, in the early times of the empire, giant obelisks to mark emperors’ tombs (underground grave chambers) were constructed, the most famous of which is the Obelisk of Aksum.
Arab writers of the time continued to describe Ethiopia (no longer referred to as Aksum) as an extensive and powerful state, although it had lost control of most of the coast and its tributaries.
The Warsangali Sultanate was a kingdom centered in northeastern and in some parts of southeastern Somalia.
It was one of the largest sultanates ever established in the territory. e The Sultanate of Ifat was a medieval Muslim Sultanate in the Horn of Africa.
The Kingdom ruled over parts of what are now eastern Ethiopia, Djibouti, and northern Somalia.
Ifat first emerged in the 13th century, when Sultan Umar Walashma conquered the Sultanate of Showa in 1285.
By the 9th century it was the capital of the Ifat Sultanate and a major port for its successor state the Adal Sultanate.
An Agaw lord named Mara Takla Haymanot founded the Zagwe dynasty in 1137.
Around 1270, a new dynasty was established in the Abyssinian highlands under Yekuno Amlak.
It is not known whether D'mt ended as a civilization before Aksum's (its one possible successor) early stages, evolved into the Aksumite state, or was one of the smaller states united in the Aksumite kingdom possibly around the beginning of the lst century.
About 1000 (presumably 960, though the date is uncertain), a non-Christian female ruler conquered the area.
The new Zagwe dynasty established its capital at Roha , where they built a series of monolithic churches.
Wars with Somall Sultanates Between 1528 and 1540, armies of Muslims, under the Imam Ahmad ibn lIbrihim al-Ghazi, entered Ethiopia from the low country to the southeast and overran the Abyssinian Kingdom, obliging the Emperor to take refuge in the mountains.
Learning Objective Describe the tribal makeup of Namibia Key Points e Not much is known about pre-colonial Namibia, but evidence suggests that a number of diverse peoples settled there as a result of ancient, medieval, and modern migrations. e The San are generally assumed to have been the earliest inhabitants of the region comprising today's Namibia, Botswana, and South Africa.
Their economy was based on farming, cattle, and fishing, but they also produced metal goods. e During the 17th century, the Herero, a pastoral, nomadic people keeping cattle, moved into Namibia.
Known as Oorlams, these Khoisan adopted Boer customs and spoke a language similar to Afrikaans. e Europeans first arrived in Namibia in the 15th century, and the territory became one of the first European colonies on the continent.
Culturally, they are divided into the foraging San, or Bushmen, and the pastoral Khoi, or more specifically Knoikhoi, previously known as Hottentots.
Great Zimbabwe Great Zimbabwe was the capital of the Kingdom of Zimbabwe ; it flourished as an international gold and ivory trade center and its architecturally unique ruins remain among the oldest and largest structures in Southern Africa.
There, they would establish the Kingdom of Zimbabwe around 1220. e Nyatsimba Mutota from Great Zimbabwe established his dynasty at Chitakochangonya Hill, and the land he conquered would become the Kingdom of Mutapa.
Learning Objective Explain how the Bantu migration impacted the Swahili culture Key Points Swahili culture is the culture of the Swahili people inhabiting the Swahili Coast.
They are mainly united under the mother tongue of Kiswahili, a Bantu language.
Around the 8th century, the Swahili people engaged in the Indian Ocean trade.
They were Muslim, cosmopolitan, and politically independent of one another.
The Kilwa Sultanate was a medieval sultanate, centered at Kilwa, whose authority, at its height, stretched over the entire length of the Swahili Coast.
Despite its origin as a Persian colony, extensive intermarriage and conversion of local Bantu inhabitants and later Arab immigration turned the Kilwa Sultanate into a very diverse state.
It is the mixture of Perso-Arab and Bantu cultures in Kilwa that is credited for creating Swahili as a distinctive East African culture and language. e The diverse history of the Swahili Coast has also resulted in multicultural influences on Swahili arts, including furniture and architecture.
They evolved gradually from the 6th century onward to accommodate for an increase in trade , population growth, and further centralized urbanization, developing into what would later become known as the Swahili city-states. ca Ce | a eae” analliacs é Swahili Arabic script on a carved wooden door at Lamu in Kenya British archaeologists assumed during the colonial period that Arab or Persian colonizers brought stone architecture and urban civilization to the Swahili Coast.
Kilwa Sultanate The Kilwa Sultanate was a medieval sultanate, centered at Kilwa , whose authority, at its height, stretched over the entire length of the Swahili Coast.
The Kilwan mode of living was as middlemen traders, importing manufactured goods from Arabia and India, which were then swapped in the highland market towns for Bantu-produced agricultural commodities (grain, meats, etc.) for their own subsistence, and precious raw materials that they would export back to Asia.
Centuries of intermarriages created the Malagasy people that form nearly the entire population of Madagascar today.
According to local tradition, the founders of the Sakalava kingdom quickly subdued the neighboring princes, starting with the southern ones, in the Mahafaly area.
A northern Betsimisaraka zana-malata named Ratsimilaho successfully united his compatriots, and around 1712 was elected king of all the Betsimisaraka.
Around a century later, the fractured Betsimisaraka kingdom was easily colonized by Radama I, king of Merina.
The Merina emerged as the politically dominant group in the course of the 17th and 18th centuries, and the Merina kingdom reached the peak of its power in the early 19th century.
Centuries of intermarriages created the Malagasy people, who primarily soeak Malagasy, an Austronesian language with Bantu, Malay, Arabic, French, and English influences.
Ramanano, the chief of Vatomandry, was elected in 1710 as the leader of the Tsikoa and initiated invasions of the northern ports.
In 1712, he forced the Tsikoa to flee, and was elected king of all the Betsimisaraka and given a new name, Ramaromanompo at his capital at Foulpointe.
The fractured Betsimisaraka kingdom was easily colonized in 1817 by Radama l, king of Merina.
Learning Objective Identify key aspects of Moche life Key Points e The Moche were less of a state or empire and more of a society—they lived in a general geographic area and shared cultural values, but were not governed under a uniform political system. e The Moche practiced a number of religious rituals, some of which involved human sacrifice. e Moche art appears in a variety of mediums, such as ceramics, architecture, and textiles, and lends insight into their beliefs and culture.
Moche A city in modern-day Peru, which is also where the Moche culture was centered. vicuna A wild South American camelid that lives in the high alpine areas of the Andes.
The Moche also wove textiles, mostly using wool from vicunas and alpacas.
Nazca Lines The geoglyphs of Nazca, or ""Nazca Lines,"" are a series of geometric shapes, extended lines that run for miles, and large drawings of animal figures (some as large as a football field) constructed on the desert floor in the Nazca region.
The breeding and herding of Ilamas on the north coast since the time of the Moche could have been utilized by the Sican to provide caravans of llamas to transport the goods considerable distances.
Learning Objective Discuss distinguishing aspects of Chimu religion, craftsmanship, and agriculture Key Points e The Chimu expanded to cover a vast area and include many different ethnic groups along the northern coast of modern-day Peru. e Chimu artisans made notable multi-colored textiles and monochromatic pottery and metalwork.
The Chimu worshipped the Moon as the essential deity of fertility, good weather, and bountiful crops.
Sacrifices of soondylus Shells and other precious items were made to the Moon.
Key Points e Centered in Cusco, the Inca Empire extended from modern-day Chile to modern-day Colombia. e Inca society was sophisticated, and boasted around seventy different crops across the empire's various climates. e The Inca considered finely woven textiles to be an essential commodity, and spun various grades of cloth from Ilama and vicuna wool.
The administrative, political, and military center of the empire was located in Cusco (also spelled Cuzco) in modern-day Peru.
This vast territory was known in Quechua as Tawantin Suyu, or the Four Regions, which met in the capital of Cusco.
On the other hand, a fine-spun, very soft cloth made from vicuna wool could only be used in religious ceremonies.
Key Terms quipus Brightly colored knotted strings that recorded numerical information, such as taxes, goods, and labor, using the base number of 10 to record data in knots.
SUYyUS Distinct districts of the Inca Empire that all reported back to the capital of Cusco.
Local inspectors called okoyrikog, or “he who sees all,"" reported back to the capital and the emperor and made immediate decisions regarding punishment in cases where customs were not honored.
Quipus (also spelled khipus) were colorful bunches of knotted strings that recorded census data, taxes, calendrical information, military organization, and accounting information.
Although the Inca ruler was mostly cooperative in captivity, and was finally baptized, the Spanish killed him on August 29, 1533, essentially ending the potential for larger Inca attacks on Spanish forces. rad Bess pS eran Wee ; Sp TRS dope eee.
Diseases that the population had never been exposed to, such as smallpox, diphtheria, tyohus, measles, and influenza, devastated large swaths of the population within fifty years. e Superior Spanish military gear, including armor, horses, and weapons, overpowered the siege warfare more common in the Inca Empire.
Learning Objective Give an account of the society, trade, art, and religion of the Olmec Key Points The Olmec lived in south-central Mexico, with their center in La Venta in Tabasco.
Little is known about Olmec religion, though scholars believe there were eight main deities.
People lived in small agricultural villages outside of urban centers, which were mainly for ceremonial use.
The decline of the Olmec population from 400—350 BCE may have been due to environmental changes.
Maize Beans Squash Manioc Sweet potatoes Cotton Religion Unfortunately, there is no surviving direct account of Olmec beliefs, but their notable artwork provide clues about their life and religion.
At the height of the Aztec Empire (between 1428 and 1521 CE) many Mixtec polities were forced to pay tribute.
Just 30 miles from modern day Mexico City lies the precolumbian Mesoamerican city of Teotinuacan.
Other scholars maintain that the largest population group must have been of Otomi ethnicity, because the Otomi language is known to have been spoken in the area around Teotihuacan both before and after the classic period and not during the middle period.
Many Maya murals represent Teotinucuan and the leaders of the city during its zenith.
The Aztecs were also heavily influenced by the architecture, culture, and lore of this ancient city, claiming common ancestry with the Teotihuacanos and adopting some of their artistic and architectural styles.
At its zenith, around the first half of the first millennium CE, Teotinuacan was the largest city in the pre-Columbian Americas, with a population estimated at 125,000 or more.
There is also evidence that at least some of the people living in Teotihuacan immigrated from those areas influenced by the Teotihuacano civilization, including the Zapotec, Mixtec, and Maya peoples. 7 7 . ae Oe 4 aaienant > a OTE A 6.
As a religious center, Teotihuacan displayed its most prominent gods and goddesses in murals and architecture.
The Great Goddess of Teotinuacan appears to be the most prominent of these deities, and she likely represented the underworld, war, creation, water, and the earth.
Layout The city's broad central avenue, called ""Avenue of the Dead"" , is flanked by impressive ceremonial architecture, including the immense Pyramid of the Sun (third largest in the World after the Great Pyramid of Cholula and the Great Pyramid of Giza) and the Pyramid of the Moon.
Teotihuacan City Plan The layout of Teotihuacan exemplifies Mesoamerican urban planning The geographical layout of Teotinuacan is a good example of the Mesoamerican tradition of planning cities, settlements, and buildings as a reflection of the Universe.
This appears to be the case at Teotihuacan, although the mountain to which it is oriented is not visible from within the Teotihuacan complex due to a closer mountain ridge.
Fine pieces of rare jade, pearl, and obsidian were found ina cache in Oaxaca, and were probably used to cleanse religious sites or temples upon the completion of construction. ae aCe re ASS ont ¢ etry oh Y at iy 4 Dy Smee pate zh +N ae Cpe 2S pi ON ee The ball court at Monte Alban A religious ball game utilizing a rubber ball was practiced throughout Mesoamerica by young men playing for sacred, and often sacrificial, purposes.
Gulf of Mexico Southern Maya Area By 2000 BCE, there were speakers of Mayan languages in the Southern Maya Area.
From west to east, it included the Amada, Izapa, TAkalik Abaj, El Baul, Kaminaljuyu, Chalchuapa, Copan, and Quirigua.
Complex Cities Middle Preclassic (1000 BCE-400 BCE) By around the year 1000 BCE, centuries of agricultural village life had begun to form the beginnings of a complex society, with an elite class, entrenched religious practices, and a military presence.
Prestige goods, such as obsidian mirrors and jade mosaics, began to appear, increasing the demand for more extensive trade with other language groups, including the Olmecs.
Canals and irrigation schemes demanding coordinated human effort began to appear with increasing complexity and scale.
Villages began to include central plazas and earthen mounds, occasionally enhanced by masonry.
These plazas also suggest a developing religious and hierarchical social structure.
Carved stone stele also began to appear during this period, adorned with portraits of rulers but still devoid of writing.
Warfare appears to have intensified during this period, as evidenced by advanced weaponry, rulers beginning to be portrayed as warriors, and the appearance of mass graves and decapitated skeletons.
The Maya civilizations are now thought to have lived on, and also prospered, perhaps for another century after the fall of Teotihuacano influence.
The Decline of the Maya The period after the second collapse of the Maya Empire is called the Postclassic period.
Learning Objective Explain what happened to the structure of the Maya Empire in the Postclassic period Key Points The Maya cities of the northern lowlands in Yucatan continued to flourish.
The period after the second collapse of the Maya Empire is called the Postclassic period.
EI Castillo in Chichén Itza Built by the pre-Columbian Maya civilization sometime between the 9th and 12th centuries CE, El Castillo served as a temple to the god Kukulkan, the Yucatec Maya Feathered Serpent deity closely related to the god Quetzalcoatl known to the Aztecs and other central Mexican cultures of the Postclassic period.
The Itza maintained their capital at Tayasal , an archaeological site thought to underlay the modern city of Flores, Guatemala, on Lake Petén Itza.
Learning Objective Identify the Toltecs Key Points Much of what is Known about the Toltecs is based on what has been learned about the Aztecs.
Historicists believe that Aztec accounts of the Toltecs can be trusted as historical sources.
Others believe that Aztec accounts are too shrouded in myth to be trusted as sources of truth.
Certain Mayan sites, such as Chichén Itza, share distinctive archeological traits with religious monuments and buildings in Tula.
Archaeologist Laurette Sejourné, followed by the historian Enrique Florescano, argued that the ""original"" Tollan was probably Teotihuacan.
This fourth sun immediately precedes the fifth sun of the Aztec people, which was prophesied to be presided over by Quetzalcoatl.
Two of the primary architects of the Aztec empire were the half-brothers Tlacaelel and Montezuma |, nephews of Itzcoatl.
Teixiptla, by contrast, denoted the physical representations of the tetl as well as the human cultic activity surrounding this physical representation.
The Aztec religious cosmology included the physical earth plane, where humans lived, the underworld (or land of the dead), and the realm of the sky.
Quetzalcoatl The feathered serpent god that represented the morning star, wind, and life.
Mixcoatl The “cloud serpent” god that was incorporated into Aztec belief and represented war.
This deity was also incorporated from cultures under the Aztec Triple Alliance umbrella. r F « Huitzilopochtli as depicted in the Codex Telleriano-Remensis This depiction of the war and sun god shows him in all of his warrior and ritual garb.
Aztec Calendar Aztec sun calendar This calendar shows the eighteen months circling around a representation of the sun.
Learning Objective Describe the role of the Confederacy of Tlaxcala in the fall of the Aztec empire Key Points e The arrival of Hernando Cortés in 1519 marked the beginning of the end for the Aztec empire.
Cortés and the Confederacy of Tlaxcala allied to militarily defeat the Aztecs, who were further weakened by a smallpox epidemic in 1520-1521 and subsequent outbreaks.
Aztec hegemonic structure was re-appropriated to serve the Spanish colonialists.
The biography of Cortés by Francisco Lopez de Gémara contains a description of the massacre.
When the captured emperor Moctezuma II, now seen as a mere puppet of the invading Spaniards, attempted to calm the outraged populace, he was killed by a projectile.
These bison-oriented indigenous peoples inhabited a portion of the North American continent known as the Great Basin.
The climate in the Great Basin was very arid, which affected the lifestyles and cultures of its inhabitants.
Learning Objective Examine how natural resources shaped the cultures of the Pacific Coast Key Points Due to the prosperity made possible by the abundant natural resources in this region, the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest developed complex religious and social ceremonies as well as many fine arts and crafts.
Many works of art served practical purposes, such as clothing, tools, weapons of war and hunting, transportation, and shelter; but others were purely aesthetic.
The Pacific Coast was at one time the most densely populated area of North America in terms of indigenous peoples.
Early Woodland Period The archaeological record suggests that humans in the Eastern Woodlands of North America were collecting plants from the wild by 6,000 BCE and gradually modifying them by selective collection and cultivation.
Middle Woodland Period The beginning of this period saw a shift of settlement to the interior.
Late Woodland Period The late Woodland period was a time of apparent population dispersal.
Bow and arrow technology gradually overtook the use of the spear and atlatl, and agricultural production of the ""three sisters"" was introduced.
The adoption and use of riverine Shells as tempering agents in their shell tempered pottery. e Widespread trade networks extending as far west as the Rockies, north to the Great Lakes, south to the Gulf of Mexico, and east to the Atlantic Ocean.
The development of the chiefdom or complex chiefdom level of social complexity. e A centralization of control of combined political and religious power in the hands of few or one. e The beginnings of a settlement hierarchy, in which one major center has clear influence or control over a number of lesser communities, which may or may not possess a smaller number of mounds. e The adoption of the paraphernalia of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex , also called the Southern Cult.
Leonardo da Vinci's VWitruvian Man Leonardo da Vinci's Vitruvian Man shows clearly the effect writers of Antiquity had on Renaissance thinkers.
Based on the specifications in Vitruvius' De architectura (1st century BCE), Leonardo tried to draw the perfectly proportioned man.
In particular, Florence became one of the wealthiest cities in Northern Italy.
The Italian trade routes that covered the Mediterranean and beyond were also major conduits of culture and knowledge.
Wool was imported from Northern Europe (and in the 16th century from Spain), and together with dyes from the east was used to make high quality textiles.
Their wealth and influence initially derived from the textile trade guided by the guild of the Arte de/la Lana.
The Church tn the Late Middle Ages The Renaissance began in times of religious turmoil.
Nicolaus Copernicus dedicated De revolutionibus orbium coelestium to Paul Ill, who became the grandfather of Alessandro Farnese , who had paintings by Titian, Michelangelo, and Raphael, as well as an important collection of drawings, and who commissioned the masterpiece of Giulio Clovio, arguably the last major illuminated manuscript, the Farnese Hours.
In turn, the Renaissance had a profound effect on contemporary theology, particularly in the way people perceived the relationship between man and Michelangelo's Pieta in St.
In addition to being the head of the church, the pope became one of Italy's most important secular rulers, and pontiffs such as Julius Il often waged campaigns to protect and expand their temporal domains.
Furthermore, the popes, in a spirit of refined competition with other Italian lords, spent lavishly both on private luxuries and public works, repairing or building churches, bridges, and a magnificent system of aqgueducts in Rome that still function today.
The Counter-Reformation was a comprehensive effort composed of four major elements—ecclesiastical or structural reconfigurations, new religious orders (such as the Jesuits), spiritual movements, and political reform.
Learning Objective Assess how Humanism gave rise to the art of the Renasissance Key Points Humanists reacted against the utilitarian approach to education, seeking to create a citizenry who were able to speak and write with eloquence and thus able to engage the civic life of their communities.
While Humanism initially began as a predominantly literary movement, its influence quickly pervaded the general culture of the time, reintroducing classical Greek and Roman art forms and leading to the Renaissance.
Donatello became renowned as the greatest sculptor of the Early Renaissance, known especially for his Humanist, and unusually erotic, statue of David.
In humanist painting, the treatment of the elements of perspective and depiction of light became of particular concern.
Following the Crusader sacking of Constantinople and the end of the Byzantine Empire in 1453, the migration of Byzantine Greek scholars and émigrés, who had greater familiarity with ancient languages and works, furthered the revival of Greek and Roman literature and science.
Learning Objective Define Humanism and its goals as a movement in education Key Points The Humanists of the Renaissance created schools to teach their ideas and wrote books all about education.
One of the most profound and important schools was established and created by Vittorino da Feltre in 1423 in Mantua to provide the children of the ruler of Mantua with a Humanist education.
Humanists sought to create a citizenry able to speak and write with eloguence and clarity, thus capable of engaging in the civic life of their communities and persuading others to virtuous and prudent actions.
Humanist schools combined Christianity and classical texts to produce a model of education for all of Europe.
This ideology was referred to as the uvomo universale, an ancient Greco-Roman ideal.
Mannerist artists, who consciously rebelled against the principles of High Renaissance, tended to represent elongated figures in illogical soaces.
Learning Objective Discuss the relationship between art, patronage, and politics during the Renaissance Key Points Although the Renaissance was underway before the Medici family came to power in Florence, their patronage and political support of the arts helped catalyze the Renaissance into a fully fledged cultural movement.
The Medici wealth and influence initially derived from the textile trade guided by the guild of the Arte della Lana; through financial superiority, the Medici dominated their city's government.
Medici patronage was responsible for the majority of Florentine art during their reign, as artists generally only made their works when they received commissions in advance.
Although none of the Medici themselves were scientists, the family is well known to have been the patrons of the famous Galileo Galilei, who tutored multiple generations of Medici children.
Pope Clement Vil commissioned Michelangelo to paint the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel just before the pontiff's death in 1534.
Marie de’ Medici, widow of Henry IV of France and mother of Louis XIll, is the subject of a commissioned cycle of paintings known as the Marie de’ Medici cycle, painted for the Luxembourg Palace by court painter Peter Paul Rubens in 1622-1623.
Above them the huge cornice ripples in a continuous band, giving the appearance of keeping the whole building in a state of compression. vie ' ” pret fn a Vick ji TTT St.
Literature tn the Renaissance 17.5.1: The Rise of the Vernacular Renaissance literature refers to European literature that was influenced by the intellectual and cultural tendencies of the Renaissance.
Learning Objective Evaluate the influence of the different people, styles, and ideas that influenced Renaissance literature Key Points e Inthe 13th century, Italian authors began writing in their native vernacular language rather than in Latin, French, or Provencal.
It was only in the 13th century that Italian authors began writing in their native vernacular language rather than in Latin, French, or Provencal.
Petrarch's disciple, Giovanni Boccaccio, became a major author in his own right, whose major work, The Decameron, was a source of inspiration and plots for many English authors in the Renaissance.
A generation before Petrarch and Boccaccio, Dante Alighieri set the stage for Renaissance literature with his Divine Comedy, widely considered the greatest literary work composed in the Italian language and a masterpiece of world literature.
In De vulgari eloquentia , however, Dante defended use of the vernacular in literature.
He fought in the Battle of Campaldino with the Florentine Guelphs against the Arezzo Ghibellines.
Dante was accused of corruption and financial wrongdoing by the Black Guelphs for the time that he was serving as city prior (Florence's highest position) for two months in 1300.
Bruni's most notable work is Historiarum Florentini popull libri XII , which has been called the first modern history book.
Learning Objective Discuss the significance of Christine de Pizan's work Key Points Christine de Pizan was an Italian-French late medieval author, primarily a court writer, who wrote commissioned works for aristocratic families and addressed literary debates of the era.
Her work is characterized by a prominent and positive depiction of women who encouraged ethical and judicious conduct in courtly life.
Much of the impetus for her writing came from her need to earn a living to support her mother, a niece, and her two surviving children after being widowed at the age of 25; Christine's participation in a literary debate about Jean de Meun's Romance of the Rose allowed her to move beyond the courtly circles, and ultimately to establish her status as a writer concerned with the position of women in society.
Overview Niccolo Machiavelli was an Italian Renaissance historian, politician, diplomat, philosopher, Humanist, and writer.
His middle road (""Via Media"") approach disappointed and even angered scholars in both camps.
He is known for signing and dating his work ""ALS IK KAN"" , Signatures were not particularly customary during this time, but helped to secure his lasting reputation.
Learning Objective Define a nation-state Key Points e The concept of a nation-state is notoriously difficult to define.
Scholars continue to debate a number of possible hypotheses. e Most commonly, the idea of a nation-state was and is associated with the rise of the modern system of states, often called the ""Westphalian system"" in reference to the Treaty of Westphalia . e Nation-states have their own characteristics that today may be taken-for-granted factors shaping a modern state, but that all developed in contrast to pre-national states. e The most obvious impact of the nation-state is the creation of a uniform national culture through state policy.
Westphalian system A global system based on the principle of international law that each state has sovereignty over its territory and domestic affairs, to the exclusion of all external powers, on the principle of non-interference in another country's domestic affairs, and that each state (no matter how large or small) is equal in international law.
The Westphalian system did not create the nation-state, but the nation-state meets the criteria for its component states.
Ger nee Skaters (ect mee (eater ation ATLANTIC OCEAN PORTUGAL Mass SPAIN SARDINIA European boundaries set by the Congress of Vienna, 1815 This map of Europe, outlining borders in 1815, demonstrates that still at the beginning of the 19th century, Europe was divided mostly into empires, kingdoms, and confederations.
The Peace of Westphalia established the precedent of peace reached by diplomatic congress and a new system of political order in Europe based upon the concept of co-existing sovereign states.
The Westphalian principle of the recognition of another state's sovereignty and right to decide its own fate rests at the foundations of international law today.
The European colonization of Asia and Africa in the 19th century and two global wars in the 20th century dramatically undermined the principles established in Westphalia.
Westphalian sovereignty The principle of international law that each nationstate has sovereignty over its territory and domestic affairs, to the exclusion of all external powers, on the principle of non-interference in another country's domestic affairs, and that each state (no matter how large or small) is equal in international law.
These events caused widespread fears throughout northern and Central Europe, and triggered the Protestant Bohemians living in the dominion of Habsburg Austria to revolt against their nominal ruler, Ferdinand Il.
The empire and its opponent France, including the allies of each, as well as the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands and its opponent Spain (and their respective allies), negotiated in Munster.
This principle of international law presumes that each state has sovereignty over its territory and domestic affairs, to the exclusion of all external powers, on the principle of noninterference in another country's domestic affairs, and that each state is equal in international law.
Medieval Spain was the scene of almost constant warfare between Muslims and Christians. e By 1250, nearly all of Iberia was back under Christian rule, with the exception of the Muslim kingdom of Granada—the only independent Muslim realm in Spain that would last until 1492. e Around 1480, Catholic Monarchs Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella | of Castile (known as the Catholic Monarchs) established what would be known as the Spanish Inquisition.
Arian teachings were first attributed to Arius , a Christian presbyter in Alexandria, Egypt.
Warfare between Muslims and Christians Muslim interest in the peninsula returned in force around when Al-Mansur sacked Barcelona in 985.
Francisco Pradilla Ortiz, The Capitulation of Granada The Capitulation of Granada shows Muhammad XII confronting Ferdinand and Isabella.
People who converted to Catholicism were not subject to expulsion, but between 1480 and 1492 hundreds of those who had converted were accused of secretly practicing their original religion (crypto-Judaism or crypto-Islam) and arrested, imprisoned, interrogated under torture, and in some cases burned to death, in both Castile and Aragon.
The Inquisition was not definitively abolished until 1834, during the reign of Isabella II, after a period of declining influence in the preceding century.
Learning Objective Explain why the Spanish Habsburgs grew increasingly feeble as a family Key Points Spain was ruled by the major branch of the Habsburg dynasty over the 16th and 17th centuries.
In this period, it dominated Europe politically and militarily, but experienced a gradual decline of influence in the second half of the 17th century under the later Habsburg kings.
When Spain's first Habsburg ruler, Charles |, became king of Spain in 1516, Spain became central to the dynastic struggles of Europe.
Portugal was lost to the crown for good; in Italy and most of Catalonia, French forces were expelled and Catalonia's independence was suppressed. e Charles’ Il mental and physical disabilities, caused most likely by the generations of inbreeding among the Spanish Habsburgs, enabled power games on the court and meant that Spain was essentially left leaderless and gradually reduced to a second-rank power.
However, Spain as a unified state came into being by right only after the death of Charles II in 1700, the last ruler of Spain of the Habsburg dynasty.
His government resorted to a tactic that had been resolutely resisted by Philip Il, paying for the budget deficits by the mass minting of increasingly worthless vellones (the currency), causing inflation.
Philip Il and the Spanish Armada Extreme commitment to championing Catholicism against both Protestantism and Islam shaped both the domestic and foreign policies of Philip Il, who was the most powerful European monarch in an era of religious conflict.
Learning Objective Describe Philip II's convictions and how he attempted to carry them out Key Points e During the reign of Philip Il, Spain reached the height of its influence and power, and remained firmly Roman Catholic.
Wars with Dutch Provinces, England, France, and the Ottoman Empire all had the undermining religious aspects of protecting Catholicism in increasingly Protestant Europe or protecting Christianity against Islam.
Because Philip Il was the most powerful European monarch in an era of war and religious conflict, evaluating both his reign and the man himself has become a controversial historical subject.
Catholic League A major participant in the French Wars of Religion, formed by Henry |, Duke of Guise, in 1576.
Similarly, the husband of an heiress could become the legal possessor of her lands jure uxoris, ""by right of wife."" /ure uxoris monarchs are not to be confused with kings consort, who were merely consorts of their wives, not co-rulers.
Even in countries that remained Catholic, primarily France and the Italian states, fear and envy of Spanish success and domination created a wide receptiveness for the worst possible descriptions of Philip Il.
Spanish rule of Naples was important for making connections between Italian and Spanish art. e The most influential Spanish painters of the era include El Greco, Diego Velazquez, Francisco de Zurbaran, and Bartolomé Esteban Murillo. e The same period produced some of the most important works of Spanish architecture.
E/ Siglo de Oro does not imply precise dates and is usually considered to have lasted longer than an actual century.
The last great writer of the period, Pedro Calder6én de la Barca, died in 1681, and his death is usually considered the end of E/ Siglo de Oro in the arts and literature.
EN MADRID Por tuan dela Cuefia. —_—_— —-ee Or Vondefe en cafadeFrancilco de Robles, tibrero del Rey nfo [efor Cervantes's Don Quixote , Original title page Don Quixote, the first European novel, has endured to the present day as a landmark in world literary history, and it was an immediate international hit in its own time.
Born when the Spanish Golden Age theater was being defined by Lope de Vega, Pedro Calderén de la Barca developed it further, and his work is regarded as the culmination of the Spanish Baroque theater.
Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. e Philip Il and the Spanish Armada O° O° O° ° O° ""Morisco."" httos://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morisco.
Learning Objective Identify some of the highlights from Queen Elizabeth I's reign Key Points e Elizabeth | was Queen of England and Ireland from 1558 until her death in 1603.
Elizabeth never married nor had children and thus was the last monarch of the Tudor dynasty. e Mary's marriage to Philip Il of Spain contributed to the complex relations between England and Spain that after Mary's death dominated Elizabeth's reign in the realm of international relations.
Elizabeth's efforts led to the Religious Settlement, a legal process by which the Protestant Church of England was restored and the queen took the title of Supreme Governor of the Church of England. e Elizabeth's foreign policy was largely defensive.
Pope Sixtus V, Philip Il of Spain, and the Jesuits were all supporters of this Catholic party.
Elizabeth I of England Elizabeth | was Queen of England and Ireland from 1558 until her death in 1603.
The ""Darnley Portrait"" of Elizabeth | of England, National Portrait Gallery The portrait was named after a previous owner.
After the occupation and loss of Le Havre, Elizabeth avoided military expeditions on the continent until 1585, when she sent an English army to aid the Protestant Dutch rebels against Philip II. ln December 1584, an alliance between Philip Il and the French Catholic League undermined the ability of Henry Ill of France to counter Spanish domination of the Netherlands.
A series of armed conflicts and political machinations between Parliamentarians and Royalists ended in, among other things, the prosecution of Charles Key Terms Thirty Years' War A series of wars in Central Europe between 1618 and 1648.
Reformation in England in Scotland The separation of the Church of England (or Anglican Church) from Rome under Henry VIII brought England alongside a broad Reformation movement, but the English Reformation differed from its European counterparts.
However, Mary's successor, Elizabeth I, restored the Church of England and reasserted the royal supremacy in 1559.
James | of England, Portrait attributed to John de Critz, 1605 King of Scotland as James VI from 1567 and King of England and Ireland as James | from the union of the Scottish and English crowns in 1603 until his death.
Charles | and the English Parliament With the failure of the Spanish match, Charles married French princess Henrietta Maria.
Charles I and the Power to Tax Charles I's attempt to impose taxes not authorized by Parliament contributed to the ongoing conflict between the king and Parliament and eventually resulted in the passing of the 1628 Petition of Right.
As a result, a series of parliamentary declarations establishing a series of personal liberties known as the Reso/utions were prepared after tense debates. e In the end, a suggestion to pass the Resolutions as a petition of right won.
A committee produced a petition covering discretionary imprisonment, non-Parliamentary taxation, martial law, and forced billeting. e The 1628 Petition of Right marks the founding of the United Kingdom's modern constitutional monarchy.
Cromwell and the Roundheads The escalating conflict between Charles | of England and the English Parliament resulted in the English Civil War, in the aftermath of which monarchy disappeared for over a decade and Oliver Cromwell ruled as Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Key Points Charles I's belief, inherited from his father, that the power of the crown is God-given and that the king does not have to respect the position of the English Parliament, shaped his reign and led to a political crisis that in the end would cost him his own life.
After Ireland first descended into chaos, cities and towns declared their sympathies for one faction or the other.
The English Civil War pitted the supporters of King Charles | and later his son and successor, Charles Il, against the supporters of Parliament.
Cavaliers A name first used by Roundheads as a term of abuse for the wealthier male Royalist supporters of King Charles | and his son Charles II of England during the English Civil War, the Interregnum, and the Restoration (1642-c.
Initially a war between various Protestant and Catholic states in the fragmented Holy Roman Empire, it gradually developed into a more general conflict involving most of the great powers. tonnage and poundage Certain duties and taxes first levied in Edward II's reign on every tun of imported wine, which came mostly from Spain and Portugal, and on every pound weight of merchandise exported or imported.
Within months, the lrish Catholics, fearing a resurgence of Protestant power, struck first, and all of Ireland soon descended into chaos.
He was an intensely religious man (an Independent Puritan) who entered the English Civil War on the side of the ""Roundheads,"" or Parliamentarians.
In April 1653, he dismissed the Rump Parliament by force, setting up a short-lived nominated assembly known as Barebone's Parliament, before being invited by his fellow leaders to rule as Lord Protector of England (which included Wales at the time), Scotland, and Ireland from December 1653.
Instrument of Government A constitution of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
The term ""Commonwealth"" is sometimes used for the whole of 1649 to 1660—a period referred to by monarchists as the Interregnum—although for other historians, the use of the term is limited to the years prior to Cromwell’s formal assumption of power in 1653. ttt Coat of arms of the Commonwealth of England from 1653 to 1659 during the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell The Protectorate The Protectorate was the period during the Commonwealth when England (which at that time included Wales), Ireland, and Scotland were governed by a Lord Protector.
Cromwell passed a series of Penal Laws against Roman Catholics (the vast majority of the population) and confiscated large amounts of their land.
Learning Objective Evaluate why the Stuarts were brought back and restored to the English throne Key Points Richard Cromwell was Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland after Oliver Cromwell's death in 1658, but he lacked his father's authority.
He proved unable to manage the Parliament and control the army and was removed from his office after several months.
In the aftermath of Richard's removal, power struggles ensued, with George Monck emerging as a key figure in the restoration of monarchy and bringing Charles II back to England.
Clo&, overagaintt the Trone Church, > 1658. / » in Harts Denini EDINBURGH, egeed by eiiaen aver Proclamation announcing the death of Oliver Cromwell and the succession of Richard Cromwell as Lord Protector.
Restoration of Charles II On April 4, 1660, Charles II issued the Declaration of Breda, in which he made several promises in relation to the reclamation of the crown of England.
Monck organized the Convention Parliament; on May 8, it proclaimed that King Charles Il had been the lawful monarch since the execution of Charles | on January 30, 1649.
Oliver Cromwell, Henry lreton, Judge Thomas Pride, and Judge John Bradshaw were posthumously attained for high treason.
In January 1661, the corpses of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw were exhumed and hanged in chains at Tyburn.
Charles Il of England by Peter Lely, 1675, Collection of Euston Hall, Suffolk King Charles II, the first monarch to rule after the English Restoration.
Learning Objective Analyze the significant changes the Glorious Revolution made to English government Key Points e James II ascended the throne upon the death of his brother, Charles II, in 1685.
During his short reign, he became directly involved in the political battles between Catholicism and Protestantism and between the Divine Right of Kings and the political rights of the Parliament of England. e James's greatest political problem was his Catholicism, which left him alienated from both parties in England.
William arrived on November 5. e In December, James fled the country, and in 1689 William and Mary were appointed monarchs. e In order to regulate the relationship between the monarch and Parliament, the Bill of Rights was passed in 1689.
James Il of England James II of England was the second surviving son of Charles |; he ascended the throne upon the death of his brother, Charles II, in 1685.
Detail of Willlam and Mary as portrayed on the ceiling of the Painted Hall of the Greenwich Hospital.
Learning Objective Identify Cardinal Richelieu's main goals and his successes and failures in achieving them Key Points e Cardinal Richelieu was a French clergyman, nobleman, and statesman, serving as King Louis XIII's Chief Minister from 1624.
He sought to consolidate royal power and strengthen France's international position. e Although initially Richelieu was closely affiliated with Marie de Médicis, Louis XIlII's mother, and did not enjoy the king's trust, his role as a successful mediator in the power struggle between Louis and Marie helped him reach the position of the king's principal minister.
Peace of Alais A treaty negotiated by Cardinal Richelieu with Huguenot leaders and signed by King Louis XIII of France in 1629.
Cardinal Richelieu Cardinal Richelieu , was a French clergyman, nobleman, and statesman, serving as King Louis XIll's Chief Minister from 1624.
Engraved portrait of Cardinal Richelieu by Robert Nanteuil , Bibliotheque nationale de France Richelieu was also famous for his patronage of the arts.
Most notably, he founded the Académie Francaise, the learned society responsible for matters pertaining to the French language.
Learning Objective Discuss Cardinal Mazarin's goals during his tenure as regent Key Points e Cardinal Jules Mazarin was an Italian cardinal, diplomat, and politician who served as the Chief Minister to the King of France from 1642 until his death in 1661.
He functioned essentially as the co-ruler of France alongside the queen during the regency of Anne, and until his death effectively directed French policy alongside the monarch, Louis XIV. e Mazarin continued Richelieu's anti-Habsburg policy and laid the foundation for Louis XIV's expansionist policies.
He was critical to the negotiations of the Peace of Westphalia, which left France the most powerful state in continental Europe. e Towards Protestantism at home, Mazarin pursued a policy of promises and calculated delay to defuse armed insurrections and keep the Huguenots disarmed.
However, the Huguenots never achieved any protection. e As the Crown needed to recover from its expenditures in the recent wars, the increase of taxes contributed to already growing social unrest.
Key Terms Edict of Nantes An edict signed probably in 1598 by King Henry IV of France that granted the Calvinist Protestants of France substantial rights in the nation, which was, at the time, still considered essentially Catholic.
After serving in the papal army and diplomatic service and at the French court, he entered the service of France and made himself valuable to King Louis XIlIl's chief minister, Cardinal Richelieu, who brought him into the council of state.
During the negotiations of the Peace of Westphalia, which concluded the Thirty Years' War, Mazarin (together with the queen) represented France with policies that were French rather than Catholic.
Austria, ruled by the Habsburg Emperor Ferdinand Ill, ceded all Habsburg lands and claims in Alsace to France and acknowledged her de facto sovereignty over the Three Bishoprics of Metz, Verdun, and Toul.
In May 1648, a tax levied on judicial officers of the Parlement of Paris provoked not merely a refusal to pay but also a condemnation of earlier financial edicts and a demand for the acceptance of a scheme of constitutional reforms framed by a united committee of the parlement (the Chambre Saint-Louis), composed of members of all the sovereign courts of Paris.
Henri, Viscount of Turenne, as the defender of France and Louis Il, and Prince de Condé as a Spanish invader.
Learning Objective Describe Louis XIV's views on royal power and how he expanded his own authority Key Points e At the time of King Louis XIlIl's death in 1643, Louis XIV was only five years old.
The Sun King At the time of King Louis XIlIl's death in 1643, Louis XIV was only five years old.
The principle of cu/us regio, eius religio generally had also meant that subjects who refused to convert could emigrate, but Louis banned emigration and effectively insisted that all Protestants must be converted.
Learning Objective Analyze Louis XIV's persecution of the Huguenots and the consequences that had for France Key Points The Edict of Nantes was issued in 1598 by Henry IV of France.
Responding to petitions, he initially excluded Protestants from office, constrained the meeting of synods, closed churches outside Edict-stipulated areas, banned Protestant outdoor preachers, and prohibited domestic Protestant migration.
The revocation caused France to suffer a kind of early brain drain, as it lost a large number of skilled craftsmen.
Edict of Nantes An edict signed in 1598 by King Henry IV of France that granted the Calvinist Protestants of France (also known as Huguenots) substantial rights in the nation, which was, at the time, still considered essentially Catholic.
The principle of cu/us regio, eius religio had usually meant that subjects who refused to convert could emigrate, but Louis banned emigration and effectively insisted that all Protestants must be converted.
Learning Objective Identify the consequences of Louis XIV's wars Key Points In addition to sweeping domestic reforms, Louis XIV aspired to make France the leading European power.
The Franco-Dutch War pitted France, Sweden, Munster, Cologne, and England against the Dutch Republic, which was later joined by the Austrian Habsburg lands, Brandenburg-Prussia, and Spain to form a Quadruple Alliance.
After years of fighting and a series of exhausting battles, the 1678-1679 Treaties of Nijmegen declared the Franche-Comté and the Spanish Netherlands French territories, making France Europe's strongest power.
The Nine Years' War once again pitted Louis XIV against a European-wide coalition, the Grand Alliance.
It was signed in 1684 at the Dominican convent at Ratisbon in Bavaria between Louis XIV of France on the one side and the Holy Roman Emperor, Leopold I, and the Spanish King, Charles II, on the other.
The Nine Years' War The Nine Years' War , often called the War of the Grand Alliance or the War of the League of Augsburg, once again pitted Louis XIV against a European-wide coalition, the Grand Alliance, led by the Anglo-Dutch King William III, Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I, King Charles II of Spain, Victor Amadeus II of Savoy, and several princes of the Holy Roman Empire.
But when Leopold | and the German princes resolved to resist, and when the States General and William II] brought the Dutch and the English into the war against France, the French king at last faced a powerful coalition aimed at curtailing his ambitions.
The Maritime Powers (England and the Dutch Republic) were also financially exhausted, and when Savoy defected from the Alliance, all parties were keen for a negotiated settlement.
Louis also accepted William Ill as the rightful King of England, while the Dutch acquired their barrier fortress system in the Spanish Netherlands to help secure their own borders.
However, with the ailing and childless Charles Il of Spain approaching his end, a new conflict over the inheritance of the Spanish Empire would soon embroil Louis XIV and the Grand Alliance in a final war —the War of the Spanish Succession.
Learning Objective Describe the reasons why there was conflict over who should take the Spanish throne Key Points In the late 1690s, the declining health of childless King Charles II of Soain deepened the ongoing dispute over his succession.
Charles II of Spain opposed partition and on his deathbed offered the empire to Philip, Duke of Anjou and Louis's grandson, who became King Philip V Spain.
Britain, the Dutch Republic, the Holy Roman Emperor, and the petty German states formed another Grand Alliance and declared war on France in 1702.
With losses, victories, and significant financial costs on both sides, as well as a fragile Grand Alliance, French and British ministers prepared the groundwork for a peace conference, and in 1712 Britain ceased combat operations. e By the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht and the Treaty of Rastatt , the Spanish empire was partitioned between the major and minor powers.
Moreover, the agreement proposed that Louis, le Grand Dauphin, would get Naples, Sicily, and Tuscany, and Archduke Charles, the younger son of Emperor Leopold I, would get the Spanish Netherlands.
Under the new treaty, Archduke Charles , the second son of Emperor Leopold |, was to become king of Spain when Charles II died, and acquire her oversees colonies.
Background In the late 1690s, the declining health of childless King Charles Il of Soain deepened the ongoing dispute over his succession.
Ultimately, the main rivals for the Spanish inheritance were the heirs and descendants of the Bourbon King Louis XIV of France and the Austrian Habsburg Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I However, the inheritance was so vast that its transference would dramatically increase either French or Austrian power which, due to the implied threat of European hegemony, was of the utmost importance to Europe as a whole.
In an attempt to avoid war, Louis signed the Treaty of the Hague with William III of England in 1698.
The signatories, however, omitted to consult Charles II, who was passionately opposed to the dismemberment of his empire.
In 1700, Louis and William II] concluded a fresh partitioning agreement, the Treaty of London.
Savoy received Sicily and parts of the Duchy of Milan, while Charles VI (the Holy Roman Emperor and Archduke of Austria) received the Spanish Netherlands, the Kingdom of Naples, Sardinia, and the bulk of the Duchy of Milan.
In addition, Soain ceded Gibraltar and Minorca to Great Britain and agreed to give to the British the Asiento, a monopoly on the oceanic slave trade to the Spanish colonies in America.
Learning Objective Explain William's stake in the War of the Spanish Succession and the goals of the Grand Alliance Key Points As William Ill's life drew towards its conclusion, he, like many other European rulers, was concerned with the question of succession to the throne of Spain.
He sought to prevent the Spanish inheritance from going to the descendants of either Louis XIV or Leopold I, as he feared this would upset the European balance of power.
While the Tory-dominated House of Commons was keen to prevent further conflict, to William III, France's growing strength made war inevitable.
Under the new Treaty, Archduke Charles , the second son of the Emperor Leopold I, was to become king of Spain when Charles II died, and acquire her oversees colonies.
William III of England and the Spanish Succession William III was sovereign Prince of Orange from birth, Dutch Stadtholder from 1672, and King of England, Ireland, and Scotland from 1689 until his death.
The king of Spain, Charles II, had no prospect of having children, and among his closest relatives were Louis XIV and Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor.
Louis and William sought to solve the problem of the Spanish inheritance through negotiation based on the principle of partition (at first without prior reference to the Spanish or Austrian courts), to take effect after the death of Charles Il.
Around the same time as the Alliance was formed, the Catholic James Il of England —exiled in SaintGermain since the Glorious Revolution—died, and Louis XIV recognized James II's Catholic son, James, as King James III of England.
Learning Objective Describe the terms of the Peace of Utrecht and their significance across Europe Key Points e The War of the Spanish Succession was a European conflict triggered by the death of the last Habsburg king of Spain, Charles II, in 1700.
As he had reigned over a vast global empire, the question of who would succeed him had long troubled ministers in capitals throughout Europe.
The balance of victories and losses shifted regularly over the course of the war, with both sides exhausted militarily and financially.
War of the Spanish Succession A major European conflict of the early 18th century triggered by the death in 1700 of the last Habsburg king of Spain, Charles Il.
By backing the Habsburg candidate (known to his supporters as King Charles Ill of Spain) each member of the coalition sought to reduce the power of France, ensure their own territorial and dynastic security, and restore and improve the trade opportunities they had enjoyed under Charles Il.
TRACT AT Ws ACIS * Se aia First edition of the the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht between Great Britain and Spain in Spanish , and a later edition in Latin and English The treaties, signed in the Dutch city of Utrecht, were concluded between the representatives of Louis XIV of France and his grandson Philip V of Spain on one hand, and representatives of Anne of Great Britain, Victor Amadeus II of Sardinia, John V of Portugal, and the United Provinces of the Netherlands on the other.
Eventually, Peter's half-brother, lvan V, and tenyear-old Peter became co-tsars, with Sophia Alekseyevna, one of Alexis's daughters from his first marriage, acting as regent.
Sophia was eventually overthrown, with Peter | and Ivan V continuing to act as co-tsars, yet power was exercised mostly by Peter's mother.
The mission failed, as Europe was at the time preoccupied with the question of the Spanish succession. e The European trip, although politically a failure, exposed Peter to Western European artists, scientists, craftsmen, and noble families.
Key Terms boyars Members of the highest rank of the feudal Bulgarian, Moscovian, Ruthenian , Wallachian, and Moldavian aristocracies, second only to the ruling princes , from the 10th century to the 17th century.
Political Background Peter the Great of the House of Romanov ruled the Tsardom of Russia and later the Russian Empire from 1682 until his death, jointly ruling before 1696 with his elder half-brother, lvan V The Romanovs took over Russia in 1613, and the first decades of their reign were marked by attempts to restore peace, both internally and with Russia's rivals, most notably Poland and Sweden.
As he did not leave any children, a dispute arose between the Miloslavsky family (Maria Miloslavskaya was the first wife of Alexis |) and the Naryshkin family over who should inherit the throne.
Consequently, the Boyar Duma chose 10-year-old Peter to become tsar, with his mother as regent.
However, Sophia Alekseyevna, one of Alexis's daughters from his first marriage, led a rebellion of the Streltsy , which made it possible for her, the Miloslavskys , and their allies to insist that Peter and Ivan be proclaimed joint tsars, with Ivan being acclaimed as the senior.
After a power struggle, in which the Streltsy was forced to shift its loyalty, Sophia was eventually overthrown, with Peter | and Ivan V continuing to act as co-tsars.
It was only when Nataliya died in 1694 that Peter became an independent sovereign, and the sole ruler after Ilvan's death in 1696.
His visits to the West impressed upon him the notion that European customs were in several respects superior to Russian traditions. e Heavily influenced by his advisers from Western Europe, he reorganized the Russian army along modern lines and dreamed of making Russia a maritime power.
His social reforms included the requirement of Western fashion in his court , attempts to end arranged marriages, and the introduction of the Julian Calendar in 1700. e One of Peter's most audacious goals was reducing the influence of the boyars, or the feudal elite class.
Peter also taxed many Russian cultural customs (such as bathing, fishing, beekeeping, or wearing beards) and issued tax stamps for paper goods.
Learning Objective Analyze Peter's foreign policy goals and the extent to which he achieved them Key Points e To improve his nation's position on the seas, Peter the Great sought to gain more maritime outlets.
The goal of making Russia a maritime power shaped Peter's foreign policy. e Peter's first military efforts were directed against the Ottoman Turks.
He secured formerly PolishLithuanian territories in Ukraine and had an impact on internal politics in the Commonwealth. e Peter's foreign policy turned the Tsardom into the Russian Empire and left Russia one of the most powerful states in Europe and a major player in global politics.
The parties revived their alliance, which Charles XIl of Sweden had destroyed in the Treaty of Altranstadt , and agreed on restoring the Polish crown to Augustus.
In 1700, Peter, supported by his allies, declared war on Sweden, which was at the time led by eighteen-year-old King Charles XIl.
Learning Objective Explain Peter's domestic reforms and what he hoped to accomplish with each of them Key Points Peter the Great recognized the weaknesses of the Russian state and aspired to reform it following Western European models.
Seeing the class of boyars as obstacles standing in the way of Europeanization and reform, he introduced comprehensive changes into a relatively antiquated system of Russian administration.
The Orthodox church did not accept Peter's reforms, and Peter refused to accept the power of the patriarch.
He moved the capital from Moscow to Saint Petersburg in 1712, and the city became the political and cultural center of Russia.
While Peter died without naming a successor, his manipulations led to the death of his only male heir and the crowning of his second wife, Catherine, the Empress.
Peter's Reforms of the Russia State Unlike most of his predecessors, not only did Peter the Great recognize the weaknesses of the Russian state, which at the time was greatly influenced by the class of boyars (feudal elites), but also aspired to reform it following Western European models.
Catherine I of Russia by Jean-Marc Nattier Catherine, Peter's second wife, was the first woman to rule Imperial Russia , opening the legal path fora century almost entirely dominated by women.
One of several views of epistemology, the study of human knowledge, along with rationalism and skepticism, it emphasizes the role of experience and evidence (especially sensory experience), in the formation of ideas, over the notion of innate ideas or traditions. scientific method A body of techniques for investigating phenomena, acquiring new knowledge, or correcting and integrating previous knowledge based on empirical or measurable evidence subject to specific principles of reasoning.
Many Enlightenment writers and thinkers had backgrounds in the sciences, and associated scientific advancement with the overthrow of religion and traditional authority in favor of the development of free soeech and thought.
Both Spinoza and Leibniz asserted that, in principle, all knowledge, including scientific knowledge, could be gained through the use of reason alone, though they both observed that this was not possible in practice for human beings, except in specific areas, such as mathematics. e While empiricism (a theory that knowledge comes only or primarily from a sensory experience) dominated the Enlightenment, Immanuel Kant, attempted to combine the principles of empiricism and rationalism.
Both Spinoza and Leibniz asserted that, /n principle, all knowledge, including scientific knowledge, could be gained through the use of reason alone, though they both observed that this was not possible /n practice for human beings, except in specific areas, such as mathematics.
Kant named his brand of epistemology (theory of knowledge) ""transcendental idealism,"" and he first laid out these views in his famous work, The Critique of Pure Reason.
They are usually defined in opposition to legal rights, or those bestowed onto a person by a given legal system.
Although natural rights have been discussed since antiquity, it was the philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment that developed the modern concept of natural rights, which has been critical to the modern republican government and civil society.
The theory addressed the questions of the origin of society and the legitimacy of the authority of the state over the individual.
He objected to the attempt to derive rights from ""natural law,” arguing that law and right though often confused, signify opposites, with law referring to obligations, while rights refers to the absence of obligations.
The most famous natural right formulation comes from John Locke, who argued that the natural rights include perfect equality and freedom, and the right to preserve life and property.
Other Enlightenment and postEnlightenment philosophers that developed and complicated the concept of natural rights were John Lilourne, Francis Hutcheson, Georg Hegel, and Thomas Paine.
The modern European anti-slavery movement drew heavily from the concept of natural rights that became central to the efforts of European abolitionists.
Learning Objective Understand the exploration of Eurasia in the Middle Ages by Marco Polo, and why it was a prelude to the advent of the Age of Discovery in the 15th Century Key Points e European medieval knowledge about Asia beyond the reach of Byzantine Empire was sourced in partial reports, often obscured by legends. e In 1154, Arab geographer Muhammad al-ldrisi created what would be known as the Tabula Rogeriana— a description of the world and world map.
It remained the most accurate world map for the next three centuries. e Indian Ocean trade routes were sailed by Arab traders.
The fleets visited Arabia, East Africa, India, Maritime Southeast Asia, and Thailand. e A series of European expeditions crossing Eurasia by land in the late Middle Ages marked a prelude to the Age of Discovery.
Others traveled to various regions of Asia between 13th and the third quarter of the 15th centuries; these travelers included Russian Yaroslav of Vladimir and his sons Alexander Nevsky and Andrey II of Vladimir, French André de Longjumeau and Flemish William of Rubruck, Moroccan Ibn Battuta, and Italian Niccolo de' Conti.
Tabula Rogeriana A book containing a description of the world and world map created by the Arab geographer, Muhammad alIdrisi, in 1154.
In 1154, Arab geographer Muhammad al-lIdrisi created what would be known as the Tabula Rogeriana at the court of King Roger Il of Sicily.
The Travels of Marco Polo Marco Polo traveling, miniature from the book The Travels of Marco Polo , originally published during Polo's lifetime , but frequently reprinted and translated.
One of the men from the ship, presumably Marco Polo, soeaks men at the gate.
In 1419, two of Henry's captains, Joao Goncalves Zarco and Tristao Vaz Teixeira, were driven by a storm to Madeira, an uninhabited island off the coast of Africa, which had probably been known to Europeans since the 14th century.
Later, this monopoly would be enforced by two Papal bulls , giving Portugal the trade monopoly for the newly appropriated territories, laying the foundations for the Portuguese empire.
Following the first American voyage, Columbus made three more. e A division of influence became necessary to avoid conflict between the Spanish and Portuguese.
Of equal importance was the Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire under Francisco Pizarro.
In 1565, the first permanent Spanish settlement in the Philippines was founded, which added a critical Asian post to the empire.
The object of the third voyage was to verify the existence of a continent that King John Il of Portugal claimed was located to the southwest of the Cape Verde Islands.
The Spanish conquest was also facilitated by the spread of diseases , common in Europe but never present in the New World, which reduced the indigenous populations in the Americas.
In 1496, King Henry VII of England, following the successes of Spain and Portugal in overseas exploration, commissioned John Cabot to lead a voyage to discover a route to Asia via the North Atlantic.
Cartier attempted to create the first permanent European settlement in North America at CapRouge in 1541, but the settlement was abandoned the next year.
By the first decades of the 18th century, the French created and controlled a number of settlement colonies in North America. e As the French empire in North America grew, the French also began to build a smaller but more profitable empire in the West Indies. e While the French quite rapidly lost nearly all of its colonial gains in the Americas, their colonial expansion also covered territories in Africa and Asia where France grew to be a major colonial power in the 19th century.
France's most important Caribbean colonial possession was established in 1664, when the colony of Saint-Domingue was founded on the western half of the Spanish island of Hispaniola.
The eastern half of Hispaniola (today's Dominican Republic) also came under French rule for a short period, after being given to France by Spain in 1795.
Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. ie) ""1280px-British_colonies_176376_shepherd1923.
It was put forward in Bacon's book Novum Organum , , and was supposed to replace the methods put forward in Aristotle's Organon.
The term British empiricism came into use to describe philosophical differences perceived between two of its founders—Francis Bacon, described as empiricist, and René Descartes, who was described as a rationalist.
The discoveries of Johannes Kepler and Galileo gave the theory credibility and the work culminated in Isaac Newton's Principia, which formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation that dominated scientists’ view of the physical universe for the next three centuries.
Studying human anatomy based upon the dissection of human corpses, rather than the animal dissections, as practiced for centuries.
Discovering and studying magnetism and electricity, and thus, electric properties of various materials.
Modernization of disciplines (making them more as what they are today), including dentistry, physiology, chemistry, or optics.
Invention of tools that deepened the understating of sciences, including mechanical calculator, steam digester , refracting and reflecting telescopes, vacuum pump, or mercury barometer.
Learning Objective Distinguish between the different key figures of the scientific revolution and their achievements in mathematics and physics Key Points The philosophy of using an inductive approach to nature was in strict contrast with the earlier, Aristotelian approach of deduction, by which analysis of known facts produced further understanding.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, European scientists began increasingly applying quantitative measurements to the measurement of physical phenomena on the earth.
The Copernican Revolution, or the paradigm shift from the Ptolemaic model of the heavens to the heliocentric model with the sun at the center of the solar system, began with the publication of Copernicus’s De revolutionibus orbium coelestium, and ended with Newton’s work over a century later.
In practice, many scientists (and philosophers) believed that a healthy mix of both was needed—the willingness to question assumptions, yet also to interpret observations assumed to have some degree of validity.
René Descartes, whose thought emphasized the power of reasoning but also helped establish the scientific method, distinguished between the knowledge that could be attained by reason alone (rationalist approach), which he thought was mathematics, and the knowledge that required experience of the world, which he thought was physics.
Mathematization To the extent that medieval natural philosophers used mathematical problems, they limited social studies to theoretical analyses of local soeed and other aspects of life.
Isaac Newton's Philosophie Naturalis Principia Mathematica concluded the Copernican Revolution.
The first usage of the word e/ectricity is ascribed to Thomas Browne in 1646 work.
Learning Objective Assess the work of both Copernicus and Kepler and their revolutionary ideas Key Points The development of astronomy during the period of the scientific revolution entirely transformed societal views about nature.
The publication of Nicolaus Copernicus' De revolutionibus in 1543 is often seen as marking the beginning of the time when scientific disciplines gradually transformed into the modern sciences as we know them today.
Copernican heliocentrism is the name given to the astronomical model developed by Copernicus that positioned the sun near the center of the universe, motionless, with Earth and the other planets rotating around it in circular paths, modified by epicycles and at uniform speeds. e For over a century, few astronomers were convinced by the Copernican system.
Kepler's work on Mars and planetary motion further confirmed the heliocentric theory.
Galileo Galilei designed his own telescope, with which he made a number of critical astronomical observations.
Learning Objective List the discoveries and progress made by leading medical professionals during the Early Modern era Key Points During the Renaissance, experimental investigation, particularly in the field of dissection and body examination, advanced the knowledge of human anatomy and modernized medical research.
De humani corporis fabrica by Andreas Vesalius emphasized the priority of dissection and what has come to be called the ""anatomical"" view of the body.
Ambroise Paré A French surgeon who is considered one of the fathers of surgery and modern forensic pathology, and a pioneer in surgical techniques and battlefield medicine, especially in the treatment of wounds.
Andreas Vesalius A Belgian anatomist , physician, and author of one of the most influential books on human anatomy, De humani corporis fabrica (On the Fabric of the Human Body). humorism A system of medicine detailing the makeup and workings of the human body, adopted by the Indian Ayurveda system of medicine, and Ancient Greek and Roman physicians and philosophers.
French surgeon Ambroise Paré (c.101590) is considered one of the fathers of surgery and modern forensic pathology, and a pioneer in surgical techniques and battlefield medicine, especially in the treatment of wounds.
He is widely known for writing the first complete scientific description of dentistry, Le Chirurgien Dentiste , published in 1728.
Andreas Vesalius, De corporis humani fabrica libri septem, illustration attributed to Jan van Calcar (circa 1499-1546/1550) The front cover illustration of De Humani Corporis Fabrica , showing a public dissection being carried out by Vesalius himself.
Learning Objective Describe Thomas Hobbes' beliefs on the relationship between government and the people Key Points e Thomas Hobbes, an English philosopher and scientist, was one of the key figures in the political debates of the Enlightenment period.
Despite advocating the idea of absolutism of the sovereign, he developed some of the fundamentals of European liberal thought. e Hobbes was the first modern philosopher to articulate a detailed social contract theory that appeared in his 1651 work Leviathan.
In it, Hobbes set out his doctrine of the foundation of states and legitimate governments and creating an objective science of morality. e Hobbes argued that in order to avoid chaos, which he associated with the state of nature, people accede toa social contract and establish a civil society. e One of the most influential tensions in Hobbes' argument is a relation between the absolute sovereign and the society.
His writings were immensely influential for the development of social contract theory.
Two Treatises of Government, Locke's most important work on political theory, is divided into the First Treatise and the Second Treatise.
He believed that human nature is characterized by reason and tolerance, but he assumed that the sole right to defend in the state of nature was not enough, so people established a civil society to resolve conflicts ina civil way with help from government in a state of society.
Locke's conception of natural rights is captured in his best known statement that individuals have a right to protect their ""life, health, liberty, or possessions"" and in his belief that the natural right to property is derived from labor.
Learning Objective Describe Montesquieu's solution for keeping power from falling into the hands of any one individual Key Points e Montesquieu was a French lawyer, man of letters, and one of the most influential political philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment.
His political theory work, particularly the idea of separation of powers, shaped the modern democratic government. e The Spirit of the Laws is a treatise on political theory that was first published anonymously by Montesquieu in 1748.
As he defines them, republican political systems vary depending on how broadly they extend citizenship rights. e Another major theme in The Spirit of Laws concerns political liberty and the best means of preserving it.
William's successful invasion of England with a Dutch fleet and army led to his ascending of the English throne as William Ill of England jointly with his wife Mary II of England, in conjunction with the documentation of the Bill of Rights 1689.
Learning Objective Discuss Voltaire's thoughts on the masses and government Key Points e Voltaire was a French Enlightenment writer, historian, and philosopher famous for his wit, his attacks on the established Catholic Church, and his advocacy of freedom of religion, freedom of expression, and separation of church and state. e Voltaire's political and philosophical views can be found in nearly all of his prose writings.
His two most famous works elaborating the concept are The Treatise on Tolerance and The Philosophical Dictionary. e Voltaire had an enormous influence on the development of historiography through his demonstration of fresh new ways to look at the past.
His best-known works are The Age of Louis XIV and The Essay on the Customs and the Spirit of the Nations. e In his criticism of the French society and existing social structures, Voltaire hardly spared anyone.
Key Terms Ancien Régime The monarchic-aristocratic, social, and political system established in the Kingdom of France from approximately the 15th century until the latter part of the 18th century , under the late Valois and Bourbon Dynasties.
Voltaire Francois-Marie Arouet, known by his literary pseudonym Voltaire, was a French Enlightenment writer, historian, and philosopher famous for his wit, his attacks on the established Catholic Church, and his advocacy of freedom of religion, freedom of expression, and separation of church and state.
Voltaire's first major philosophical work in his battle against ""l'infame"" was The Treatise on Tolerance , in which he calls for tolerance between religions and targets religious fanaticism, especially that of the Jesuits, indicting all superstitions surrounding religions.
In The Discourse on the Origins of Inequality Among Men, he maintained that the stage of human development associated with what he called ""savages"" was the best or optimal in human development. e In his Discourse on the Moral Effects of the Arts and Sciences, Rousseau argued, in opposition to the dominant stand of Enlightenment thinkers, that the arts and sciences corrupt human morality. e The Social Contract outlines the basis for a legitimate political order within a framework of classical republicanism.
Rousseau's philosophy of education concerns itself with developing the students’ character and moral sense, so that they may learn to practice self-mastery and remain virtuous even in the unnatural and imperfect society in which they will have to live.
Rousseau was a believer in the moral superiority of the patriarchal family on the antique Roman model.
The private sphere as Rousseau imagines it depends on the subordination of women, in order for both it and the public political sohere to function as Rousseau imagines it could and should.
He launched a career as a mathematician, soon reaching international fame.
However, his political ideas, particularly that of radical democracy and opposition to Slavery, were criticized heavily in the English-speaking world. e Condorcet took a leading role when the French Revolution swept France in 1789.
He was educated at the Jesuit College in Reims and at the Co//lége de Navarre in Paris, where he quickly showed his intellectual ability and gained his first public distinctions in mathematics.
Learning Objective Summarize the ways in which Wollstonecraft's philosophy differed from the other Enlightenment thinkers Key Points e Mary Wollstonecraft was an English writer, philosopher, and advocate of women's rights.
Until the late 20th century, however, Wollstonecraft's life, received more attention than her writing. e The majority of Wollstonecraft's early works focus on education.
She also advocates the education of women, a controversial topic at the time and one which she would return to throughout her career. e In response to Edmund Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France , which was a defense of constitutional monarchy, aristocracy, and the Church of England, Wollstonecraft's A Vindication of the Rights of Men attacks aristocracy and advocates republicanism. e A Vindication of the Rights of Woman is one of the earliest works of feminist philosophy.
In it, Wollstonecraft argues that women ought to have an education commensurate with their position in society, and claims that women are essential to the nation because they educate its children and because they could be ""companions"" to their husbands, rather than just wives.
Scholars of feminism still debate to what extent Wollstonecraft was, indeed, a feminist; while she does call for equality between the sexes in particular areas of life, such as morality, she does not explicitly state that men and women are equal.
Wollstonecraft addresses her writings to the middle class, and represents a class bias by her condescending treatment of the poor.
After two ill-fated affairs, with Henry Fuseli and Gilbert Imlay (by whom she had a daughter, Fanny Imlay), Wollstonecraft married the philosopher William Godwin, one of the forefathers of the anarchist movement.
She assembled an anthology of literary extracts ""for the improvement of young women"" entitled The Female Reader.
Ni colas_ de LargilliC3%A8re, Fran%C3%A7oisMarie Arouet_dit Voltaire (vers 17241725)_-001.jpg.
Council of Trent by Pasquale Cati Painting representing the artist's depiction of The Council of Trent.
His translation of the Bible into the vernacular (instead of Latin) made it more accessible to the laity, an event that had a tremendous impact on both the church and German culture.
Learning Objective Compare and contrast Calvinism with Lutheranism Key Points Calvinism is a major branch of Protestantism that follows the theological tradition and forms of Christian practice of John Calvin and other Reformation-era theologians.
Calvin's theological critiques mostly broke with the Roman Catholic Church, but he differed from Luther on certain theological points, such as the idea that Christ died only for the elect instead of all humanity, like Luther believed.
Calvin's ""Ordinances"" of 1541 involved a collaboration of church affairs with the Geneva city council and consistory to bring morality to all areas of life.
Protestantism also spread into France, where the Protestants were derisively nicknamed ""Huguenots,"" and this touched off decades of warfare in France.
Calvin's /nstitutes of the Christian Religion was one of the most influential theologies of the era and was written as an introductory textbook on the Protestant faith.
Despite heavy persecution by Henry Il, the Reformed Church of France, largely Calvinist in direction, made steady progress across large sections of the nation, in the urban bourgeoisie and parts of the aristocracy, appealing to people alienated by the obduracy and the complacency of the Catholic establishment. att gina Interior of a Calvinist Church Calvinism has been known at times for its simple, unadorned churches and lifestyles, as depicted in this painting by Emanuel de Witte1661.
The doctrine holds that this purposeful influence of God's Holy Spirit cannot be resisted.
Key Points e The English Reformation was associated with the wider process of the European Protestant Reformation, though based on Henry VIII's desire for an annulment of his marriage, it was at the outset more of a political affair than a theological dispute. e Having been refused an annulment by the pope, Henry summoned parliament to deal with annulment, and the breaking with Rome proceeded.
After Henry's death his son Edward VI was crowned, and the reformation continued with the destruction and removal of decor and religious features, which changed the church forever.
From 1553, under the reign of Henry's Roman Catholic daughter, Mary I, the Reformation legislation was repealed, and Mary sought to achieve reunion with Rome.
During Elizabeth I's reign, support for her father's idea of reforming the church continued with some minor adjustments.
Catholic Restoration From 1553, under the reign of Henry's Roman Catholic daughter, Mary I, the Reformation legislation was repealed, and Mary sought to achieve reunion with Rome.
Learning Objective Discuss how the patterns of warfare that took place in France affected the Huguenots Key Points Protestant ideas were first introduced to France during the reign of Francis I, who firmly opposed Protestantism, but continued to try and seek a middle course until the later stages of his regime.
Henry Il continued the harsh religious policy that his father had followed during the last years of his reign.
The Swiss were his allies, and had come to invade France to free him from subjection, but Henry III insisted that their invasion was not in his favor, but against him, forcing them to return home.
Learning Objective Demonstrate how natural events and pandemics contributed to the hysteria surrounding the witch trials of the 16th through 18th centuries Key Points e In early modern Europe, there was widespread hysteria that malevolent Satanic witches were operating as an organized threat to Christianity.
Those who were accused of witchcraft were portrayed as being Devil worshipers. e In medieval Europe, the Black Death was a turning point in peoples’ views of witches.
The death of a large percentage of the European population was believed by many Christians to have been caused by their enemies. e The peak of the witch hunt was during the European wars of religion, peaking between about 1580 and 1630. e Over the entire duration of the trials, which spanned three centuries, an estimated total of 40,000-100,000 people were executed.
As a part of this, it was believed that they gained new, supernatural powers that enabled them to work magic, which they would use against Christians. c SS a | A Witch feeding her familliars An image of a witch and her familiar spirits taken from a publication that dealt with the witch trials of Elizabeth Stile, Mother Dutten, Mother Devell, and Mother Margaret in Windsor, 1579.
Here, the cause of eliminating the supposed Satanic witches from society was taken up by a number of individuals; Claude Tholosan for instance had tried over two hundred people, accusing them of witchcraft in Briancon, Dauphiné, by 1420.
Nevertheless, it has been argued that the supposedly misogynistic agenda of works on witchcraft has been greatly exaggerated, based on the selective repetition of a few relevant passages of the Ma/leus Maleficarum.
Interior of the Oude kerk in Amsterdam (south na eee ee SS SS eS ee ""John.
Key Terms Ferdinand II His rule coincided with the Thirty Years' War and his aim, as a zealous Catholic, was to restore Catholicism as the only religion in the empire and suppress Protestantism.
Ferdinand II was a devout Roman Catholic and relatively intolerant when compared to his predecessor, Rudolf Il.
The Peace established the principle Cu/us regio, elus religio (""Whose realm, his religion""), which allowed Holy Roman Empire state princes to select either Lutheranism or Catholicism within the domains they controlled, ultimately reaffirming the independence they had over their states.
Much to the consternation of their Spanish ruling cousins, the Habsburg emperors who followed Charles V (especially Ferdinand | and Maximilian II, but also Rudolf II and his successor, Matthias) were content to allow the princes of the empire to choose their own religious policies.
War Breaks Out Ferdinand Il, educated by the Jesuits, was a staunch Catholic who wanted to impose religious uniformity on his lands.
Ferdinand Il Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Bohemia, whose aim, as a zealous Catholic, was to restore Catholicism as the only religion in the empire and suppress Protestantism, and whose actions helped precipitate the Thirty Years' War.
Toward the end his reign, Emperor Matthias, realizing he would die without an heir, arranged for his lands to go to his nearest male relative, the staunchly Catholic Archduke Ferdinand II of Austria.
Background In 1555, the Peace of Augsburg had settled religious disputes in the Holy Roman Empire by enshrining the principle of Cu/us regio, e/us religio, allowing a prince to determine the religion of his subjects.
Without heirs, Emperor Matthias sought to assure an orderly transition during his lifetime by having his dynastic heir (the fiercely Catholic Ferdinand of Styria, later Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor) elected to the separate royal thrones of Bohemia and Hungary.
Danish Intervention After the Bohemian Revolt was suppressed by Ferdinand Il, the Danish king, Christian IV, fearing that recent Catholic successes threatened his sovereignty as a Protestant nation, led troops against Ferdinand.
Negotiations and the Edict of Restitution Negotiations concluded with the Treaty of Lubeck in 1629, which stated that Christian IV could retain control over Denmark if he would abandon his support for the Protestant German states.
Christian IV of Denmark Christian IV receives homage from the countries of Europe as mediator in the Thirty Years' War.
Swedish Intervention The Swedish intervention in the Thirty Years' War, when King Gustav II Adolf of Sweden ordered a full-scale invasion of the Catholic states, was a major turning point of the war.
After several attempts by the Holy Roman Empire to prevent the spread of Protestantism in Europe, King Gustav Il Adolf of Sweden ordered a full-scale invasion of the Catholic states.
Gustav was concerned about the growing power of the Holy Roman Empire, and like Christian IV before him, was heavily subsidized by Cardinal Richelieu, the chief minister of Louis XIIl of France, and by the Dutch.
After dismissing Wallenstein in 1630, from fear he was planning a revolt, Ferdinand Il became dependent on the Catholic League.
This success largely reversed many of the effects of their defeat at Nordlingen, albeit not without creating some tensions between Banér and Leslie.
In 1648, the Swedes and the French defeated the imperial army at the Battle of Zusmarshausen, and the Spanish at Lens.
The Swedish siege of Prague in 1648 In 1648, the Swedish army entered Prague and captured Prague Castle, where the catalyst of the war, the Defenestration of Prague, had taken place thirty years before.
Christians living in principalities where their denomination was not the established church were guaranteed the right to practice their faith in public during allotted hours and in private at their will. e General recognition of the exclusive sovereignty of each party over its lands, people, and agents abroad, and responsibility for the warlike acts of any of its citizens or agents.
Learning Objective Identify the core ideas that drove the Age of Enlightenment Key Points e The Age of Enlightenment was a philosophical movement that dominated the world of ideas in Europe in the 18th century.
Centered on the idea that reason is the primary source of authority and legitimacy, this movement advocated such ideals as liberty, progress, tolerance, fraternity, constitutional government, and separation of church and state. e There is little consensus on the precise beginning of the Age of Enlightenment, but the beginning of the 18th century or the middle of the 17th century are commonly identified as starting points.
Most scholars use the last years of the century, often choosing the French Revolution of 1789 or the beginning of the Napoleonic Wars to date the end of the Enlightenment. e The Enlightenment took hold in most European countries, often with a specific local emphasis.
Historians of race, gender, and class note that Enlightenment ideals were not originally envisioned as universal in the today's sense of the word.
In France, many cite the publication of Isaac Newton's Principia Mathematica in 1687.
Cras big epee “tied 2: 5: i yee s Sopwichy & 2: oe a: Word Baxzetre F Zonds Four.
Learning Objective Describe advancements made in science and social sciences during the 18th century Key Points Science came to play a leading role in Enlightenment discourse and ideas.
Building on the body of work forwarded by Copernicus, Kepler and Newton, 18th-century astronomers refined telescopes, produced star catalogs, and worked towards explaining the motions of heavenly bodies and the consequences of universal gravitation.
The 18th century witnessed the early modern reformulation of chemistry that culminated in the law of conservation of mass and the oxygen theory of combustion.
The Age of Enlightenment was also when the first scientific and literary journals were established.
In 1705, astronomer Edward Halley correctly linked historical descriptions of particularly bright comets to the reappearance of just one , based on his computation of the orbits of comets.
The resulting product was termed ca/x, which was considered a dephlogisticated substance in its true form.
Another prominent intellectual was Francesco Mario Pagano, whose work Saggi Politici argued against torture and capital punishment and advocated more benign penal codes.
Learning Objective Describe advancements made in the popularization of science during the 18th century Key Points Science during the Enlightenment was dominated by scientific societies and academies, which largely replaced universities as centers of scientific research and development.
Scientific academies and societies grew out of the Scientific Revolution as the creators of scientific knowledge in contrast to the scholasticism of the university.
National scientific societies were founded throughout the Enlightenment era in the urban hotbeds of scientific development across Europe.
Academies and societies disseminated Enlightenment science by publishing the works of their members.
While the journals of the academies primarily published scientific papers, the independent periodicals that followed were a mix of reviews, abstracts, translations of foreign texts, and sometimes derivative, reprinted materials.
Although dictionaries and encyclopedias have existed since ancient times, during the Enlightenment they evolved from a simple list of definitions to far more detailed discussions of those words.
The most wellknown of the 18th century encyclopedic dictionaries is Encyclopaedia, or a Systematic Dictionary of the Sciences, Arts, and Crafts.
During the Enlightenment, science began to appeal to an increasingly larger audience.
Petersburg, and the Kungliga Vetenskapsakademien (Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences) were created.
Most of these texts were published in the local vernacular, so their continental soread depended on the language of the readers.
Vol I For Anno ane and 1666, In the SAVOT, Printed by ‘TN. for John Martyn at the Bell, alicele without Temple-Bar , and Fames Alleftry in Duck Lane ;' Printers to che Royal Society, Cover of the first volume of Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 1665-1666, the Royal Society of London.
In effect, the monarchs of enlightened absolutism strengthened their authority by improving the lives of their subjects. e An essay defending the system of enlightened despotism was penned by Frederick the Great, who ruled Prussia from 1740 to 1786.
However, unlike other enlightened despots, Maria Theresa found it hard to fit into the intellectual sohere of the Enlightenment and did not Share fascination with Enlightenment ideals. e Joseph was a proponent of enlightened despotism but his commitment to modernizing reforms subsequently engendered significant opposition, which eventually culminated in a failure to fully implement his programs.
Catherine the Great Catherine II of Russia was the most renowned and the longest-ruling female leader of Russia, reigning from 1762 until her death in 1796.
However, Maria Theresa found it hard to fit into the intellectual sohere of the Enlightenment.
Joseph II of Austria Maria Theresa's oldest son, Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor from 1765 to 1790 and ruler of the Habsburg lands from 1780 to 1790, was at ease with Enlightenment ideas.
Joseph Il is plowing the field near Slawikowitz tn rural southern Moravia on 19 August 1769.
Calling himself the guardian of Catholicism, Joseph Il struck vigorously at papal power.
In return for aiding Emperor Leopold | during the War of the Spanish Succession, Frederick William's son, Frederick IIl, was allowed to elevate Prussia to the status of a kingdom.
The Swabian branch ruled the principalities of Hohenzollern-Hechingen and Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen (both fiefs of the Holy Roman Empire) until 1849 and ruled Romania from 1866 to 1947.
The next elector, Frederick Il, forced the submission of Berlin and Colln, setting an example for the other towns of Brandenburg.
Margaret Goldsmith, a biographer of Frederick's, suggests the attachment was of a sexual nature and as a result Keith was sent away and Frederick temporarily relocated. e When he was 18, Frederick plotted to flee to England with his close friend Hans Hermann von Katte and other junior army officers.
Key Terms The Prince A 16th-century political treatise by the Italian diplomat and political theorist Niccolod Machiavelli.
His birth was particularly welcomed by his grandfather, Frederick I, as his two previous grandsons both died in infancy.
Frederick was keenly interested in land use, especially draining swamps and opening new farmland for colonizers who would increase the kingdom's food supply.
The resulting program created 60,000 hectares of new farmland, but also eliminated vast swaths of natural habitat.
While Frederick was largely non-practicing and tolerated all faiths in his realm, Protestantism became the favored religion and Catholics were not chosen for higher state positions.
Just like Catherine Il, he recognized the educational Skills the Jesuits had as an asset for the nation and was interested in attracting a diversity of skills to his country, whether from Jesuit teachers, Huguenot citizens, or Jewish merchants and bankers.
Learning Objective Evaluate Frederick the Great's actual goals against his stated rationale for the War of Austrian Succession Key Points e In 1713, Charles VI of the Habsburg dynasty issued an edict known as the Pragmatic Sanction, which aimed to ensure that the Habsburg hereditary possessions could be inherited by a daughter.
Politically, he used the 1537 Treaty of Brieg as a pretext for the invasion. e The War of the Austrian Succession escalated and eventually involved most of the powers of Europe.
The war included King George's War in North America, the War of Jenkins' Ear , the First Carnatic War in India, the Jacobite rising of 1745 in Scotland, and the First and Second Silesian Wars. personal union The combination of two or more states with the same monarch but distinct boundaries, laws, and interests.
In 1804, the Holy Roman Emperor Francis Il, who was also ruler of the lands of the Habsburg Monarchy, founded the Empire of Austria.
Imperial Recess A resolution passed by the Re/chstag of the Holy Roman Empire in 1803 and ratified by the Emperor Francis Il. lt proved to be the last significant law enacted by the Empire before its dissolution in 1806.
It was signed in Pressburg , at that time in Hungary, by Johann | Josef, Prince of Liechtenstein and the Hungarian Count Ignaz Gyulai for Austria and Charles Maurice de Talleyrand for France.
Serious attempts at centralization began under Maria Theresa and especially her son Joseph Il in the mid to late 18th century, but many of these were abandoned following large-scale resistance to Joseph's more radical reform attempts.
When Francis died in 1765, Maria Theresa continued to rule the Habsburg lands, but her son, Joseph II, secured the title of the Holy Roman Emperor.
In 1804, the Holy Roman Emperor Francis Il, who was also ruler of the lands of the Habsburg Monarchy, founded the Empire of Austria comprising all his lands.
Learning Objective Explain the contents of the Pragmatic Sanction and its intended purpose Key Points e The Pragmatic Sanction was an edict issued by Charles Vil on April 19, 1713, to ensure that the Habsburg hereditary possessions could be inherited by a daughter.
Charles soon expressed a wish to amend this pact to give his own future daughters precedence over his nieces.
The Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 was the first such document to be publicly announced and as such required formal acceptance by the estates of the realms it concerned.
For 10 years, Charles VI labored with the support of his closest advisor Johann Christoph von Bartenstein to have his sanction accepted by the courts of Europe and by Habsburg's hereditary territories.
However, should both brothers die leaving no sons, the daughters of the elder brother Joseph) would have absolute precedence over the daughters of the younger brother , and the eldest daughter of Joseph would ascend all the Habsburg thrones.
In 1705, Leopold | died and was succeeded by his elder son, Joseph I Six years later, Joseph | died leaving behind two daughters, Archduchesses Maria Josepha and Maria Amalia.
Learning Objective Analyze Empress Maria-Theresa's reforms and policies Key Points Maria Theresa was the only female ruler of the Habsburg dominions and the last of the House of Habsburg.
Maria Theresa was a devout Roman Catholic and believed that religious unity was necessary for a peaceful public life.
Maria Theresa implemented significant reforms to strengthen Austria's military, financial, and bureaucratic efficiency.
However, her title of Holy Roman Empress meant that she was in fact the wife of the Emperor, Francis |, wno secured the title as one of Austria's gains in the same war.
The council lacked executive or legislative authority, but nevertheless was distinguishable from the form of government employed by Frederick II of Prussia.
Learning Objective Contrast Joseph's domestic reforms with those of his mother Key Points e Joseph Il became the absolute ruler over the most extensive realm of Central Europe in 1780.
It was enforced differently in all the various Habsburg lands but serfdom was abolished in the Empire only in 1848.
Joseph continued education and public health reforms initiated by his mother.
Joseph Il recognized the importance of further reforms, continually attempting to destroy the economic subjugation through related laws, such as his Tax Decree of 1789.
This new law would have finally realized Emperor Joseph II's ambition to modernize Habsburg society, allowing for the end of corvée and the beginning of lesser tax obligations.
Learning Objective Recall the parties involved in the Diplomatic Revolution and what changed between them as a result of this event Key Points e The War of the Austrian Succession had seen belligerence align on a time-honored basis.
This change in European alliances was a prelude to the Seven Years' War, triggered by a separation of interests between Austria, Britain, and France. e The War of Austrian Succession made it clear that Britain no longer viewed Austria as powerful enough to check French power but was content to build up other states like Prussia.
France and Austria signed a new offensive alliance, the Second Treaty of Versailles . e In 1758, the Anglo-Prussian Convention between Great Britain and the Kingdom of Prussia formalized the alliance between the two powers.
In 1762, the Russian Empress Elizabeth died and her successor, Peter Ill, recalled Russian armies from Berlin and mediated Frederick's truce with Sweden.
While the question of whether the Seven Years' War was indeed the first world war remains ambiguous, the conflict certainly had global impact and marked a shift in the European balance of power.
Although the war did not result in major territorial changes in Europe, a new political order emerged.
With Britain becoming the main colonial power, Prussia confirming its position as a military, economic, and political European power, and Austria and Russia proving their growing military potential, France lost its influence in Europe.
Second Hundred Years' War A periodization or historical era term used by some historians to describe the series of military conflicts between Great Britain and France that occurred from about 1689 to 1815.
When the Seven Years' War between France and Great Britain started in 1756, Spain and Portugal remained neutral, but everything changed when Ferdinand VI died in 1759 and was succeeded by his younger half-brother Charles IIl of Spain.
France captured Minorca and British trading posts in Sumatra, while Spain captured the border fortress of Almeida in Portugal and Colonia del Sacramento in South America. e In the treaty, most of these territories were restored to their original owners, although Britain made considerable gains.
The Treaty of Paris gave Britain the east side of the Mississippi, with New Orleans remaining in French hands.
The Treaty of Hubertusburg was signed five days later by Prussia, Austria, and Saxony.
The Treaty of Paris was to give Britain the east side of the Mississippi (including Baton Rouge, Louisiana, which was to be part of the British territory of West Florida) except for the Ile d'Orléans , which was granted to Spain, along with the territory to the west the larger portion of Louisiana.
Learning Objective Characterize Elizabeth I's two decades in power Key Points e Elizabeth , the daughter of Peter the Great and his second wife, Catherine |, was the Empress of Russia from 1741 until her death in 1762.
In 1743, the Treaty of Abo was signed, with Sweden ceding to Russia all of southern Finland east of the Kymmene River. e The triumphs of Elizabeth's foreign policy were credited to the diplomatic ability of Aleksey Bestuzhev-Ryumin, the head of foreign affairs.
She therefore entered into an alliance with France and Austria against Prussia. e A year before the Seven Years' War formally ended, Elizabeth died.
After his death in 1730, Elizabeth's first cousin, Empress Anna , daughter of Peter the Great's elder brother Ivan V, ruled Russia.
The Brief Reign of Peter III Peter III's decision to turn Russia from an enemy to an ally of Prussia and his domestic reforms did not convince the Russian nobility to support the unpopular emperor.
The traditionally held view of Peter as a person of weak character and many vices is mainly drawn from the memoirs of his wife and successor. e After Peter succeeded to the Russian throne, the proPrussian emperor withdrew Russian forces from the Seven Years' War and concluded a peace treaty with Prussia.
The decision proved to be extremely unpopular in his own court and greatly contributed to Peter's quick demise. e One of Peter's most widely debated reforms was a manifesto that exempted the nobility from obligatory state and military service (established by Peter the Great) and gave them freedom to travel abroad.
Although the exemption from the obligatory service was welcomed by the Russian elites, the overall reform did not convince them to support their emperor, who was generally considered as taking little interest in Russia and its matters. e Catherine staged a coup and had her husband arrested, forcing him to sign a document of abdication and leaving no one to dispute her accession to the throne.
From German Princess to Russian Tsarina Born to the family of impoverished German aristocracy, Catherine the Great's fate was decided when she was chosen to become wife of her second cousin, the prospective tsar Peter Ill, whom she eventually overthrew to become the Empress of Russia in 1762.
Learning Objective Detail Catherine the Great's journey from German Princess to sole ruler of Russia Key Points e« Catherine II of Russia reigned Russia from 1762 until her death in 1796.
Born Sophia Augusta Fredericka to Christian August, Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst, and Princess Johanna Elisabeth of Holstein-Gottorp in Stettin, Pomerania, her fate was decided after she was chosen to become wife of her second cousin, the prospective tsar Peter of Holstein-Gottorp . e Catherine spared no effort to ingratiate herself not only with the Empress, but also with her husband and with the Russian people.
On the following day, the formal betrothal took place in Saint Petersburg. e Count Andrei Shuvalov, chamberlain to Catherine, is credited as the source of rumors regarding the monarch's intimate affairs.
After the death of Empress Elizabeth in 1762, Peter succeeded to the throne as Emperor Peter III and Catherine became empress consort.
The tsar's eccentricities and policies, including a great admiration for Frederick the Great of Prussia, alienated the same groups that Catherine cultivated. e Catherine staged a coup and had her husband arrested, then forced him to sign a document of abdication, leaving no one to dispute her accession to the throne.
Early Life Catherine II of Russia was the longest-ruling female leader of Russia, reigning from 1762 until her death in 1796 at the age of 67.
The choice of Sophia as wife of her second cousin, the prospective tsar Peter of Holstein-Gottorp, resulted from diplomatic management in which Count Lestocq, Peter's aunt , and Frederick the Great of Prussia took part.
Lestocg and Frederick wanted to strengthen the friendship between Prussia and Russia to weaken Austria's influence and ruin the Russian chancellor Bestuzhev, on whom Empress Elizabeth relied and who acted as a known partisan of Russo-Austrian co-operation.
Peter was believed to have taken a mistress , while Catherine carried on liaisons with Sergei Saltykov, Grigory Grigoryevich Orlov, Alexander Vasilchikov, Grigory Potemkin, Stanistaw August Poniatowski, Alexander Vasilchikov, and others.
Peter III's temperament became quite unbearable for those who resided in the palace.
In 1754, Catherine and Peter welcomed a son, the future tsar Paul I There is considerable speculation as to the actual paternity of Paul.
The Coup After the death of Empress Elizabeth in 1762, Peter succeeded to the throne as Emperor Peter III and Catherine became empress consort.
Learning Objective Evaluate Catherine the Great's domestic policies and to what extent she can be considered an enlightened despot Key Points e The period of Catherine's rule , the Catherinian Era, is often considered the Golden Age of the Russian Empire and Russian nobility.
Her religious policies aimed to control populations and religious institutions in the multi-religious empire and were not an expression of religious freedom.
Catherine did not advocate democratic reforms but addressed some modernization trends, including dividing the country into provinces and districts, further increasing the power of the landed oligarchs, and issuing the Charter of the Towns, which distributed all people into six groups as a way to limit the power of nobles and create a middle estate.
Cossacks the A group of predominantly East Slavic-speaking people who became known as members of democratic, selfgoverning, semi-military communities, predominantly located in Ukraine and in Russia.
They inhabited sparsely populated areas and islands in the lower Dnieper, Don, Terek, and Ural river basins and played an important role in the historical and cultural development of both Russia and Ukraine.
Smolny Institute Russia's first educational establishment for women, established under Catherine the Great's rule, that continued to function under the personal patronage of the Russian Empress until just before the 1917 revolution.
Catherine took many approaches to Islam during her reign but her pro-Islam policies were all an attempt to control Muslim populations in the empire.
Under her rule, some 200,000 square miles were added to Russian territory. e Catherine made Russia the dominant power in southeastern Europe after her first Russo-Turkish War against the Ottoman Empire , which saw some of the heaviest defeats in Ottoman history.
This war, catastrophic for the Ottomans, legitimized the Russian claim to the Crimea. e Catherine's triumph in Crimea is linked to a concept of Potemkin villages.
She pioneered for Russia the role that Britain later played through most of the 19th and early 20th centuries as an international mediator in disputes that could, or did, lead to war. e In 1780, she established a League of Armed Neutrality, designed to defend neutral shipping from the British Royal Navy during the American Revolution.
The term comes from stories of a fake portable village, supposedly built only to impress Empress Catherine II during her journey to Crimea in 1787. the Confederation of Bar An association of Polish nobles formed at the fortress of Bar in Podolia in 1768 to defend the internal and external independence of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth against Russian influence and against King Stanistaw Il Augustus with Polish reformers, who were attempting to limit the power of the Commonwealth's wealthy magnates.
Treaty of Jassy A 1792 peace treaty signed at Jassy in Moldavia by the Russian and Ottoman Empires that ended the Russo-Turkish War of 1787-92 and confirmed Russia's increasing dominance in the Black Sea.
The treaty formally recognized the Russian Empire's annexation of the Crimean Khanate via the Treaty of Kucuk Kaynarca of 1783 and transferred Yedisan to Russia making the Dniester the Russo-Turkish frontier in Europe and leaving the Asiatic frontier unchanged.
Treaty of Kuguk Kaynarca A 1774 peace treaty signed in Kucuk Kaynarca (today Kaynardzha, Bulgaria) between the Russian Empire and the Ottoman Empire.
The Treaty of Kucuk Kaynarca gave the Russians territories at Azov, Kerch, Yenikale, Kinburn, and the small strip of Black Sea coast between the rivers Dnieper and Bug.
The term comes from stories of a fake portable village, built only to impress Empress Catherine Il during her journey to Crimea in 1787.
Katharine Syne A 1791 British caricature of an attempted mediation between Catherine (on the right, supported by Austria and France) and Turkey, by James Gillray, Library of Congress.
Learning Objective Detail Louis XV's upbringing and his personality as king Key Points e Louis XV was a monarch of the House of Bourbon who ruled as King of France from 1715 until his death.
Until he reached maturity in 1723, his kingdom was ruled by Philippe d'Orléans, Duke of Orléans as Regent of France, and Cardinal Fleury was his chief minister from 1726 until 1743. e Although Louis XIV was not born as the Dauphin, the death of his great-grandfather Louis XV, his father, and his older brother made him the heir to the throne of France at the age of five. e The young king received an excellent education that later resulted in his patronage of arts and sciences.
At the age of 15, he was married to Marie Leszczyfhska, daughter of Stanistaw I, the deposed king of Poland.
The birth of a long-awaited heir, which ensured the survival of the dynasty for the first time since 1712, was welcomed with tremendous joy and Louis XV became extremely popular . e In 1723, the king's majority was declared by the Parlement of Paris, which ended the regency.
Later in life he advocated the creation of departments in physics and mechanics at the College de France.
Learning Objective Describe the structure of the Ancien Régime and the societal rules at play Key Points e The Ancien Régime was the social and political system established in the Kingdom of France from approximately the 15th century until the latter part of the 18th century under the late Valois and Bourbon dynasties. e The estates of the realm were the broad orders of social hierarchy used in Christian Europe from the medieval period to early modern Europe.
The Second Estate was the French nobility and royalty, other than the monarch himself, who stood outside of the system of estates.
Ancien Régime The Ancien Régime was the social and political system established in the Kingdom of France from approximately the 15th century until the latter part of the 18th century under the late Valois and Bourbon dynasties.
The rural included peasants who owned their own land (and could be prosperous) and peasants who worked on nobles' or wealthier peasants’ land.
BEN TOT Caricature on the Third Estate carrying the First and Second Estate on its back, Bibliotheque Nationale de France.
Key Points Louis XIV believed in the divine right of kings, which assert that a monarch is above everyone except God.
He continued his predecessors' work of creating a centralized state governed from Paris, sought to eliminate remnants of feudalism in France, and subjugated and weakened the aristocracy.
Louis XIV eventually failed to reform the unjust tax system that greatly favored the nobility, but instituted reforms in military administration and compelled many members of the nobility, especially the noble elite, to inhabit Versailles.
Although Louis XV attempted to continue his predecessor's efforts to weaken the aristocracy, he failed to establish himself as an absolute monarch of Louis XIV's stature.
Eventually, the twentieth became a mere increase in the already existing taille, the most important direct tax of the monarchy from which privileged classes were exempted. e During the reign of Louis XV, the parlements repeatedly challenged the crown for control over policy, especially regarding taxes and religion, which strengthened the position of the nobility and weakened the authority of the king. e Chancellor René Nicolas de Maupeou sought to reassert royal power by suppressing the parlements in 1770.
Louis XIV also instituted reforms in military administration through Michel le Tellier and his son Francois-Michel le Tellier, Marquis de Louvois.
Eventually, the twentieth became a mere increase in the already existing ta///e, the most important direct tax of the monarchy from which privileged classes were exempted.
Key Points Louis XIV began his personal reign with effective fiscal reforms.
However, so many concessions and exemptions were won by nobles and bourgeois that the reform lost much of its value.
Louis encouraged industry, fostered trade and commerce, and sponsored the founding of an overseas empire, but the powerful position of Louis XIV's France came at a financial cost that could not be balanced by his reforms.
Although Louis XV also attempted to impose new taxes on the First and Second Estates, with all the exemptions and reductions won by the privileged classes the burden of the new tax once again fell on the poorest citizens.
Peasants were also obligated to their landlords for rent in cash, a payment related to their amount of annual production, and taxes on the use of the nobles' mills, wine-presses, and bakeries.
Caricature showing the Third Estate carrying the First and Second Estates on its back, Bibliotheque Nationale de France, 1788.
Several additional tax systems were created, including the ""capitation"" (begun in 1695), which touched every person including nobles and the clergy (although exemption could be bought for a large onetime sum) and the ""dixieme"" , enacted to support the military, which was a true tax on income and property value.
Known as the ""vingtiéme"" (or “one-twentieth""), it was enacted to reduce the royal deficit.
The attitude was internationally hailed, but at home the king became unpopular. e In what is known as diplomatic revolution, the king overruled his ministers and signed the Treaty of Versailles with Austria in 1756.
In 1756, Frederick the Great invaded Saxony without a declaration of war, initiating the Seven Years' War, and Britain declared war on France. e The French military successes of the War of the Austrian Succession were not repeated in the Seven Years' War, except for a few temporary victories. e The Treaty of Paris forced France to cede Canada, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Tobago to Britain.
Europe in the years after the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle itn 1748 In the aftermath of the War of Austrian Succession in France, there was a general resentment at what was seen as a foolish throwing away of advantages (particularly in the Austrian Netherlands, which had largely been conquered by the brilliant strategy of Marshal Saxe), and the phrases Béte comme la paix and La guerre pour le roi de Prusse became popular in Paris.
The 1777 capture of a British army at Saratoga encouraged the French to formally enter the war in support of Congress. e Benjamin Franklin negotiated a permanent military alliance in early 1778 and thus France became the first country to officially recognize the Declaration of Independence.
France supported the United States in North America but as the enemy of Britain, it was also involved in the Caribbean and Indian theaters of the American Revolution. e France's material gains in the aftermath of the American Revolution were minimal, but its financial losses huge.
The French support was weak, however, and the status quo ante bellum 1784 Treaty of Mangalore ended the war.
At the outset of the reign of Louis XVI, Marie Antoinette had limited political influence with her husband although she played an important role in introducing French meditation in the process of ending the War of Bavarian Succession. e Later, the queen's political impact rose significantly.
She played a key role in supporting the American Revolution and influenced nominations for critical state positions. e Maria Theresa died in 1780 and Marie Antoinette feared that the death of her mother would jeopardize the Franco-Austrian alliance , but her brother, Joseph Il, Holy Roman Emperor, assured her that he had no intention of breaking the alliance.
Although the war consisted of only a few minor skirmishes, thousands of soldiers died from disease and starvation, earning the conflict the name Kartoffelkrieg in Prussia and Saxony.
Childhood Maria Antonia , commonly known as Marie Antoinette, was born in Vienna as the youngest daughter of Empress Maria Theresa, ruler of the Habsburg Empire, and her husband Francis |, Holy Roman Emperor.
The queen played a very important role in supporting the American Revolution by securing Austrian and Russian support for France, which resulted in the establishment of a neutral league that stopped Great Britain's attack and by weighing in decisively for the nomination of Philippe Henri, marquis de Ségur, as Minister of War and Charles Eugene Gabriel de La Croix, marquis de Castries, Secretary of the Navy in 1780.
In 1783, the queen also played a decisive role in the nomination of Charles Alexandre de Calonne as ControllerGeneral of Finances, and of the baron de Breteuil as the Minister for the Maison du Roi (Minister of the Royal Household), making him perhaps the strongest and most conservative minister of the reign.
Joseph Il visited his sister in 1781 to reaffirm the Franco-Austrian alliance, but his visit was tainted with rumors that Marie Antoinette was sending money from the French treasury to Austria.
Learning Objective Characterize the relationship between the royals and the French people at the beginning of Louis XVI's reign Key Points Although nearly all royal marriages in Europe were traditionally arranged around the political interests of involved families, the marriage of Louis-Auguste and Maria Antonia provoked very strong and ambiguous reactions in France.
The wealth and lavish lifestyle that the royal couple provided for their favorites outraged most aristocratic families, who resented the influence of the selected few, and also fueled the increasing popular disapprobation toward Marie Antoinette, mostly in Paris. e The queen's lifestyle continued to fuel her increasingly negative public image.
Marie Antoinette dans son salon, Jean-Baptiste André Gautier-Dagoty, 1774.
In 1782, after the governess of the royal children, the princesse de Guéméné, went bankrupt and resigned, Marie Antoinette appointed her favorite, the duchesse de Polignac, to the position.
The entire Polignac family benefited greatly from the royal favor in titles and positions, but its sudden wealth and lavish lifestyle outraged most aristocratic families and fueled the increasing popular disapprobation toward Marie Antoinette, mostly in Paris.
Learning Objective Compare the efforts made by French finance ministers under Louis XVI to revitalize the French treasury Key Points While the later years of Louis XV's reign saw serious economic setbacks, it was not until 1775 that the French economy began to enter a true crisis.
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot was appointed ControllerGeneral of Finances in 1774.
His attacks on privilege won him the hatred of the nobles and the parlements; his attempted reforms in the royal household, that of the court; his free trade legislation, that of the financiers; and his views on religious tolerance that of the clergy.
Marie Antoinette disliked Turgot for opposing the granting of favors to her proteges, which played a key role in the end of his career.
Although he was recalled twice, he failed to introduce effective reforms. e In 1783, Louis replaced Necker with Charles Alexandre de Calonne, who increased public spending to buy the country way out of debt.
He suppressed, however, a number of octro/s (a local tax collected on various articles brought into a district for consumption) and minor duties, and opposed on grounds of economy, the participation of France in the American Revolutionary War, although without success.
He put a stop to the rebellion in the Dauphiné by legalizing its assembly and then set to work to arrange for the summons of the Estates-General of 1789.
Summoned by King Louis XVI to propose solutions to his government's financial problems, the Estates-General convened for several weeks in May and June 1789. e In 1787, pressured by France's desperate financial situation, the King convened an Assembly of Notables.
The most controversial and significant decision remained the nature of voting. e On May 5, 1789, the Estates-General convened.
By trying to avoid the issue of representation and focus solely on taxes, the King and his ministers gravely misjudged the situation.
The King tried to resist but after failed attempts to sabotage the Assembly and keep the three estates separate, the Estates-General ceased to exist, becoming the National Assembly.
Repeated attempts to implement tax reform failed due to lack of the Par/ement of Paris support, as parlement judges felt that any increase in tax would have a direct negative effect on their own income.
A political pamphlet written in January 1789, shortly before the outbreak of the French Revolution, by French thinker and clergyman Abbé Emmanuel Joseph Sieyes.
Following the storming of the Bastille on July 14, the National Assembly (sometimes called the Constituent Assembly) became the effective government of France.
In January 1789, Sieyés authored a pamphlet What Is the Third Estate?, a response to finance minister Jacques Necker's invitation for writers to state how they thought the Estates-General should be organized.
Work of the Assembly On August 4, 1789, the National Constituent Assembly abolished feudalism (action triggered by numerous peasant revolts), sweeping away both the seigneurial rights of the Second Estate and the tithes collected by the First Estate.
Amid the Assembly's preoccupation with constitutional affairs (many competing ideas were debated), the financial crisis continued largely unaddressed and the deficit only increased.
The crowd, on the authority of the meeting at the Palais-Royal, broke open the prisons of the Abbaye to release some grenadiers of the French guards, reportedly imprisoned for refusing to fire on the people. e On July 11, 1789, with troops distributed across the Paris area, Louis XVI dismissed and banished his finance minister, Jacques Necker, who had been sympathetic to the Third Estate.
It embodied ideals toward which France pledged to aspire in the future. e While the French Revolution provided rights to a larger portion of the population, there remained a distinction between those who obtained the political rights in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen and those who did not.
Its arguments typically posit that individuals have consented, either explicitly or tacitly, to surrender some of their freedoms and submit to the authority of the ruler or magistrate (or to the decision of a majority) in exchange for protection of their remaining rights.
The term comes from a 1762 book by Jean-Jacques Rousseau which discussed this concept. separation of powers A model for the governance of a state (or who controls the state) first developed in ancient Greece.
Intellectual Context The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen is a fundamental document of the French Revolution and in the history of human and civil rights.
In August 1789, Honoré Mirabeau played a central role in conceptualizing and drafting the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
It was translated as soon as 1793-1794 by Colombian Antonio Narino, who published it despite the Inquisition and was sentenced to be imprisoned for ten years for doing so.
While the march turned into a more general revolutionary upsurge, this fear remained at its roots.
The lavish banquet was reported in newspapers as nothing short of a gluttonous orgy, which outraged the commoners.
On the morning of October 5, a young woman struck a marching drum at the edge of a group of market women who were infuriated by the chronic shortage and high price of bread.
Although the fighting ceased quickly and the royal troops had cleared the palace attacked by the revolutionaries, the crowd was still everywhere outside.
As a result of the march, the monarchist faction in the Assembly effectively lost its significance, Robespierre raised his public profile considerably, Lafayette found himself tied too closely to the king; Maillard returned to Paris with his status as a local hero made permanent.
An tllustration of the Women's March on Versailles, October 5, 1789, author unknown.
The king was allowed a suspensive veto to balance out the interests of the people. e The constitution was not egalitarian by today's standards.
A 12-member Constitutional Committee was convened on July 14, 1789 (coincidentally the day of the Storming of the Bastille) to draft most of the articles of the constitution.
The committee became very important in the days after the Champs de Mars Massacre , when a wave of opposition against popular movements swept France and resulted ina renewed effort to preserve powers of the Crown.
They were committed to the ideals of the Revolution and thus inclined to side with the left but would also occasionally back proposals from the right.
The two most significant factors in the consequential split between the Montagnards and the Girondins were the September Massacres and the trial of Louis XVI, both in 1792. e The terms ""left"" and ""right"" used to refer to political parties is one of the lasting legacies of the French Revolution.
The Jacobins tn 1791, author unknown The Jacobins were known for creating a strong government that could deal with the needs of war, economic chaos, and internal rebellion.
Key Terms Declaration of Pillnitz A statement issued on August 27, 1791, at Pillnitz Castle near Dresden by Frederick William II of Prussia and the Habsburg Holy Roman Emperor Leopold Il, Marie Antoinette's brother.
Brunswick Manifesto A proclamation issued by Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick, commander of the Allied Army , on July 25, 1792, to the population of Paris, France during the War of the First Coalition.
The Austrian emperor Leopold Il, brother of Marie Antoinette, wished to avoid war but died in March 1792.
The duke then issued a proclamation called the Brunswick Manifesto , written by the French king's cousin, Louis Joseph de Bourbon, Prince de Condé, the leader of an émigré corps within the Allied army.
From the autumn of 1791 on, the king tied his hopes of political salvation to the dubious prospects of foreign intervention.
The members were generally young, and since none had sat in the previous Assembly they largely lacked national political experience. e From the beginning, relations between the king and the Legislative Assembly were hostile.
Soon, the King dismissed Girondins from the Ministry. e When the king formed a new cabinet mostly of Feuillants, the breach with the king and the Assembly on one side and the majority of the common people of Paris on the other.
The Girondins made a last advance to Louis, offering to save the monarchy if he would accept them as ministers.
Brunswick Manifesto A proclamation issued by Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick, commander of the Allied Army , on July 25, 1792, to the population of Paris during the War of the First Coalition.
Medal of the First French Legislative Assembly , Augustin Challamel, Histoire-musée de la république Francaise, depuis l'assemblée des notables, Paris, Delloye, 1842.
The first were conservative members of the bourgeoisie that favored a constitutional monarchy, represented by the Feuillants, who felt that the revolution had already achieved its goal.
The People Storming the Tuileries on 20 June, 1792, Jacques-Antoine Dulaure, Esquisses historiques des principaux événemens de la revolution, 2, Paris, Baudouin freres, 1823.
Learning Objective Evaluate the decision to execute the king and queen Key Points The Insurrection of August 10, 1792, led to the creation of the National Convention, elected by universal male suffrage and charged with writing a new constitution.
On September 20, the Convention became the new de facto government of France, and the next day it abolished the monarchy and declared a republic.
A commission was established to examine evidence against the King while the Convention's Legislation Committee considered legal aspects of any future trial.
Most Montagnards favored judgement and execution, while the Girondins were divided concerning Louis's fate.
Given overwhelming evidence of Louis' collusion with the invaders during the ongoing war with Austria and Prussia, the verdict was a foregone conclusion.
She was guillotined on October 16, 1793. e In France, the Reign of Terror followed.
Most Montagnards favored judgement and execution, while the Girondins were divided concerning Louis's fate, with some arguing for royal inviolability, others for clemency, and still others for either lesser punishment or death.
The task of lead counsel eventually fell to Raymond Deséze, assisted by Francois Denis Tronchet and Guillaume-Chrétien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes.
The former Louis XVI, now simply named Citoyen Louis Capet , was executed by guillotine.
Aftermath of the Execution In April 1793, members of the Montagnards went on to establish the Committee of Public Safety under Robespierre, which would be responsible for the Terror (September 5, 1793 July 28, 1794), the bloodiest and one of the most controversial phases of the French Revolution.
The foundation of the Terror was centered around the April 1793 creation of the Committee of Public Safety.
Its power peaked between August 1793 and July 1794 under the leadership of Robespierre, who established a virtual dictatorship.
In June 1793, Paris sections took over the Convention, calling for administrative and political purges, a low fixed price for bread, and a limitation of the electoral franchise to sans-culottes alone.
On June 24, the Convention adopted the first republican constitution of France, the French Constitution of 1793.
In June 1794, Robespierre, who favored deism over atheism, recommended that the Convention acknowledge the existence of his god.
Among people who were condemned by the revolutionary tribunals, about 8% were aristocrats, 6% clergy, 14% middle class, and 72% were workers or peasants accused of hoarding, evading the draft, desertion, or rebellion. ik.
His fall was brought about by conflicts between those who wanted more power for the Committee of Public Safety and moderates who completely opposed the revolutionary government.
Learning Objective Recall the composition and role of the National Convention Key Points e The National Convention was a single-chamber assembly in France from September 20, 1792, to October 26, 1795, during the French Revolution.
Traditionally, historians have also identified a centrist faction called the Plain, but many historians tend to blur the line between the Plain and the Girondins. e Within days, the Convention was overtaken by factional conflicts.The political deadlock, which had repercussions all over France, eventually drove both major factions to accept dangerous allies.
In June 1792, under the pressure of armed sans-culottes, the Girondins ceased to be a political force. e Throughout the winter of 1792 and spring of 1793, Paris was plagued by food riots and mass hunger.
In July 1794, Robespierre was overthrown, the Jacobin club was closed, and the surviving Girondins were reinstated.
The law ordered the arrest of all avowed enemies and likely enemies of the Revolution, which included nobles, relatives of émigrés, officials removed from office, officers suspected of treason, and hoarders of goods.
Thermidorian Reaction A 1794 coup d'état within the French Revolution against the leaders of the Jacobin Club that dominated the Committee of Public Safety.
Learning Objective Describe the events of the Thermidorian Reaction Key Points The Thermidorian Reaction was a coup d'état within the French Revolution against the leaders of the Jacobin Club who dominated the Committee of Public Safety.
With Robespierre the sole remaining strongman of the Revolution, his apparent total grasp on power became increasingly illusory.
In addition to widespread reaction to the Reign of Terror, Robespierre's tight personal control of the military, distrust of military might and banks, and opposition to supposedly corrupt individuals in government made him the subject of a number of conspiracies.
The prime mover for the events was a Montagnard conspiracy, which was gradually coalescing and came to pass when the Montagnards finally swayed the deputies of the right over to their side.
Key Terms Thermidorian Reaction A 1794 coup d'état within the French Revolution against the leaders of the Jacobin Club that dominated the Committee of Public Safety.
The name Thermidorian refers to Thermidor 9, Year II (July 27, 1794), the date according to the French Republican Calendar when Robespierre and other radical revolutionaries came under concerted attack in the National Convention.
Conspiracies against Robespierre With Robespierre the sole remaining strongman of the Revolution following the assassination of Jean-Paul Marat and the executions of Jacques Hébert, Georges Danton, and Camille Desmoulins, his apparent total grasp on power became increasingly illusory, especially support from factions to his right.
The following day, Thermidor 10 (July 28, 1794), he was executed with 21 of his closest associates.
A new constitution called the Constitution of the Year Ill was drawn up, which eased back some of the democratic elements of the Constitution of 1793.
Only one out of the five original members served on the Directory throughout its entire existence. e State finances were in total disarray.
Key Terms The Directory A five-member committee that governed France from November 1795, when it replaced the Committee of Public Safety, until it was overthrown by Napoleon Bonaparte in the Coup of 18 Brumaire (November 8-9, 1799) and replaced by the Consulate.
The Directory defeated a resurgence of the War in the Vendée, the royalistled civil war in the Vendée region, but failed in its venture to support the Irish Rebellion of 1798 and create an Irish Republic.
Learning Objective Review Napoleon's career from the military to the Directory Key Points ¢ Upon graduating from the prestigious Ecole Militaire in Paris in September 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned as a second lieutenant in an artillery regiment.
He supported the republican Jacobin movement and was promoted to captain in 1792, despite exceeding his leave of absence and leading a riot against a French army in Corsica.
Directory A five-member committee that governed France from November 1795, when it replaced the Committee of Public Safety, until it was overthrown by Napoleon Bonaparte in the Coup of 18 Brumaire (November 8-9, 1799) and replaced by the Consulate.
As Napoleon I, he was emperor of the French from 1804 until 1814, and again in 1815.
Early Career Upon graduating from the prestigious Ecole Militaire in Paris in September 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned as a second lieutenant in an artillery regiment.
Napoleon Bonaparte, aged 23, lleutenant-colonel of a battalion of Corsican Republican volunteers, paitning by Henri Felix Emmanuel Philippoteaux, ca.34.
He ordered a young cavalry officer named Joachim Murat to seize large cannons and used them to repel the attackers on October 5, 1795 (13 Vendémiaire in the French Republican Calendar). 1,400 royalists died and the rest fled.
The 18th Brumaire Despite the failures in Egypt, Napoleon returned to a hero's welcome.
He allied with a number of prominent political figures tooverthrew the Directory by a coup d'état on November 9, 1799 (Coup of 18th Brumaire, according to the revolutionary calendar), closing down the Council of Five Hundred.
His first language was Corsican and he always spoke French with a marked Corsican accent. e Napoleon's father Nobile Carlo Buonaparte, an attorney, was named Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI in 1777.
Historians emphasize the strength of the ambition that took Napoleon from an obscure village in Corsica to command of most of Europe.
In this half-length posthumous portrait, Carlo Maria is dressed as a gentleman of the Ancien Régime with powdered wig and a coat laced with gold.
He was christened Napo/eone di Buonaparte and adopted the more French-sounding Napo/éon Bonaparte in his 20s.
She was decreed ""Madam, the Mother of His Imperial Majesty The Emperor"" , Imperial Highness in 1804 or 1805.
On completion of his studies at Brienne in 1784, Napoleon was admitted to the elite Eco/e Militaire in Paris.
Upon graduating in 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in La Feére artillery regiment.
He returned in the fall of 1799 to cheering throngs in the streets despite the Royal Navy's critical triumph at the Battle of the Nile in 1798. e Napoleon's arrival from Egypt led to the fall of the Directory in the Coup of 18 Brumaire, with Napoleon installing himself as Consul.
Despite his own affairs, their relationship was never the same after he learnt about hers. e The coronation ceremony, officiated by Pope Pius VII, took place at Notre Dame de Paris in December 1804.
Following prearranged protocol, Napoleon first crowned himself, then put the crown on Josephine's head, proclaiming her empress. e When after a few years it became clear Josephine could not have a child, Napoleon, though he still loved his wife, began to think seriously about the possibility of divorce and created lists of eligible princesses.
Despite her anger, Josephine agreed to the divorce so the Emperor could remarry in the hope of having an heir. e Despite his divorce from Josephine, he showed his dedication to her for the rest of his life.
The Coup of 30 Prairial VII une 18) ousted the Jacobins and left Emmanuel Joseph Sieyés as the dominant figure in the government.
However, from the moment of his return, Napoleon plotted a coup within the coup, ultimately gaining power for himself rather than Sieyes.
On the 18 of Brumaire, three of the five Directors resigned, which prevented a quorum and thus practically abolished the Directory.
Originally devised by Sieyés to give Napoleon a minor role but rewritten by Napoleon and accepted by direct popular vote, the Constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but in reality established a dictatorship.
Bonaparte completed his coup within a coup by the adoption of a constitution under which the First Consul, a position he was sure to hold, had greater power than the other two consuls.
It left Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyeés as the dominant figure of the French government and prefigured the Coup of 18 Brumaire that brought Napoleon Bonaparte to power.
The Coup of 30 Prairial VII une 18) ousted the Jacobins and left Emmanuel Joseph Sieyés, a member of the five-man ruling Directory, the dominant figure in the government.
The use of military force had certainly strengthened Napoleon's hand vis a vis Sieyes and the other plotters.
The commissions then drew up the Constitution of the Year Vill , the first of the constitutions since the Revolution without a Declaration of Rights.
A portrait of the three Consuls, Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacéres, Napoleon Bonaparteand CharlesFrancois Lebrun by Henri-Nicolas Van Gorp.
By consolidating power, Bonaparte was able to transform the aristocratic constitution of Sieyeés into a dictatorship.
The Sénat conservateur (Conservative Senate, which verified the draft bills and directly advised the First Consul on the implications of such bills) allowed him to rule by decree, so the more independent Conseil d'Etat (Council of State, which drafted bills) and Tribunat (debated bills but could not vote on them) were relegated to unimportant roles.
Learning Objective Discuss Napoleon's early military successes against Austria and Britain Key Points e The War of the First Coalition was the first attempt by the European monarchies to defeat the French First Republic.
Anumber of other European states, including Britain, joined the First Coalition over the course of the war. e Napoleon did not enter the war as the leader of the French army until 1796, although he faced the British forces at the 1793 Siege of Toulon, where he played a major role in crushing the royalist rebellion by expelling an English fleet and securing the valuable French harbor.
The Mediterranean campaign of 1798 was a series of major naval operations surrounding a French expeditionary force sent to Egypt under Napoleon Bonaparte that serves as a bridge between the War of the First Coalition and the War of the Second Coalition.
The campaign was initially Napoleon's success but he failed to stop the British dominance once it moved to Egypt.
The War of the Second Coalition was the second war on revolutionary France by the European monarchies, led by Britain, Austria and Russia, and including the Ottoman Empire, Portugal, and Naples.
In the end, the Austrians negotiated the Treaty of Lunéville, basically accepting the terms of the previous Treaty of Campo Formio.
Learning Objective Assess Napoleon's Constitution and whether it upheld the ideals of the French Revolution Key Points e Napoleon and his allies overthrew the Directory by a coup d'état on November 9, 1799 (the Coup of 18 Brumaire), closing down the Council of Five Hundred.
His power was confirmed by the new Constitution of the Year VIII, which preserved the appearance of a republic but established a dictatorship. e The Constitution of the Year VIII was adopted on December 24, 1799, and established the form of government known as the Consulate.
The Conservative Senate was a governmental body equal to the three aforementioned legislative assemblies. e The executive power was vested in three Consuls, but all actual power was held by the First Consul, Bonaparte, who never intended to be part of an equal triumvirate.
As the years progressed, he moved to consolidate his own power as First Consul and leave the two other consuls and the Assemblies weak and subservient. e On February 7, 1800, a public referendum confirmed the new constitution.
While this near-unanimity is certainly doubtful, Napoleon was genuinely popular among many voters. e The Constitution was amended twice and in each case, the amendments strengthened Napoleon's already concentrated power.
In 1804, the Constitution of the Year XII established the First French Empire with Napoleon Bonaparte as Napoleon I, Emperor of the French.
The Constitution of the Year VIIll Despite the failures in Egypt , Napoleon arrived in France to a hero's welcome.
His power was confirmed by the new Constitution of the Year VIII, originally devised by Sieyes to give Napoleon a minor role, but rewritten by Napoleon and accepted by direct popular vote.
The Constitution of the Year VIII was adopted on December 24, 1799 (during the Year VIII of the French Revolutionary Calendar), and established the form of government known as the Consulate.
As the years progressed, he moved to consolidate his own power as First Consul and leave the two other consuls, Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérés and Charles-Francois Lebrun, duc de Plaisance, as well as the Assemblies, weak and subservient.
In 1802, Napoleon became the First Consul for Life and two years later he was elected as Emperor of the French.
Like the old monarchy, he reintroduced plenipotentiaries, an over-centralized, strictly utilitarian administration that constructed or consolidated the funds necessary for national institutions, local governments, a judiciary system, organs of finance, banking, codes, an a conscientious well-disciplined labor force.
Napoleon was largely able to quell dissent within government by expelling his more vocal critics.
In strengthening the machinery of state, Napoleon created the elite order of the Légion d'honneur (The Legion of Honor a substitute for the old royalist decorations and orders of chivalry, to encourage civilian and military achievements), signed the Concordat, and restored indirect taxes.
Praised for its Gallic clarity, it soread rapidly throughout Europe and the world, marking the end of feudalism where it took effect.
Legion of Honor The highest French order for military and civil merits, established in 1802 by Napoléon Bonaparte.
Arguably the second most important person in his government, Joseph Fouché, was Talleyrand's opponent, yet the two served together under Napoleon.
It discarded the old right of primogeniture (where only the eldest son inherited) and required that inheritances be divided equally among all the children.
He moved the clergy and large numbers of devout Catholics from hostility to the government to support for him after the Catholic system was reestablished by the Concordat of 1801 that allowed the Church return to normal operations.
Learning Objective Evaluate Napoleon's relationship to the New World, specifically Haiti Key Points e In the middle of the 18th century, a series of colonial conflicts began between France and Britain, ultimately resulting in the destruction of most of the existing French colonial empire and the near complete expulsion of France from the Americas. e Modest recovery of the French colonial empire was made during the French intervention in the American Revolution, with Saint Lucia returned to France by the Treaty of Paris in 1783.
During the following years Napoleon, already the ruler of France, did not manage to turn the country into an important colonial power. e A brief peace in Europe allowed Napoleon to focus on the French colonies.
Louisiana Purchase The acquisition of the Louisiana territory (828,000 square miles) by the United States from France in 1803.
The Seven Years' War was a particularly bad defeat for the French, with the numerically superior British conquering not only New France (excluding the small islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon), but also most of France's West Indian colonies and all of the French Indian outposts.
Gibige ar sunerbirle 2 sr cukuade pe erwerien Aria ps. api wi pa adn Be Mle, fe madyelden auch ober tatrefcbied elle Wea du ota Saint-Domingue slave revolt in 1791 , German copper engraving, author unknown.
Learning Objective Evaluate the significance of the Concordat of 1801 Key Points e During the French Revolution, the National Assembly took Church properties and issued the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, which made the Church a department of the state, effectively removing it from papal authority.
Napoleon looked for recognition by the Church of the disposition of its property and geographical reorganization of bishoprics, while Rome sought the protection of Catholics and the recognition of a special status of the Catholic Church in the French State.
As a part of the Concordat, Napoleon presented another set of laws called the Organic Articles.
The Catholic Church tn Revolutionary France During the French Revolution, the National Assembly took Church properties and issued the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, which made the Church a department of the state and effectively removed it from papal authority.
Leaders of the Catholic Church taking the civil oath required by the Concordat of 1801, Henri Gourdon de Genouillac, Paris a travers les siécles, 4, Paris, F Roy, 1881.
The Napoleonic Code The 1804 Napoleonic Code, which influenced civil law codes across the world, replaced the fragmented laws of prerevolutionary France, recognizing the principles of civil liberty, equality before the law (although not for women in the same sense as for men), and the secular character of the state.
Other codes were commissioned by Napoleon to codify criminal and commerce law. e Praised for its clarity, the Code spread rapidly throughout Europe and the world and marked the end of feudalism and the liberation of serfs where it took effect.
It formed the basis of the law systems across most of continental Europe and has had a lasting impact on civil law codes in other regions of the world, including the Middle East where it has been combined with the Islamic law. e The development of the Napoleonic Code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law system, making laws clearer and more accessible.
Jean-Jacques Régis de Cambacérés led the drafting process of a single civil law code.
It discarded the old right of primogeniture and required that inheritances be divided equally among all children.
There is no rule of stare decisis (binding precedent) in French law, but decisions by important courts have become more or less equivalent to case law.
The constitution tailor-made the position of First Consul to give Napoleon most of the powers of a dictator. e The constitution was amended twice and in each case, the amendments strengthened Napoleon's authority.
Napoleon I on His Imperial Throne by Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, 1806.
The path to war seemed inevitable and the final straw was Napoleon's formation of the Confederation of the Rhine out of various German states in July 1806.
The formation of the Confederation was the final nail in the coffin of the Holy Roman Empire.
Napoleon consolidated the various smaller states of the former Holy Roman Empire, which allied with France into larger electorates, duchies, and kingdoms to make the governance of non-Prussian and Austrian Germany more efficient.
In return for continued French protection, member states were compelled to supply France with many of their own military personnel and contribute much of the resources to support the French armies still occupying western and southern Germany. e The Confederation was at its largest in 1808, when it included 35 states and collapsed in 1813, in the aftermath of Napoleon's failed campaign against the Russian Empire.
In what is widely regarded as the greatest victory achieved by Napoleon, the Grande Armée of France defeated a larger Russian and Austrian army led by Tsar Alexander | and Holy Roman Emperor Francis Il.
On August 1, the members of the confederation formally seceded from the Holy Roman Empire and on August 6, following an ultimatum by Napoleon, Francis Il declared the Holy Roman Empire dissolved.
Abdication in Spain In an attempt to control the Iberian Peninsula, in 1808 Napoleon forced the abdications of Charles IV and Ferdinand Vil of Spain and granted the Spanish crown to his brother Joseph, provoking a violent conflict that overlapped with the Peninsular War.
The abdications led to what the Spanish-speaking world calls the Spanish War of Independence , which overlaps with the Peninsular War.
Napoleon then entered Milan, where he was welcomed as a liberator. e In 1797, Napoleon signed the Treaty of Campo Formio, by which the Republic of Venice was annexed to the Austrian state, dashing Italian nationalists' hopes that it might become an independent state.
While the constitution gave the republic some level of sovereignty, in practice it was largely controlled by Napoleon. e The Kingdom of Italy was established in 1805, when the Italian Republic became the Kingdom of Italy, with the Same man as King of Italy, and the 24-year-old Eugéne de Beauharnais (Napoleon's stepson) as his viceroy.
Key Terms Kingdom of Italy A French client state founded in Northern Italy by Napoleon |, fully influenced by revolutionary France, that ended with his defeat and fall.
This situation was shaken in 1796, when the French Army of Italy under Napoleon invaded Italy with the aims of forcing the First Coalition to abandon Sardinia (where they had created an anti-revolutionary puppet-ruler) and forcing Austria to withdraw from Italy.
Within only two weeks, Victor Amadeus Ill of Sardinia was forced to sign an armistice.
The Kingdom of Italy The Kingdom of Italy was established in 1805 when the Italian Republic became the Kingdom of Italy, with the same man as King of Italy and the 24year-old Eugéne de Beauharnais as his viceroy.
Learning Objective Identify Napoleon's goals with the Continental System Key Points e Great Britain was the central force in encouraging and financing alliances against Napoleonic France.
Napoleon's exclusively landbased customs enforcers could not stop British smugglers.
British allies, including Sweden and Portugal, refused to comply, which resulted in damaging wars.
Ograbme A political cartoon showing merchants dodging the ""Ograbme,"" which is ""Embargo"" spelled backwards.
Learning Objective Identify the members and explain the function of the Holy Alliance Key Points e The Holy Alliance was a coalition created by the monarchist great powers of Russia, Austria, and Prussia.
Ostensibly, the alliance was formed to instill the divine right of kings and Christian values in European political life. e In practice, the Austrian state chancellor Prince Klemens von Metternich made the Alliance a bastion against democracy, revolution, and secularism.
The monarchs of the three countries involved used it to band together to prevent revolutionary influence (especially from the French Revolution) from entering these nations. e The Alliance is usually associated with the later Quadruple and Quintuple Alliances, which included the United Kingdom and France with the aim of upholding the European peace settlement and balance of power in the Concert of Europe concluded at the Congress of Vienna. e The meetings of the Alliances were irregular and focused on reactionary initiatives that aimed to preserve the old royal order in Europe.
The last meetings revealed the rising antagonism between Britain and France, especially on Italian unification, the right to selfdetermination, and the Eastern Question.
The Holy Alliance, the brainchild of Tsar Alexander I, gained a lot of support because most European monarchs did not wish to offend the Tsar by refusing to sign it.
The monarchs of the three countries involved used it to band together to prevent revolutionary influence (especially from the French Revolution) from entering these nations.
Quadruple and Quintuple Alliances The Alliance is usually associated with the later Quadruple and Quintuple Alliances, which included the United Kingdom and France.
Assessment The Holy Alliance, the brainchild of Tsar Alexander I, gained support because most European monarchs did not wish to offend the Tsar by refusing to sign it.
Learning Objective Critique Napoleon's decision to invade Russia Key Points e The Treaty of Schonbrunn, which ended the 1809 war between Austria and France, had a clause removing Western Galicia from Austria and annexing it to the Grand Duchy of Warsaw.
Russia's withdrawal from the Continental System was a further incentive for Napoleon to start a campaign against it. e Napoleon ignored repeated advice against an invasion of the Russian heartland and prepared for an offensive Campaign.
Following the Campaign, a saying arose that the Generals Janvier and Février anuary and February) defeated Napoleon, alluding to the Russian Winter.
Michail Ilarionovich Kutuzov (1745 1813), commander-in-chief of the Russian army on the far left, with his generals at the talks deciding to surrender Moscow to Napoleon.
When this Campaign resulted in the destruction of Napoleon's Grande Armée, Prussia and Austria took advantage of the situation by forming a Sixth Coalition against France . e The retreat from Russia turned into a new war on German soil.
The battle ended when the French commanders surrendered the city to Tsar Alexander on March 31.
There, at the so-called Battle of Nations (October 1619, 1813) Napoleon was defeated.
The supreme commander of the Coalition forces in the theater and the paramount monarch among the three main Coalition monarchs, the Russian Tsar Alexander I, ordered all Coalition forces in Germany to cross the Rhine and invade France.
On April 2, the Senate declared Napoleon deposed. a a Battle of Paris of 1814 by Bogdan Willewalde.
Their role was consultative , as only the King had the power to propose or sanction laws and appoint or recall ministers. e The franchise was now limited to men with considerable property holdings and just 1% of people could vote.
It was liberal in spirit and gave the French people rights which were previously unknown to them.
The Charter was adopted by a plebiscite on June 1, 1815, by an immense majority of the five million voters, although many eligible voters abstained.
The soldiers quickly responded with, ""Vive L'Empereur "" Marshal Michel Ney, who had pledged loyalty to the restored Bourbon king, Louis XVIII, affectionately kissed his former emperor and forgot his oath of allegiance to the Bourbon monarch.
Some time after the allies began mobilizing, the invasion of France was planned for July 1, 1815.
He failed to do so and was forced to abdicate; a provisional government with Joseph Fouché as acting president was formed. e The two Coalition armies entered Paris on July 7.
Waterloo Campaign Hostilities started on June 15 when the French drove away the Prussian outposts and crossed the river Sambre at Charleroi, placing their forces between the cantonment areas of Wellington's Army and Blucher's army to the east.
On the same day, Napoleon received from Fouché an intimation that he must leave Paris.
Learning Objective Define the Balance of Power Key Points e As the Napoleonic Wars came to close in the second decade of the 19th century, the Great Powers of Europe started planning for the postwar world. e To bring about a balance of power in Europe and prevent further conflict, they developed what became known as the Concert of Europe, beginning with the Congress of Vienna.
The Congress of Vienna dissolved the Napoleonic world and attempted to restore the monarchies Napoleon had overthrown.
The Congress was the first occasion in history where on a continental scale, national representatives came together to formulate treaties instead of relying mostly on messages between the several capitals. e The Concert of Europe, despite later changes and diplomatic breakdowns a few decades later, formed the basic framework for European international politics until the outbreak of the First World War in 1914.
Under the Concert of Europe, the major European powers—Britain, Russia, Prussia, Austria, and France—pledged to meet regularly to resolve differences.
The leading personalities of the Congress were British foreign secretary Lord Castlereagh, Austrian Chancellor Klemens von Metternich, and Tsar Alexander | of Russia.
These three leaders in the Congress are known for their conservatism, aimed at creating lasting peace and maintaining the status quo and opposed to liberal progress and nationalism. e This conservative agenda has been heavily criticized by many historians who argue that it stood in the way of progress and created the conditions for World War lI. e Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord of France was largely responsible for quickly returning France to its place alongside the other major powers in international diplomacy after their defeat in the Napoleonic Wars.
War broke out as a continuation of the French Revolution, which had plunged the European continent into war since 1792. reactionary A person who holds political views that favor a return to the status quo ante, the previous political state of society, which they believe possessed characteristics that are negatively absent from the contemporary status quo of a society.
King Frederick William III of Prussia was also in Vienna, playing his role behind the scenes.
He allied himself to a Committee of Eight lesser powers to control the negotiations.
Pedro de Sousa Holstein, Count of Palmela; Anténio de Saldanha da Gama, Count of Porto Santo; Joaquim Lobo da Silveira.
The Netherlands Earl of Clancarty, the British Ambassador at the Dutch court, and Baron Hans von Gagern Switzerland Every canton had its own delegation.
The Papal States Cardinal Ercole Consalvi Republic of Genoa Marquise Agostino Pareto, Senator of the Republic Bavaria Maximilian Graf von Montgelas Wurttemberg Georg Ernst Levin von Wintzingerode Hanover, then in a personal union with the British crown Georg Graf zu Munster.
Learning Objective Outline the borders that changed in Europe after the Congress of Vienna Key Points The Final Act, embodying all the separate treaties created at and around the Congress of Vienna, was signed on June 9, 1815, ushering in major territorial changes to Europe to create a balance of power between nations.
Russia gained much of Poland, while Prussia added smaller German states in the west, Swedish Pomerania, and 40% of the Kingdom of Saxony.
The term is used almost exclusively in Europe, where in the present day there is no sovereign duchy left.
During the wars, Portugal lost its town of Olivencga to Spain and moved to have it restored.
However, by 1823 the diplomatic system developed by the Congress by which the main powers could propose a conference to solve a crisis had failed.
In 1818, the British decided not to become involved in continental issues that did not directly affect them and did not support the Tsar in his vision to prevent revolution.
No Congress was called to restore the old system during the great revolutionary upheavals of 1848; thus, nationalism and liberalism began to triumph over the conservatism of the Congress system.
The diplomatic alliances that formed out of the Congress were shattered during the Crimean War, in which Russia was defeated by the other Powers.
A more tangible source of antagonism was the pressure applied to possessors of biens nationaux by the Catholic Church and returning emigrés attempting to repossess their former lands.
Second Restoration Talleyrand was again influential in seeing that the Bourbons reigned, as was Fouché, Napoleon's minister of police during the Hundred Days.
Guillaume Marie Anne Brune was savagely assassinated and his remains thrown into the Rhéne River.
Ancien Régime The monarchic, aristocratic, social, and political system established in the Kingdom of France from approximately the 15th century until the latter part of the 18th century under the late Valois and Bourbon dynasties.
Charles X The ascension to the throne of Charles X, the leader of the Ultra-royalist faction, coincided with the Ultras' control of power in the Chamber of Deputies; thus, the ministry of the comte de Villele was able to continue, and the last ""restraint"" on the Ultra-royalists was removed.
Some innovations were included upon request by Villéle; although Charles was hostile towards the 1814 Charter, commitment to the ""constitutional charter"" was affirmed with four of Napoleon's generals in attendance.
At 4:30 pm, commanders of the troops of the First Military division of Paris and the Garde Royale were ordered to concentrate their troops, and guns, on the Place du Carrousel facing the Tuileries, the Place Vendéme, and the Place de la Bastille.
Liberty Leading the People is a painting by Eugene Delacroix commemorating the July Revolution of 1830, which toppled King Charles X of France.
Learning Objective Contrast the July monarchy with the reign of Charles X Key Points e In 1830, the discontent caused by Charles X's authoritarian policies culminated in an uprising in the streets of Paris Known as the 1830 July Revolution. e Charles was forced to flee and Louis-Philippe d'Orléans, a member of the Orléans branch of the family and son of Philippe Egalité who had voted the death of his cousin Louis XVI, ascended the throne, marking the beginning of the July Monarchy, so named for the Revolution.
The French Kingdom, commonly known as the July Monarchy, was a liberal constitutional monarchy in France under Louis Philippe I, starting with the July Revolution of 1830 and ending with the Revolution of 1848.
Louis Philippe, a member of the traditionally more liberal Orl€ans branch of the House of Bourbon, proclaimed himself Roi des Francais rather than ""King of France,"" emphasizing the popular origins of his reign.
There was an increase in workers' demonstrations, with riots in the Buzancais in 1847.
The crowds directed their anger against the Citizen King Louis Philippe and his chief minister for foreign and domestic policy, Francois Pierre Guillaume Guizot.
Following the overthrow of King Louis Philippe in February, a provisional government (Constituent Assembly) was created, which was disorganized as it attempted to deal with France's economic problems created by the political upheaval. e Frustration among the laboring classes arose when the Constituent Assembly did not address the concerns of the workers, leading to strikes and worker demonstrations.
In December 1848, a nephew of Napoléon Bonaparte, Charles Louis Napoléon Bonaparte, was elected as President of the Republic, and pretexting legislative gridlock, in 1851 he staged a coup d'état.
Finally, in 1852 he had himself declared Emperor Napoléon Ill of the Second Empire of France.
Election of Napoleon III and a Short-Lived Republic The election was keenly contested; the democratic republicans adopted as their candidate Ledru-Rollin, the “pure republicans"" Cavaignac, and the recently reorganized Imperialist party Prince Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte.
The new National Constituent Assembly was heavily composed of royalist sympathizers of both the Legitimist wing and the Orleanist (Citizen King Louis Philippe) wing.
Napoleon III The Second French Empire was the Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III from 1852 to 1870, between the Second Republic and the Third Republic, an era of great industrialization, urbanization (including the massive rebuilding of Paris by Baron Haussmann), and economic growth, as well as major disasters in foreign affairs.
In July 1870, Napoleon entered the Franco-Prussian War without allies and with inferior military forces; the French army was rapidly defeated and Napoleon III was captured at the Battle of Sedan. e The French Third Republic was proclaimed in Paris, and Napoleon went into exile in England, where he died in 1873.
Key Terms Franco-Prussian War A conflict between the Second French Empire of Napoleon Ill and the German states of the North German Confederation led by the Kingdom of Prussia.
He was blocked by the Constitution and Parliament from running for a second term, so he organized a coup d'état in 1851 and then took the throne as Napoleon IIl on December 2, 1852, the 48th anniversary of Napoleon I's coronation.
He remains the longest-serving French head of state since the French Revolution. reconstruction of Paris A vast public works program commissioned by Emperor Napoléon Ill and directed by his prefect of the Seine, Georges-Eugéne Haussmann, between 1853 and 1870.
Haussmann's work met with fierce opposition and was finally dismissed by Napoleon ll in 1870, but work on his projects continued until 1927.
In 1848, a nephew of Napoléon Bonaparte, Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte, was elected President of France through universal male suffrage, taking 74% of the vote.
Legacy Napoleon Ill is best known today for his grand reconstruction of Paris, carried out by his prefect of the Seine, Baron Haussmann.
Napoleon III modernized the French banking system, greatly expanded and consolidated the French railway system, and made the French merchant marine the second largest in the world.
Painting depicting the FrancoPrussian War French soldiers assaulted by German infantry during the Franco-Prussian War, 1870, which led to the defeat of Napoleon Ill and the end of the Second French Empire.
But Emperor Napoleon Ill stressed his own imperial role as the foundation of the government.
The anti-parliamentary French Constitution of 1852, instituted by Napoleon Ill on January 14, 1852, was largely a repetition of that of 1848.
He was born in Saint Petersburg to Grand Duke Paul Petrovich, later Emperor Paul I, and succeeded to the throne after his father was murdered.
Early Reign At first, the Orthodox Church exercised little influence on Alexander's reign.
In a few years the liberal Mikhail Soeransky became one of the Tsar's closest advisors, and drew up many plans for elaborate reforms.
A Peasant Leaving His Landlord on Yuriev Day A painting by Sergei V lvanov from 1908, depicting a family of serfs leaving their landlord on Yuriev Day, a two-week period that was the only time of the year when the Russian peasants were free to move from one landowner to another before the abolition of serfdom in 1861.
The tsar's greatest triumph came in 1812 as Napoleon's invasion of Russia proved a total disaster for the French.
He formed the Holy Alliance to suppress revolutionary movements in Europe that he saw as immoral threats to legitimate Christian monarchs.
Under Alexander, Russia also fought a successful war with Persia, gaining disputed territory in the Caucasus region, which provides vital access to the Black Sea and Caspian Sea.
Key Terms Peter the Great He ruled the Tsardom of Russia and later the Russian Empire from May 7, 1682, until his death, jointly ruling before 1696 with his elder half-brother, Ivan V Through a number of successful wars, he expanded the Tsardom into a much larger empire that became a major European power.
Meanwhile, spurred by their experiences of the Napoleonic Wars and realizing many of the harsh indignities through which the peasant soldiers were forced, Decembrist officers and sympathizers displayed their contempt for the regime by rejecting court lifestyle, wearing their cavalry swords at balls , and committing themselves to academic study.
On the morning of December 26, a group of officers commanding about 3,000 men assembled in Senate Square, where they refused to swear allegiance to the new tsar, Nicholas I, proclaiming instead their loyalty to Constantine and their Decembrist Constitution.
After soending most of the day in fruitless attempts to parley with the rebel force, Nicholas ordered a cavalry charge which slipped on the icy cobbles and retired in disorder.
He was the younger brother of his predecessor, Alexander I Nicholas inherited his brother's throne despite the failed Decembrist revolt against him and went on to become the most reactionary of all Russian leaders.
Nicholas's policy towards the Ottoman Empire was to use the Treaty of Kugcuk Kaynarca, which gave Russia a vague right to be the protector of the Orthodox peoples in the Balkans, to place the Ottoman Empire into the Russian sphere of influence.
Learning Objective Compare and contrast the opinions and goals of the Westerners and the Slavophiles Key Points e Peter the Great, the Tsar of Russia from 1672-1725, started a trend in Russia of modernization and westernization of Russian culture and economics.
Peter implemented absolute social modernization by introducing French and western dress to his court and requiring courtiers, state officials, and the military to Shave their beards and adopt modern clothing styles. e Catherine the Great, who ruled from 1762 until her death in 1796, continued Peter's project and helped herald the Russian Enlightenment, transforming education and culture to mirror the European Enlightenment.
Rural life was praised by the movement, which opposed industrialization and urban development, and protection of the ""mir"" (peasant village communities) was an important measure to prevent the growth of the working class.
Drawing on the works of Greek Church Fathers, the poet Aleksey Khomyakov and his devoutly Orthodox colleagues elaborated a traditionalistic doctrine that claimed Russia has its own distinct way that should avoid imitating ""Western"" institutions.
Over 50 countries were affected, but with no coordination or cooperation between their respective revolutionaries. mir Peasant village communities, as opposed to individual farmsteads or khutors, in Imperial Russia.
Alexander Il The Tsar of Russia from March 2, 1855, until his assassination in 1881.
Second, large parts of common land were passed to the major land owners as otrezki (""cut off lands""), making many forests, roads, and rivers accessible only for a fee.
Learning Objective Diagram the political relations and structure of the German Confederation Key Points e One of the major outcomes of the Congress of Vienna was the creation of German Confederation, a loose association of 39 states designed to coordinate the economies of separate German-speaking countries. e It acted as a buffer between the powerful states of Austria and Prussia to preserve the Concert of Europe. e Most historians have judged the Confederation as weak and ineffective, as well as an obstacle to German nationalist aspirations.
It collapsed due to the rivalry between Prussia and Austria, warfare, the 1848 revolution, and the inability of the multiple members to compromise. e It was replaced by the North German Confederation in 1866.
It collapsed because of the rivalry between Prussia and Austria , warfare, the 1848 revolution, and the inability of members to compromise.
The era until the failed 1848 revolution when these tensions escalated is commonly referred to as Vormarz , in reference to the outbreak of riots in March 1848.
Further efforts to improve the Confederation began in 1834 with the establishment of a customs union, the Zol/verein.
The customs union opened up a common market, ended tariffs between states, and standardized weights, measures, and currencies within member states (excluding Austria), forming the basis of a proto-national economy.
By the mid-18th century the ""Aufklarung"" (The Enlightenment) had transformed German high culture in music, philosophy, science, and literature.
Travelers both foreign and local complained bitterly about the state of the Heerstra en, the military roads previously maintained for the ease of moving troops.
Patriotic songs as ""Die Wacht am Rhein"" by Max Schneckenburger began to focus attention on geographic space, not limiting ""German-ness"" to a common language.
The Hambacher Fest is noteworthy for the republicans adopting the black-red-gold colors (used on today's national flag of Germany) as a symbol of the republican movement and of unity among the Germanspeaking people.
The Grand Duke of Baden stands beside Wilhelm I, proclaimed here as German Emperor, leading the cheers.
Learning Objective Examine the structure of the newly formed German Empire and the role of the Kaiser Key Points e On December 10, 1870, the North German Confederation Reichstag renamed the Confederation as the German Empire and gave the title of German Emperor to William I, the King of Prussia.
In what became known as the ""First Genocide of the Twentieth-Century,"" between 1904 and 1907, the German colonial government in South-West Africa (presentday Namibia) ordered the annihilation of the local Herero and Namaqua peoples as a punitive measure for an uprising against German colonial rule, killing over 100,000 people.
In the German Revolution , Emperor Wilhelm Il and all German ruling princes abdicated their positions and responsibilities, marking the beginning of the Weimar Republic.
Political Structure On December 10, 1870, the North German Confederation Reichstag renamed the Confederation as the German Empire and gave the title of German Emperor to William I, the King of Prussia.
The new constitution (Constitution of the German Confederation) and the title Emperor came into effect on January 1, 1871.
The empire had a parliament called the Re/chstag, which was elected by universal male suffrage.
Executive power was vested in the emperor, or Ka/ser, who was assisted by a chancellor responsible only to him.
However, historians continue to dispute whether the developments leading to the unprecedented agricultural growth can be seen as ""a revolution,"" since the growth was, in fact, a result of a series of significant changes that took place over a long period of time. e One of the most important innovations of the Agricultural Revolution was the development of the Norfolk four-course rotation, which greatly increased crop and livestock yields by improving soil fertility and reducing fallow.
Following a two-field crop rotation system common in the Middle Ages and a three-year three field crop rotation routine employed later, the regular planting of legumes such as peas and beans in the fields that were previously fallow became central and slowly restored the fertility of some croplands.
In the end, it was the farmers in Flanders that discovered a still more effective four-field crop rotation system, using turnips and clover as forage crops to replace the three-year crop rotation fallow year.
In the mid-18th century, two British agriculturalists, Robert Bakewell and Thomas Coke, introduced selective breeding as a scientific practice and used inbreeding to stabilize certain qualities in order to reduce genetic diversity.
Certain practices that contributed to a more productive use of land intensified, such as converting some pasture land into arable land and recovering fen land and pastures.
It was the farmers in Flanders (in parts of France and current-day Belgium) that discovered a still more effective four-field crop rotation system, using turnips and clover (a legume) as forage crops to replace the three-year crop rotation fallow year.
There was no need to let the soil lie fallow as clover would add nitrates back to the soil.
As a result of a mishap in his foundry, a broken mold caused molten metal to come into contact with cold metal, making the metal surface extremely hard — chilled casting — which he advertised as ""self sharpening"" ploughs and received patents for his discovery. e James Small further advanced the design.
However, seed drills of this and successive types were expensive, unreliable, and fragile.
Once enclosed, these land uses were restricted to the owner, and the land ceased to be for the use of commoners.
By the 19th century, unenclosed commons became largely restricted to large rough pastures in mountainous areas and relatively small residual parcels of land in the lowlands.
The latter process was sometimes accompanied by force, resistance, and bloodshed, and remains among the most controversial areas of agricultural and economic history in England.
Parliamentary enclosures consolidated strips in the open fields into more compact units and enclosed much of the remaining pasture commons or wastes.
Enclosure faced a great deal of popular resistance because of its effects on the household economies of smallholders and landless laborers, who were often pushed out of the rural areas.
Some rights of common were said to be /n gross, or unconnected with tenure of land.
The part allocated to “common pasture"" ts shown in the north-east section, shaded green.
The Agricultural Revolution gave Britain the most productive agriculture in Europe, with 19th-century yields as much as 80% higher than the Continental average.
The increase in the food supply contributed to the rapid growth of population in England and Wales, from 5. million in 1700 to over 9 million by 1801, although domestic production gave way increasingly to food imports in the 19th century as population more than tripled to over 32 million.
But Britain's lead eroded as European countries experienced their own agricultural revolutions, raising grain yields on average by 60% in the century preceding World War I Interestingly, the Agricultural Revolution in Britain did not result in overall productivity per hectare of agriculture that would rival productivity in China, where intensive cultivation had been practiced for many centuries.
Watt formed a partnership with a businessman Matthew Boulton and together they manufactured steam engines that could be used by industry. e With Cartwright's loom, the spinning mule, and Boulton and Watt's steam engine, the pieces were in place to build a mechanized textile industry.
Spinning jenny A multi-spindle spinning frame, one of the key developments in the industrialization of weaving during the early Industrial Revolution.
The jenny produced a lightly twisted yarn only Suitable for weft, not warp.
Model of spinning jenny in the Museum of Early Industrialization, Wuppertal The device reduced the amount of work needed to produce yarn, with a worker able to work eight or more spools at once.
Realizing that the expiration of the Arkwright patent would greatly increase the supply of soun cotton and lead toa shortage of weavers, Edmund Cartwright developed a vertical power loom which he patented in 1785.
Factories put husbands, wives, and children under the same conditions and authority of the manufacturer masters. e The factory system was partly responsible for the rise of urban living, as large numbers of workers migrated into the towns in search of employment in the factories.
The transition to industrialization was not without opposition from the workers who feared that machines would end the need for skilled labor. e One of the best known accounts of factory worker's tragic living conditions during the Industrial Revolution is Friedrich Engels' The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844.
In it, work is contracted by a central agent to subcontractors who complete the work in off-site facilities, either in their own homes or in workshops with multiple craftsmen.
Jerénimo de Ayanz y Beaumont received patents in 1606 for 50 steam-powered inventions, including a water pump for draining inundated mines.
The 1698 Savery Engine, Institute of Human Thermodynamics and loHT Publishing Ltd.
This invention dramatically improved the efficiency of the engine. e Watt's next improvement to the Newcomen design was to seal the top of the cylinder and surround the cylinder with a jacket.
These improvements led to the fully developed version of 1776 that actually went into production. e The separate condenser showed dramatic potential for improvements on the Newcomen engine, but Watt was still discouraged by seemingly insurmountable problems before a marketable engine could be perfected.
Boulton and Watt became an engineering company that was critical to the technological advancements of the Industrial Revolution. e As fully developed, the Watt engine used about 75% less fuel than a similar Newcomen one.
Further, it was not possible to connect the piston rod of the sealed cylinder direct/y to the beam, because while the rod moved vertically in a straight line, the beam was pivoted at its center with each side inscribing an arc.
This masterpiece of engineering uses a four-bar linkage coupled with a pantograph to produce the required straight-line motion much more cheaply than if he had used a slider type of linkage.
They supported talents and other companies, creating a culture where firms often shared information that they could use to create new techniques or products.
From mines to mills, steam engines found many uses in a variety of industries.
The use of steam engines on railroads proved extraordinary since large amounts of goods and raw materials could now be delivered to cities and factories alike at a fraction of the cost traveling by wagon.
Following the advent of the steamboat, the United States saw an incredible growth in the transportation of goods and people, which was key in westward expansion.
Attributions e Early Steam Engines o ""Aeolipile."" httos://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aeolipile.
Coal was so abundant in Britain that the supply could be stepped up to meet the rapidly rising demand. e Coal was central to the development of the steam engine and, in turn, the steam engine dramatically increased the efficiency of coal mining.
However, coke pig iron was hardly used to produce wrought iron in forges until the mid-1750s, when his son Abraham Darby Il built Horsehay and Ketley furnaces.
Since cast iron was becoming cheaper and more plentiful, it became a structural material following the building of the innovative Iron Bridge in 1778 by Abraham Darby IIl. e Wrought iron for smiths to forge into consumer goods was still made in finery forges, as it long had been.
By the 18th century, the availability of wood for making charcoal had limited the expansion of iron production, so England became increasingly dependent on Sweden and then from about 1725 on Russia for the iron required for industry.
For a long time Huntsman exported his whole output to France as local producers refused to work with steel harder than they were already using.
Further experiments by Goran Fredrik Goransson and Robert Forester Mushet allowed Bessemer to perfect what would be known as the Bessemer process.
Although initially Bessemer met with rebuffs and was forced to undertake the exploitation of his process himself, eventually licences were applied for in such numbers that Bessemer received royalties exceeding a million pounds sterling.
Attributions e The Shift to Coal O° O° 1e) {e) ""Coal."" httos://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coal.
Innovations tn Transportation 25.5.1: Canals The modern canal network in Britain emerged because the Industrial Revolution demanded an economic and reliable way to transport goods and commodities in large quantities, simultaneously responding to the needs of the Industrial Revolution and fueling its further advancement.
Key Points e The British canal system played a vital role in the Industrial Revolution at a time when roads were only just emerging from the medieval mud and long trains of packhorses were the only means of more easily accessible transport.
They were often marginalized from land-based society and perceived as strange outsiders living a nomadic lifestyle. e From about 1840, railways began to threaten canals.
It connected Worsley with the rapidly growing town of Manchester and its construction cost £168,000 , but its advantages over land and river transport meant that within a year of its opening, the price of coal in Manchester fell by about half.
The first for public use and on cast iron rails was the Surrey lron Railway, incorporated in 1799.
The railway was also empowered to carry passengers in addition to coal and general merchandise. e The first public steam railway in Scotland was the Monkland and Kirkintilloch Railway.
Further, horse-drawn traffic could use the Stockton and Darlington upon payment of a toll. e To determine which locomotives would be suitable, the L&MR directors organized the Rainhill Trials.
A year later George Stephenson, another of Wylam's employees, improved the design with Blucher, the first locomotive to use flanged wheels keeping the locomotive on the track and had cylinder rods directly connected to the wheels in the manner of Catch Me Who Can.
An unexpected enthusiasm for passenger travel resulted in opening the London and Birmingham Railway and the Grand Junction, linking the existing L&MR and the new L&BR in 1837.
A new railway always needed an Act of Parliament, which typically cost over £200,000 to obtain, but opposition could effectively prevent its construction.
Once an Act was obtained, there was little government regulation, as /a/ssez faire and private ownership had become accepted practices.
Learning Objective Describe the factory system and how it functioned Key Points e One of the earliest factories was John Lombe's waterpowered silk mill at Derby, operational by 1721.
Matthew Boulton at his Soho Manufactory, which started operating in 1766, was among the pioneers of mass production on the assembly line principle, while Josiah Wedgwood in Staffordshire opened the first true ceramics factory in 1769. e The factory system began to grow rapidly when cotton spinning was mechanized.
The factory system was a new way of organizing labor made necessary by the development of machines, which were too large to house in a worker's cottage.
They feared that the years workers spent learning a craft would go to waste and unskilled machine operators would rob them of their livelihood.
Bicycles were mass-produced beginning in the 1880s. fe ” —_— ti Ss. we st nt] ag The Cromford Mill today Richard Arkwright is the person credited with inventing the prototype of the modern factory.
They feared that the years workers had spent learning a craft would go to waste and unskilled machine operators would rob them of their livelihoods.
While some have pointed out that industrialization slowly improved the living standards of workers, others have concluded that living standards for the majority of the population did not grow meaningfully until much later. e Not everyone lived in poor conditions and struggled with the challenges of rapid industrialization.
Fo) SFA seh vigner Sinffenung unk authetin Daan Ya Frledvidh Eagels. £ripria.
Learning Objective Review the conditions workers labored under in the early factories Key Points As a result of industrialization, ordinary working people found increased opportunities for employment in the new mills and factories, but these were often under strict working conditions with long hours of labor dominated by a pace set by machines.
In the textile industry, factories set hours of work and the machinery within them shaped the pace of work.
It prohibited all girls and boys under ten years old from working underground in coal mines. e Over time, more men than women would find that industrial employment and industrial wages provided a higher level of material security than agricultural employment.
Common particularly in the early 19th century, they pulled a corf full of coal along roadways as small as 16 inches in height.
In 1800, there were 20,000 apprentices (usually pauper children) working in cotton mills.
Working-Class Women Before the Mines and Collieries Act 1842, women (and children) worked underground as hurriers who carted tubs of coal up through the narrow mine shafts.
The first legislation in response to the abuses experienced by child laborers did not even attempt to ban child labor, but merely improve working conditions for some child workers.
The Act was introduced by Sir Robert Peel, who became concerned with the issue after an 1784 outbreak of a ""malignant fever"" at one of his cotton mills, which he later blamed on ""gross mismanagement"" by his subordinates.
Strictly speaking, Peel's Cotton Mills and Factories Act of 1819 paved the way for subsequent Factory Acts and set up effective means of industry regulation.
These 1802 and 1819 Acts were largely ineffective and after radical agitation by child labor opponents, a Royal Commission recommended in 1833 that children aged 1118 should work a maximum of 12 hours per day, children aged 9-11 a maximum of eight hours, and children under the age of nine were no longer permitted to work.
Learning Objective Describe the grievances that gave rise to organized labor Key Points e The rapid expansion of industrial society during the Industrial Revolution drew women, children, rural workers, and immigrants into the industrial work force in large numbers and in new roles.
Chartism thus relied on constitutional methods to secure its aims. e More permanent trade unions followed from the 1850s.
Radical War A week of strikes and unrest, also Known as the Scottish Insurrection of 1820, that was a culmination of Radical demands for reform in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland which became prominent in the early years of the French Revolution, but were then repressed during the long Napoleonic Wars.
This pool of unskilled and semiSkilled labor soontaneously organized in fits and starts throughout the early phases of industrialization and would later be an important arena for the development of trade unions.
William Ed ward_Kilburn_View_of the Great _Chartist Meeting _on Kenningto n_ Common _Google Art Project.jog.
In South America, Sim6n Bolivar and José de San Martin led the final phase of the independence struggle.
The Haitian Revolution was a successful anti-slavery and anti-colonial insurrection that took place in the former French colony of Saint Domingue from 1791 until 1804.
Convinced that a law passed by the French Constituent Assembly gave full civil rights to wealthy men of color, Ogé demanded the right to vote.
When the colonial governor refused, Ogé led a brief insurgency in the area around Cap Francais.
Learning Objective Recall Simon Bolivar and his contributions to South American independence movements Key Points The military and political career of Simon Bolivar, which included both formal service in the armies of various revolutionary regimes and actions organized by himself or in collaboration with other exiled patriot leaders from 1811 to 1830, was important in the success of the independence wars in South America.
Bolivar first found success in his native Venezuela, taking advantage of the instability caused by Napoleon's Peninsular War and leading the revolutionary forces to a victory in 1821, which resulted in the creation of an independent Venezuela.
Throughout his military career, he also lead efforts to oust Spanish rulers from Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia.
Bolivar was passionate about the creation of a unified Latin America, through military and economic alliances and various confederations to protect the area's newly won autonomy, but in the end, nationalistic enterprises won out.
He was simultaneously president of Gran Colombia (current Venezuela, Colombia, Panama, and Ecuador) and Peru, while his second in command Antonio José de Sucre was appointed president of Bolivia.
His second challenge was implementing a vision to unify the region into one large state, which he believed (and most would agree, correctly) would be the only guarantee of maintaining American independence from the Spanish in northern South America.
These caudillos would maintain their control primarily on the basis of a cult of personality, populist politics, and military might.
Gran Colombia Gran Colombia, a state that encompassed much of northern South America and part of southern Central America, was created in 1819 by Sim6n Bolivar as part of his vision for a unified Latin America, but was fraught with political instability and collapsed in 1831.
The faction that favored constitutional rule coalesced around Vice-President Francisco de Paula Santander, while those who supported the creation of a stronger presidency were led by President Sim6n Bolivar.
In 1828, the new constitutional assembly, the Convention of Ocana, began its sessions.
José de San Martin José de San Martin was one of the prime leaders of Latin America's successful struggle for freedom from the Spanish Empire, commanding crucial military campaigns that led to independence for Argentina, Chile, and Peru.
Learning Objective Compare José de San Martin's efforts to Bolivar's Key Points e José de San Martin, along with Sim6n Bolivar, was one of the most important leaders of the Latin American independence movements.
He left suddenly in 1822 for France, leaving the remainder of the war for independence to be led by Bolivar, who succeeded against the Spanish forces in 1824.
In 1817, it crossed the Andes Mountains from the Argentine province of Cuyo (at the current-day province of Mendoza, Argentina), and succeeded in dislodging the Spanish from the country.
The Order of the Liberator General San Martin , created in his honor, is the highest decoration conferred by the Argentine government.
The undesired outcomes of the Paraguay and Upper Peru campaigns led the Junta (the provisional government after the May Revolution) to be replaced by an executive Triumvirate in September 1811.
He proposed a similar measure at the national level, but Pueyrred6én encountered severe resistance.
He tried instead to divide the enemy forces in several locations, as during the Crossing of the Andes, and trap the royalists with a pincer movement with either reinforcements of the Army of the North from the South or the army of Simén Bolivar from the North.
Guayaquil Conference The conference between Sim6n Bolivar and José de San Martin.
A painting of the conference between Sim6n Bolivar and José de San Martin.
Learning Objective Assess the Portuguese colonization of Brazil Key Points e In 1494, the two kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula divided the New World between them in the Treaty of Tordesillas ¢ In 1500, navigator Pedro Alvares Cabral landed in what is now Brazil and claimed it in the name of King Manuel | of Portugal. e The Portuguese identified brazilwood as a valuable red dye and an exploitable product and attempted to force indigenous groups in Brazil to cut the trees, but at first gave little attention to the area.
Pernambuco, Sao Vicente , Captaincy of IIhéus, and Captaincy of Porto Seguro.
The Ccaptaincies gradually reverted to the Crown and became provinces and eventually states of the country.
For example, the unsuccessful attempt in 1555 of a French expedition led by Nicolas Durand de Villegaignon, viceadmiral of Brittany and corsair under the King, to establish a colony in present-day Rio de Janeiro was motivated in part by the bounty generated by economic exploitation of brazilwood.
The dependencies of the farm included a casa-grande (big house) where the owner of the farm lived with his family, and the senzal/a, where the slaves were kept.
Africa played an essential role as the supplier of Slaves, and Brazilian slave traders in Africa frequently exchanged cachaca, a distilled spirit derived from Sugarcane, and shells for slaves.
Even though Brazilian sugar had a reputation for quality, the industry faced a crisis during the 17th and 18th centuries when the Dutch and the French started producing sugar in the Antilles, located much closer to Europe, causing sugar prices to fall.
The movement initiated by the liberal constitutionalists resulted in the meeting of the Cortes (or Constituent Assembly) that would create the kingdom's first constitution.
On October 12, the prince was acclaimed Pedro I, first Emperor of the newly created Empire of Brazil, a constitutional monarchy.
Learning Objective Summarize the breadth and structure of the Brazilian Empire Key Points Brazil was one of only three modern states in the Americas to have its own indigenous monarchy (the other two were Mexico and Haiti) for a period of almost 90 years.
In 1808, the Portuguese court, fleeing from Napoleon's invasion of Portugal during the Peninsular War, moved the government apparatus to its then-colony, Brazil, establishing themselves in the city of Rio de Janeiro from where the Portuguese king ruled his huge empire for 15 years.
When the king left Brazil to return to Portugal in 1821, his elder son, Pedro |, stayed in his stead as regent of Brazil.
One year later, Pedro stated the reasons for the secession of Brazil from Portugal and led the Independence War.
He instituted a constitutional monarchy in Brazil, assuming its head as Emperor Pedro Also known as ""Dom Pedro |"" after his abdication in 1831 for political incompatibilities (disliked both by the landed elites who thought him too liberal and the intellectuals who felt he was not liberal enough), he left for Portugal, leaving behind his five-year-old son as Emperor Pedro Il.
This period was beset by rebellions of various motivations and political instability.
Although there was no desire for a change in the form of government among most Brazilians, the Emperor was overthrown in a sudden coup d'état that had almost no support outside a clique of military leaders who desired a republic headed by a dictator. e The reign of Pedro II and the Brazilian Empire came to an unusual end—he was overthrown while highly regarded by the people and at the pinnacle of his popularity.
Its government was a representative parliamentary constitutional monarchy under the rule of Emperors Dom Pedro | and his son Dom Pedro Il.
On September 7, 1822, Pedro declared the independence of Brazil and after waging a successful war against his father's kingdom, was acclaimed on October 12 as Pedro I, the first Emperor of Brazil.
Having inherited an empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro Il, once he was declared of age, managed to bring peace and stability to the country, which eventually became an emerging international power.
Pedro Il had become weary of emperorship and despaired over the monarchy's future prospects, despite its overwhelming popular support.
The reign of Pedro Il thus came to an unusual end—he was overthrown while highly regarded by the people and at the pinnacle of his popularity, and some of his accomplishments were soon brought to naught as Brazil slipped into a long period of weak governments, dictatorships, and constitutional and economic crises.
Learning Objective Analyze the effect events in Europe had on Mexico in 1808 Key Points e Events in Spain during the Peninsular War had profound effects on Spanish America, leading to numerous successful independence movements. e In 1808, a year after Napoleon invaded Portugal, the French turned on Spain, a previous ally, which led to a political crisis. e Napoleon forced the abdication of the Spanish king, Charles IV, and replaced him with his brother, Joseph Bonaparte, who ruled Spain for five years.
Numerous revolts occurred throughout Spain in response, causing confusion and crisis.
A number of juntas were set up Spain to fill the power vacuum and lead the charge against the French. e This crisis also resulted in a shift in leadership over the colonies in the Americas, where juntas were also set up.
The dissolution of the Supreme Junta on January 29, 1810, because of the reverses suffered after the Battle of Ocana by the Spanish forces paid with Spanish American money set off another wave of juntas in the Americas.
In January 1821, Iturbide began peace negotiations with Guerrero, suggesting they unite to establish an independent New Spain.
Both the Spanish Cortes and Ferdinand VII rejected the Treaty of Cérdoba, and the final break with the mother country came on May 19, 1822, when the Mexican Congress conferred the throne on Itrubide.
Related to Spanish ideas about purity of blood (which historically also related to its reconquest of Spain from the Moors), the colonists established a caste system in Latin America by which a person's socio-economic status generally correlated with race or racial mix in the known family background, or simply on phenotype (physical appearance) if the family background was unknown.
Indigenous Efforts Against Colonialism After the Spanish conquest of Central America, there were several indigenous uprisings against colonial rule, most notably the Mixt6n War and the Chichimeca War.
Learning Objective Examine some of the indigenous uprisings against the Spanish Key Points e After the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, the Spanish created the colony and kingdom of New Spain, which placed the indigenous populations at the bottom of the racial hierarchy.
Territories populated by indigenous nomadic peoples were harder to conquer, and once the natives got hold of horses, many populations evaded Spanish rule for much of the colonial period. e Other natives in densely populated areas suffered continual abuse and oppression under the Spaniards, leading to several revolts. e The first revolt, named the Mixt6n war, pitted the viceroy of New Spain, Don Antonio de Mendoza, against the Caxcanes Indians, who began a rebellion in 1440.
After two years of fighting, with the natives repeatedly repelling the Spanish army, the stronghold of Mixtén fell to the Spaniards and the rebellion was over. e Skirmishes continued, and by 1550, another war broke out against the Chichimeca Indians.
The first was in 1541, the Mixton war, in which the viceroy himself, Don Antonio de Mendoza, led an army against the uprising by Caxcanes.
Mixton War The Mixt6n War was fought from 1540 until 1542 between the Caxcanes and other semi-nomadic indigenous people of the area of northwestern Mexico against Spanish invaders, including Aztec and Tlaxcalan allies.
The war was named after Mixt6n, a hill in the southern part of Zacatecas state in Mexico that served as an Indigenous stronghold.
Although other indigenous groups also fought against the Spanish in the Mixt6n War, the Caxcanes were the “heart and soul” of the resistance.
However, the Caxcanes seem to have been sedentary, depending upon agriculture for their livelihood and living in permanent towns and settlements.
After killing two Catholic priests, many Indians fled the encomiendas and took refuge in the mountains, especially on the hill fortress of Mixt6n.
Onate attempted to storm Mixtén, but the Indians on the summit repelled his attack.
In early 1542 the stronghold of Mixt6n fell to the Spaniards and the rebellion was over.
The reports of the excessive violence against civilian Indians caused the Council of the Indies to undertake a secret investigation into the conduct of the viceroy. a \ xXochipil Mixton War Viceroy don Antonio de Mendoza and Tlaxcalan Indians battle with the Caxcanes in the Mixt6n war, 1541-42 in Nueva Galicia.
Hidalgo then decided to retreat against the advice of Allende, a choice that has puzzled historians since. e The retreat is considered a tactical error, leading to the suppression of the revolt and the execution of Hidalgo and Allende.
The insurgent forces planned a defensive strategy at a bridge on the Calderdn River, pursued by the Spanish army.
A favorite of the Mexican church hierarchy, Iturbide symbolized conservative criollo values; he was devoutly religious and committed to the defense of property rights and social privileges.
Mexico would be an independent monarchy governed by King Ferdinand, another Bourbon prince, or some other conservative European prince; criollos would be given equal rights and privileges to peninsulares (those born in Spain); and the Roman Catholic Church in Mexico would retain its privileges and position as the established religion of the land.
On August 24, 1821, representatives of the Spanish crown and Iturbide signed the Treaty of Cérdoba, which recognized Mexican independence under the Plan of Iguala.
Agustin de Iturbide Oil painting of Agustin de Iturbide, leader of independence who was declared Emperor Augustin I, in 1822 following independence.
Maximilian, too liberal for the conservatives and an enemy of the liberals because he represented the monarchy, had few friends in Mexico, despite his best efforts at positive reform. e The United States, who never recognized Maximilian, after the end of the American Civil War pressured Napoleon III to withdraw the French from Mexico, thereby ending the Second Mexican Empire and ousting Maximilian. e Maximilian chose to remain in Mexico rather than return to Europe and was captured and executed along with two Mexican supporters on June 19, 1867.
Key Terms Napoleon III The only President of the French Second Republic and the Emperor of the Second French Empire.
French Intervention tn Mexico The War of the French Intervention was an invasion of Mexico in late 1861 by the Second French Empire, supported in the beginning by the United Kingdom and Spain.
Maximilian I of Mexico Maximilian | was the only monarch of the Second Mexican Empire, a younger brother of the Austrian emperor Francis Joseph I After a distinguished career in the Austrian Navy, he accepted an offer by Napoleon Ill of France to rule Mexico.
Britain recognized the independence of the United States following their defeat at Yorktown in 1781. e Americans' eagerness to expand westward prompted a long series of American Indian Wars.
The Louisiana Purchase of French-claimed territory in 1803 almost doubled the nation's area.
A series of military incursions into Florida led Spain to cede it and other Gulf Coast territory in 1819.
After the American Civil War, new transcontinental railways made relocation easier for settlers, expanded internal trade, and increased conflict with Native Americans. e Rapid economic development during the late 19th and early 20th centuries fostered the rise of many prominent industrialists.
Gradually the United States purchased the Native American tribal lands and extinguished their claims, forcing most tribes onto subsidized reservations. fa ls Manifest Destiny United States territorial acquisitions throughout United States history.
Learning Objective Synthesize the Monroe Doctrine and its place in global affairs Key Points e The Monroe Doctrine, first promoted in James Monroe's State of the Union Address in 1823, stated that Europe should no longer interfere in the affairs of the American continent, particularly opposing any new colonial efforts. e At the same time, the doctrine noted that the United States would recognize and not interfere with existing European colonies nor meddle in the internal concerns of European countries.
Initially, because the United States was not seen as a major military power, the doctrine was largely ignored by Europe, although Britain generally agreed with its terms for its own reasons. e The doctrine was welcomed and applauded by most Latin Americans, many of whom were in the midst of freeing themselves from European colonialism. e In many instances, the United States did not intervene against European actions in the Americas and thus the doctrine was often not enforced.
In 1862, French forces under Napoleon Ill invaded and conquered Mexico, giving control to the puppet monarch Emperor Maximilian.
WILLIAM HL STS BIG MINSTREL JUBILEE oe. pe a ee oT Spanish-American War Spanish-American War, the result of United States intervention in the Cuban War of Independence, which released Cuba from European influence as per the Monroe Doctrine.
Learning Objective Describe the Canadian Confederation Key Points e The Confederation of Canada emerged from multiple impulses.
The British wanted Canada to defend itself; British-Canadian nationalism sought to unite the lands into one country, dominated by the English language and British culture; and the fear of possible United States expansion northward. e On a political level, there was a desire for the expansion of responsible government and elimination of the legislative deadlock between Upper and Lower Canada, and their replacement with provincial legislatures in a federation.
In 1635, Nurchaci's son and successor Huangtaiji changed the name of the Jurchen ethnic group to the Manchu. e In 1618, Nurhachi announced the Seven Grievances and began to rebel against the Ming domination, effectively a declaration of war.
Two of Nurhaci's critical contributions were ordering the creation of a written Manchu script based on the Mongolian and the creation of the civil and military administrative system, which eventually evolved into the Eight Banners.
Under the reign of Dorgon, whom historians have called ""the mastermind of the Qing conquest"" and ""the principal architect of the great Manchu enterprise,"" the Qing continued to subdue all areas previously under the Ming.
Created in the early 17th century by Nurhaci, the armies played an instrumental role in his unification of the fragmented Jurchen people (later renamed the Manchus) and in the Qing dynasty's conquest of the Ming dynasty.
Decisive Battle of Shanhai Pass in 1644 that led to the formation of the Qing dynasty At the Battle of Shanhai Pass, Qing Prince-Regent Dorgon allied with former Ming general Wu Sangui to defeat rebel leader Li Zicheng of the Shun dynasty, allowing Dorgon and the Manchus to rapidly conquer Beijing and replace the Ming dynasty.
Learning Objective Describe the characteristics of Qing society Key Points During the early and mid-Qing period, the population grew rapidly and was remarkably mobile.
To give people more incentive to participate in the market, the tax burden was reduced and the corvée system replaced with a head tax used to hire laborers.
The relative peace and import of new crops to China from the Americas contributed to population growth.
The early Qing military was rooted in the Eight Banners first developed by Nurhaci.
The majority of the population belonged to the first category and were described as /iangmin, a legal term meaning good people, as opposed to /ianmin meaning the mean people.
The eventual decision to turn the banner troops into a professional force led to its decline as a fighting force.
Soldiers of the blue banner parading in front of Emperor Qianlong Initially, Nurhaci's forces were organized into small hunting parties of about a dozen men related by blood, marriage, clan, or place of residence, as was the Jurchen custom.
The poetry of the Qing dynasty is a field studied for its association with Chinese opera, developmental trends of classical Chinese poetry, the transition to a greater role for vernacular language, and poetry by women in Chinese culture.
Unlike other European partners, China did not deal with Russia through the Ministry of Tributary Affairs, but rather through the same ministry as the Mongols, seen by the Chinese as a problematic partner. e The Chinese worldview changed very little during the Qing dynasty as China's sinocentric perspectives continued to be informed and reinforced by deliberate policies and practices designed to minimize evidence of its growing weakness and West's evolving power.
Opium Wars Two wars in the mid-19th century (1839-1842 and 1856-1860) involving Anglo-Chinese disputes over British trade in China and China's sovereignty.
When they refused, Lin stopped trade altogether and placed the foreign residents under virtual siege in their factories. e The First Opium War over the trade and diplomatic relations between Imperial China and Britain began in 1839.
The Treaty of Nanking demanded war reparations and forced China to open up the Treaty Ports of Canton, Amoy, Fuchow, Ningpo, and Shanghai to western trade and missionaries and cede Hong Kong Island to Britain. e The Second Opium War, triggered by further British demands, began in 1856 and ended with the 1860 Convention of Beijing.
The Qing dynasty Jiaging Emperor issued an imperial decree banning imports of the drug in 1799.
This promise and the inability of the British government to pay it without causing a political storm was an important casus belli for the subsequent British offensive. a Two poor Chinese opium smokers.
Initially used by medical practitioners to control bodily fluid and preserve q/or vital force, during the Ming dynasty , opium also functioned as an aphrodisiac.
On October 29, a hole was blasted in the city walls and troops entered, with a flag of the United States of America being planted by James Keenan ( United States Consul) on the walls and residence of Ye Mingchen.
The Treaty of Nanking was a step to opening the lucrative Chinese market to global commerce and the opium trade. a oe Opium smokers, 1880, by Lai Afong.
Dungan Revolt A mainly ethnic and religious war fought in 19th-century western China, mostly during the reign of the Tongzhi Emperor of the Qing dynasty.
Punti-Hakka Clan Wars The conflict between the Hakka and Punti (Cantonese people) in Guangdong, China, between 1855 and 1867.
In 1856, the Taiping were weakened after infighting following an attempted coup led by the East King, Yang Xiuging.
While Taiping forces were preoccupied in Jiangsu, Zeng's forces moved down the Yangzi River capturing Anqging in 1861.
For instance, the Punti-Hakka Clan Wars pitted the Hakka against Punti (Cantonese people) in Guangdong between 1855 and 1867.
The Panthay Rebellion (1856-1873; discussed sometimes as part of the Dungan Revolt) was a rebellion of the Muslim Hui people and other non-Muslim ethnic minorities against the Manchu rulers in southwestern Yunnan Province as part of a wave of Hui-led multi-ethnic unrest.
General Zeng Guofan, author unknown, scan from Jonathan Spence, In Search for Modern China, 1990.
However, the United States felt threatened by other powers' much larger spheres of influence and worried that it might lose access to the Chinese market should the country be partitioned.
As a response, United States diplomat William Woodville Rockhill formulated the Open Door Policy to safeguard American business opportunities and other interests in China.
In 1902, the United States government protested the Russian encroachment in Manchuria after the Boxer Rebellion as a violation of the Open Door Policy.
However, the United States government also acknowledged that Japan had ""special interests"" in China due to its geographic proximity.
The Lansing-Ishii Agreement was replaced by the 1922 Nine-Power Treaty.
In 1899, United States Secretary of State John Hay sent notes to France, Germany, Britain, Italy, Japan, and Russia, asking them to declare formally that they would uphold Chinese territorial and administrative integrity and would not interfere with the free use of the treaty ports within their spheres of influence in China.
A he Ws if bf —t/ £27. gf 42 fa ee a Ca Tokugawa leyasu, first shogun of the Tokugawa shogunate, by Kano Tan' yu, Osaka Castle main tower leyasu had a number of qualities that enabled him to rise to power.
Harsh penalties, including crucifixion, beheading, and death by boiling, were decreed for even the most minor offenses, although criminals of high social class were often given the option of seppuku (""selfdisembowelment""), an ancient form of suicide that became ritualized.
To prevent further foreign ideas from sowing dissent, the third Tokugawa shogun, lemitsu, implemented the sakoku (""closed country"") isolationist policy, under which Japanese people were not allowed to travel abroad, return from overseas, or build ocean-going vessels.
Next came the shogun, da/myos, and layers of feudal lords, whose rank was indicated by their closeness to the Tokugawa.
The shogunate maintained limited and tightly controlled trade relations with the Dutch, China, Korea, the Ainu people, and the Ryukyu Kingdom. e The growing commerce between America and China, the presence of American whalers in waters off Japan, and the increasing monopolization of potential coaling stations by the British and French in Asia were all contributing factors in the decision by United States President Millard Fillmore to dispatch an expedition to Japan.
After presenting the letter, Perry departed for Hong Kong, promising to return the following year for the Japanese reply. e Perry returned in 1854, after only half a year.
Trade with the Ainu people was limited to the Matsumae Domain in Hokkaido and trade with the RyukyU Kingdom took place in Satsuma Domain.
In 1844, King William II of the Netherlands sent a letter urging Japan to end the isolation policy on its own before change would be forced from the outside.
Between 1790 and 1853, at least 27 United States ships visited Japan, only to be turned away.
He refused Japanese demands to leave or to proceed to Nagasaki, the only Japanese port open to foreigners.
Z \ ~~ ayia 4 abs) TP , a _ Matthew Calbraith Perry, photo by Mathew Brady, ca.56-58.
When Perry returned to the United States in 1855, Congress voted to grant him a reward of $20,000 (USD $514,000 in 2017) in appreciation of his work in Japan.
Learning Objective Identify some artistic trends during the Edo Period Key Points During the Edo period, the Japanese studied Western sciences and techniques (called rangaku, ""Dutch studies"") through the information and books received from Dutch traders in Dejima.
Although this system of thought was not new during the Edo period, its major tenets became more popular, including a secular view of man and society, ethical humanism, rationalism, and historical perspective of neo-Confucian doctrine.
By the mid-17th century, neo-Confucianism was Japan's dominant legal philosophy and contributed directly to the development of the kokugaku.
It held that the Japanese national character would reveal its splendor once the foreign influences were removed.
Advanced studies and growing applications of neoConfucianism contributed to the transition of the social and political order from feudal norms to classand largegroup-oriented practices.
For the first time, urban populations had the means and leisure time to support a new mass culture.
Their search for enjoyment became known as ukiyo (the floating world), an ideal world of fashion, popular entertainment, and the discovery of aesthetic qualities in objects and actions of everyday life.
Prostitution based on the indentured servitude of girls and young women became the critical component of the district's identity. e Music, popular stories, kabuki and bunraku (puppet theater), poetry, literature, and art all flourished during the Edo period.
Chonindo (""the way of the townspeople"") was a distinct culture that arose in cities such as Osaka, Kyoto, and Edo.
A significant number served out their contracts and married a client, went into other employment , or returned to their family homes. nee ice ‘re i ha ar i U PR || Fras edisk ee tank il MU mth i a r eS SSS Prostitutes on display in Yoshiwara during the Meiji period (the period following the Edo period in the Japanese history), possibly by Kusakabe Kimbei.
Although it is often used in tsunami literature, there is no reason to suspect that Hokusai intended it to be interpreted in that way.
Jippensha Ikku wrote Tokaidochu Hizakurige, a mix of travelogue and comedy.
The Meiji Restoration The Meiji Restoration was a chain of events, triggered by an internal crisis and strong anti-Western sentiments, that ended the Edo period and thus the rule of the Tokugawa shogunate and restored practical imperial rule to Japan in 1868 under Emperor Meiji.
The major ideological-political divide during this period was between the pro-imperial nationalists called /shin shishi and the shogunate forces, which included the elite shinsengumi swordsmen.
An alliance of western Samurai, particularly the domains of Choshu, Satsuma, and Tosa, and court officials, secured control of the imperial court and influenced the Emperor Meiji.
To implement the Charter Oath, a short-lived constitution was drawn up in 1868. e The Meiji government assured the foreign powers that it would follow the old treaties.
Tokugawa Yoshinobu tried to reorganize the government under the Emperor while preserving the shogun's leadership role, a system known as kobu gattal.
Fearing the growing power of the Satsuma and Choshu feudal domains, other domains called for returning the shogun's political power to the emperor and a council chaired by the former Tokugawa shogun.
With the threat of an imminent Satsuma-Choshu led military action, Yoshinobu moved pre-emptively by surrendering some of his previous authority.
Satsuma and Choshu forces then moved on Kyoto in force, pressuring the Imperial Court for a conclusive edict demolishing the shogunate.
Fearing a feigned concession of the shogunal power to consolidate power, the dispute continued until culminating in a military confrontation between Tokugawa and allied domains with Satsuma, Tosa, and Choshu forces in Fushimi and Toba.
A teenage Emperor Meji with foreign representatives at the end of the Boshin War The Meiji Restoration and the resultant modernization of Japan influenced Japanese self-identity with respect to its Asian neighbors, as Japan became the first Asian state to modernize based on the European model, replacing the traditional Confucian hierarchical order that persisted previously under a dominant China with one based on modernity.
Mutsuhito, who was to reign until 1912, selected a new reign title—Mei//, or Enlightened Rule—to mark the beginning of a new era in Japanese history.
To further dramatize the new order, the capital was relocated from Kyoto, where it had been situated since 794, to Tokyo , the new name for Edo.
Officials from the favored former han, such as Satsuma, Choshu, Tosa, and Hizen, staffed the new ministries.
Learning Objective Extrapolate the main ideas of the Meiji Constitution Key Points After the Meiji restoration, the leaders of the samurai who overthrew the Tokugawa shogunate had no predeveloped plan on how to run Japan.
In 1869, the central government led by Okubo Toshimichi of Satsuma felt strong enough to effect centralization.
After merging the armies of Satsuma and Chosht into a combined force, Okubo convinced the feudal lords of Satsuma, Choshu, Hizen, and Tosa to surrender their domains to the emperor.
Prior to the Meiji Restoration, Japan had no written constitution and the idea of one became a subject of heated debate.
The Constitution established clear limits on the power of the executive branch and the Emperor and guaranteed some civil rights and liberties, although in many cases they were subject to limitation by law. e The Meiji Constitution was ambiguous in wording and in many places self-contradictory.
Immediately after the resignation of Tokugawa Yoshinobu in 1867, with no official centralized government, the country was a collection of largely semi-independent feudal domains (the han system), held together by the military strength of the Satcho Alliance (military alliance between the feudal domains of Satsuma and Choshu formed in 1866 to combine their efforts to restore Imperial rule) and the prestige of the Imperial Court.
After merging the armies of Satsuma and Choshu into a combined force, Okubo and Kido Takayoshi convinced the feudal lords of Satsuma, Choshu, Hizen. and Tosa to surrender their domains to the emperor.
The Emperor meets with his Privy Councilors, ukityo-e woodblock prints by Yoshu Chikanobu, 1888.
The Privy Council consisted of a chairman, a vice chairman , 12 councilors, a chief secretary, and three additional secretaries.
Learning Objective Analyze the success of Japan's rapid shift to industrialization Key Points The Industrial Revolution in Japan began about 1870 as Meiji period leaders decided to catch up with the West.
In 1871, a group of Japanese statesmen and scholars known as the Ilwakura Mission embarked upon a voyage across Europe and the United States.
The mission aimed to gain recognition for the newly reinstated imperial dynasty and begin preliminary renegotiation of the unequal treaties, but it was the exploration of modern Western industrial, political, military, and educational systems and structures that became its most consequential outcome.
Japan's Industrial Revolution first appeared in textiles, including cotton and especially silk, traditionally made in home workshops in rural areas.
To promote industrialization, the government decided that while it should help private business allocate resources and plan, the private sector was best equipped to stimulate economic growth.
The private sector embraced the government-promoted Western model of capitalism.
The phenomenal industrial growth sparked rapid urbanization, and most people lived longer and healthier lives.
Key Terms Iwakura Mission A Japanese diplomatic voyage to the United States and Europe conducted between 1871 and 1873 by leading statesmen and scholars of the Meiji period.
Although it had a number of political, diplomatic, and economic goals, it is most well-known and possibly most significant in terms of its impact on the modernization of Japan after a long period of isolation from the West.
Zaibatsu Industrial and financial business conglomerates in the Empire of Japan, whose influence and size allowed control over significant parts of the Japanese economy from the Meiji period until the end of World War Il.
Iwakura Mission The Industrial Revolution in Japan began about 1870 as Meiji period leaders decided to catch up with the West.
Hand in hand, industrial and financial business conglomerates known as Za/batsu and government guided the nation, borrowing technology from the West.
He faced opposition from many of his peers, including most conservative samurai, who recognized that these ideas would end not only the livelihood of thousands of Samurai but also their privileged position in society.
Originally formed in 1867, it was dissolved at the conclusion of World War Il and replaced by a civilian counterpart in 1947. samurai The military nobility and officer caste of medieval and early-modern Japan.
Mei Militarization Efforts In 1854, after Admiral Matthew C Perry forced the signing of the Treaty of Kanagawa, Japanese elites concluded that they needed to modernize the state's military capacities or risk further coercion from Western powers.
He also strongly supported the abolition of the han system and with it the numerous private armies maintained by the feudal lords, which he considered a drain on resources and a potential threat to security.
Omura faced opposition from many of his peers, including most conservative samurai who saw his ideas on modernizing and reforming the Japanese military as too radical, ending not only the livelihood of thousands of samurai but also their privileged position in society.
The law also allowed the military to educate the enlisted, providing opportunities for both basic (e.g., learning how to read) and advanced education and career advancement.
Kumamoto castle was the site of the first major engagement when garrisoned forces fired on Saigo's army as they attempted to force their way into the castle.
Two days later, Saigo's rebels, while attempting to block a mountain pass, encountered advanced elements of the national army en route to reinforce Kumamoto castle.
A few weeks later the national army engaged Saigo's rebels in a frontal assault at what now is called the Battle of Tabaruzuka.
Due to conscription, however, the Japanese army was able to reconstitute its forces, while SaigO's was not.
Saigo's army was outnumbered seven-to-one, prompting a mass surrender of many samurai.
Learning Objective Characterize the foreign policy goals of the Japanese government in the Meiji period Key Points Meiji Japan's foreign policy was shaped by its need to reconcile its Asian identity with its desire for status and security in an international order dominated by the West.
The principal foreign policy goals of the Meiji period were to protect the integrity and independence of Japan against Western domination, including gaining international respect through the modernization and expansion of the military.
Japan's unequal status was symbolized by the treaties imposed on the country when it was forcefully opened to foreign influences.
The major task of Meiji diplomacy was to press for the revision of the unequal treaties.
The newly created military was used to extend Japanese power overseas as many leaders believed that national security depended on expansion and not merely a strong defense.
Perhaps most importantly, Japan gained enormous prestige by being the first non-Western country to operate a modern colony.
This recognized Japanese interests in Korea and assured Japan they would remain neutral in case of a Russo-Japanese war, but would become more actively involved if another power (an allusion to France) entered the war as a Russian ally.
In the following Russo-Japanese War , Japan won possession of southern Sakhalin and a position of paramount influence in Korea and southern Manchuria.
U.S.-Japanese relations at the time were shaped by antiJapanese sentiment, especially on the West Coast, and an eventual informal Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907 assured Japan the United States would not bar Japanese immigration if Japan ensured little or no movement to the United States The agreement also rescinded the segregation order of the San Francisco School Board in California, which had humiliated and angered the Japanese.
Russia moved to fill the void by securing from China a 25year lease of Dalian (Dairen in Japanese, also known as Port Arthur) and rights to the South Manchurian Railway Company, a semi-official Japanese company, to construct a railroad.
Despite tremendous loss of life on both sides, the Japanese won a series of land battles and then decisively defeated Russia's Baltic Sea Fleet at the Battle of Tsushima in 1905.
In an act aimed at strengthening the power of the EIC, King Charles II granted the EIC (in a series of five acts around 1670) the rights to autonomously acquire territory, mint money, command fortresses and troops and form alliances, make war and peace, and exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction over the acquired areas.
By an act passed in 1698, a new ""parallel"" East India Company (officially titled the English Company Trading to the East Indies) was floated under a state-backed indemnity of £2 million.
POTTE TECTED ECETEE EERE GET E This Company painting probably depicts William Fullerton of Rosemount, who joined the East India Company's service in 1744, by Dip Chand, 1760-64.
During the wars against the French and their allies in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the EIC's armies were used to seize the colonial possessions of other European nations, including the islands of Réunion and Mauritius.
Learning Objective Explain why the British Raj was established in India Key Points The control of rich Bengal gained in the aftermath of the Battle of Plassey brought India into the public spotlight in Britain, and Parliament established regulations to manage the affairs of the East India Company.
Although some wanted the Company's territories to be taken over by the British state, the eventual compromise asserted that the Company could act as a sovereign power on behalf of the Crown while subject to oversight and regulation by the British government and parliament.
Under the terms of The Charter Act of 1833, the British Parliament revoked the Company's trade license, which made the Company a part of British governance, but administration of British India remained the responsibility Company officers.
The Act also charged the Governor-General-in-Council (to whose title was now added ""of India"") with the supervision of civil and military administration of India as well as the exclusive power of legislation.
After the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the British government took control of the Company.
A princely state was a semi-sovereign principality during the British Raj that was not directly governed by the British, but rather by a local ruler.
British Government Until the 1757 Battle of Plassey, the East India Company territories in India, which consisted largely of the presidency towns of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, were governed by the mostly autonomous—and sporadically unmanageable—town councils, all composed of merchants.
In London, it provided for a cabinet-level Secretary of State for India and a 15-member Council of India, whose members were required, to have spent at least ten years in India no more than 10 years ago.
The GovernorGeneral in the capital, Calcutta, and the Governor ina subordinate presidency was each required to consult his advisory council.
However, in the years of the post-rebellion reconstruction, Viceroy Lord Canning found the collective decision making of the Council to be too time-consuming for the pressing tasks ahead, so he requested the ""portfolio system"" of an Executive Council, in which the business of each government department (the portfolio) was assigned to and became the responsibility of a single council member.
Learning Objective Define the ""civilising mission"" Key Points e The mission civilisatrice, a French term that translates literally into English as civilising mission, is a rationale for intervention or colonization, purporting to contribute to the spread of civilization and used mostly in relation to the colonization and Westernization of indigenous peoples in the 19th and 20th centuries.
In India, the British ""civilising mission"" focused largely on educational reforms designed to speed up modernization and reduce administrative charges.
All these benefits, however, went to the Indian elites and middle classes, who were expected to serve as loyal supporters of the British rule in India.
The ""civilising mission"" rhetoric continued, but soon became an alibi for British misrule and racism without the pretense that Indian progress was ever a goal.
By 1887, of 21,000 mid-level civil service appointments, 45% were held by Hindus, 7% by Muslims, 19% by Eurasians (European father and Indian mother), and 29% by Europeans.
Learning Objective Analyze the reasons for the Great Uprising of 1857 Key Points The Indian Rebellion of 1857 resulted from an accumulation of factors over time rather than any single event.
Some historians have suggested that heavy land-revenue assessment in some areas resulted in many landowning families losing their land or going into great debt. e The rebellion began as a mutiny of sepoys on May 10, 1857, in the cantonment of the town of Meerut, and soon escalated into other mutinies and civilian rebellions, largely in the upper Gangetic plain and central India, with the major hostilities confined to present-day Uttar Pradesh, western Bihar, northern Madhya Pradesh, and the Delhi region.
In general, the rebels were disorganized, had differing goals, were poorly equipped, led, and trained, and had no outside support or funding. e The rebellion and its aftermath resulted in the deaths of more than 100,000 Indians.
Most of the British press and British public, outraged by the stories of alleged rape and the killings of civilians and wounded British soldiers, did not advocate clemency of any kind. e The rebellion saw the end of the East India Company's rule in India.
Rural landlords called ta/uqdars lost half their landed estates to peasant farmers as a result of the land reforms that came in the wake of annexation of Oudh.
Learning Objective Describe the economy of British India and how it fit into Britain's mercantilism Key Points Both the direct administration of India by the British Crown and the technological change ushered in by the Industrial Revolution closely intertwined the economies of India and Great Britain.
Despite Britain's position as the global leader of industrial development, India's industrialization was limited beyond textiles.
Entrepreneur Jamsetji Tata became the symbol of local industrial success, establishing a company that remains an influential global brand today.
The railways were privately owned and operated and run by British administrators, engineers, and skilled craftsmen.
While other Indian mills produced cheap coarse yarn (and later cloth) using local short-staple cotton and cheap machinery imported from Britain, Tata imported expensive longerstapled cotton from Egypt and bought more complex ringspindle machinery from the United States to spin finer yarn that could compete with imports from Britain.
The Tata Iron and Steel Company , headed by his son Dorabji Tata , opened its plant in 1908.
The railway network tn 1909, when it was the fourth largest railway network in the world In 1907, almost all the rail companies were taken over by the government.
During this period, the Congress remained center-left in its social policies while steadily shifting from a socialist to a neoliberal economic outlook. e Throughout the post-independence period, Congress leadership was dominated by the Nehru-Gandhi political dynasty.
With the help of the moderate group led by Ghokhale, Gandhi became president of the Congress and formed an alliance with the Khilafat Movement, a pan-Islamic, political protest Campaign launched by Muslims to influence the British government and increase Hindu Muslim unity.
The Khilafat movement soon collapsed and in the years following World War I, the party became associated with Mahatma Gandhi, who remained its unofficial spiritual leader and icon.
Shastri retained many members of Nehru's Council of Ministers and appointed Indira Gandhi , Jawaharlal Nehru's daughter and former Congress President, Minister of Information and Broadcasting.
In response to increasing disorder, Gandhi's cabinet and government recommended that President Fakhruddin Ali Anmed declare a state of emergency.
Members of the upwardly mobile and successful western-educated elites established organizations that aimed to ensure that they would gain influence in Indian politics but were not focused on the question of Indian independence.
By 1900, although the Indian National Congress, the leading independence movement organization, emerged as an all-India political organization, its achievement was undermined by its failure to attract Muslims.
They often referred to the 1941 Atlantic Charter and applied a number of strategies, both militant and based on the civil disobedience model. e New modernizing forms of African nationalism gained strength in the early 20th-century with the emergence of Pan-Africanism.
The destabilization of European rule led to the rapid growth of nationalist movements, and nearly all Asian colonies gained independence in the aftermath of World War Il, sometimes as a result of violent conflicts.
In the late 19th and early to mid-20th centuries, it became a pivotal participant in the Indian independence movement, with over 15 million members and over 70 million participants in its opposition to British colonial rule in India. swaraj A Hindi term that means generally se/Fgovernance or se/f-rule and was used to refer to Gandhi's concept for Indian independence from foreign domination.
The Knmer Empire, with the capital city in Angkor, grew out of the remnants of Chenla, becoming firmly established in 802. e After a long series of wars with neighboring kingdoms, Angkor was sacked by the Ayutthaya Kingdom and abandoned in 1432.
In the 19th century a renewed struggle between Siam and Vietnam for control of Cambodia resulted in the Siamese-Vietnamese War that placed the country under joint suzerainty. e Laos traces its history to the kingdom of Lan Xang , founded in the 14th century by Lao prince Fa Ngum.
The rebellion failed and Vientiane was ransacked. e In 938, the Vietnamese lord Ngo Quyen defeated the forces of the Chinese Southern Han state and achieved full independence for Vietnam after a millennium of Chinese domination.
Between the 11th and 18th centuries, Vietnam expanded southward, eventually conquering the kingdom of Champa and part of the Knmer Empire.
The term was later adopted as the name of the colony of French Indochina , and the entire area of Indochina is now usually referred to as the Indochinese Peninsula or Mainland Southeast Asia.
As reliable sources from this period are very rare, a fully defensible and conclusive explanation for the decline of the Knmer Empire, recognized unanimously by the scientific community, has so far not been produced.
Perhaps because of the complicated ethnic diversity of Lan Xang, the structure of society was fairly straightforward, especially in comparison to the Khmer with their complex caste system and concepts of a divine kingship or devaraja.
Learning Objective Analyze the French reasons for establishing a protectorate in Indochina Key Points The French were determined to establish their presence in Southeast Asia and used religious persecution as pretext for intervention.
Luang Prabang became a protectorate of France in 1889. e In 1893, France went to war with Siam.
Following Siam's acceptance of the ultimatum to cede the lands east of the Mekong including its islands, the Protectorate of Laos was officially established and the administrative capital moved from Luang Prabang to Vientiane. e On paper, Cochinchina was the only region of French Indochina with direct rule, but the differences between direct and indirect rule were purely theoretical and political interference was equally intrusive across the entire area.
French Imperial Ambitions tn Indochina The French had few pretexts to justify their imperial ambitions in Indochina.
See /h ye ae sb a 2 French marine infantrymen in Tonkin, 1884-1888 French troops landed in Vietnam in 1858 and by the mid1880s had established a firm grip over the northern region.
During the 19th century, the kingdom of Cambodia had been reduced to a vassal state of the kingdom of Siam , which had annexed its western provinces while growing influence from the Vietnamese Nguyen Dynasty threatened the eastern portion of the country.
INDOCHINE FRANCAIBE Oo carriat (Dor paler omens “Ym Pee Cate Bone Eehe Map of French Indochina from the colonial period showing its subdivisions, 1930 French Indochina was formed on October 17, 1887, from Annam, Tonkin, Cochinchina (which together form modern Vietnam), and the Kingdom of Cambodia.
However, because all investments aimed to attain immediate high returns for investors, only a small fraction of profit was reinvested. e Economically, the French did not develop Laos and Cambodia to the scale that they did Vietnam.
Since French Indochina was seen as a co/onie d'exploitation économique rather than a colonie de peuplement , by 1940 only about 34,000 French civilians lived in the region, along with a smaller number of French military personnel and government workers.
Economy French Indochina was designated as a colonie d'exploitation by the French government, but both exploitation and economic development differed significantly across the main regions of the colony.
The French suppressed both movements and Vietnamese revolutionaries began to radicalize.
In 1885, Si Votha, half brother of king Norodom and contender for the throne, led a rebellion to dispose of the French-backed Norodom after returning from exile in Siam.
In 1884, the governor of Cochinchina, Charles Anthoine Francois Thomson, attempted to overthrow the monarch and establish full French control over Cambodia by sending a small force to the royal palace in Phnom Penh.
Minor independence movements, especially the Khmer Issarak, began to develop in 1940 among Cambodians in Thailand who feared their actions would have led to punishment if they operated in their homeland.
Learning Objective Explain why Europeans were interested in obtaining land in Africa Key Points e The geography of North Africa has been reasonably wellknown since classical antiquity in Greco-Roman geography.
Focus on Africa was limited to the transatlantic slave trade. e Starting in the early 19th century, European land holdings in Africa began to shift and increase. e In the mid-19th century, Protestant missions were carrying on active missionary work, most famously by David Livingstone. e In November 1855, Livingstone became the first European to see the famous Victoria Falls, named after the Queen of the United Kingdom. e Henry Morton Stanley, who had in 1871 succeeded in finding and supporting Livingstone (originating the famous line ""Dr.
The Portuguese also established trade interests in the Kingdom of Mutapa in the 16th century, and in 1629 placed a puppet ruler on the throne.
Nyasa was first reached by the confidential slave of Antdnio da Silva Porto, a Portuguese trader established at Bié in Angola who crossed Africa during 1853-1856 from Benguella to the mouth of the Rovuma.
Du Chaillu had previously, through journeys in the Gabon region between 1855 and 1859, confirmed existence of the gorilla, previously thought to be a legend by Europeans.
Cape Goal Sig ae European Exploration of Africa Routes of European explorers in Africa to 1853.
Learning Objective Describe the ways Europe was already involved in Africa prior to the Berlin Conference Key Points Before the conference, European diplomacy treated African indigenous people in the same manner as the New World natives, forming trading relationships with the indigenous chiefs.
With the exception of trading posts along the coasts used to trade goods and slaves around the world, the continent was essentially ignored until the second half of the 19th century.
Even as late as the 1870s, European states still controlled only 10% of the African continent; by WWI, Europe controlled 90% of Africa.
Most notably, King Leopold II explored and colonized the Congo as a private venture with the aid of explorer Morton Stanley.
Leopold extracted a fortune from the Congo through forced labor of ivory and rubber production, causing the deaths of 1 to 15 million Congolese people.
With the dismissal of the aging Chancellor Bismarck by Kaiser Wilhelm II, the relatively orderly colonization became a frantic scramble.
Under support from the British and the initiative of Portugal, Otto von Bismarck, German Chancellor, called on representatives of 13 nations in Europe as well as the United States to take part in the Berlin Conference in 1884 to work out joint policy on the African continent. e The main dominating powers of the conference were France, Germany, Great Britain and Portugal; they remapped Africa without considering the cultural and linguistic borders that were already established. e No Africans were invited to the Conference.
Hoping to quickly soothe this brewing conflict, King Leopold Il convinced France and Germany that common trade in Africa was in the best interests of all three countries.
Learning Objective List some of the key agreements in the General Act of the Conference Key Points In 1884, the Berlin Conference was convened to discuss African colonization, with the aim of setting up international guidelines for making claims to African land to avoid conflict between European powers.
At the Conference, the participants decided on the ""General Act of the Conference,"" which laid the frameworks for colonization.
One of the most important decisions in the ""Act"" was the principle of effective occupation, which stated that no territory could be formally claimed prior to being directly ruled and administered by the colonial power.
The conference also resolved to end slavery by African and Islamic powers, a move that many critics ridiculed as a humanitarian facade to garner international support; the resolution was non-binding.
The Scramble for Africa sped up after the Conference, since even within areas designated as their spheres of influence, the European powers had to take possession under the Principle of Effectivity.
According to some critics, the diplomats put ona humanitarian facade to garner international support by condemning the slave trade, prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages and firearms in certain regions, and expressing concern for missionary activities.
Thus, an international prohibition of the Slave trade throughout their respected spheres was signed by the European members.
The Congo Free State was confirmed as the private property of the Congo Society, which supported Leopold's promises to keep the country open to all European investment.
The 14 signatory powers would have free trade throughout the Congo Basin as well as Lake Malawi, and east of this in an area south of 5° N The Niger and Congo rivers were made free for ship traffic.
A Principle of Effectivity was introduced to prevent powers from setting up colonies in name only.
Any fresh act of taking possession of any portion of the African coast would have to be notified by the power taking possession or to the other signatory powers in a protectorate. e Regions were defined in which each European power had an exclusive right to ""pursue"" the legal ownership of land in the eyes of the other European powers. e The first reference in an international act to the obligations attaching to ""spheres of influence"" is contained in the Berlin Act.
Congo Free State A large state in Central Africa from 1885 to 1908 in personal union with the Kingdom of Belgium under Leopold ll.
Leopold's regime began various infrastructure projects, such as construction of the railway that ran from the coast to the capital of Leopoldville and took eight years to complete.
Shortly after the anti-slavery conference he held in Brussels in 1889, Leopold issued a new decree which said that Africans could only sell their harvested products (mostly ivory and rubber) to the state in a large part of the Free State.
Meanwhile, the FP was required to provide the hands of their victims as proof when they had shot and killed someone, as it was believed they would otherwise use the munitions for hunting.
Roger Casement, then the British Consul at Boma , was sent to the Congo Free State to investigate.
The Congo rubber came from wild vines in the jungle, which cannot be cultivated, unlike the rubber from Brazil , which was tapped from trees and could be cultivated.
These detailed unlawful killings and other abuses by Abir, and Leopold II was embarrassed into instituting reforms.
These began with the appointment of American Richard Mohun by Leopold II as director of Abir.
France in Africa 28.3.1: French West Africa French West Africa was a federation of eight French colonial territories in Africa: Mauritania, Senegal, French Sudan (now Mali), French Guinea , Céte d'Ivoire, Upper Volta , Dahomey , and Niger.
Afrique occidentale francaise, AOF) was a federation of eight French colonial territories in Africa: Mauritania, Senegal, French Sudan , French Guinea , Céte d'lvoire, Upper Volta (now Burkina Faso), Dahomey and Niger.
Learning Objective Discuss the French presence in Northern Africa and how these colonies differed from others Key Points French North Africa, which at the height of French colonial control amounted to most of the Maghreb region, began with the French invasion of Algeria in 1830.
From 1848, when France officially made Algeria a colony, until independence in 1962, the whole Mediterranean region of Algeria was administered as an integral part of France.
Algeria became a destination for hundreds of thousands of European immigrants.
The French protectorate of Tunisia was established in 1881 during the collapse of the Ottoman Empire at the hands of the Russians, and lasted until Tunisian independence in 1956.
During French rule of Tunisia, major developments and improvements were undertaken in several areas, including transport and infrastructure, industry, the financial system, public health, and administration, although French businesses and citizen were favored, to the anger and resentment of the Tunisians.
The French Protectorate in Morocco was established by the Treaty of Fez in 1912; it had been a Spanish protectorate since 1884.
In opposition to the approach taken in Algeria and Tunisia, in Morocco, the French abandoned their typical assimilationist approach to culture and education, instead using urban planning and colonial education to prevent cultural mixing and uphold the traditional society of Morocco.
Until its independence, French Algeria had been part of metropolitan France since before World War Il.
French North Africa ended soon after the Evian Accords of March 1962, which led to the Algerian independence referendum of July 1962.
Germany, seeing the French claim asa way to divert attention from vengeful action in Europe and little concerned about the southern Mediterranean, agreed to allow France to rule in Tunisia.
Its ultimate aim was achieved in 1956 when it became the Republic of Tunisia. a Congress of Berlin A depiction of the Congress of Berlin, which resulted in France receiving Tunisia from Britain.
First, the protectorate was established only two years before the outbreak of World War I, which brought with it a new attitude toward colonial rule.
By adopting French language and culture, the indigenous populations under colonial rule could eventually become French, sharing in the equal rights of citizenship. e This policy was put most famously into practice in the oldest French colonial towns, known as the Four Communes. e During the French Revolution of 1848, slavery was abolished and the Four Communes were given voting rights and the right to elect a Deputy to the Assembly in Paris, which they did in 1912 with Blaise Diagne, the first black man to hold a position in the French government.
The promise of equal rights and respect under the assimilation policy was often merely an abstraction, as the assimilated Africans still faced substantial discrimination in Africa and France.
In addition, in the largest and most populous colonies, a strict separation between ""sujets francais"" (all the natives) and ""citoyens francais"" (all males of European extraction), along with different rights and duties, was maintained.
Aside from the Four Communes in Senegal (discussed below), for the most part, in the largest and most populous colonies, a strict separation between ""sujets francais"" (all the natives) and ""citoyens francais"" (all males of European extraction), along with different rights and duties, was maintained.
After World War Il, the segregationist approach modeled in Morocco had been discredited and assimilationism enjoyed a brief revival.
Learning Objective Describe changes in Egypt after the British began to take a strong interest in the country Key Points e British control of Egypt, which at first took the form of indirect and informal rule and later as an official protectorate, began in the 1880s. e In 1882 opposition to European control led to growing tension among notable natives, with the most dangerous opposition coming from the army.
By June Egypt was in the hands of nationalists opposed to European domination of the country. e The British succeeded in defeating the Egyptian Army at Tel El Kebir in September and took control of the country.
The combined Anglo-French-Indian army easily defeated the Egyptian Army at Tel El Kebir in September and took control of the country putting Tawfig back in control.
Staggered, the British brought in large numbers of soldiers and fought back with overwhelming force, forcing the Boers to revert to guerrilla warfare. e The British solution was to set up complex nets of block houses, strong points, and barbed wire fences, partitioning off the entire conquered territory and relocating civilians into concentration camps.
Fashoda Incident The climax of imperial territorial disoutes between Britain and France in Eastern Africa in 1898.
An ardent believer in British imperialism, he and his British South Africa Company founded the southern African territory of Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe and Zambia), which the company named after him in 1895.
France also had an outpost near the mouth of the Red Sea in Djibouti (French Somaliland), which could serve as an eastern anchor to an east-west belt of French territory across the continent.
The British, on the other hand, wanted to link their possessions in Southern Africa (modern South Africa, Botswana, Malawi, Lesotho, Zimbabwe, and Zambia), with their territories in East Africa , and these two areas with the Nile basin.
A cartoon depicting Cecil Rhodes standing over Africa, with one foot in South Africa and the other in Egypt.
In 1882, ongoing civil disturbances in Egypt prompted Britain to intervene, extending a hand to France.
The attitude toward colonialism shifted again during the reign of Kaiser Wilhelm II, who espoused a Weltpolitik foreign policy that emphasized aggressive diplomacy, the acquisition of overseas colonies, and the development of a large navy.
The aim of We/tpolitik was to transform Germany into a global power through aggressive diplomacy, the acquisition of overseas colonies, and the development of a large navy.
FS Ww Thr fawn os gamy reckt jem wom De anderen Doct untew Uvideiifigamy fades, Ilan bel deer cxdlih Bebe beer obra Otto Von Bismarck's Ambivalence Cartoon from 1884.
Germany and the Herero The Herero and Nama genocide was a campaign of racial extermination and collective punishment that the German Empire undertook in German South-West Africa (modern-day Namibia) against the Herero and Nama people, considered one of the first genocides of the 20th century.
Learning Objective Assess the argument for classifying the persecution against the Herero as a genocide Key Points During the Scramble for Africa, South-West Africa was claimed by Germany in August 1884.
German colonists arriving in the following years occupied large areas of land, ignoring claims by the Herero and other natives.
There was continual resistance by the natives, most notably in 1903 when some of the Herero tribes rose in revolt and about 60 German settlers were killed.
It took until 1908 to re-establish German authority over the territory; by that time tens of thousands of Africans had been either killed or died of thirst while fleeing.
In recent years scholars have debated the ""continuity thesis"" that links German colonialist brutalities to the treatment of Jews, Poles, and Russians during World War Il.
Learning Objective Describe what distinguishes Liberia from other African states Key Points From around 1800, in the United States, people opposed to slavery were planning ways to achieve freedom for more slaves and ultimately abolish the institution.
At the same time, slaveholders in the South opposed having free blacks in their midst, as they believed the free people threatened the stability of their slave societies.
While mostly free across the North, former slaves and other free blacks suffered considerable discrimination, and some territories and states in the Northwest prohibited migration by free people of color.
Some abolitionists and slaveholders discussed the idea of relocating freed African-American slaves to a colony in Africa, which led to the American Colonization Society , established in 1816 by Robert Finley of New Jersey. e From 1821, thousands of free blacks who faced legislated restrictions in the United States moved to Liberia. e In 1847, the legislature of Liberia declared the nation an independent state. e By 1867, the ACS had assisted in the movement of more than 13,000 Americans to Liberia.
Liberia retained its independence throughout the Scramble for Africa by European colonial powers during the late 19th century, but the country remained in the American sphere of influence.
It is bordered by Sierra Leone to its west, Guinea to its north, and Cote d'Ivoire to its east.
King, 17th President of Liberia , with his entourage on the steps of the Peace Palace, The Hague , 1927.
More rapid modernization took place under Menelik Il and Haile Selassie, but this did not deter another Italian invasion in 1935.
Much to their surprise, they found that Ethiopian ruler Menelik Il, rather than being opposed by some of his traditional enemies, was supported by them.
Full-scale war broke out in 1895, with Italian troops having initial success until Ethiopian troops counterattacked Italian positions and besieged the Italian fort of Meqgele, forcing its surrender.
Occurring during the era of the French Third Republic (beginning 1870), it was characterized by optimism, regional peace, economic prosperity and technological, scientific and cultural innovations.
The British Empire (marked in pink) was the superpower of the 19th century.
The Belle Epoque was named, in retrospect, when it began to be considered a “Golden Age"" in contrast to the horrors of World War I In the United Kingdom, the Belle Epoque overlapped with the late Victorian era and the Edwardian era.
World War I, mass transportation, the spread of literacy, and various citizenship concerns changed this.
Aix-la-Chapelle , Carlsbad , Troppau , Laibach , Verona , London , and Berlin . e The Concert's effectiveness ended with the rise of nationalism, the 1848 Revolutions, the Crimean War, the unification of Germany, and the Eastern Question, among other factors.
Disputes on precedence among nations (and therefore the appropriate diplomatic ranks used) were first addressed at the Congress of Aix-laChapelle in 1818, but persisted for over a century until after World War Il, when the rank of ambassador became the norm.
Learning Objective Assess the World Fairs and their purpose in the late 19th and early 20th centuries Key Points e World fairs are international exhibits displaying the achievements of nations, largely focused on technological and industrial developments. e World fairs originated in the French tradition of national exhibitions that culminated with the French Industrial Exposition of 1844 held in Paris.
It was attended by numerous notable figures of the time, including Charles Darwin, Samuel Colt, members of the Orléanist Royal Family, and the writers Charlotte Bronte, Charles Dickens, Lewis Carroll, George Eliot, and Alfred Tennyson. human zoos Public exhibitions of humans, usually in a so-called natural or primitive state.
Heating -Ventilation nga ilitary Science a World Fairs A poster advertising the Brussels International Exposition.
The 1900 World's Fair presented the famous diorama living in Madagascar, while the Colonial Exhibitions in Marseilles and in Paris (1907 and 1931) also displayed humans in cages, often nude or semi-nude.
Rise of Militarism Prior to World War | The main causes of World War I, which broke out unexpectedly in central Europe in summer 1914, comprised all the conflicts and hostility of the four decades leading up to the war.
Sceiiemkanenilll ee... mo RIMET SE i en NNR pat cone te pat nthe 4 be ihe de pe te Naval Arms Race 1909 cartoon in Puck shows the United States, Germany, Britain, France, and Japan engaged in naval race in a ""no limit"" game.
This ""powder keg"" was thus a major catalyst for the outbreak of World War Learning Objective Define the Balkan Powder Keg Key Points e By the early 20th century, Bulgaria, Greece, Montenegro, and Serbia had achieved independence from the Ottoman Empire, but large elements of their ethnic populations remained under Ottoman rule.
In 1912 these countries formed the Balkan League and declared war on the Ottomans to reclaim territory. e Four Balkan states defeated the Ottoman Empire in the first war; one of the four, Bulgaria, suffered defeat in the second war. e The tensions and conflicts in this are often referred to as the ""Balkan powder keg"" and had implications beyond the region.
Key Terms irredentism Any political or popular movement intended to reclaim and reoccupy a ""lost"" or ""unredeemed"" area; territorial claims are justified on the basis of real or imagined national and historic or ethnic (an area inhabited by that nation or ethnic group) affiliations.
To complicate matters, in the years preceding World War I, there existed a tangle of Great Power alliances, both formal and informal, public and secret.
The murder was described by Christopher Clark as ""a terrorist event charged with historic meaning, transforming the political chemistry in Vienna.” e The assassination triggered the July Crisis, a series of tense diplomatic maneuverings that led to an ultimatum from Austria-Hungary to the Kingdom of Serbia, who rejected some of these conditions as a violation of their sovereignty.
Key Terms Black Hand A secret military society formed on May 9, 1911, by officers in the Army of the Kingdom of Serbia, originating in the conspiracy group that assassinated the Serbian royal couple led by captain Dragutin Dimitrijevic ""Apis."" irredentism Any political or popular movement intended to reclaim and reoccupy a ""lost"" or ""unredeemed"" area; territorial claims are justified on the basis of real or imagined national and historic or ethnic (an area inhabited by that nation or ethnic group) affiliations.
Princip was one of a group of six assassins (five Serbs and one Bosniak) coordinated by Danilo Ili€é, a Bosnian Serb and a member of the Black Hand secret society.
The assassins’ motives were consistent with Young Bosnia, a revolutionary movement active in the Condominium of Bosnia and Herzegovina before World War I The members were predominantly school students, primarily Serbs but also Bosniaks and Croats.
Events of World War I 29.3.1: The Alliances During the 19th century, the major European powers went to great lengths to maintain a balance of power throughout Europe, resulting in the existence of a complex network of political and military alliances throughout the continent leading up to World War I According to some historians, this caused a localized conflict to escalate into a global war.
The Triple Alliance and the Triple Entente, which were renewed several times leading up to World War I, formed the two opposing sides of the war, with Italy moving over to ally with the Triple Entente after the start of the war and other nations pulled in over time.
When Wilhelm II ascended to the throne as German Emperor , Bismarck was compelled to retire and his system of alliances was gradually de-emphasized.
Kaiser Wilhelm Il of Germany, King George V of England, and Tsar Nicholas II of Russia were cousins.
Bratianu, also secretly pledged to support the Triple Alliance, but he remained neutral since Austria-Hungary started the war.
Schlieffen's war plans by the name of Aufmarsch Il and Aufmarsch Ost continued to stress that Germany's best hope for survival in a war with the Franco-Russian entente was a defensive strategy.
Accordingly, the Aufmarsch Ii West deployment was changed for the offensive of 1914, despite its unrealistic goals and the insufficient forces Germany had available for decisive success.
Learning Objective Summarize the general trends of the early battles of World War | Key Points The Western Front was the main theatre of war during World War I Following the outbreak of war in August 1914, the German Army opened the Western Front by invading Luxembourg and Belgium, then gained military control of important industrial regions in France.
The resulting ""Race to the Sea"" had both sides establishing a meandering line of fortified trenches stretching from the North Sea to the Swiss frontier with France in an attempt to outflank the opposition. e This line remained essentially unchanged for most of the war.
Key Terms Battle of the Frontiers A series of battles along the eastern frontier of France and in southern Belgium shortly after the outbreak of World War I The battles resolved the military strategies of the French Chief of Staff General Joseph Joffre with Plan XVII and an offensive interpretation of the German Aufmarsch Ii deployment plan by Helmuth von Moltke the Younger.
Siege of Liége The opening engagement of the German invasion of Belgium and the first battle of World War I The attack on Liége city began on August 5, 1914, and lasted until August 16 when the last fort surrendered.
Battle of Liege At the outbreak of the First World War, the German Army executed a modified version of the Schlieffen Plan, designed to quickly attack France through neutral Belgium before turning southwards to encircle the French Army on the German border.
The first battle in Belgium was the Siege of Liege, which lasted from August 5-16.
First Battle of the Marne The German Army came within 43 miles of Paris but at the First Battle of the Marne , French and British troops were able to force a German retreat by exploiting a gap that appeared between the 1st and 2nd Armies, ending the German advance into France.
Laying Trenches and the First Battle of Ypres On the Entente side (those countries opposing the German alliance), the final lines were occupied by the armies of the Allied countries, with each nation defending a part of the front.
The most famous use of trench warfare is the Western Front in World War e Trench warfare occurs when a revolution in firepower is not matched by similar advances in mobility, as in the first two decades of the 20th century when advances allowed the creation of strong defensive systems that out-of-date military tactics could not break through for most of the war. e Barbed wire was a significant hindrance to massed infantry advances.
Trench Warfare in World War I Trench warfare occurs when a revolution in firepower is not matched by similar advances in mobility, resulting ina grueling form of warfare in which the defender holds the advantage.
The opening of this offensive (July 1, 1916) saw the British Army endure the bloodiest day in its history, suffering 57,470 casualties, including 19,240 dead, on the first day alone.
On April 22, 1915, at the Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western Front.
Tanks were developed by Britain and France, and were first used in combat by the British during the Battle of FlersCourcelette on September 15, 1916, with only partial success.
The End of World War I 29.4.1: American Entry into WWI The American entry into World War | came in April 1917, after two and a half years of efforts by President Woodrow Wilson to keep the United States neutral.
The sinking turned public opinion in many countries against Germany, contributed to the American entry into World War I, and became an iconic symbol in military recruiting campaigns.
American Neutrality and the Lusitania At the outbreak of World War I, the United States pursued a policy of non-intervention, avoiding conflict while trying to broker a peace.
The treaty ceded vast territories, including Finland, the Baltic provinces, parts of Poland, and Ukraine, to the Central Powers. e The treaty was effectively terminated in November 1918 when Germany surrendered to the Allies.
The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was a peace treaty signed on March 3, 1918, between the new Bolshevik government of Soviet Russia and the Central Powers (Germany, AustriaHungary, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire), that ended Russia's participation in World War I The treaty was signed at Brest-Litovsk after two months of negotiations and was forced on the Bolshevik government by the threat of further advances by German and Austrian forces.
At the time, the Russian economy nearly collapsed under the strain of the war effort.
On October 26, 1917, Viadimir Lenin signed the Decree on Peace, which was approved by the Second Congress of the Soviet of Workers', Soldiers’, and Peasants' Deputies.
The signatories were Bolshevik Russia signed by Grigori Yakovlovich Sokolnikov on the one side and the German Empire, Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, and Ottoman Empire on the other.
The treaty marked Russia's final withdrawal from World War las an enemy of her co-signatories, on unexpectedly humiliating terms.
Signing of armistice between Russia and Germany, shows German delegates and Soviet delegates (on the right) sitting and standing along a long table, signing the Treaty.
The Allied powers led a small-scale invasion of Russia, partly to stop Germany from exploiting Russian resources, and to a lesser extent, to support the ""Whites"" in the Russian Civil War.
In the Armistice of November 11, 1918, that ended World War |, one of the first conditions was the complete abrogation of the Brest-Litovsk treaty.
Shortly after the outbreak of the war, the British navy, the largest and most powerful in the world at that time, began a naval blockade of Germany, cutting off vital military and civilian supplies. e Britain mined international waters to prevent any ships from entering entire sections of ocean, causing danger to even neutral ships. e The German Board of Public Health in December 1918 claimed that 763,000 German civilians died from starvation and disease caused by the blockade through December 1918.
The Hundred Days Offensive The Hundred Days Offensive was the final period of World War |, during which the Allies launched a series of offensive attacks against the Central Powers that pushed the Germans out of France and led to their defeat.
Learning Objective Describe the events of the Hundred Days Offensive and how they led to the end of the war Key Points After a stunning German offensive along the Western Front in the spring of 1918, the Allies rallied and drove back the Germans in a series of successful offensives, known collectively as the Hundred Days Offensives.
The allies continued offensives on several points on the Western Front, eventually forcing the Germans behind the Hindenburg Line, which had been a stable defensive line for the Germans.
On November 4, 1918, the Austro-Hungarian empire agreed to an armistice, and Germany, which had its own trouble with revolutionaries, agreed to an armistice on November 11, 1918, ending the war in victory for the Allies.
The Germans realized that their only remaining chance of victory was to defeat the Allies before the overwhelming human and matériel resources of the United States could be fully deployed.
Finally, the German defenses, manned by the German 2nd Army (General Georg von der Marwitz), were relatively weak, having been subjected to continual raiding by the Australians in a process termed peaceful penetration.
Soon after, the Germans signed the Armistice of Compiegne, which ended the fighting on the Western Front.
USA _bryter de diplomatiska for bindelserna_med_Tyskland_ 3 februari_1917.jpg.
The Treaty of Versailles 29.5.1: Diplomatic Goals at the Paris Peace Conference The ""Big Four"" (United States, Great Britain, France, and Italy) made all the major decisions of the Paris Peace Conference, although they disagreed on several points.
Nicknamed ""Pére la Victoire"" or ""Le Tigre"" , he took a harsh position against defeated Germany, though not quite as much as the President Raymond Poincaré, and won agreement on Germany's payment of large sums for reparations.
Wilson felt it was his duty and obligation to the people of the world to be a prominent figure at the peace negotiations.
Ensuring the security of France Removing the threat of the German High Seas Fleet Settling territorial contentions Supporting the League of Nations with that order of priority Convinced that Canada had become a nation on the battlefields of Europe, its Prime Minister, Sir Robert Borden, demanded that it have a separate seat at the conference.
In May 1919 the diplomat René Massigli was sent on several secret missions to Berlin.
Wilson's Fourteen Points The Fourteen Points was a statement of principles used for peace negotiations following the end World War I, outlined in a January 8, 1918, speech to the United States Congress by President Woodrow Wilson.
This group researched topics likely to arise in the anticipated peace conference.
The speech, known as the Fourteen Points, was authored mainly by Walter Lippmann and projected Wilson's progressive domestic policies into the international arena.
It was the clearest expression of intention made by any of the belligerent nations and was generally supported by the European nations.
The first six points dealt with diplomacy, freedom of the seas, and settlement of colonial claims; pragmatic territorial issues were addressed as well, and the final point regarded the establishment of an association of nations to guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all nations—a League of Nations. e The actual agreements reached at the Paris Peace Conference were quite different than Wilson's plan, most notably in the harsh economic reparations required from Germany.
The address was well received in the United States and Allied nations and even by Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin as a landmark of enlightenment in international relations.
Learning Objective Describe the final treaty signed by the belligerants Key Points The major decisions at the Paris Peace Conference were the creation of the League of Nations; the five peace treaties with defeated enemies; the awarding of German and Ottoman overseas possessions as ""mandates,"" chiefly to Britain and France; and the drawing of new national boundaries to better reflect the forces of nationalism.
The Central Powers had to acknowledge responsibility for ""all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by"" their aggression.
In the Treaty of Versailles, this statement was Article 231, which became known as War Guilt clause because of the resentment and humiliation it caused many Germans.
The Treaty of Versailles also forced Germany to disarm, make substantial territorial concessions, and pay reparations to certain countries that formed the Entente powers.
The redrawing of the world map at these conferences created many critical conflict-prone international contradictions; these became one of the causes of World War Il.
The humiliation and resentment this caused is sometimes consider responsible for Nazi electoral successes and indirectly, World War Il.
The Ottoman Empire was to be partitioned by the Treaty of Sevres of 1920.
At the time economists, notably John Maynard Keynes, predicted that the treaty was too harsh—a ""Carthaginian peace""—and said the reparations figure was excessive and counter-productive, views that have since been the subject of ongoing debate by historians and economists from several countries.
Historical Assessment The remaking of the world map at these conferences gave birth to a number of critical conflict-prone international contradictions, which would become one of the causes of World War Il.
Economic depression, renewed nationalism, weakened successor states, and feelings of humiliation (particularly in Germany) eventually contributed to World War Il.
Learning Objective Explain the ideals that underpinned the forming of the League of Nations Key Points The League of Nations was formed at the Paris Peace Conference to prevent another global conflict like World War | and maintain world peace.
Unlike former efforts at world peace such as the Concert of Europe, the League was an independent organization without an army of its own, and thus depended on the Great Powers to enforce its resolutions.
The members were often hesitant to do so, leaving the League powerless to intervene in disputes and conflicts.
The United States Congress, mainly led by Henry Cabot Lodge, was resistant to joining the League, as doing so would legally bind the United States to intervene in European conflicts.
In the end, the United States did not join the League, despite being its main architects.
The League would consist of a General Assembly , an Executive Council (with membership limited to major powers), and a permanent secretariat.
William Or pen %E2%80%93 The Signing of Peace in the Hal |_of Mirrors, Versailles 1919, Ausschnitt.jpg.
Tactical reorganizations (such as shifting the focus of command from the 100+ man company to the 10+ man squad) went hand-in-hand with armored cars, the first submachine guns, and automatic rifles that a single individual soldier could carry and use. e Although the use of poison gas was banned by the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, Germany turned to this industry for what it hoped would be a decisive weapon to break the deadlock of trench warfare.
Although at times they were efficient fleet weapons against enemy naval warships, they were most effectively used in an economic warfare role , enforcing a naval blockade against enemy shipping.
Many of the deadliest battles in history occurred during World War I, such as Ypres, the Marne, Cambrai, the Somme, Verdun, and Gallipoli.
Most of these would be forgotten in the interwar period until World War Il revived the need.
World War | as Total War Almost the whole of Europe and its colonial empires mobilized to wage World War I Young men were removed from production jobs to serve in military roles and were replaced by women.
Economics of World War I All of the powers in 1914 expected a short war; none had made any economic preparations for a long war, such as stockpiling food or critical raw materials.
One estimate is that the Allies soent $147 billion on the war and the Central Powers only $61 billion.
Vickers machine _gun_in the Battle of Passchendaele September 1917. jpg.
Key Terms Young Plan A program for settling German reparations debts after World War I, written in 1929 and formally adopted in 1930.
Learning Objective Describe the Weimar Republic and the challenges it faced Key Points e The Weimar Republic came into existence during the final stages of World War I, during the German Revolution of 1918-19.
In its 14 years, the Weimar Republic faced numerous problems, including hyperinflation, political extremism (with paramilitaries both leftand right-wing); and contentious relationships with the victors of the First World War.
The Weimar Republic had some of the most serious economic problems ever experienced by any Western democracy in history.
Turkish revolutionaries led by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, a successful Ottoman commander, rejected the terms enforced at Sevres and under the guise of General Inspector of the Ottoman Army, left Istanbul for Samsun to organize the remaining Ottoman forces to resist the terms of the treaty.
As a result, Turkey became the only power of World War | to overturn the terms of its defeat and negotiate with the Allies as an equal.
Europe in 1923 The dissolution of the German, Russian, Austro-Hungarian, and Ottoman empires created a number of new countries in eastern Europe, such as Poland, Finland, Yugoslavia, and Turkey.
Self-Determination The right of peoples to self-determination is a cardinal principle in modern international law.
It also is derived from principles espoused by United States President Woodrow Wilson following World War |, after which some new nation states were formed or previous states revived after the dissolution of empires.
Leading up to World War I, in Europe there was a rise of nationalism, with nations such as Greece, Hungary, Poland, and Bulgaria seeking or winning their independence.
In the Statute of Westminster the United Kingdom granted independence to Canada, New Zealand, Newfoundland, the Irish Free State, the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Union of South Africa after the British parliament declared itself as incapable of passing laws over them without their consent.
Learning Objective Identify why the Kellogg-Briand Pact was concieved and signed Key Points After World War I, seeing the devastating consequences of total war, many politicians and diplomats strove to created measures that would prevent further armed conflict.
This effort resulted in numerous international institutions and treaties, such as the creation of the League of Nations and in 1928, the Kellogg-Briand Pact.
Practically, the Kellogg-Briand Pact did not live up to its aim of ending war or stopping the rise of militarism, and in this sense it made no immediate contribution to international peace and proved to be ineffective in the years to come.
Nevertheless, the pact has served as one of the legal bases establishing the international norms that the threat or use of military force in contravention of international law, as well as the territorial acquisitions resulting from it, are unlawful.
It inspired and influenced future international agreements, including the United Nations Charter.
While the United States Senate did not add any reservation to the treaty, it did pass a measure which interpreted the treaty as not infringing upon the United States’ right of self-defense and not obliging the nation to enforce it by taking action against those who violated it.
Learning Objective Outline the events of the 1905 Revolution, along with its successes and failures Key Points e In January 1905, an incident known as ""Bloody Sunday"" occurred when Father Gapon led an enormous crowd to the Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg to present a petition to the tsar. e When the procession reached the palace, Cossacks opened fire on the crowd, killing hundreds. e The Russian masses were so aroused over the massacre that a general strike was declared demanding a democratic republic, which marked the beginning of the Russian Revolution of 1905.
In October 1905, Tsar Nicholas reluctantly issued the famous October Manifesto, which conceded the creation of a national Duma , as well as the right to vote, and affirmed that no law was to go into force without confirmation by the Duma.
The moderate groups were satisfied, but the socialists rejected the concessions as insufficient and tried to organize new strikes. e By the end of 1905, there was disunity among the reformers, and the tsar's position was strengthened for the time being.
Disturbances in the Russian-controlled Congress Poland culminated in June 1905 in the £6dz insurrection.
This only increased during World War I, leading to the utter collapse of the Tsarist regime in 1917 and an era of civil war.
The Russian Revolution of 1905 was a major factor of the February Revolutions of 1917, unleashing a steady current of worker unrest and increased political agitation.
The idea of a soviet as an organ to coordinate workers’ strike activities arose during the January-February 1905 meetings of workers at the apartment of Voline (later a famous anarchist) during the abortive revolution of 1905.
While rural agrarian peasants had been emancipated from serfdom in 1861, they still resented paying redemption payments to the state, and demanded communal tender of the land they worked.
World War | Tsar Nicholas Il and his subjects entered World War | with enthusiasm and patriotism, with the defense of Russia's fellow Orthodox Slavs, the Serbs, as the main battle cry.
By its end, World War | prompted a Russian outcry directed at Tsar Nicholas Il.
Learning Objective Detail the workings of Russia's provisional government Key Points The February Revolution of 1917 was focused around Petrograd , then capital of Russia.
The army leadership felt they did not have the means to suppress the revolution, resulting in Tsar Nicholas's abdication and soon after, the end of the Tsarist regime altogether.
To fill the vacuum of authority, the Duma declared a provisional government headed by Prince Lvov, collectively known as the Russian Republic.
Meanwhile, the socialists in Petrograd organized elections among workers and soldiers to form a soviet of workers' and soldiers' deputies as an organ of popular power that could pressure the ""bourgeois"" provisional government.
The Soviets initially permitted the provisional government to rule, but insisted on a prerogative to influence decisions and control various militias.
During this chaotic period there were frequent mutinies, protests, and strikes, such as the July Days.
Three days later, the result was the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II, the end of the Romanov dynasty, and the end of the Russian Empire.
Russian Provisional Government A provisional government of the Russian Republic established immediately following the abdication of Tsar Nicholas Il of the Russian Empire on 2 March.
February Revolution At the beginning of February 1917, Petrograd (Saint Petersburg) workers began several strikes and demonstrations.
The socialists had formed their rival body, the Petrograd Soviet (or workers' council) four days earlier.
The policies enacted by this moderate government represented arguably the most liberal legislation in Europe at the time.
In July, following a series of crises known as the July Days that undermined its authority with the public, the head of the provisional government resigned and was succeeded by Alexander Kerensky.
Learning Objective Explain the events of the October Revolution Key Points In the October Revolution (November in the Gregorian calendar), the Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, and the workers' soviets overthrew the Russian Provisional Government in Petrograd. e The Bolsheviks appointed themselves as leaders of various government ministries and seized control of the countryside, establishing the Cheka to quash dissent.
Viadimir Lenin A Russian communist revolutionary, politician, and political theorist.
It followed and capitalized on the February Revolution of the Same year, which overthrew the Tsarist autocracy and resulted in a provisional government after a transfer of power proclaimed by Grand Duke Michael, brother of Tsar Nicolas Il, who declined to take power after the Tsar stepped down.
Control of the factories was given to the soviets. e Wages were fixed at higher rates than during the war, and a shorter, eight-hour working day was introduced.
Lenin and Trotsky, Russian Revolutionaries Vladimir Lenin, leader of the Bolsheviks, speaking at a meeting in Sverdlov Square in Moscow, with Leon Trotsky and Lev Kamenev adjacent to the right of the podium.
The Whites had backing from Great Britain, France, the U.S., and Japan, while the Reds possessed internal support which proved to be much more effective.
Though the Allied nations, using external interference, provided substantial military aid to the loosely knit antiBolshevik forces, they were ultimately defeated.
White Army A loose confederation of Anti-Communist forces that fought the Bolsheviks, also known as the Reds, in the Russian Civil War and, to a lesser extent, continued operating as militarized associations both outside and within Russian borders until roughly World War Il.
Denikin, became known as the White movement (sometimes referred to as the ""White Army"") and controlled significant parts of the former Russian Empire for most of the war.
Another one to two million people, known as the White émigrés, fled Russia, many with Gen.
Learning Objective Assess the reasons for creating the Soviet Union Key Points The Soviet Union had its roots in the October Revolution of 1917, when the Bolsheviks overthrew the Russian Provisional Government that had replaced Tsar Nicholas Il.
However, it only officially consolidated as the new government of Russia after the defeat of the White Army during the Russian Civil War in 1922.
The period from the consolidation of the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917 until 1921 is known as the period of war communism, in which land, all industry, and small businesses were nationalized and the economy was restricted.
The constitution, adopted in 1924, established a federal system of government based on a succession of soviets set up in villages, factories, and cities in larger regions, which culminated in the All-Union Congress of Soviets.
His theories about society, economics, and politics— collectively understood as Marxism—hold that human societies develop through class struggle; in capitalism, this manifests itself in the conflict between the ruling classes that control the means of production and working classes (Known as the proletariat) that enable these means by selling their labor for wages.
The Soviet Union had its roots in the October Revolution of 1917, when the Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, overthrew the Russian Provisional Government that had replaced Tsar Nicholas Il.
Yet despite the turmoil of the mid-to-late 1930s, the Soviet Union developed a powerful industrial economy in the years before World War Il.
When stocks plummeted on Black Tuesday, the world noticed immediately, creating a ripple effect on the global economy.
The gold standard was the primary transmission mechanism of the Great Depression, driving down the currency of even nations with no banking crisis. e The sooner nations got off the gold standard, the sooner they recovered from the depression. e In many countries, the negative effects of the Great Depression lasted until the beginning of World War Il.
Key Terms speculation The purchase of an asset (a commodity, goods, or real estate) with the hope that it will become more valuable at a future date.
However, in many countries the negative effects of the Great Depression lasted until the beginning of World War Il.
On October 24 (""Black Thursday""), the market lost 11 percent of its value at the opening bell on very heavy trading.
Decline tn International Trade Many economists have argued that the sharp decline in international trade after 1930 helped to worsen the Great Depression, and many historians partly blame this on the American Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act for reducing international trade and causing retaliatory tariffs in other countries.
This slowed international trade, which in turn exacerbated the depression.
The situation was made worse by the rise of protectionism throughout the globe, which is the economic policy of restraining trade between countries through methods such as tariffs on imported goods, restrictive quotas, and other government regulations.
This attitude was put into effect most forcibly by the 1930 Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, passed by the United States Congress. e The Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act aimed to protect American jobs and farmers from foreign competition by encouraging the purchase of American-made products by increasing the cost of imported goods. e Other nations increased tariffs on American-made goods in retaliation, reducing international trade and worsening the Depression.
Learning Objective Evaluate why Mussolini was able to seize power in Italy Key Points e The rise of fascism in Italy began during World War |, when Benito Mussolini and other radicals formed a political group supporting the war against Germany and Austria-Hungary. e The first meeting of Mussolini's Fasci of Revolutionary Action was held on January 24, 1915. e For the next several years, the small group of fascists took part in political actions, taking advantage of worker strikes to incite violence.
Beginning in 1922, Fascist paramilitaries escalated their strategy from attacking socialist offices and homes of socialist leadership figures to violent occupation of cities, eventually setting their sites on Rome. e During the so-called ""March on Rome,"" Mussolini was appointed Prime Minister of Italy. e From 1925 to 1929, Fascism steadily became entrenched in power.
Victor Emmanuel Ill decided to appoint Mussolini as Prime Minister of Italy, and Mussolini arrived in Rome on October 30 to accept the appointment.
Learning Objective Define fascism Key Points e Fascism is a far-right authoritarian political ideology that emerged in the early 20th century and rose to prominence after World War | in several nations, notably Italy, Germany, and Japan. e Fascists believe that liberal democracy is obsolete and regard the complete mobilization of society under a totalitarian one-party state, led by a dictator, as necessary to prepare a nation for armed conflict and respond effectively to economic difficulties.
It holds that liberal democracy is obsolete and that the complete mobilization of society under a totalitarian one-party state is necessary to prepare a nation for armed conflict and to respond effectively to economic difficulties. fin-de-siecle French for end of the century, a term which typically encompasses both the meaning of the similar English idiom turn of the century and also makes reference to the closing of one era and onset of another.
Since the end of World War Il in 1945, few parties have openly described themselves as fascist, and the term is instead now usually used pejoratively by political opponents.
Early History of Fascism The historian Zeev Sternhell has traced the ideological roots of fascism back to the 1880s, and in particular to the fin-desiecle theme of that time.
After the end of the World War I, fascism rose out of relative obscurity into international prominence, with fascist regimes forming most notably in Italy, Germany, and Japan, the three of which would be allied in World War Il.
Hitler and Mussolini Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini were the two most prominent fascist dictators, rising to power in the decades after World War I Photo of Hitler and Mussolini in official military uniforms overlooking a crowd of people.
The 1919 Treaty of Versailles that ended World War | did not recognize the Empire of Japan's territorial claims, which angered the Japanese and led to a surge in nationalism.
Key Terms Meiji Restoration An event that restored practical imperial rule to Japan in 1868 under Emperor Meiji, leading to enormous changes in Japan's political and social structure and spanning both the late Edo period (often called the Late Tokugawa shogunate) and the beginning of the Meiji period.
Development of Statist Ideology The 1919 Treaty of Versailles that ended World War | did not recognize the Empire of Japan's territorial claims, and international naval treaties between Western powers and the Empire of Japan (Washington Naval Treaty and London Naval Treaty) imposed limitations on naval shipbuilding that limited the size of the Imperial Japanese Navy.
Ikki Kita was an early 20th-century political theorist who advocated a hybrid of state socialism with ""Asian nationalism,"" which blended the early ultranationalist movement with Japanese militarism.
After suffering defeat in World War Il, Japan was occupied by foreign powers for the first time in its history, then re-emerged as a major world economic power.
Spanish Fascism Falangism was the political ideology of the Falange Espanola de las JONS and, afterwards, of the Falange Espanola Tradicionalista y de las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional Sindicalista , as well as derivatives of it in other countries.
The Great Depression, which caused significant social unrest throughout the world, led to the major surge of fascism. e Economic depression was one of the major causes of the rise of Nazism in Germany. e Fascism was also popular during the Depression era outside of Europe, in Japan, Brazil, and Argentina among other nations.
Historian and philosopher Ernst Nolte argues that fascism arose as a form of resistance to and a reaction against modernity.
Iron Guard The name most commonly given to a far-right movement and political party in Romania in the period from 1927 into the early part of World War Il.
In China, Wang Jingwei's Ka/-tsu p’‘ai faction of the Kuomintang supported Nazism in the late 1930s.
In Japan, a Nazi movement called the Tohokai was formed by Seigo Nakano.
Hitler and the Third Reich 30.5.1: Adolf Hitler Adolf Hitler was born and raised in Austria-Hungary, was decorated during his service in the German Army in World War I, and began to rise to prominence in German politics with his vitriolic soeeches promoting German nationalism, anti-semitism, and anti-communism.
After his release in 1924, Hitler gained popular support by attacking the Treaty of Versailles and promoting PanGermanism, anti-semitism, and anti-communism with charismatic oratory and Nazi propaganda. e Hitler frequently denounced international capitalism and communism as part of a Jewish conspiracy.
The party emerged from the German nationalist, racist, and populist Fre/korps paramilitary culture, which fought against the communist uprisings in post-World War | Germany.
The party was created to draw workers away from communism and into vo/kisch nationalism.
His first six years in power resulted in rapid economic recovery from the Great Depression, the effective abandonment of restrictions imposed on Germany after World War |, and the annexation of territories that were home to millions of ethnic Germans — actions that gave him significant popular support.
His aggressive foreign policy is considered to be the primary cause of the outbreak of World War Il in Europe.
German nationalist Georg Ritter von Schonerer, who advocated Pan-Germanism, anti-Semitism, anti-Slavism, and anti-Catholicism, was one influence on Hitler.
World War I In 1914, at the outbreak of World War I, Hitler was living in Munich and voluntarily enlisted in the Bavarian Army.
Hitler in World War I Hitler with his army comrades of the Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment 16 Hitler with his army comrades of the Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment 16.
On November 8, 1923, Hitler and the SA stormed a public meeting of 3,000 people organized by Gustav Ritter von Kahr in the Burgerbrdaukeller, a beer hall in Munich.
Adolf Hitler joined the DAP in 1919 and quickly became their main orator and spokesperson. e Around that time, the party only had around 60 members.
It has been variously used to describe all Indo-Europeans in general (spanning from India to Europe), the original Aryan people specifically in Persia, and most controversially through Nazi misinterpretation, the Nordic or Germanic peoples.
Following the defeat of the Third Reich at the conclusion of World War Il in Europe, the party was ""declared to be illegal"" by the Allied powers, who carried out denazification in the years after the war.
Origins and Early History The party grew out of smaller political groups with nationalist orientation that formed in the last years of World War I In 1918, a league called the Freien Arbe/terausschuss fur einen guten Frieden (Free Workers' Committee for a good Peace) was created in Bremen, Germany.
He also accused international capitalism of being a Jewish-dominated movement and denounced capitalists for war profiteering in World War I Drexler saw the situation of political violence and instability in Germany as the result of the new Weimar Republic being out-of-touch with the masses, especially the lower classes.
Hitler used the campaign Slogan ""Hitler Uber Deutschland"" , a reference to his political ambitions and campaigning by aircraft.
Ranks of SA men served as guards inside the building, while large groups outside opposing the proposed legislation shouted slogans and threats toward the arriving members of parliament.
While elections to the Reichstag were still held , voters were presented with a single list of Nazis and pro-Nazi “guests” which carried with well over 90 percent of the vote.
Learning Objective Give examples of antisemitism in Germany before the outbreak of World War Il Key Points One of the central tenets of the Nazi regime was a pseudo-scientific racial hierarchy placing the Nordic or Aryan races at the top and Slavs, Romani, and especially Jews at the bottom.
In April 1933, Hitler declared a national boycott of Jewish businesses and passed the Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service, which forced all non-Aryan civil servants to retire from the legal profession and civil service.
On September 15, 1935, the Nuremberg Laws were passed, which included the Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour.
The Reich Citizenship Law declared that only those of German or related blood were eligible to be Reich citizens.
In November 1938, persecution of the Jews became violent when Nazi paramilitary damaged or destroyed synagogues and Jewish property throughout Germany during what became known as Kristallnacht, the ""Night of Broken Glass."" e Up until the outbreak of World War II, when the racist policies of the Nazis turned into outright genocide, the persecution of Jews and other ""subhumans"" continued under mostly legal means.
The Germanic peoples (the Nordic race) were considered by the Nazis to be the purest branch of the Aryan race and therefore viewed as the master race.
Nazi policies placed centuries-long residents in German territory who were not ethnic Germans such as Jews (a Semitic people of Levantine origins), Romanis (also Known as Gypsies, an Indo-Aryan people of Indian Subcontinent origins), European non-Nordic peoples including Slavs , and all other persons of color as inferior non-Aryan subhumans (i.e. non-Nordics, under the Nazi misinterpretation of the term ""Aryan"") in a racial hierarchy with the Herrenvolk of the Volksgemeinschatt at the top.
The Jewish community was fined one billion marks to pay for the damage caused by Krista//nacht and told that any money received via insurance claims would be confiscated.
The two laws were the Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour, which forbade marriages and extramarital intercourse between Jews and Germans (seen as ""race disgrace"") and the employment of German females under 45 in Jewish households, and the Reich Citizenship Law, which declared that only those of German or related blood were eligible to be Reich citizens; the remainder were classed as state subjects without citizenship rights.
Lebensraum and Anschluss The ideology of Nazism brought together elements of antisemitism, racial hygiene, and eugenics with panGermanism and territorial expansionism with the goal of obtaining more Lebensraum for the Germanic people.
Learning Objective Define the terms Lebensraum and Anschluss Key Points e The foreign policy of the Nazi regime, outlined by Adolf Hitler in Mein Kampf in 1925, expanded upon the German ideas of a ""Greater Germany"" that had been discussed and enacted in various ways since the 19th century.
This territorial aim was combined with the racist ideologies of the Nazis to form the idea that people deemed to be part of inferior races (Slavs and Jews, for example), within the territory of Lebensraum expansion, were subjected to expulsion or destruction.
The annexation of Austria occurred in 1938 when Hitler ordered troops into Austria to pressure its president to appoint a Nazi chancellor who would orchestrate the unification.
Within two days of installation, Nazis transferred power to Germany, and Wehrmacht troops entered Austria to enforce the Anschluss, which was then ratified by a controlled popular vote.
The aim of Hitler's initiative was to convince all Vo/ksdeutsche living outside of Nazi Germany (in Austria and the western districts of Poland) that they should strive to bring these regions ""home"" into Greater Germany and relocate from outside German-controlled territories following the conquest of Poland in accordance with the Nazi-Soviet pact.
The Nazi Generalplan Ost policy (the Master Plan for the East) was based on its tenets.
There had been several years of pressure from supporters in Austria and Germany for the ""Heim ins Reich"" movement.
In March 1933, the Enabling Act, an amendment to the Weimar Constitution, passed in the Re/chstag.
This allowed Hitler and his cabinet to pass laws—even laws that violated the constitution—without the consent of the president or the Reichstag. e President Hindenburg died on August 2, 1934, and Hitler became dictator of Germany by merging the powers and offices of the Chancellery and Presidency. e Germany was now a totalitarian state with Hitler at its head.
The official name of the state was Deutsches Reich from 1933 to 1943 and Gro&bdeutsches Reich from 1943 to 1945.
The Nazi regime came to an end after the Allied Forces defeated Germany in May 1945, ending World War Il in Europe.
The Nazis proposed national and cultural renewal based upon the Volkisch movement.
The regional state parliaments and the Re/chsrat were abolished in January 1934.
The socialist agitations that followed the devastation of World War I, inspired by the Russian Revolution, led to counter-revolution and repression throughout Italy.
Mussolini's Rise to Power The Fascisti, led by one of Mussolini's close confidants, Dino Grandi, formed armed squads of war veterans called Blackshirts with the goal of restoring order to the streets of Italy with a strong hand.
On the morning of October 28, King Victor Emmanuel Ill, who according to the Albertine Statute held the supreme military power, refused the government request to declare martial law, leading to Facta's resignation.
Se, ‘Wi , Hitler and Mussolini On 25 October 1936, an Axis was declared between Italy and Germany.
Stalin's brutal methods to achieve his goals, which included party purges, political repression of the general population, and forced collectivization, led to millions of deaths in Gulag labor camps and during man-made famine. e In August 1939, after failed attempts to conclude antiHitler pacts with other major European powers, Stalin entered into a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany known as the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
Although statues of Stalin depict him at a height and build approximating the very tall Tsar Alexander Ill, sources suggest he was approximately 5 feet 4 inches.
Learning Objective Describe the state of France prior to 1939 Key Points Foreign policy was of central interest to France during the interwar period.
Because of the horrible devastation of the war, including the death of 1. million French soldiers, the destruction of much of the steel and coal regions, and the long-term costs for veterans, France demanded that Germany assume many of the costs incurred from the war through annual reparation payments.
As a response to the failure of the Weimar Republic to pay reparations in the aftermath of World War I, France occupied the industrial region of the Ruhr as a means of ensuring repayments from Germany.
In the 1920s, France established an elaborate system of border defenses called the Maginot Line, designed to fight off any German attack. e France experienced a mild financial depression during the time of the Great Depression, but saw a more potent social reaction to financial strain culminating in a riot in 1934. e Socialist Leon Blum, leading the Popular Front, brought together Socialists and Radicals to become Prime Minister from 1936 to 1937.
As a response to the failure of the Weimar Republic to pay reparations in the aftermath of World War I, France occupied the industrial region of the Ruhr to ensure repayments from Germany.
Sa ate Figs of Anschluss Immediately after the Anschluss, Vienna’s Jews were forced to wash pro-independence slogans from the city’s pavements.
American Isolationism As Europe moved closer to war in the late 1930s, the United States Congress continued to demand American neutrality, but President Roosevelt and the American public began to support war with Nazi Germany by 1941.
Interwar Period In the wake of the First World War, non-interventionist tendencies of United States foreign policy gained ascendancy.
Such activities played a role in American entrance into World War I On September 1, 1939, Germany invaded Poland and Britain and France subsequently declared war on Germany, marking the start of World War Il.
Isolationists believed that the safety of the nation was more important than any foreign war.
N( REIGN CNTANGLEMENIS SRITAIN ww i “No Foreign Entanglements"" Protest march to prevent American involvement in World War II before the attack on Pearl Harbor.
Learning Objective Summarize the events of September 1, 1939 Key Points e Following several staged incidents that German propaganda used as a pretext to claim that German forces were acting in self-defense, the first regular act of war took place on September 1, 1939, when the Luftwaffe attacked the Polish town of Wielun, destroying 75% of the city and killing close to 1,200 people, most of them civilians. e As the Wehrmacht advanced, Polish forces withdrew from their forward bases of operation close to the PolishGerman border to more established lines of defense to the east.
After the mid-September Polish defeat in the Battle of the Bzura, the Germans gained an undisputed advantage. e On September 3 after a British ultimatum to Germany to cease military operations was ignored, Britain and France declared war on Germany. e On October 8, after an initial period of military administration, Germany directly annexed western Poland and the former Free City of Danzig and placed the remaining block of territory under the administration of the newly established General Government.
Key Terms Gleiwitz incident A false flag operation by Nazi forces posing as Poles on August 31, 1939, against the German radio station Sender Gleiwitz in Gleiwitz, Upper Silesia, Germany on the eve of World War Il in Europe.
The German invasion began on September 1, 1939, one week after the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, while the Soviet invasion commenced on September 17 following the Molotov-Togo agreement that terminated the Russian and Japanese hostilities in the east on September 16.
The Invasion of Poland This map shows the beginning of World War II in September 1939 in a European context.
The Second Polish Republic, one of the three original allies of World War Il, was invaded and divided between the Third Reich and Soviet Union, acting together in line with the secret protocol of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, dividing Central and Eastern Europe between the two countries.
War Erupts On September 3 after a British ultimatum to Germany to cease military operations was ignored, Britain and France, followed by the fully independent Dominions of the British Commonwealth—Australia , Canada (10 September), New Zealand , and South Africa —declared war on Germany.
The German-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Demarcation (later Known as the German-Soviet Frontier Treaty) was a second supplementary protocol of the 1939 Hitler-Stalin Pact.
The treaty was a follow-up to the first secret protocol of the MolotovRibbentrop Pact signed on August 23, 1939, between the two countries prior to their invasion of Poland and the start of World War Il in Europe.
Learning Objective Evaluate the success or failure of the evacuation at Dunkirk Key Points e During the 1930s, the French constructed the Maginot Line, a series of fortifications along their border with Germany. e The area immediately to the north of the Maginot Line was covered by the heavily wooded Ardennes region, which French General Philippe Pétain declared to be ""impenetrable"" as long as ""Special provisions” were taken.
Dunkirk Evacuation The Dunkirk evacuation, code-named Operation Dynamo and also known as the Miracle of Dunkirk, was the evacuation of Allied soldiers from the beaches and harbor of Dunkirk, France between May 26 and June 4, 1940, during World War Il.
In his soeech to the House of Commons on June 4, Churchill reminded the country that ""we must be very careful not to assign to this deliverance the attributes of a victory.
The area immediately to the north of the Maginot Line was covered by the heavily wooded Ardennes region, which French General Philippe Pétain declared to be “impenetrable” as long as ""Special provisions"" were taken.
Vichy France Vichy France is the common name of the French State headed by Marshal Philippe Pétain during World War Il.
In particular, it represents the unoccupied ""Free Zone"" (zone libre) that governed the southern part of the country.
Learning Objective Describe the Battle of Britain Key Points e The Battle of Britain began in early July with Luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbors. e On July 19, Hitler publicly offered to end the war, saying he had no desire to destroy the British Empire.
Luftwaffe The aerial warfare branch of the German Wehrmacht during World War Il.
The failure to destroy Britain's air defenses to force an armistice is considered the Nazis’ first major defeat in World War Il and a crucial turning point in the conflict.
Conflict in the Atlantic The Battle of the Atlantic was the longest continuous military campaign in World War II, running from 1939 to the defeat of Germany in 1945.
The situation changed constantly, with one side or the other gaining advantage as participating countries surrendered, joined, and even changed sides, and as new weapons, tactics, counter-measures, and equipment were developed by both sides. e The Germans failed to stop the flow of strategic supplies to Britain, which resulted in the build-up of troops and supplies needed for the D-Day landings.
He advocated a system known as the Rudeltaktik , in which U-boats would spread out in a long line across the projected course of a convoy.
In all, during the Atlantic Campaign only 10% of transatlantic convoys that sailed were attacked, and of those attacked only about LO%were lost.
More people died fighting on the Eastern Front than in all other fighting across the globe during World War Il.
Initially, though, the Nazis used legal repression and forced deportation and relocation to eliminate Jews from German culture. e In 1941, as Germany conquered new territory in eastern Europe, specialized paramilitary units called Einsatzgruppen murdered around two million Jews, partisans, and others, often in mass shootings. e By the end of 1942, victims were regularly transported by freight trains to extermination camps where most who survived the journey were systematically killed in gas chambers.
Final Solution The Nazi plan for the total extermination of the Jews during World War Il, carried out in the period known as the Holocaust. extermination camps Camps designed and built by Nazi Germany during World War II to systematically kill millions of Jews, Slavs, and others considered ""sub-human,"" primarily by gassing but also in mass executions and through extreme work under starvation conditions. genocide The intentional action to destroy a people (usually defined as an ethnic, national, racial, or religious group) in whole or in part.
In 1938, legal repression and resettlement turned to violence on Kristal//inacht (""Night of Broken Glass""), when Jews were attacked and Jewish property was vandalized.
Important base installations such as the power station, shipyard, maintenance, and fuel and torpedo storage facilities, as well as the submarine piers and headquarters building (also home of the intelligence section) were not attacked.
The attack came as a profound shock to the American people and led directly to the American entry into World War Il in both the Pacific and European theaters.
Clandestine support of the United Kingdom (e.g., the Neutrality Patrol) was replaced by active alliance.
Japanese planes are visible in the right center and over the Navy Yard at right.
Learning Objective Describe the events of the Battle of Midway Key Points e This Japanese operation, like the earlier attack on Pearl Harbor, sought to eliminate the United States as a strategic power in the Pacific, giving Japan a free hand in establishing supremacy in East Asia. e American cryptographers were able to determine the date and location of the planned attack, enabling the forewarned United States Navy to prepare its own ambush.
All four of Japan's large aircraft carriers and a heavy cruiser were sunk, while the United States lost only the carrier Yorktown and a destroyer. e After Midway and the exhausting attrition of the Solomon Islands campaign, Japan's capacity to replace its losses in material and men rapidly became insufficient to cope with mounting casualties, while the United States' massive industrial and training capabilities made losses far easier to replace.
The Battle of Midway, along with the Guadalcanal Campaign, is considered a turning point in the Pacific War. ~ se & i es USS Yorktown Yorktown at the moment of impact of a torpedo from a Nakajima B5N of Lieutenant Hashimoto's 2nd fleet.
A second attack from the United States carriers a few hours later found and destroyed Hiryu, the last remaining fleet carrier available to Nagumo.
The Guadalcanal Campaign Guadalcanal marked the decisive Allied transition from defensive operations to the strategic initiative in the Pacific theater, leading to offensive operations such as the Solomon Islands, New Guinea, and Central Pacific campaigns that eventually resulted in Japan's surrender and the end of World War ll.
Surprised by the Allied offensive, the Japanese made several attempts between August and November to retake Henderson Field. e Three major land battles, seven large naval battles (five nighttime surface actions and two carrier battles), and continual, almost daily aerial battles culminated in the decisive Naval Battle of Guadalcanal in early November, in which the last Japanese attempt to bombard Henderson Field from the sea and land with enough troops to retake it was defeated.
The Allies overwhelmed the outnumbered Japanese defenders, who had occupied the islands since May 1942, and captured Tulagi and Florida, as well as an airfield that was under construction on Guadalcanal.
It was a turning point in the European theater of World War Il; German forces never regained the initiative in the East and withdrew a vast military force from the West to replace their losses.
Overview The Battle of Stalingrad (August 23, 1942 February 2, 1943) was a major battle on the Eastern Front of World War II in which Nazi Germany and its allies fought the Soviet Union for control of the city of Stalingrad in Southern Russia, on the eastern boundary of Europe.
Marked by constant close-quarters combat and direct assaults on civilians by air raids, it is often regarded as one of the single largest and bloodiest battles in the history of warfare.
The heavy losses inflicted on the German Wehrmacht make it arguably the most strategically decisive battle of the whole war and a turning point in the European theater of World War Il.
On June 14, the British Army's 11th Hussars (assisted by elements of the 1st Royal Tank Regiment, 1st RTR) crossed the border from Egypt into Libya and captured the Italian Fort Capuzzo.
During Operation Compass, the Italian LOth Army was destroyed and the German Afrika Korps—commanded by Erwin Rommel, who later became known as ""The Desert Fox""—was dispatched to North Africa during Operation Sonnenblume to reinforce Italian forces and prevent a complete Axis defeat.
The Axis never had sufficient resources or the means to deliver them to defeat the British, who missed several opportunities to finish the Campaign by diverting resources to Greece and the Levant in 1941 and the Far East in 1942.
Learning Objective Discuss the events of the Sicilian Campaign Key Points e Following the defeat of the Axis Powers in North Africa in May 1943, there was disagreement between the Allies as to what the next step should be.
Churchill wanted to invade Italy, which he called ""the soft underbelly of the axis."" e Joseph Stalin, the Soviet leader, was pressing Churchill and Roosevelt to open a ""second front"" in Europe to lessen the German Army's focus on the Eastern Front, where the bulk of its forces were fighting in the largest armed conflict in history.
To distract and confuse the Axis, the Allies engaged in several deception operations, most famously Operation Mincemeat, where the British allowed a corpse disguised as a British Royal Marines officer to drift ashore in Spain carrying a briefcase containing fake secret documents. e Joint Allied forces planned and commanded the invasion of Sicily in July 1943, followed in September by the invasion of the Italian mainland and the campaign on Italian soil until the surrender of the German Armed Forces in Italy in May 1945.
Although the leaders arrived with differing objectives, the main outcome of the Tehran Conference was the Western Allies' commitment to open a second front against Nazi Germany, including an invasion on France.
Iran and Turkey were discussed in detail, with Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin all agreeing to support Iran's government and the Soviet Union pledging support to Turkey if they entered the war.
The cross-channel invasion of France (Operation Overlord) would be launched during May 1944 in conjunction with an operation against southern France.
Wikipedia CC BY-SA 3.0. o ""Troops from_51st_Highland_Division_unloading_sto res from_tank_landing_craft_on_the opening day_of _the Allied _invasion_of Sicily, 10 July 1943.
Learning Objective Outline the events of the Invasion of Normandy Key Points The Normandy invasion began with overnight parachute and glider landings, massive air attacks, and naval bombardments.
In the months leading up to the invasion, the Allies conducted a substantial military deception, code named Operation Bodyguard, that successfully misled the Germans as to the date and location of the main Allied landings.
The invasion was costly in terms of men for the Allies, but the defeat inflicted on the Germans was one of the largest of the war and led to the loss of the German position in most of France.
D-Day The landing operations on Tuesday, June 6, 1944, the first day of the Allied invasion of Normandy in Operation Overlord during World War Il.
The Normandy Landings The Normandy landings on Tuesday, June 6, 1944, were the Allied invasion of Normandy in Operation Overlord during World War Il.
Roosevelt wanted Soviet support in the United States Pacific War against Japan and Soviet participation in the UN; Churchill pressed for free elections and democratic governments in Eastern and Central Europe (specifically Poland); and Stalin demanded a Soviet sphere of political influence in Eastern and Central Europe.
Roosevelt wanted Soviet support in the United States Pacific War against Japan, specifically for the planned invasion of Japan , as well as Soviet participation in the UN; Churchill pressed for free elections and democratic governments in Eastern and Central Europe (specifically Poland); and Stalin demanded a Soviet sphere of political influence in Eastern and Central Europe, an essential aspect of the USSR's national security strategy.
After the war, Germany and Berlin would be split into four occupied zones. e Stalin agreed that France would have a fourth occupation zone in Germany that would be formed out of the American and British zones. e Germany would undergo demilitarization and denazification.
Learning Objective Summarize the last weeks of the war and the final days of the Nazi Regime Key Points e By the time the Allied forces launched an invasion of Germany from the Western and Eastern front, Allied victory in Europe was inevitable. e Having gambled his future ability to defend Germany on the Ardennes offensive and lost, Hitler had no strength left to stop the powerful Allied armies.
On April 30, 1945, the Reichstag was captured, signalling the military defeat of Nazi Germany. e On that same day, Hitler committed suicide and was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Donitz. e As the Allies advanced on Germany, they began to discover the extent of the Holocaust and liberated many concentration camps along their route.
Battle of Berlin The final major offensive of the European theatre of World War II when the Soviet Red Army invaded Berlin, Germany.
Battle of Berlin After the battle, Soviet soldiers hoist the Soviet flag on the balcony of the Hotel Adlon in Berlin After the battle of Berlin, Soviet soldiers hoist the Soviet flag on the balcony of the Hotel Adlon in Berlin overlooking the street Liberation of Concentration Camps As the Allies advanced on Germany, they began to discover the extent of the Holocaust.
Treblinka, Sobibdér, and Betzec were never liberated, but were destroyed by the Nazis in 1943.
Okinawa and Iwo Jima Hard-fought battles on the Japanese home islands of lwo Jima, Okinawa, and others resulted in horrific casualties on both sides but finally produced a Japanese defeat.
Learning Objective Connect the battles for Okinawa and Iwo Jima with the greater American ""island hopping"" strategy Key Points e The Battle of lwo Jima was a major battle in which the United States Marines landed on and eventually captured the island of Iwo Jima from the Japanese Imperial Army during World War Il.
Iwo Jima The battle of lwo Jima in February 1945 was one of the bloodiest battles fought by the Americans in the Pacific War.
Iwo Jima was an eight-squaremile island situated halfway between Tokyo and the Mariana Islands.
Starting in mid-June 1944, Iwo Jima came under sustained aerial bombardment and naval artillery fire.
Iwo Jima Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima, by Joe Rosenthal, became the only photograph to win the Pulitzer Prize for Photography in the same year as its publication, and came to be regarded in the United States as one of the most significant and recognizable images of the war.
Four divisions of the United States 10th Army (the 7th, 27th, 77th, and 96th) and two Marine Divisions fought on the island, supported by naval, amphibious, and tactical air forces.
Some islands that saw major battles, such as Iwo Jima, were uninhabited or previously evacuated.
It also included Germany's demilitarization, reparations, and prosecution of war criminals.
Truman mentioned an unspecified ""powerful new weapon"" to Stalin during the conference, a reference to the nuclear bombs just developed by the United States Towards the end of the conference, Japan was given an ultimatum to surrender or meet ""prompt and utter destruction,"" but Prime Minister Kantaro Suzuki did not respond.
In addition, at the Potsdam Conference Truman became aware of possible complications elsewhere when Stalin objected to Churchill's proposal for an early Allied withdrawal from Iran ahead of the schedule agreed at the Tehran Conference.
Agreement on war reparations to the Soviet Union from their zone of occupation in Germany.
Ensuring that German standards of living did not exceed the European average.
Destruction of German industrial war-potential through the destruction or control of all industry with military potential.
A Provisional Government of National Unity recognized by all three powers should be created in Poland. e Poles who were serving in the British Army should be free to return to Poland, with no security upon their return to the communist country guaranteed. e The provisional western border of Poland should be the Oder-Neisse line, defined by the Oder and Neisse rivers. e The Soviet Union declared it would settle the reparation claims of Poland from its own share of the overall reparation payments.
The bombings’ role in Japan's surrender and their ethical justification are still debated by historians and other scholars.
Overview The United States, with the consent of the United Kingdom as laid down in the Quebec Agreement, dropped nuclear weapons on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on August 6 and 9, 1945, during the final stage of World War Il.
The Japanese, facing the same fate, refused to accept the Allies' demands for unconditional surrender and the Pacific War continued.
On September 2, it signed the instrument of surrender, effectively ending World War Il.
Japan's geography made this invasion plan obvious to the Japanese; they were able to predict the Allied invasion plans accurately and adjust their defensive plan, Operation Ketsugo, accordingly.
The Japanese planned an all-out defense of Kyushu, with little left in reserve for any subsequent defense operations.
This, together with the sea blockade and the collapse of Germany (with its implications regarding redeployment), could also have led to a Japanese surrender.
Impact of War World Hl 31.8.1: Terms of Surrender The unconditional surrender of Germany on May 8, 1945, and Japan on September 2, 1945, brought World War Il to an end.
Learning Objective Describe the terms under which Germany, Japan, and Italy surrendered Key Points e The German Instrument of Surrender ended World War II in Europe on the night of May 8, 1945. e The terms of Germany's unconditional surrender had been discussed since January 1944 and further clarified at the Yalta conference.
Key Terms Paris Peace Treaties A series of document wherein victorious wartime Allied powers negotiated the details of peace treaties with minor Axis powers, namely Italy (though it was considered a major Axis Power), Romania, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Finland, following the end of World War II in 1945.
German Instrument of Surrender The first instrument of surrender signed at Reims on May 7, 1945.
Terms of Peace with Italy The Treaty of Peace with Italy (one of the Paris Peace Treaties) was signed on February 10, 1947 between Italy and the victorious powers of World War II, formally ending hostilities.
Articles 47 and 48 called for the demolition of all permanent fortifications along the Franco-Italian and Yugoslav-Italian frontier.
Casualties of World War Il Some 75 million people died in World War II, including about 20 million military personnel and 40 million civilians, many of whom died because of deliberate genocide, massacres, mass-bombings, disease, and starvation.
Learning Objective Assess the losses and damages of World War II Key Points e World War Il was the deadliest military conflict in history in terms of total dead, with some 75 million people casualties including military and civilians, or around 3% of the world's population at the time. e Many civilians died because of deliberate genocide, massacres, mass-bombings, disease, and starvation. e The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people during the war, including 8. million military and 19 million civilians.
This represents the most military deaths of any nation by a large margin.
Of the total number of deaths in World War Il, approximately 85 percent were on the Allied side and 15 percent were on the Axis side, with many of these deaths caused by war crimes committed by German and Japanese forces in occupied territories.
Nazi Germany, as part of a deliberate program of extermination, systematically killed over 11 million people including 6 million Jews.
Mitsuyoshi Himeta reported that 2. million casualties occurred during the Sanko Sakusen.
However, no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during World War Il.
In addition to Nazi concentration camps, the Soviet gulags led to the death of citizens of occupied countries such as Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, as well as German prisoners of war and Soviet citizens who were thought to be Nazi supporters.
Adherents of the Atlantic Charter signed the Declaration by United Nations on January 1, 1942; it became the basis for the modern United Nations.
In a September 1941 speech, Churchill stated that the Charter was only meant to apply to states under German occupation and not to people who formed part of the British Empire, a statement which became controversial and resulted in strong pushback from figures such as Gandhi.
There was to be global economic cooperation and advancement of social welfare; 6.
There was to be disarmament of aggressor nations, and a post-war common disarmament. ul & W Adherents of the Atlantic Charter signed the Declaration by United Nations on January 1, 1942; it became the basis for the modern United Nations.
Spirit te the abandonment of tho aso _ Beeewe no futurc perce com de mainteined if lard, ‘ eae armmments contiaes te be omplored by notions ehuch Atlantic Charter Winston Churchill's edited copy of the final draft of the Atlantic Charter.
Learning Objective Understand the purpose and legal effect of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights Key Points The Universal Declaration of Human Rights arose directly from the experience of the Second World War and represents the first global expression of what many believe are the rights to which all human beings are inherently entitled.
The Declaration consists of thirty articles which, although not legally binding, have been elaborated in subsequent international treaties, economic transfers, regional human rights instruments, national constitutions, and other laws, thereby making many of their principles legally binding in various nations. e The United Nations is an intergovernmental organization to promote international cooperation established in 1945 after the end of WWII to replace the ineffectual League of Nations.
A replacement for the ineffective League of Nations, the organization was established after World War II to prevent another such conflict.
Soviet aggression was fundamentally not aligned with the views of the Russian people or with economic reality, but rooted in historic Russian nationalism and neurosis. e The Soviet government's structure inhibited objective or accurate pictures of internal and external reality.
Kennan argued that Stalin would not moderate the supposed Soviet determination to overthrow Western governments.
NATO An intergovernmental military alliance signed on April 4, 1949 and including the five Treaty of Brussels states (Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, France, and the United Kingdom) plus the United States, Canada, Portugal, Italy, Norway, Denmark, and Iceland. ""iron curtain"" A term indicating the imaginary boundary dividing Europe into two separate areas from the end of World War Il in 1945 until the end of the Cold War in 1991.
In particular, Churchill feared that the United States might return to its prewar isolationism, leaving the exhausted European states unable to resist Soviet demands.
Although not well received at the time, the phrase /ron curtain gained popularity as a shorthand reference to the division of Europe as the Cold War strengthened.
Hard as bourgeois politicians and writers may strive to conceal the truth of the achievements of the Soviet order and Soviet culture, hard as they may strive to erect an iron curtain to keep the truth about the Soviet Union from penetrating abroad, hard as they may strive to belittle the genuine growth and scope of Soviet culture, all their efforts are foredoomed to failure.
Generally Marxist-Leninists support the ideas of a vanguard party, one-party state, state-dominance over the economy, internationalism, opposition to bourgeois democracy, and opposition to capitalism.
Viadimir Lenin Viadimir Lenin, leader of the Soviet Union from 1917 to 1924, was one of the most influential figures of the 20th Century.
That turn toward national communism was a shift from the previously held Marxist position that socialism must be established globally (world communism), and it was in opposition to Leon Trotsky's theory of permanent revolution.
Learning Objective Define a Soviet Socialist Republic Key Points e The Soviet Union, officially the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics , was a federation of Soviet Republics that were outwardly independent nations, but existed essentially as satellite states under the control of Russian power. e During the opening stages of World War Il, the Soviet Union laid the foundation for the Eastern Bloc by invading and then annexing several countries as Soviet Socialist Republics, adding to the existing Soviet Union of Russia, Transcaucasia, Ukraine, and Byelorussia.
The defining characteristic of communism implemented in the Eastern Bloc was the unique symbiosis of the state with society and the economy, resulting in politics and economics losing their distinctive features as autonomous and distinguishable spheres.
The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 or the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 was a nationwide revolt against the government of the Hungarian People's Republic and its Soviet-imposed policies, lasting from October 23 until November 10, 1956.
As a result, the country underwent a period of rapid industrialization and collectivization which laid the foundation for its victory in World War Il and post-war dominance of Eastern Europe.
During the opening stages of World War Il, the Soviet Union created the Eastern Bloc (the group of communist states of Central and Eastern Europe during the Cold War) by invading and then annexing several countries as Soviet Socialist Republics by agreement with Nazi Germany in the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
EASTERN BLOC AREA BORDER CHANGES 1938 TO 1948 USSR 1938 | BD expsnded’Ssrs iz | Satellite States Soviet Republics Eastern Bloc area border changes between 1938 and 1948 A map depicting the Socialist Republics of the Soviet Union.
Learning Objective Give examples of culture in the Soviet Union Key Points e The culture of the Soviet Union passed through several stages during the USSR's 69-year existence, from relative freedom to repressive control and censorship.
During the Stalin era, art and culture was put under strict control and public displays of Soviet life were limited to optimistic, positive, and realistic depictions of the Soviet man and woman, a style called socialist realism.
Despite the strict censorship of the arts and the repression of political dissidence during this period, the Soviet people benefited from some social liberalization, including more equal education and social roles for women, free and improved health care, and other social benefits. e Starting in the early 1930s, the Soviet government began an all-out war on organized religion in the country, and atheism was vigorously promoted by the government.
Many writers were imprisoned and killed or died of starvation, including Daniil Kharms, Osip Mandelstam, Isaac Babel, and Boris Pilnyak.
In 1930 around 20,000 ""kulaks"" were killed by the Soviet government. e Widespread famine ensued from collectivization and affected Ukraine, southern Russia, and other parts of the USSR, with the death toll estimated at between 5 and 10 million. e The Holodomor, considered a genocide by many historians, was a man-made famine in Ukraine in 1932 and 1933 that killed an estimated 2.5-7. million Ukrainians.
Planners regarded collectivization as the solution to the crisis of agricultural distribution (mainly in grain deliveries) that began in 1927.
If Soviet policies and actions were conclusively documented as intending to eradicate the rise of Ukrainian nationalism, they would fall under the legal definition of genocide. nied eee, | oo Golodomor Starved peasants on a street in Kharkiv, Ukraine, 1933 Photo of a street in the Ukraine with several people lying dead or dying and several others walking by.
Containment 32.3.1: The Truman Doctrine The Truman Doctrine was an American foreign policy created to contain Soviet geopolitical soread during the Cold War, first announced to Congress by President Harry S Truman on March 12, 1947.
Truman Doctrine An American foreign policy created to counter Soviet geopolitical soread during the Cold War, announced by Harry S Truman to Congress in 1947. containment A military strategy to stop the expansion of an enemy, best known as the Cold War policy of the United States and its allies to prevent the spread of communism.
Soviet imperialism in Eastern Europe, its delayed withdrawal from lran, and the breakdown of Allied cooperation in Germany provided a backdrop of escalating tensions for the Truman Doctrine.
Learning Objective Distinguish between the Marshall Plan and the Molotov Plan Key Points In early 1947, Britain, France, and the United States unsuccessfully attempted to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union for a plan envisioning an economically self-sufficient Germany.
The years 1948 to 1952 saw the fastest period of growth in European history; industrial production increased by 35%, some of which has been attributed to the Marshall Plan aid.
The Soviet Union refused the aid because Stalin believed that economic integration with the West would allow Eastern Bloc countries to escape Soviet control.
In response, the Soviet Union created the Molotov Plan, later expanded into the COMECON, a system of bilateral trade agreements and an economic alliance between socialist countries in the Eastern Bloc.
Marshall Plan The Marshall Plan (officially the European Recovery Program, ERP) was an American initiative to aid Western Europe, in which the United States gave over $12 billion in economic support to help rebuild Western European economies after the end of World War Il.
Potsdam Agreement The 1945 agreement between three of the Allies of World War II, United Kingdom, United States, and USSR, for the military occupation and reconstruction of Germany.
Neither side wanted a war; the Soviets did not disrupt the airlift. wer Berlin Airlift Berliners watch a Douglas C-54 Skymaster land at Tempelhof Airport, 1948 Photo of a group of people watching a plane land during the Berlin airlift.
In addition, the 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état by the Communists had overthrown a democratic government and British Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin reiterated that the best way to prevent another Czechoslovakia was to evolve a joint Western military strategy.
Although obliged to respond, they maintain the freedom to choose the method by which they do so.
This policy stated that in the event of an attack from an aggressor, a state would massively retaliate with force disproportionate to the size of the attack, thus deterring an enemy state from initially attacking.
Krushchev developed a similar policy in the USSR, aimed at cutting military soending while creating a nuclear program to match the U.S., but while the Soviets acquired atomic weapons in 1949, it took years for them to reach parity with the United States.
An important part of the Cold War nuclear competition was the concept of mutual assured destruction , in which a full-scale use of nuclear weapons by two or more opposing sides would cause the complete annihilation of both the attacker and the defender.
MAD is based on the theory of deterrence, which holds that the threat of using strong weapons against the enemy prevents the enemy's use of those same weapons.
Political Changes tn the United States and USSR When Dwight D Eisenhower was sworn in as United States President in 1953, the Democrats lost their two-decades-long control of the United States presidency.
Discussion of nuclear war in the first authoritative Soviet monograph on strategy since the 1920s, Marshal Vasilii Sokolovskili's ""Military Strategy,"" focused upon the use of nuclear weapons for fighting rather than for deterring a war.
Learning Objective Characterize the Space Race Key Points e The Space Race, the competition between the United States and USSR for supremacy in space flight capability, had its Origins in the missile-based nuclear arms race between the two nations following World War Il. e The technological superiority required for such Supremacy was seen as necessary for national security and symbolic of ideological superiority.
The Soviets earned an early lead in the Space Race in 1957 with the launching of Sputnik, the first artificial satellite, followed by the first manned flight.
The success of the Soviet space program was a great shock to the United States, which believed it was ahead technologically; the ability to launch objects into orbit was especially ominous because it showed Soviet missiles could target anywhere on the planet.
American President John F Kennedy launched an unprecedented effort, promising that by the end of the 1960s Americans would land a man on the moon.
It had its origins in the missile-based nuclear arms race between the two nations following World War Il, aided by captured German missile technology and personnel from their missile program.
Overall, wnat caused the fear for the American people was not the satellite itself but more so the rocket that put Sputnik into orbit.
Yuri Gagarin By 1959, American observers believed the Soviet Union would be the first to get a human into space because of the time needed to prepare for Mercury's first launch.
After achieving orbit, Armstrong and Aldrin transferred into the Lunar Module named Eagle, and after a landing gear inspection by Collins remaining in the Command/Service Module Co/umbia began their descent.
The Marshall Plan had bolstered economic recovery, so the United States was less concerned with losing Western Europe to Soviet influence.
Following a series of waves of African and Asian decolonization following the Second World War and the emergence of left-leaning leaders in Latin America, the United States focused on the Third World.
In such an international setting, the Soviet Union propagated a role as the leader of the ""anti-imperialist"" camp, currying favor in the Third World as a staunch opponent of colonialism.
Many Third World nations, however, did not want to align themselves with either of the superpowers, and the Non-Aligned Movement, led by India, Egypt, and Austria, attempted to unite the third world against what was seen as imperialism by both the East and the West.
Throughout much of Latin America, reactionary oligarchies ruled through their alliances with the military elite and United States, but by the 1960s, Marxists gained increasing influence throughout the regions, prompting fears in the United States that Latin American instability posed a threat to United States national security. e This era also saw battles for ideological alignment in the Congo, Indonesia, and Iran.
The term refers particularly to the dismantlement, in the years after World War Il of the colonial empires established prior to World War | throughout the world.
Patrice Lumumba 1961 Soviet stamp commemorating Patrice Lumumba, prime minister of the Republic of the Congo, who was killed during a United States backed coup d'état.
Its audience increased substantially following the failed Berlin riots of 1953 and the highly publicized defection of J6zef Swiatto.
The aims were to regain Western control of the Suez Canal and remove Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser from power. e The invasion was poorly planned and Eisenhower persuaded the United Kingdom and France to retreat, which was an international embarrassment for the latter countries and emboldened the USSR and Egypt.
As a result of the conflict, the United Nations created the UNEF Peacekeepers to police the Egyptian-lsraeli border, and British Prime Minister Anthony Eden resigned. e The Suez stalemate was a turning point heralding an ever-growing rift between the Atlantic Cold War allies, who were becoming far less of a united monolith than in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War.
The area also had vast reserves of oil, not crucial for either superpower in the 1950s (which each held large oil reserves on its own), but essential for the rapidly rebuilding American allies Europe and Japan.
The Hungarian Uprising The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 occurred shortly after Khrushchev arranged the removal of Hungary's Stalinist leader Matyas Rakosi, but the new regime was soon crushed by the Soviet army.
Learning Objective Examine the circumstances surrounding the Hungarian uprising Key Points The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 occurred shortly after Khrushchev arranged the removal of Hungary's Stalinist leader Matyas Rakosi.
In response to a popular uprising, the new regime formally disbanded the secret police, declared its intention to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact, and pledged to re-establish free elections.
Thousands of Hungarians were arrested, imprisoned, and deported to the Soviet Union, and approximately 200,000 Hungarians fled Hungary in the chaos.
In 1949 the leader of the Hungarian Catholic Church, Cardinal J6zsef Mindszenty, was arrested and sentenced to life imprisonment for treason.
Some observers (including George Kennan) believed that the Japanese treaty led Stalin to approve a plan to invade U.S.-supported South Korea on June 25, 1950.
Its central objective, the unification of the Korean peninsula under the Kim Il-Sung regime, was not achieved.
Learning Objective Deconstruct Soviet Union's reasons for building the Berlin Wall Key Points Berlin was divided between East and West since the end of World War Il, with the Western powers occupying the Western portion and the Soviet Union occupying the East.
With the closing of the East-West sector boundary in Berlin, the vast majority of East Germans could no longer travel or emigrate to West Germany, and Berlin soon went from the easiest place to make an unauthorized crossing between East and West Germany to the most difficult. e Many families were split, while East Berliners employed in the West were cut off from their jobs.
Inner German border The border between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany from 1949 to 1990.
Constructed by the German Democratic Republic starting on August 13, 1961, the Wall completely cut off West Berlin from surrounding East Germany and from East Berlin until government officials opened it in November 1989.
The barrier included guard towers placed along large concrete walls, which circumscribed a wide area (later Known as the ""death strip"") that contained anti-vehicle trenches, ""fakir beds,"" and other defenses.
If the United States tried to bargain with the Soviets after becoming aware of the missiles, Knrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin.
Mauritania, Senegal, French Sudan (now Mali), French Guinea , Céte d’Ilvoire, Upper Volta , Dahomey , and Niger.
Un Chef de Section, Chemin de fer du Sénégal au Niger French West Africa A ""Section Chief"" in the building of the Dakar-Niger Railway, pushed by African workers, Kayes, Mali, 1904 A photo of a white French ""Section Chief"" being pushed on a rail cart by two black African workers in Mali, 1904.
Senegal and former French Sudan became the Mali Federation , while Céte d’lvoire, Niger, Upper Volta and Dahomey subsequently formed the short-lived Sahel-Benin Union, later the Conseil de |'Entente.
The FLN turned to killing civilians during the Philippeville Massacre, which brought on harsh retaliation by the French army.
After major demonstrations in favor of independence from the end of 1960 and a United Nations resolution recognizing the right to independence, De Gaulle decided to open a series of negotiations with the FLN, which concluded with the signing of the Evian Accords on March 1962.
Overview The Algerian War, also Known as the Algerian War of Independence or the Algerian Revolution, was a war between France and the Algerian National Liberation Front from 1954 to 1962 and led to Algerian independence from France.
Effectively started by members of the National Liberation Front on November 1, 1954, during the Toussaint Rouge , the conflict shook the foundations of the weak and unstable Fourth French Republic and led to its replacement by the Fifth Republic with Charles de Gaulle as President.
An important watershed in the War of Independence was the massacre of Pieds-Noirs civilians by the FLN near the town of Philippeville (now known as Skikda) in August 1955.
France's exile of Sultan Mohammed V in 1953 to Madagascar and his replacement by the unpopular Mohammed Ben Aarafa sparked active opposition to the French and Spanish protectorates.
Rif War Also called the Second Moroccan War, this war was fought in the early 1920s between the colonial power Spain and the Berbers of the Rif mountainous region.
Several divisions of Moroccan soldiers served in the French army in both World War | and World War Il, and in the Spanish Nationalist Army in the Spanish Civil War and after.
A month later, Spain ceded most of its protectorate in Northern Morocco to the new state but kept its two coastal enclaves on the Mediterranean coast.
He was also intent on preventing the Istiglal from consolidating its control and establishing a one-party state.
Idris al-Mahdi as-Senussi , Emir of Cyrenaica, led the Libyan resistance to Italian occupation between the two world wars.
Key Terms évolués A French term used during the colonial era to refer to a native African or Asian who had ""evolved"" by becoming Europeanised through education or assimilation and accepted European values and patterns of behavior.
One of the results of these measures was the development of a new middle class of Europeanised African ""évolués"" in the cities.
Nationalist Politics An African nationalist movement developed in the Belgian Congo during the 1950s, primarily among the évo/ués.
It was increasingly polarized between moderate évolués and the more radical mass membership.
The nationalist parties' influence expanded outside the major cities for the first time, and nationalist demonstrations and riots became a regular occurrence over the next year, bringing large numbers of black people from outside the évo/ué class into the independence movement.
This led to growing differences with President Joseph Kasa-Vubu and chief-of-staff Joseph-Désiré Mobutu as well as foreign opposition from the United States and Belgium.
Amid continuing unrest and violence, the United Nations deployed peacekeepers, but the UN Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold refused to use these troops to help the central government in Léopoldville fight the secessionists.
Key Terms Joseph-Désiré Mobutu The military dictator and President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (which was renamed Zaire in 1971) from 1965 to 1997, who formed an authoritarian regime, amassed vast personal wealth, and attempted to purge the country of all colonial cultural influence while enjoying considerable support from the United States due to its anti-communist stance.
Decolonization tn the Cold War The combined effects of two great European wars weakened the political and economic domination of Latin America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East by European powers.
However, many people viewed these charges with skepticism; in fact, one of Mobutu's staunchest critics, Nzongola-Ntalaja, soeculated that Mobutu invented the plot as an excuse to purge the military of talented officers who might otherwise pose a threat to his rule.
The Smith administration initially professed continued loyalty to Queen Elizabeth II, but abandoned this in 1970 when it declared a republic in an unsuccessful attempt to win foreign recognition.
Learning Objective Describe the Bush War Key Points e In 1965, the conservative white minority government led by lan Smith unilaterally declared independence from the United Kingdom as Rhodesia, which led to sanctions from the UN. e The United Kingdom deemed the Rhodesian declaration an act of rebellion, but did not re-establish control by force.
Key Terms Lancaster House Agreement Negotiations in 1980 that brought internationally recognized independence to Rhodesia (as the Republic of Zimbabwe) following lan Smith's Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 1965. lan Smith A politician, farmer, and fighter pilot who served as Prime Minister of Rhodesia from 1964 to 1979.
Learning Objective Explain Mugabe's rise to power and the regime he established in Zimbabwe Key Points e Robert Mugabe is the current President of Zimbabwe and has ruled the nation since 1980, first as Prime Minister and then as President in 1987. e Mugabe rose to prominence in the 1960s as the leader of the Zimbabwe African National Union during the conflict against the conservative white-minority government of Rhodesia. e At the time of his 1980 election victory, Mugabe was widely acclaimed as a revolutionary hero who was embracing racial reconciliation.
South Africa 33.4.1: Imperialism in South Africa Much of South Africa's history, particularly of the colonial and post-colonial eras, is characterized by clashes of culture, violent territorial disoutes between European settlers and indigenous people, dispossession and repression, and other racial and political tensions.
Learning Objective Analyze the social consequences of imperialism in South Africa Key Points e In 1652, a century and a half after the discovery of the Cape sea route, Jan van Riebeeck established a refreshment station at the Cape of Good Hope at what would become Cape Town, on behalf of the Dutch East India Company. e The Dutch transported slaves from Indonesia, Madagascar, and India as labor for the colonists in Cape Town.
The Anglo-Zulu War was fought in 1879 between the British Empire and the Zulu Kingdom, ending in a Zulu defeat. e After winning the First Boer War, the Boers were ultimately defeated in the Second Boer War by 1902. e Within the country, anti-British policies among white South Africans focused on independence.
The Zulu nation spectacularly defeated the British at the Battle of Isandlwana.
Cape Colony, Natal Colony, Transvaal Colony, and Orange River Colony. e Among other harsh segregationist laws, including denial of voting rights to black people, the Union parliament enacted the 1913 Natives’ Land Act, which earmarked only eight percent of South Africa's available land for black occupancy.
Dissatisfaction with British influence in the Union's affairs reached a climax in September 1914, when impoverished Boers, anti-British Boers, and bitter-enders launched a rebellion that was quickly squashed. e In 1931 the union was fully sovereign from the United Kingdom with the passage of the Statute of Westminster, which abolished the last powers of the British Government on the country.
The British High Commission territories of Basutoland (now Lesotho), Bechuanaland , Swaziland, and Rhodesia continued under direct rule from Britain.
Learning Objective Explain what aspects of South African policy comprise the movement referred to as ""apartheid"" Key Points e Racist legislation during the apartheid era was a continuation and extension of discriminatory and segregationist laws that began in 1856 under Dutch rule in the Cape and continued throughout the country under British colonialism.
After a long and sometimes violent struggle by the African National Congress and other anti-apartheid activists both inside and outside the country, discriminatory laws began to be repealed or abolished in 1990.
British Involvement in Egypt Post-iIndependence The Kingdom of Egypt was established in 1922 following the Unilateral Declaration of Egyptian Independence, but the Kingdom was only nominally independent since the British continued to have varying degrees of political control and military presence until 1952.
Learning Objective Explain the ties between Britain and Egypt after the establishment of an independent Egyptian state Key Points The formal British protectorate over Egypt was ended by the Unilateral Declaration of Egyptian Independence on February 28, 1922.
After the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, the British agreed to withdraw their troops and did so by June 1956. e Britain went to war against Egypt over the Suez Canal in late 1956, but with insufficient international support was forced to back down.
The tensions began on August 18 when the Syrian government presided by Shukri al-Quwatli made a series of provocative institutional changes, such as the appointment of Col.
Afif al-Bizri, the Syrian army's chief of staff, soearheaded the union with Egypt.
Sadat made a historic visit to Israel in 1977, which led to the 1979 peace treaty in exchange for Israeli withdrawal from Sinai. e Sadat launched the Infitah economic reform policy, creating a ""open door"" for foreign investment while clamping down on religious and secular opposition. e On October 6, 1981, Sadat and six diplomats were assassinated while observing a military parade commemorating the eighth anniversary of the October 1973 War.
After Israel lost the defensive war, Egypt and Israel came together for negotiations with Israel, culminating in the Egypt-lsrael Peace Treaty in which Israel traded the Sinai to Egypt for peace.
The accords led to the March 26, 1979, signing of the Egypt-lIsrael Peace Treaty, by which Egypt regained control of the Sinai in May 1982.
The Ottoman Empire had long been the ""sick man of Europe"" and after a series of Balkan wars by 1914 was driven out of nearly all of Europe and North Africa. e The Second Constitutional Era began after the Young Turk Revolution with the sultan's announcement of the restoration of the 1876 constitution and the reconvening of the Ottoman Parliament.
Key Terms Turkish War of Independence A war fought between the Turkish nationalists and the proxies of the Allies namely Greece on the Western front, Armenia on the Eastern, France on the Southern and with them, the United Kingdom and Italy in Constantinople after some parts of Turkey were occupied and partitioned following the Ottoman Empire's defeat in World War I It resulted in the founding of the Republic of Turkey in the Anatolian heartland and the abolition of the Ottoman monarchy and caliphate.
Later, their leaders led a rebellion against the absolute rule of Sultan Abdul Hamid II in the 1908 Young Turk Revolution.
The Ottoman Empire The Ottoman Empire, also known as the Turkish Empire, was founded at the end of the 13th century in northwestern Anatolia in the vicinity of Bilecik and Sd6gut by the Oghuz Turkish tribal leader Osman.
The Ottoman Empire entered World War | after the Goeben and Breslau incident, in which it gave safe harbor to two German ships that were fleeing British ships.
The Ottomans were also forced to evacuate the parts of the former Russian Empire in the Caucasus (in present-day Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan), which they had gained towards the end of World War | after Russia's retreat from the war with the Russian Revolution in 1917.
During the Greek War of Independence, Russia established major influence and power over the Ottoman Empire.
The Crimean War was part of this longrunning contest between the major European powers for influence over territories of the Empire and focused on the rights of Christian minorities in the Holy Land, which was a part of the Ottoman Empire.
The continuing collapse of the Ottoman Empire led to two wars in the Balkans, in 1912 and 1913, which in turn was a prelude to world war.
His surname, Ataturk , was granted to him in 1934 and forbidden to any other person by the Turkish parliament.
Turkish War of Independence The Turkish War of Independence (May 19, 1919 July 24, 1923) was fought between the Turkish nationalists and the proxies of the Allies namely Greece on the Western front, Armenia on the Eastern, France on the Southern and with them, the United Kingdom and Italy in Constantinople (now Istanbul) after some parts of Turkey were occupied and partitioned following the Ottoman Empire's defeat in World War I Few of the present British, French, and Italian troops were deployed or engaged in combat.
Learning Objective Deconstruct the arguments for and against referring to these events as a genocide Key Points The ethnic cleansing of Armenians during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is widely considered a genocide, with an estimated 1. million victims.
A wave of persecution in the years 1894 to 1896 eventually culminated in the events of the Armenian Genocide in 1915 and 1916.
With World War | in progress, the Ottoman Empire accused the Armenians as liable to ally with Imperial Russia, and used this as a pretext to deal with the entire Armenian population as an enemy within their empire.
In 1915, as the Russian Caucasus Army continued to advance in eastern Anatolia, the Ottoman government decided to issue the Tehcir Law, which started the deportation of the ethnic Armenians, particularly from the provinces close to the Ottoman-Russian front.
Widespread rape, mass burnings, drownings, and other atrocities were an integral part of the genocide.
In order to justify this enormous crime the requisite propaganda material was thoroughly prepared in Istanbul. 'the Armenians are in league with the enemy.
Other estimates vary between 800,000 and 1,500,000. . a iti 1 Armenian Genocide “Those who fell by the wayside.
Diaspora Following the breakup of the Russian Empire in the aftermath of World War I, Armenia was briefly an independent republic from 1918 to 1920.
The understanding between the three powers, supplemented by agreements with Japan and Portugal, constituted a powerful counterweight to the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Kingdom of Italy, though Italy did not side with Germany and Austria during World War Il.
France got control of southeastern Turkey, northern Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon.
They also ruled Mandatory Irag from 1920 until 1932, while the French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon lasted from 1923 to 1946.
The terms were negotiated by British diplomat Mark Sykes and a French counterpart, Francois Georges-Picot.
Key Terms Balfour Declaration A letter dated November 1917 from the United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary Arthur James Balfour to Walter Rothschild, 2nd Baron Rothschild, a leader of the British Jewish community, for transmission to the Zionist Federation of Great Britain and Ireland.
British civil administration in Palestine operated from 1920 until 1948.
Palestine, Mesopotamia (later Iraq), and control of the coastal strip between the Mediterranean Sea and the River Jordan.
A son of Sharif Hussein (who helped lead the Arab Revolt against the Ottoman Empire), Faisal, was installed as King of Iraq, with Transjordan providing a throne for another of Hussein's sons, Abdullah.
Most of the Arabian peninsula fell to another British ally, lbn Saud, who created the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932.
Lawrence of Arabia), Britain supported the establishment of a united Arab state covering a large area of the Arab Middle East in exchange for Arab support of the British during the war.
Learning Objective Connect French politics in the Middle East to the present day Key Points e After WWI, Syria and Lebanon became a French protectorate (thinly disguised as a League of Nations Mandate). e French control was met immediately with armed resistance, so to combat Arab nationalism France divided the Mandate area into Lebanon and four substates.
Syria proclaimed its independence again in 1941 but was not recognized as an independent republic until January 1, 1944.
France bombed Damascus and tried to arrest its democratically elected leaders, but continuing pressure from Syrian nationalist groups and the British forced the French to evacuate their last troops on April 17, 1946.
Key Terms League of Nations mandate The legal status for certain territories transferred from the control of one country to another following World War I, or the legal instruments that contained the internationally agreed-upon terms for administering the territory on behalf of the League of Nations.
Damascus , Aleppo , Alawites , Jabal Druze , the autonomous Sanjak of Alexandretta (1921, modern-day Hatay), and the State of Greater Lebanon , which became later the modern country of Lebanon.
State of Damascus MANDATORY IRAQ Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon is22 Sent me Oruee Mate S States created Sering the French Mancate —, a © Capiats of the states MANDATORY PALESTINE State orders evtabished unts 1945 French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon Map showing the states of the French Mandate from 192122.
On April 25, 1920, the supreme inter-Allied council that was formulating the Treaty of Sevres granted France the mandate of Syria , and granted Britain the Mandate of Palestine and Iraq.
End of the Mandate With the fall of France in 1940 during World War Il, Syria came under the control of the Vichy Government until the British and Free French invaded and occupied the country in July 1941.
Iranian popular opposition to the APOC's royalty terms whereby Iran only received 16% of net profits was widespread and created political discontent throughout the country. e In 1941, during World War Il, Britain and the USSR invaded Iran, exiled Reza Shah, and put his son, Reza Pahlavi, who was friendlier to their interests, onto the throne.
Following WWII, nationalistic sentiments were on the rise in the Middle East, most notably in Iran, and the Iranian parliament voted to nationalize the oil industry; at the same time, the public elected Mohammed Mossadegh as Prime Minister, causing the Abadan Crisis.
Britain was unable to subvert Mossadegh, so British and American intelligence agencies orchestrated a coup d'état to overthrow him and bring Reza Pahlavi back onto the throne.
By 1954, now with a pro-Western leader in place, oil production started again under the control of a new cartel named the ""Seven Sisters,"" completely based outside the Middle East.
Abadan Crisis Occurred from 1951 to 1954 after Iran nationalized the Iranian assets of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company and expelled Western companies from oil refineries in the city of Abadan.
In 1913, shortly before World War I, APOC managers negotiated with a new customer, Winston Churchill, who was then First Lord of the Admiralty of Britain.
Britain and the USSR saw the newly opened Trans-Iranian Railway as an attractive route to transport supplies, including oil, from the Persian Gulf to the Soviet Union.
AlOC and the pro-western Iranian government led by Prime Minister Ali Razmara initially resisted nationalist pressure to revise AlOC's concession terms further in Iran's favor.
AlIOC withdrew from Iran and increased output of its other reserves in the Persian Gulf.
At the same time, however, his coalition was weakening as Britain’s boycott of Iranian oil eliminated a major source of government revenue and strategically made Iranians poorer and thus unhappier by the day.
Under pressure from the U.S., British Petroleum was forced to accept membership in a consortium of companies that would bring Iranian oil back on the international market.
After World War II and the destruction of Jewish life in Central and Eastern Europe where these alternative movements were rooted, Zionism became the dominant view about a Jewish national state.
Learning Objective Analyze the partitioning of Palestine Key Points e In 1923, the land of Palestine, previously under the control of the Ottoman Empire, was made a British Mandate by the League of Nations. e During WWI, the British made conflicting promises to the Arab and Jewish populations of Palestine. e In 1937, following a six-month-long Arab General Strike, the British established the Peel Commission, which concluded that the Mandate was not working and proposed a partition of Palestine into independent Jewish and Arab States.
At the beginning of WWII, in 1939, the British put a limit on the immigration of Jews into Palestine.
After World War Il, in August 1945 President Truman asked for the admission of 100,000 Holocaust survivors into Palestine, but the British maintained limits on Jewish immigration, which led to a new inquiry into partitioning Palestine. e By 1947, the British announced their desire to terminate the Palestine Mandate and placed the Question of Palestine before the United Nations, which developed a non-binding recommendation for independent Arab and Jewish states. e The proposal was rejected by the Palestinians and civil war broke out.
The recommendations triggered violent demonstrations in the Arab states and calls fora Jihad and an annihilation of all European Jews in Palestine.
The UN created UNSCOP (the UN Special Committee on Palestine) on May 15, 1947, with representatives from 11 countries.
Key Terms Eretz-Israel The traditional Jewish name for an area of indefinite geographical extension in the Southern Levant.
After World War Il, Britain found itself in intense conflict with the Jewish community over Jewish immigration limits, as well as continued conflict with the Arab community over limit levels.
The following day, the armies of four Arab countries—Egypt, Syria, Transjordan, and Irag—entered what had been British Mandatory Palestine, launching the 1948 Arab-Israeli War.
Palestinian Refugees During the 1948 Palestine War, around 85% (720,000 people) of the Palestinian Arab population of what became Israel were expelled from their homes, fleeing to the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan.
Learning Objective Trace the Palestinian refugee populations in places such as Jordan Key Points During the Palestine War of 1948, the first phase of the Arab-Israeli War of 1948, 85% of the Palestinian Arab population fled from their homes in what became known as the Palestinian Exodus of 1948.
There is heated debate among historians and politicians as to the causes of the Exodus, and the status of this debate has bearing on the claim of Palestinians to their land.
Displaced Palestinian Arabs, Known as Palestinian refugees, were settled in Palestinian refugee camps throughout the Arab world, with most fleeing to the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan.
Most Arab nations denied citizenship to the Palestinian refugees, except in Jordan, where most have citizenship or the equivalent rights of citizens.
Learning Objective Describe the events of the Six-Day War Key Points e Relations between Israel and its neighboring Arab nations had never fully normalized following the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, fought immediately after the Israel declared itself an independent nation-state.
The Six-Day War, also known as the June War, 1967 ArabIsraeli War, or Third Arab-Israeli War, was fought between June 5 and 10, 1967, by Israel and the neighboring states of Egypt , Jordan, and Syria.
On June 19, 1967, the National Unity Government [ of Israel] voted unanimously to return the Sinai to Egypt and the Golan Heights to Syria in return for peace agreements.
However, according to the Basic Law of Saudi Arabia adopted by royal decree in 1992, the king must comply with Sharia and the Quran, while the Quran and the Sunnah (the traditions of Muhammad) are declared to be the country's constitution.
Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud, the first king of Saudi Arabia, ruled for 21 years.
Gulf War A war waged by coalition forces from 34 nations led by the United States against Irag in response to Iraq's invasion and annexation of Kuwait.
After the Great Arab Revolt against the Ottomans in 1916 during World War I, the Ottoman Empire was partitioned by Britain and France.
During the first Gulf War , these relations were damaged by Jordan's neutrality and its maintenance of relations with Iraq.
Later, Jordan restored its relations with Western countries through its participation in the enforcement of UN sanctions against Iraq and in the Southwest Asia peace process.
Learning Objective Compare and contrast the emirates of the Arabian Peninsula Key Points Most emirates have either disappeared, been integrated in a larger modern state or changed their rulers' styles.
True emirate-states have become rare, with only three in existence today.
The United Arab Emirates is a federal state that comprises seven federal emirates, each administered by a hereditary emir.
These form the electoral college for the federation's President and Prime Minister.
The UAE is criticized for its human rights record, including the specific interpretations of Sharia law used in its legal system that make flogging and stoning legal punishments.
Qatar has the highest per capita income in the world, backed by the world's third largest natural gas reserves and oil reserves.
Kuwait is among the Middle East's freest countries in terms of civil liberties and political rights, and Kuwaiti women are among the most emancipated in the Middle East.
Major insurgencies and civil wars in Irag, Libya, Syria, and Yemen resulted, along with civil uprisings in Bahrain and Egypt; large street demonstrations in Algeria, Iran, Lebanon, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, Oman, and Sudan; and minor protests in Djibouti, Mauritania, the Palestinian territories, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, and the Western Sahara.
It borders with Oman to the east and Saudi Arabia to the south, although the United Arab Emirates shares maritime borders with Qatar in the west and Iran in the north and sea borders with Irag, Kuwait, and Bahrain.
Situated in the northern edge of Eastern Arabia at the tip of the Persian Gulf, it shares borders with Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
It was created in 1960, a year after the ""Seven Sisters"" multinational oil companies unilaterally reduced their posted prices for Venezuelan and Middle Eastern crude oil by 10 percent.
The 1973 oil crisis began in October of that year when the members of the Arab sub-group of OPEC proclaimed an oil embargo against the United States and other industrialized nations that supported Israel in the Yom Kippur War.
By the end of the embargo in March 1974, the price of oil had risen from United States $3 per barrel to nearly $12 globally.
The embargo caused an oil crisis, with many shortand long-term effects on global politics and economics.
The 1979 oil crisis or oil Shock occurred in the United States due to decreased oil output in the wake of the Iranian Revolution.
This was supported by various leftist and Islamist organizations and Iranian student movements.
As of December 2016, OPEC's members are Algeria, Angola, Ecuador, Gabon, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia (the de facto leader), United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.
In September 1960, the Baghdad Conference was held at the initiative of Tariki, Pérez Alfonzo, and Iraqi prime minister Abd al-Karim Qasim.
In 1980, following the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq War, oil production in Iran nearly stopped, and Iraq's oil production was severely cut as well.
He came to power during World War Il after an Anglo-Soviet invasion forced the abdication of his father, Reza Shah.
Mosaddegh became enormously popular in Iran after he nationalized its petroleum industry and oil reserves.
Other factors contributed to strong opposition to the Shah among certain groups within Iran, most significantly United States and UK support for his regime, clashes with Islamists, and increased communist activity.
Explanations for why Mohammad Reza was overthrown include his status as a dictator put in place by a non-Muslim Western power, the United States, whose foreign culture was seen as influencing that of Iran.
In this era that ensued until the fall of the shah in 1979, Iran was one of the United States’ closest allies.
The Shah's close ties to Washington and his Westernization policies soon angered some Iranians, especially the hardline Islamic conservatives.
The reasons why the Shah was overthrown and replaced by an Islamic Republic are the subject of historical debate.
The revolution was in part a conservative backlash against the westernization and secularization efforts of the Western-backed Shah, and a more popular reaction to social injustice and other shortcomings of the regime.
The Shah was perceived by many Iranians as beholden to if not a puppet of a non-Muslim Western power whose culture was contaminating that of Iran.
The final collapse of the Pahlavi dynasty occurred Shortly after on February 11, when Iran's military declared itself ""neutral"" after guerrillas and rebel troops overwhelmed troops loyal to the Shah in armed street fighting. lran officially became an Islamic Republic on April 1, 1979, when Iranians overwhelmingly approved a national referendum to make it so.
The new theocratic Constitution — whereby Khomeini became Supreme Leader of the country — was approved in December 1979.
The royal reign collapsed shortly after on February 11, when guerrillas and rebel troops overwhelmed troops loyal to the Shah in armed street fighting, bringing Khomeini to official power. lran voted by national referendum to become an Islamic Republic on April 1, 1979, and approved a new theocraticrepublican constitution whereby Khomeini became Supreme Leader of the country in December 1979.
Khomeini was released after eight months of house arrest and continued his agitation, condemning Iran's close cooperation with Israel and its capitulations and extension of diplomatic immunity to American government personnel in Iran.
While the revolution brought about some re-Islamization of Iran, particularly in terms of personal appearance— beards, hijab—it has not prompted a reversal of all modernization or a return to traditional patterns of family life.
Autocratic monarchy was replaced by an Islamic Republic based on the principle of rule by Islamic jurists, , where clerics serve as head of state and in many powerful governmental roles.
On Jimmy Carter's final day in office, the last hostages were finally set free as a result of the Algiers Accords.
Iran Hostage Crisis A group photograph of the fifty-two United States hostages ina hospital where they spent a few days after their release.
Knomeini's 1989 fatwa call for the killing of British citizen Salman Rushdie for his allegedly blasphemous book, The Satanic Verses, demonstrated the willingness of the Islamic revolutionaries to sacrifice trade and other ties with western countries to threaten an individual citizen living thousands of miles away.
Following the 2005 election of President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad, Iran has returned to more a more hardline stance, frequently antagonizing the west and its neighbors while battling for control over the region.
The Leader of the Revolution is responsible for delineation and supervision of the general policies of the Islamic Republic of lran.
According to the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the powers of government in the Islamic Republic of Iran are vested in the legislature, the judiciary, and the executive powers, functioning under the supervision of the ""Absolute Guardianship and the Leadership of the Ummah,"" which refers to the Supreme Leader of Iran.
After the Supreme Leader, the Constitution defines the President of Iran as the highest state authority.
The Iran-Iraq War On September 22, 1980, the Iragi army invaded the Iranian Khuzestan and the Iran-Iraq War began.
Learning Objective Analyze the reasons for the Iran-Iraq War Key Points Shortly after the success of the revolution, revolutionary leader Ruhollah Khomeini began calling for Islamic revolutions across the Muslim world, including Iran's Arab neighbor Iraq, the one large state besides Iran in the Gulf with a Shia Muslim majority population.
The war began with Iraq's invasion of Iran in an attempt by Iraq's dictator Saddam Hussein to take advantage of the perceived post-revolutionary chaos and military weakness, as well as the Revolution's unpopularity with Western governments.
Although the forces of Saddam Hussein made several early advances, by mid-1982 Iranian forces successfully managed to drive the Iraqi army back into Iraq.
In July 1982, with Irag thrown on the defensive, Iran invaded Iraq and conducted countless offensives in a bid to conquer territory and capture cities, such as Basra. e The war continued until 1988 when the Iraqi army defeated the Iranian forces inside Iraq and pushed the remaining Iranian troops back across the border. e Subsequently, Khomeini accepted a truce mediated by the UN. e An estimated 200,000-240,000 Iranians and 105,000200,000 Iraqis were killed during the war.
Key Terms weapons of mass destruction Nuclear, radiological, chemical, biological or other weapons that can kill and bring significant harm toa large number of humans or cause great damage to human-made structures , natural structures , or the biosphere.
The Iran-Iraq War was an armed conflict between Iran and lraq lasting from September 22, 1980, when Iraq invaded Iran, to August 1988.
The war followed a long history of border disputes and was motivated by fears that the Iranian Revolution in 1979 would inspire insurgency among Iraq's long-suppressed Shi'i majority, as well as Iraq's desire to replace Iran as the dominant Persian Gulf state.
The conflict has been compared to World War | in terms of the tactics used, including largescale trench warfare with barbed wire stretched across trenches, manned machine gun posts, bayonet charges, human wave attacks across a no man's land, and extensive use of chemical weapons such as sulfur mustard by the Iraqi government against Iranian troops, civilians, and Kurds.
The Security Council did not identify Iraq as the aggressor of the war until December 11, 1991, 12 years after Irag invaded Iran and 16 months after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
Origins Since the Ottoman-Persian Wars of the 16th and 17th centuries, Iran and the Ottomans fought over Iraq and full control of the Shatt al-Arab until the signing of the Treaty of Zuhab in 1639, which established the final borders between the two countries.
Iraq threatened war over the Iranian move, but when on April 24 1969, an Iranian tanker escorted by Iranian warships sailed down the river, Iraq—the militarily weaker state—did nothing.
Iran's abrogation of the treaty marked the beginning of a period of acute Iragi-lranian tension that was to last until the 1975 Algiers Agreement.
In return for Iraq recognizing that the frontier on the waterway ran along the entire thalweg, Iran ended its support of Iraq's Kurdish guerrillas.
Despite Iraq's goals of regaining the Shatt al-Arab, the Iraqi government seemed to initially welcome Iran's Revolution, which overthrew Iran's Shah, seen aS a common enemy.
On July 17, 1979, despite Khomeini's call, Saddam gave a speech praising the Iranian Revolution and called for an Iraqi-Iranian friendship based on non-interference in each other's internal affairs.
When Khomeini rejected Saddam's overture by calling for Islamic revolution in Irag, Saddam was alarmed.
With Iran engulfed in chaos, an opportunity for Irag to annex the oilrich Khuzestan Province materialized.
In addition, Khuzestan's large ethnic Arab population would allow Saddam to pose as a liberator for Arabs from Persian rule.
Fellow Gulf states such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait (despite being hostile to Iraq) encouraged Iraq to attack, as they feared that an Islamic revolution would take place within their own borders.
In 1958, Afghanistan’s prime minister Daud Khan tried to create a treaty with America against the Soviet Union because he was frightened of a potential Soviet invasion and needed modern weapons. e After the Americans turned down the Afghanistan government, the Soviet Union provided financial aid, military personal training, and modern weapons, such as AK-47s and rocket launchers. e Prime Minister Daud Khan was forced to resign in 1963 because of the dependence he had created on the Soviet Union.
He abandoned the reforms of Amanullah Khan in favor of a more gradual approach to modernization but was assassinated in 1933 by Abdul Khaliq, a Hazara school student.
Zahir Shah, the last king of Afghanistan, who reigned from 1933 to 1973.
After returning to Afghanistan, Daoud made plans to diminish his government's relationships with the Soviet Union, and instead forge closer contacts with the West as well as oil-rich Saudi Arabia and Iran.
He started military training programs with India and commenced economic development talks with Imperial lran.
Meanwhile, increasing friction between the competing factions of the PDPA — the dominant Khalq and the more moderate Parcham — resulted in the dismissal of Parchami cabinet members and the arrest of Parchami military officers under the pretext of a Parchami coup.
During his short stay in power (104 days), Amin became committed to establishing a collective leadership.
Learning Objective Review the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the challenges it faced Key Points e The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan was formed after the Saur Revolution on April 27, 1978. e By mid-1978, a rebellion started, with rebels attacking the local military garrison in the Nuristan region of eastern Afghanistan.
Civil war soon spread throughout the country. e In September 1979, Deputy Prime Minister Hafizullah Amin seized power, arresting and killing President Taraki. e Based on information from the KGB, Soviet leaders felt that Prime Minister Hafizullah Amin's actions had destabilized the situation in Afghanistan and the USSR started to discuss how to respond.
Soviet Invasion and Coup d'état On October 31, 1979, Soviet informants to the Afghan Armed Forces, under orders from the inner circle of advisers under Soviet premier Brezhnev, relayed information for them to undergo maintenance cycles for their tanks and other crucial equipment.
More than $20 billion in United States funds was funneled into the country to train and arm Afghan resistance groups. e The U.S.-built Stinger antiaircraft missile, supplied to the mujahideen in very large numbers beginning in 1986, struck a decisive blow to the Soviets. e The Stingers were so renowned and deadly that in the 1990s, the United States conducted a ""buy-back"" program to keep unused missiles from falling into the hands of anti-American terrorists, an effort which was covertly renewed in the early 2000s.
The program leaned heavily toward supporting militant Islamic groups that were favored by the regime of Muhammad Zia-ul-Hag in neighboring Pakistan, rather than less ideological Afghan resistance groups that had been fighting the Marxist-oriented Democratic Republic of Afghanistan regime since before the Soviet intervention.
Learning Objective Generalize how the conflict in Afghanistan led to the rise of Islamism and the Taliban Key Points e In 1989, with mounting international pressure and military losses against the Afghan rebels, the Soviet Union withdrew from Afghanistan, ending the SovietAfghan War. e Fighting in Afghanistan continued, with the Afghan government under the leadership of President Mohammad Najibullah launching attacks against the rebels without international support.
Afghanistan descended into political chaos and an estimated 25,000 people died during this period. e Southern and eastern Afghanistan were under the control of local commanders and in 1994, the Taliban, a Sunni Islamic fundamentalist political movement, took control of southern Afghanistan and forced the surrender of dozens of local leaders. e In 1996, the Taliban seized Kabul and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, imposing a Strict form of Sharia, which resulted in the brutal treatment of many Afghans, especially women, including sex trafficking and massacres.
Key Terms Taliban A Sunni Islamic fundamentalist political movement in Afghanistan currently waging war (an insurgency, or jihad) within that country.
Following the Soviet withdrawal, some of the foreign volunteers and young Afghan refugees, went on to continue violent jihad in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and abroad.
In 1994, the Taliban (a movement originating from Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a politicalreligious force.
In late 1994, forces of military commander Ahmad Shah Massoud held on to Kabul.
His death left a power vacuum in China and ushered in what would become known as the Warlord Era, during which much of the country was ruled by shifting coalitions of competing provincial military leaders. e During the Nanjing Decade of 1928-37, which followed the Warlord Era, the Nationalists under the leadership of Chiang Kai-shek attempted to consolidate the divided society and reform the economy.
The two Chinese parties nominally formed a united front to oppose the Japanese in 1937, during the Second Sino-Japanese War , which became part of World War Il.
China tn WWII The Second Sino-Japanese War dominated China's war efforts and although the Republic of China emerged from the war as a member of the victorious Allied forces, the country was ravaged by the economic crisis and continuous conflicts between the Nationalists and the Communists.
The Chinese resistance stiffened after July 7, 1937, when a clash occurred between Chinese and Japanese troops outside Beijing.
During World War Il, the United States emerged as a major player in Chinese affairs.
The ten-year armed struggle ended with the Xi'an Incident when Chiang Kai-shek was forced to form the Second United Front against invading forces from Japan.
The level of actual cooperation and coordination between them during World War Il was at best minimal.
Chiang Kaishek and approximately two million Nationalist Chinese retreated from mainland China to the island of Taiwan.
Most observers expected Chiang's government to eventually fall in response to a Communist invasion of Taiwan.
The Civil War Before World War Il During the 1920s, CPC activists retreated underground or to the countryside, where they advocated an armed rebellion.
A CPC meeting confirmed the party's intention to take power by force, followed by a violent anti-Communist campaign by Wang Jingwel's government in Wuhan starting on August 8.
The Civil War After World War Il The Civil War represented an ideological split between the Communist CPC and the KMT's brand of Nationalism.
However, in the last month of World War II in East Asia, Soviet forces launched the huge strategic offensive operation to attack the Japanese Kwantung Army in Manchuria and along the Chinese-Mongolian border.
It views the industrial-rural divide as a major division exploited by capitalism, involving industrial urban developed ""First World"" societies ruling over rural developing ""Third World"" societies.
During the Revolution, millions of people were persecuted in the violent struggles that ensued across the country and suffered abuses including public humiliation, arbitrary imprisonment, torture, sustained harassment, and seizure of property.
The Cultural Revolution also wreaked havoc on minority cultures in China.
The Cultural Revolution led to the destruction of much of China's traditional cultural heritage and the imprisonment of a huge number of Chinese citizens as well economic and social chaos.
Although the effects of the Cultural Revolution were disastrous for millions of people in China, there were some positive outcomes, particularly in the rural areas, including access to basic education and health care.
In the top leadership, it led to a mass purge of senior officials, most notably Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping.
TON eee A poster from the Cultural Revolution, featuring an image of Chairman Mao and published by the government of the People's Republic of China.
The revolution aimed to destroy the ""Four Olds"" and establish the corresponding ""Four News,"" which ranged from the changing of names and hair cuts to ransacking homes, vandalizing cultural treasures, and desecrating temples.
The ideological split also escalated to small-scale warfare between Russia and China. e After the regime of Mao Zedong, the PRC-USSR ideological schism no longer shaped domestic politics but continued to impact geopolitics, including such global developments as the establishment of postcolonial Indochina, the Cambodian-Vietnamese War that deposed Pol Pot in 1978, the SinoVietnamese War , and the 1979 invasion of the USSR on Afghanistan.
After World War Il, Stalin advised Mao against seizing power because the Soviet Union had signed a Treaty of Friendship and Alliance with the Nationalists in 1945.
At first, Vietnam ignored the Khmer Rouge domestic reorganization of Cambodia by the Pol Pot regime as an internal matter, until the Khmer Rouge attacked the ethnic Vietnamese populace of Cambodia and the border with Vietnam.
Learning Objective Determine why Deng Xiaoping created the Special Economic Zones Key Points Deng Xiaoping was a Chinese revolutionary and statesman, the leader of the People’s Republic of China from 1978 until his retirement in 1989.
Beginning in 1979, economic reforms boosted the market model while the leaders maintained old Communist-style rhetoric.
After the death of Chiang Ching-kuo in 1988, Lee Teng-hui succeeded him as president and led Taiwan to full-fledged democratization.
Under the final plan, however, SCAP was given direct control over the main islands of Japan and the immediately surrounding islands, while outlying possessions were divided between the Allied Powers.
Allied (primarily American) forces were set up to supervise the country, led by MacArthur.
Already in 1945, MacArthur's staff and Japanese officials were at odds over the most fundamental issue, a new constitution.
The Japanese authorities were extremely reluctant to take the drastic step of replacing the 1889 Meiji Constitution with a more liberal document.
After rejecting a Japanese-authored proposal that MacArthur deemed too conservative, he ordered his staff to draft a completely new document.
The MacArthur draft, which proposed a unicameral legislature, was changed at the insistence of the Japanese to a bicameral legislatures with two elected houses.
The source of the clause is disputed although it is most often attributed to Prime Minister Kijuro Shidehara.
Although Article 9 intended to prevent the country from ever becoming an aggressive military power again, the United States was soon pressuring Japan to rebuild its army as a bulwark against communism in Asia after the Chinese Civil War and the Korean War.
Key Terms V-] Day Term used to refer to the day on which Japan surrendered in World War Il, in effect ending the war.
Yoshida Doctrine A strategy named after Japan's first Prime Minister after World War II Shigeru Yoshida that declared the reconstruction of Japan's domestic economy with security guaranteed by an alliance with the United States.
Traditionally, Japan's military soending has been restricted to about 1% of its gross national product, although this is by popular practice, not law, and this figure has fluctuated.
MITI sought successfully to promote manufacturing and heavy industry and encouraged exports.
In accordance with United States policy, Japan recognized the Republic of China on Taiwan as the legitimate government of China after World War Il and it switched its recognition to the People's Republic of China in 1972.
Economic Growth after WWII Japan's impressive economic growth after World War II depended on a number of factors, including the nation's prewar experience, the advantageous conditions of the postwar occupation by the Allied forces, the high level and quality of investment that persisted through the 1980s, a well-educated and disciplined labor force, economies of scale, and global politics.
Learning Objective Recognize the ways in which Japan encouraged economic growth after the war Key Points Japan experienced dramatic political and social transformation under the Allied occupation in 19451952.
In the aftermath of the war, about 40% of the nation's industrial plants and infrastructure were destroyed, and production reverted to levels of about L5years earlier.
In 1965 industrial sectors employed more than 41% of the labor force, while only 26% remained in agriculture. e Japan's highly acclaimed post-war education system contributed strongly to the modernizing process.
The world's highest literacy rate and high education standards were major reasons for Japan's success in achieving a technologically advanced economy. e The mid-1960s ushered in a new type of industrial development as the economy opened itself to international competition in some industries and developed heavy and chemical manufacturers.
Whereas textiles and light manufacturing maintained their profitability internationally, products such as automobiles, electronics, ships, and machine tools, assumed new importance. e The 1973 oil crisis shocked economies that had become dependent on imported petroleum.
The occupation sought to decentralize power in Japan by breaking up the za/batsu (industrial and financial business conglomerates in the Empire, whose influence and size allowed control over significant parts of the Japanese economy), transferring ownership of agricultural land from landlords to tenant farmers, and promoting labor unionism.
Under the Allied occupation after the surrender of Japan, a partially successful attempt was made to dissolve the za/batsu.
While the za/batsu were dissolved after the war, ke/retsu—large, modern industrial enterprise groupings—emerged.
The treaty served to officially end Japan's position as an imperial power, allocate compensation to Allied civilians and former prisoners of war who suffered Japanese war crimes during World War Il, and return sovereignty to Japan.
In legal terms, the end of the occupation finally placed Japan's relations with the United States on an equal footing, but this equality was initially largely nominal.
As the disastrous results of World War II subsided into the background and trade with the United States expanded, Japan's self-confidence grew, which gave rise to a desire for greater independence from United States influence.
During the 1950s and 1960s, this was especially evident in the Japanese attitude toward United States military bases on the four main islands of Japan and in Okinawa Prefecture.
Recognizing the popular desire for the return of the Ryukyu Islands and the Bonin Islands, in 1953 the United States relinquished its control of the Amami group of islands at the northern end of the Ryukyu Islands.
Popular agitation culminated in a unanimous resolution adopted by the Diet in 1956, calling fora return of Okinawa to Japan.
Under a new 1960 treaty, both parties assumed an obligation to assist each other in case of armed attack on territories under Japanese administration.
In 1971, the two countries signed an agreement for the return of Okinawa to Japan in 1972.
A series of 1971 events marked the beginning of a new stage in relations, a period of adjustment to a changing world situation.
More recently, it has gained new urgency in light of the changing global positions of North Korea and China.
The American military bases on Okinawa have caused challenges, as Japanese and Okinawans have protested their presence for decades.
The treaty officially ended Japan's position as an imperial power, allocated compensation to Allied civilians and former prisoners of war who suffered Japanese war crimes during World War Il, and returned sovereignty to Japan.
As the disastrous results of World War II subsided and trade with the United States expanded, Japan's self-confidence grew, which gave rise to a desire for greater independence from United States influence.
This policy was put to the test in 1979, when radical lranians seized the United States embassy in Tehran, taking 60 hostages.
While the foreign policy of the administration of President George W Bush put a strain on some of the United States’ international relations, the alliance with Japan became stronger, as evidenced by the Deployment of Japanese troops to Irag and the joint development of anti-missile defense systems.
Japan and Reckoning with History Despite numerous apologies for Japan's war crimes from Japanese government representatives since World War Il, repeated comments of Japanese politicians questioning the crimes, the problematic degree of formality of apologies, and retractions or contradictions by statements or actions of Japan have exposed the country's refusal to reckon with its difficult past.
Learning Objective Discuss the challenges Japan has had in acknowledging its past Key Points e Japanese war crimes occurred in many Asian and Pacific countries during the period of Japanese imperialism, primarily during the Second Sino-Japanese War and World War Il.
Japanese nationalist politicians engaged in efforts to whitewash the actions of the Empire of Japan during World War Il.
While they were not entirely successful, some Japanese history textbooks offer only brief references to war crimes.
Critics have questioned the degree and formality of apologies and noted the retractions and contradictory actions of Japan.
While individual politicians have issued apologies, others have repeatedly questioned Japan's involvement in forcing women into sex slavery.
Both South Korea and North Korea continue to request an apology and compensation for Korea under Japanese rule, regarding the issued apologies as insincere due to repeated Japanese politicians' comments that question the scale and nature of Japanese crimes.
Yasukuni Shrine, a Shinto shrine that memorializes Japanese armed forces members killed in wartime, has been a subject of controversy as it contains a memorial for more than 1,000 Japanese and some Korean war criminals.
After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, the war merged into the greater conflict of World War Il asa major front in the Pacific War.
Airmen of the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service and Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service were not included as war criminals because there was no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law that prohibited the unlawful conduct of aerial warfare either before or during World War Il.
However, the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service took part in chemical and biological attacks on enemy nationals during the Second Sino-Japanese War and World War Il, and the use of such weapons in warfare was generally prohibited by international agreements signed by Japan, including the Hague Conventions , which banned the use of ""poison or poisoned weapons"" in warfare.
The Korean comfort women stated that they were not protesting for money and that their goals of formal and public apology from Abe and the Japanese government and the correction of Japanese history textbooks have not been met. gs <~ > S| — Ee | —s Chinese and Malayan girls forcibly taken from Penang by the Japanese to work as ""comfort girls"" for the troops.
Following private meetings between Kanemaru and North Korean leader Kim I] Sung, a joint declaration released on September 28 called for Japan to apologize and compensate North Korea for its period of colonial rule.
Junichiro Koizumi visited the shrine and paid respects six times during his term as Prime Minister of Japan.
Continued anti-Japanese uprisings led to the strengthening of military rule in 1931.
From 1939, labor shortages as a result of conscription of Japanese males for the military efforts of World War II led to organized official recruitment of Koreans to work in mainland Japan.
Koreans and many other Asians were experimented on in Unit 731, a secret military medical experimentation unit in World War Il.
The rapid growth of the Korean economy under the Japanese rule, which as historians note cannot be ignored in the analysis of the later economic success of South Korea, continues to be the subject of controversy between the two Koreas and Japan.
World War Il From 1939, labor shortages as a result of conscription of Japanese males for the military efforts of World War II led to organized official recruitment of Koreans to work in mainland Japan, initially through civilian agents and later directly, often involving elements of coercion.
Learning Objective Describe the roles the United States and the USSR played in Korea after WWII Key Points At the Tehran Conference in 1943 and the Yalta Conference in 1945, the Soviet Union promised to join its allies in the Pacific War within three months of victory in Europe.
On September 7, 1945, General Douglas MacArthur announced that Lieutenant General John R Hodge was to administer Korean affairs.
The USAMGIK tried to contain civil violence in the south by banning strikes and outlawing the People's Republic of Korea and the people's committees, but it did not prevent anti-division protests.
It eventually outlawed all the left-leaning and allegedly communist organizations, and its continuation of the Japanese colonial system made it unpopular among Koreans.
In 1946, a provisional government called the Provisional People's Committee was formed under Kim Il-sung in North Korea.
Key Terms Provisional People's Committee The official name of the provisional government governing the northern portion of the Korean Peninsula following its post-World War Il partition by the United States and the Soviet Union after the defeat of the Empire of Japan in 1945.
The Outbreak of the Korean War With the approval and support of Stalin and Mao Zedong and Kim Il-sung believing that the effort to unite the Korean Peninsula would be supported by much of the South Korean populations, North Korea invaded South Korea on June 25, 1950, marking the outbreak of the Korean War.
However, Kim Il-sung believed that the guerrillas had weakened the South Korean military and that a North Korean invasion would be welcomed by much of the South Korean population.
Learning Objective Compare involvement of the U.S., USSR, and China in the Korean War Key Points e On June 25, 1950, the United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned the North Korean invasion of the Republic of Korea with UN Security Council Resolution 82.
On the same day, President Truman ordered United States air and sea forces to help the South Korean regime. e United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson and President Truman agreed that the United States was obligated to act, paralleling the North Korean invasion with Adolf Hitler's aggression in the 1930s with the conclusion that the mistake of appeasement must not be repeated.
However, Truman later acknowledged that he believed fighting the invasion was essential to the American goal of the global containment of communism. e In September 1950, Zhou Enlai warned the United States that China was prepared to intervene in Korea if the United States crossed the 38th parallel.
The X Corps landed at Wonsan (in southeastern North Korea) and Riwon (in northeastern North Korea), already captured by ROK forces.
Learning Objective Analyze the consequences of dividing the Korean Peninsula into two countries Key Points e The United Nations Command, supported by the United States, the North Korean People's Army, and the Chinese People's Volunteers, signed the Armistice Agreement on July 27, 1953, to end the Korean War fighting.
The war is considered to have ended at this point but no peace treaty was ever signed. e Upon agreeing to the armistice, the belligerents established the Korean Demilitarized Zone, a de facto border barrier that divides the Korean Peninsula roughly in half.
There have been various incidents in and around the Zone, with military and civilian casualties on both sides. e After the war, Operation Glory, which involved the effort to transfer the remains of United Nations Command casualties from North Korea, was conducted from July to November 1954 to allow combatant countries to exchange their dead.
The exact number of South Korean POWs who were detained in North Korea after the war and who still survive in North Korea is unknown. e Large numbers of people were displaced as a result of the war and many families were divided by the reconstituted border.
In 2007, it was estimated that around 750,000 people remained separated from immediate family members, and family reunions have long been a diplomatic priority. e After the war, sporadic conflict continued between North and South Korea.
Pan A map of the Korean Demilitarized Zone, produced by the CIA in 1969.
The United States Immigration Act of 1952 legalized the naturalization of non-whites as American citizens and made possible the entry of military soouses and children from South Korea after the Korean War.
In response to the Blue House Raid, the South Korean government set up a special unit to assassinate Kim ll-sung, but the mission was aborted in 1972.
Communism in the DPRK Following the idea of /uche or self-reliance, North Korea remains one of the most isolated countries in the world, where an authoritarian political system has resulted in the destruction of the economy, complete control of the society, and extreme violations of human rights.
Learning Objective Describe how Communism looks in the DPRK today Key Points e Following the Korean War, North Korea emphasized the ideology of Juche to distinguish itself from both the Soviet Union and China.
North Korea, like all the postwar communist states, undertook massive state investment in heavy industry, state infrastructure, and military strength, neglecting the production of consumer goods. e As late as the 1970s, North Korea's gross domestic product per capita was estimated to be equivalent to South Korea's.
Without the Soviet aid, North Korea's economy went into a free-fall. e Kim Il-sung died from a sudden heart attack in 1994.
At the same time, North Korea emphasized the ideology of Juche (selfreliance) to distinguish itself from both the Soviet Union and China.
The leadership in Pyongyang responded by proclaiming that the collapse of the Eastern Bloc demonstrated the correctness of the policy of /uche.
Learning Objective Explain the policies enacted by the South Korean government to promote economic growth Key Points e Following the armistice that ended the Korean War fighting, South Korea experienced political turmoil under the autocratic leadership of Syngman Rhee.
Under his rule, the country was in a dire economic situation and he was finally forced to resign and flee in 1960, following the April Revolution. e A period of political instability followed, broken by General Park Chung-hee's May 16 coup against the weak and ineffectual government the next year.
Park was assassinated in 1979, initiating another period of political turmoil, as the previously suppressed opposition leaders all campaigned to run for president in the sudden political void.
Chun and his government held South Korea under a despotic rule until 1987, when the June Democracy Movement forced the ruling government to hold elections and institute other democratic reforms.
Sweeping economic reforms were initiated under Park's administration that announced its five-year economic development plan based on an export-oriented industrialization policy.
Despite the immense economic growth, the standard of living for city laborers and farmers was still low.
As the rural economy steadily lost ground and caused dissent among the farmers, however, the government decided to implement measures to increase farm productivity and income.
In 1979 came the Coup d'état of December Twelfth led by General Chun Doo-hwan.
Since then South Korea has engaged in consistent democratization efforts. a May 16 coup, Major General Park Chung-hee , author unknown.
The hwan lost half of its value against the dollar between fall 1960 and spring 1961.
Gandhi returned to India in 1915 and joined the Indian National Congress, a key participant in the Indian independence movement.
The march, known as the Salt March, was an act of civil disobedience against the British empire and the unjust salt tax of the British.
Gandhi initially favored offering ""nonviolent moral support"" to the British effort when World War II broke out in 1939.
Gandhi attempted to bridge these differences through many means, including a three-week fast in the autumn of 1924, but with limited success.
Gandhi exhorted Indian men and women, rich or poor, to spend time each day spinning khad/ in support of the independence movement.
The march, known as the Dandi March or the Sa/t Satyagraha, was an act of civil disobedience against the British empire and its unjust salt tax.
The organization would be crucial to the eventual creation of a separate Muslim state.
After the Muslim League reached out to the masses, it attracted hundreds of thousands of new members.
When Congress leaders were arrested in 1942, the League received an opportunity to spread its message.
Rejecting the notion of united India, Jinnah proclaimed the Two-Nation Theory, which argues that the primary identity and unifying denominator of Muslims in the South Asian subcontinent is their religion, rather than their language or ethnicity, and therefore Indian Hindus and Muslims are two distinct nations, regardless of ethnic or other commonalities. e As independence approached, the violence between Hindus and Muslims continued.
The predominantly Hindu and Sikh areas were assigned to the new state of India and predominantly Muslim areas to the new state of Pakistan. e The majority of Indians remained in place with independence, but in border areas millions of people relocated across the newly drawn borders.
With the outbreak of World War Il in 1939, the Viceroy Lord Linlithgow declared war on India's behalf without consulting Indian leaders, leading the Indian National Congress provincial ministries to resign in protest.
India adopted IR8, a semi-dwarf rice variety developed by the International Rice Research Institute , that could produce more grains of rice per plant when grown with certain fertilizers and irrigation.
Since irrigation infrastructure was very poor, Indian farmers innovated tube-wells to harvest ground water.
The increased usage of fertilizers and pesticides for high-yielding varieties has also contributed serious environmental and public health issues.
Despite the impressive accomplishments of the Green Revolution, India continues to face massive socioeconomic challenges, including those related to the development of agriculture such as extreme poverty in rural areas, hunger and undernourishment, and farmers' struggles to find funds to cultivate land.
This phenomenon is seen both at the national and state levels. e Indian society is very diverse in religion, region, language, caste, and race.
Economic issues like poverty, unemployment, and development substantially influence politics, although different parties propose dramatically different approaches. e Indian democracy faces many challenges.
The real power resides with the Chief Minister and the state council of ministers.
The reforms did away with the Licence Raj, reduced tariffs and interest rates, and ended many public monopolies, allowing automatic approval of foreign direct investment in many sectors.
Among the positive outcomes of the economic development is better access to primary education, increased literacy, and reduced poverty.
However, in terms of both access to education and poverty level, India continues to face massive challenges.
Despite the impressive economic growth, India experiences a plethora of social issues, including corruption, the lack of proper sanitation, debt bondage and other forms of bonded labor, child labor, child marriage, and gender-based violence.
The Indian automobile industry is one of the largest in the world with an annual production of 21.48 million vehicles (mostly twoand three-wheelers) in fiscal year 2013-14.
The decision initiated a territorial conflict between India and Pakistan, with an additional intervention of China in 1962, that still continues.
Muslim League officials assisted in a large-scale invasion of Kashmir by Pathan tribesmen.
The 17-day war caused thousands of casualties on both sides and witnessed the largest engagement of armored vehicles and the largest tank battle since World War Il.
War of 1947 The violence in the eastern districts of Jammu that started in September 1947 developed into a widespread massacre of Muslims around October 20, organized and perpetrated by the local Hindus.
War of 1965 Following its failure to seize Kashmir in 1947, Pakistan supported numerous covert groups in Kashmir using operatives based in its New Delhi embassy.
Under a strategy code named Operation Gibraltar, Pakistan dispatched groups into Indianadministered Kashmir, the majority of whose members were volunteers recruited from Pakistan-administered Kashmir and trained by the Army.
War of 1971 Another phase of the conflict took place from December 3 to the Fall of Dhaka on December 16, 1971.
In 1940, colonial administration of French Indochina passed to the Vichy French government.
Nearly one year after the August Revolution, Vietnam and France were at war. e After World War II, the French reestablished control in Laos and Cambodia.
After World War II, the organization opposed the reoccupation of Vietnam by France and later opposed South Vietnam and the United States in the Vietnam War.
French Indochina was designated as a colonie d'exploitation by the French government.
World War Il In 1940, France was swiftly defeated by Nazi Germany and colonial administration of French Indochina passed to the Vichy French government, a puppet state of Nazi Germany.
The Chinese accepted the Vietnamese government under Ho Chi Minh but the British refused to do likewise in Saigon.
On September 2, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the establishment of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
Negotiations between France and the Viet Minh started in Geneva in April 1954 at the Geneva Conference, when the French Union and the Viet Minh were still fighting at Dien Bien Phu.
Franco-lhai War The 1940-1941 military conflict fought between Thailand and France over certain areas of French Indochina.
French Foreign Legion patrol question a suspected member of the Viet Minh French Union forces included colonial troops from the whole former empire (Moroccan, Algerian, Tunisian, Laotian, Cambodian, and Vietnamese ethnic minorities), French professional troops, and units of the French Foreign Legion.
On Indochina, the conference produced a set of documents known as the Geneva Accords.
Lengthy negotiations revolved around the questions of the division vs. unification of Vietnam, the spheres of influence in the region, and the status of Laos and Cambodia. e On July 20, the remaining outstanding issues were resolved as the parties agreed that the partition line should be at the 17th parallel and that the elections for reunification should be in July 1956, two years after the ceasefire.
The Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Vietnam was signed only by French and Viet Minh military commands, completely bypassing the State of Vietnam. e The Geneva Accords, issued on July 21, 1954, set outa “provisional military demarcation line"" running approximately along the 17th Parallel.
North Vietnamese, especially Catholics, intellectuals, business people, land owners, anti-communist democrats, and members of the middle-class, moved south of the Accords-mandated ceasefire line. e The United States replaced the French as a political backup for Ngo Dinh Diem, then Prime Minister of the State of Vietnam, and he asserted his power in the South.
The International Control Commission , comprising Canada, Poland (at the time under the communist rule), and India as chair, was established to monitor the ceasefire.
North Vietnam established military operations in the South by providing military supplies and equipment, weaponry, and military personnel and leadership to the Viet Cong (the National Liberation Front created by Ho Chi Minh's government) in the South.
Learning Objective Explain the events of the Vietnam War and their lasting effects on the country Key Points e The 1954 Geneva Conference did not end tensions between North and South Vietnam.
The policy, Known as Vietnamization, largely failed. e Prince Norodom Sihanouk had proclaimed Cambodia neutral since 1955, but the communists used Cambodian soil as a base and Sihanouk tolerated their presence because he wished to avoid being drawn into a wider regional conflict.
The treaty included the governments of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam , the Republic of Vietnam , and the United States, as well as the Provisional Revolutionary Government that represented indigenous South Vietnamese revolutionaries.
United States government reports currently cite November 1, 1955, as the commencement date of the ""Vietnam Conflict"" because that was when the United States Military Assistance Advisory Group in Indochina (deployed to Southeast Asia under President Truman) was reorganized into country-specific units and MAAG Vietnam was established.
Nixon also pursued negotiations and began to pursue détente with the Soviet Union and rapprochement with China.
North Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1970 at the request of Knmer Rouge deputy leader Nuon Chea.
Despite speculation that the victorious North Vietnamese would massacre South Vietnamese, there is a widespread consensus that no mass executions took place.
Under the leadership of Pol Pot, the Knmer Rouge would eventually kill 1-3 million Cambodians out of a population of around 8 million in one of the bloodiest genocides in history.
Vietnamese women and children tn My Lai before being killed in the massacre, March 16, 1968.
From their ranks came the men and women who returned home and took command of the party apparatus during the 1960s, led an effective insurgency against Lon Nol from 1968 until 1975, and established the regime of Democratic Kampuchea under the leadership of Pol Pot. e In 1968, the Khmer Rouge was officially formed and its forces launched a national insurgency across Cambodia.
The political appeal of the Knmer Rouge increased after the removal of Sihanouk as head of state in 1970 by Premier Lon Nol.
Sihanouk, in exile in Beijing, made an alliance with the Knmer Rouge, after which their ranks swelled from 6,000 to 50,000 fighters.
Cambodian Genocide Mass attrocities carried out by the Khmer Rouge regime led by Pol Pot between 1975 and 1979, in which an estimated 1. to 3 million people died.
Meeting with Khmers who were fighting with the Viet Minh, they became convinced that only a tightly disciplined party organization and a readiness for armed struggle could achieve revolution.
This pivotal event remains shrouded in mystery because its outcome has become an object of contention (and considerable historical rewriting) between pro-Vietnamese and anti-Vietnamese Khmer communist factions.
The region where Pol Pot moved to was inhabited by tribal minorities, the Knmer Loeu, whose rough treatment (including resettlement and forced assimilation) at the hands of the central government made them willing recruits for a guerrilla struggle.
Sihanouk, in exile in Beijing, made an alliance with the Khmer Rouge and became the nominal head of a Khmer Rouge-dominated government-in-exile backed by China.
After Sihanouk showed his support for the Khmer Rouge by visiting them in the field, their ranks swelled from 6,000 to 50,000 fighters.
Fall of Khmer Rouge Regime In 1978, Pol Pot, fearing a Vietnamese attack, ordered a preemptive invasion of Vietnam.
At the end of the same year, the Vietnamese armed forces, along with the Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation, an organization that included many dissatisfied former Knmer Rouge members, invaded Cambodia and captured Phnom Penh in January 1979.
Today, Cambodia is officially a multiparty democracy but in reality, it is a communist-party state dominated by Prime Minister Hun Sen, a recast Knmer Rouge Official in power since 1985.
An additional 300,000 Cambodians starved to death between 1979 and 1980, largely as a result of the after-effects of Khmer Rouge policy.
The Knmer Rouge banned by decree the existence of ethnic Chinese, Vietnamese, Muslim Cham, and 20 other minorities, which altogether constituted 15% of the population at the beginning of the Khmer Rouge's rule.
Because of the intense opposition to the Vietnam War, particularly among Western intellectuals, many Western scholars denied the genocide perpetrated by the Khmer Rouge regime.
Despite the eye-witness accounts by journalists prior to their expulsion during the first few days of Knmer Rouge rule and the later testimony of refugees, many academics in the United States, United Kingdom, France, Australia, and other countries portrayed the Knmer Rouge favorably or at least were skeptical about the stories of Knmer Rouge atrocities.
Some Western scholars believed that the Khmer Rouge would free Cambodia from colonialism, capitalism, and the ravages of American bombing and invasion during the Vietnam War.
With the takeover of Cambodia by Vietnam in 1979 and the discovery of incontestable evidence, the Knmer Rouge atrocities proved to be entirely accurate.
Some former enthusiasts for the Knmer Rouge recanted their previous views, others diverted their interest to other issues, and a few continued to defend the Khmer Rouge.
South America and Latin America tn the Cold War 36.1: Mexico 36.1.1: The Porfiriato Jose de la Cruz Porfirio Diaz Mori strengthened his regime to create the internal order necessary to foster economic development; however, his authoritarian grasp on the presidency sparked the Mexican Revolution.
As a popular military hero and astute politician, Diaz determined that his main goal as president was to create the internal order necessary to foster economic development throughout the country.
Diaz developed many pragmatic and personalist approaches to the political conflicts that occurred during his first term in office and was skilled at playing interest groups against each other to create the illusion of democracy and quell rebellions before unrest began. e Diaz’s massive display of electoral fraud during the election of 1911 sparked the Mexican Revolution.
Learning Objective Outline the events of the Mexican Revolution Key Points The outbreak of the Mexican Revolution is attributed to Porfirio Diaz’s failure in resolving the problem of presidential succession.
Although Huerta’s regime attempted to legitimize his hold on power and demonstrate its legality by pursuing reformist policies in the first several months of his presidency, after October 1913, he dropped all attempts to rule within a legal framework and murdered political opponents while battling revolutionary forces that had united against his regime.
On October 26, 1913, Huerta dispensed with the Mexican legislature, surrounding the building with his army and arresting congressmen he perceived to be hostile to his regime.
The PNR would undergo name changes over the years it remained in power.
Learning Objective Explain the Mexican Economic Miracle Key Points The reduction of political turmoil that accompanied national elections during and immediately after the Mexican Revolution was an important factor in laying the groundwork for economic growth.
During the presidency of Lazaro Cardenas, significant policies were enacted in the social and political soheres that had major impacts on the economic policies of the country as a whole.
The Mexican government promoted industrial expansion through public investment in agricultural, energy, and transportation infrastructure. e Growth was sustained by Mexico’s increasing commitment to provide quality education options for its general population. e Mexico benefited substantially from World War II due to its participation supplying labor and materials to the Allies. e In the years following World War II, President Miguel Aleman Valdes instituted a full-scale importsubstitution program that stimulated output by boosting internal demand.
World War Il Mexico benefited substantially from World War II by supplying labor and materials to the Allies.
Learning Objective Give examples of major works of art in Mexico during the 20th century Key Points The Mexican Revolution had a dramatic effect on Mexican art, and the Mexican government commissioned murals for public buildings to reinforce political messages, especially those that emphasized Mexican rather than European themes.
Diego Rivera’s murals were greatly influenced by his leftist political leanings, dealing with Mexican society and reflecting the country’s 1910 Revolution.
Mural by Diego Rivera Mural Suefo de una Tarde Dominical en la Alameda Central in Mexico City, featuring Rivera and Frida Kahlo standing by La Calavera Catrina.
Key Points e Argentina was not an industrialized country in the leadup to the Great Depression and lacked the energy sources necessary to make it So. e One of Argentina’s most lucrative industries was agriculture, and its exports of frozen beef, especially to Great Britain, proved highly profitable.
Learning Objective Explain why the 1930s were referred to as the Infamous Decade Key Points Argentina’s Infamous Decade refers to the period of time that began in 1930 with Jose Felix Uriburu’s coup d’etat against standing President Hipolito Yrigoyen and ended with Juan Peron's rise to power after the military coup of 1943.
Lieutenant General Uriburu’s regime was strongly supported by rightist intellectuals and his government adopted severe measures to prevent reprisals and counter-revolutionary tactics by friends of the ousted regime.
Agustin Pedro Justo Rolon’s administration was tarnished by constant rumors of corruption and is best remembered for the outstanding diplomatic work of his Foreign Minister.
One of the most controversial successes of Justo’s presidency is the signing of the Roca-Runciman Treaty in 1933.
Justo’s first minister of the Treasury, Alberto Hueyo, took very restrictive measures against the economy.
Hueyo was eventually replaced by Frederico Pinedo, whose plan for government intervention into the economy was even more significant.
Pinedo began Argentinian industrial development via a policy of import substitution and created Argentina’s Central Bank.
Roberto Marcelino Ortiz was fraudulently elected president and assumed his office in February 1938.
He attempted to clean up the country’s corruption problem and cancelled fraudulent elections won by conservative Alberto Barcelo.
During World War Il, Argentina maintained the same neutrality it adopted during the first World War, which was advantageous for Great Britain.
Peron’s opponents, however, view Peronism was an authoritarian ideology, compare Juan Peron to fascist dictators, accuse him of demagoguery, and deride his policies as too populist. e Eva Peron, popularly known as Evita, was instrumental as a symbol of hope to the common laborer during her husband's first five-year plan.
It is soeculated that Eva’s influence on her husband led to the stipulations within the five-year plans that called for full employment, public healthcare and housing, labor benefits, raises, and humanitarian relief efforts.
Learning Objective Analyze the reasons for the outbreak of the Dirty War Key Points e The Dirty War was the name used by the Argentina Military Government for a period of state terrorism in Argentina from roughly 1974 to 1983. e The military, supported by a significant number of the general populace involved in the Radical and Socialist parties, opposed Juan Peron’s populist government and overthrew his regime in 1955 during the Revolucion Libertadora.
Peronists and other revolutionary groups within Argentina began organizing and militarizing, with many groups combining forces. e By the early 1970s, guerrilla groups were kidnapping and assassinating high-ranking military and police officers almost weekly, as well as bombing government buildings. e Juan Peron returned from exile and after his death, his widow Isabel Martinez de Peron held the presidency, only to be ousted from power during a military coup in 1976.
The resulting junta, led by Jorge Rafael Videla until 1981 and subsequently by Roberto Viola and Leopoldo Galtieri until 1983, organized and carried out strong repression of political dissidents via the government’s military and security forces, which they referred to as their National Reorganization Process.
The junta was forced to resign power in 1983 following their disastrous defeat to Great Britain in the Falklands War, which paved the way for the resumption of Argentine democracy.
Learning Objective Define the “Presidential Era” in Chile Key Points On January 23, 1925, the Chilean military overthrew the September Junta in a coup d’etat.
On March 20, 1925, Arturo Alessandri Palma, former president of Chile, returned from exile and drafted a new constitution, which was put in effect on September 18, 1925.
Alessandri’s government was composed of left-wing and radical groups, but many began to distance themselves from the President after he took power.
Alessandri resigned, and after a short interim period, Ibanez won the presidency. lbanez’s cabinet remained popular until the outbreak of the Great Depression in 1931 as a result of a high rate of economic growth fueled by American loans. e Once the effects of the economic crisis began to reach Chile, political unrest abounded and Ibanez resigned on July 26, 1931.
Carlos Ibanez vow Tw Carlos Ibanez del Campo lbanez’s cabinet remained popular until the outbreak of the Great Depression in 1931.
Early in lbanez’s administration, Congress and various political parties did not protest against his increasingly dictatorial leanings.
In fact, lbanez was granted decretos con fuerza de ley within a democratic framework.
Although lbanez’s government increased export taxes to 71% and established trade barriers, he did not manage to make balance of trade more equitable for Chile, which led to a depletion of gold reserves.
Key Points e Shortly after President Juan Montero’s inauguration in December 1931, revolutionaries took control of some military ships and sunk them in the Bay of Coquimbo in what became known as the Escuadra uprising.
LEWDE piven ng ALLENDE. eS 3 es We. “i <r 4 Allende supporters A crowd of people marching to support the election of Salvador Allende for president in Santiago, Chile.
Ibanez campaigned on a platform of eliminating political corruption, but remained vague in his proposals and provided no clear position as to his position within the political soectrum.
Once in office, Ibanez focused on rallying his supporters to win a majority in the 1953 legislative elections.
A movement of Ibanistas, consisting mainly of young army officers and inspired by the movement surrounding Argentine President Juan Domingo Peron, formed groups aimed at creating a new dictatorship under Ibanez.
Additionally, lbanez’s hostility towards the Federacion de Estudiantes de la Universidad de Chile student trade union led to outbreaks of violence during demonstrations.
In the end, his presidency was only ratified once he signed a Statute of Constitutional Guarantees.
While in office, Allende pursued a policy he called “La via chilena al socialismo”, or “the Chilean way to socialism”, which included nationalization of certain large-scale industries such as copper and healthcare, land redistribution, the continuation of the educational policies of his predecessor Eduardo Frei Montalva, and a program guaranteeing free milk for children.
The Popular Unity coalition was not perfectly united around Allende’s platform due to the president’s more moderate leanings and commitment to the principles of democracy.
Despite his predecessor’s deepening of Chile’s relations with the USSR, Allende attempted to maintain normal relations with the United States.
Marxism and dissatisfaction with the nationalization of U.S copper concerns within Chile.
Two days later, Allende responded point-by point to the accusations and accused Congress in return of encouraging sedition, civil war, and even a coup. e The Chilean military seized the opportunity created by the Chamber of Deputies’ August 22nd Resolution to oust Allende on September 11, 1973.
The government junta formally banned socialist, Marxist, and other leftist parties that comprised former President Salvador Allende’s Popular Unity coalition.
From 1974 to 1977, the DINA (National Intelligence Directorate) and other agencies such as the Joint Command were the main institutions that committed acts of repression.
Learning Objective Describe the circumstances of the 1988 national plebiscite Key Points e Following the September 11, 1973, coup d’etat, General Pinochet was designated president of the newly established military junta government on what was supposed to be a rotating basis with three other junta members.
Shortly thereafter, the junta established an advisory committee and Pinochet staffed it with his loyal Army officers.
In this context, the Enci/hamento (a “boom and bust” process that first intensified, and then crashed, in the years between 1889 and 1891) occurred, the consequences of which were felt in all areas of the Brazilian economy for many decades following.
Key Points e The Brazilian military government was an authoritarian military dictatorship that ruled Brazil from April 1, 1964 to March 15, 1985.
During his presidency, Medici soonsored the greatest human rights abuses of the time period.
Learning Objective Detail some of the reasons for Brazil's economic growth in the latter 20th century Key Points From 2000 to 2012, Brazil was one of the fastest growing major economies of the world, with an average annual GDP growth rate of over five percent.
And from roughly 1968 to 1980, Brazil’s average annual GDP growth rate was approximately ten percent during what was dubbed the Brazilian Miracle.
Much of Brazil’s economic growth during the Brazilian Miracle can be attributed to a group of technocrats led by Minister of Finance Antonio Delfim Netto, to whom the military government entrusted economic policy.
The government became directly involved in the economy, investing heavily in infrastructure, building, and reducing reliance on imports.
As a result of this industrial growth and investment in infrastructure, Brazil became an urban society, with 67% of its population living in cities.
However, to continue fueling its economic growth, Brazil needed more imported oil, and in the 1970s, a series of international energy crises contributed to a deceleration in growth.
Fidel Castro petitioned for the overthrow of Batista, whom he accused of corruption and tyranny; however, Castro’s constitutional arguments were rejected by the Cuban courts.
Castro’s Movement attacked a number of military installations, after which he and his brother Raul were imprisoned.
At the end of 1956, the Movement returned to Cuba, using the Sierra Maestra mountain range as its base.
Fighting between the Movement and the Batista regime would continue off and on through the beginning of 1959.
The United States imposed an economic embargo on the Cuban government and recalled its ambassador during the conflict, further weakening the Batista government’s mandate.
Batista’s support among Cubans began to fade, with former supporters either joining the revolutionaries or distancing themselves from the regime.
On August 21, 1958, Castro’s forces began an offensive in the Oriente province, proceeding west from the Sierra Maestra mountain range toward Santa Clara.
On January 2, 1959, the military stopped resisting their progress and Castro took the city, ending the revolution ina victory for his Movement.
The Cuban Revolution was a crucial turning point in U.S.-Cuban relations, with the American establishment fearing further Communist insurgencies would spread throughout Latin America as they had in Southeast Asia.
As the Americans took a harder line against the Cuban revolutionary government, the Soviet Union became Cuba’s main ally and ideological influence.
The revolutionaries named themselves the 26th of July Movement in reference to the attack on the Moncada Barracks that took place on that date in 1953.
Che and Fidel Revolutionary leaders Che Guevara and Fidel Castro in 1961.
Finally, Batista resoonded to Castro’s successes with an attack on the mountains called Operation Verano, or to the rebels, la Ofensiva.
Raul Castro and Che Guevara Raul Castro with his arm around his second-incommand, Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, in their Sierra de Cristal mountain stronghold in Oriente Province, Cuba, in 1958.
Under de Leon, the peace process, now brokered by the United Nations, took on new life.
Exhumation in the Ixil triangle in Guatemala Quegchi people carrying their loved one's remains after an exhumation in Cambayal in Alta Verapaz department, Guatemala in February 2012.
Also during the 1970s, continuing social discontent gave rise to an insurgency among large populations of indigenous people and peasants, who traditionally bore the brunt of unequal land tenure.The PID lost its grip on Guatemalan politics when General Efrain Rios Montt, together with a group of junior army officers, seized power in a military coup on March 23, 1982.
By the time Mejia Victores assumed power, the counterinsurgency under Lucas Garcia and Montt had largely succeeded in its objective of detaching the insurgency from its civilian Support base.
When Leén became the first city in Nicaragua to fall to the Sandinistas, he responded with aerial bombardment.
The United States refused to pay restitution and claimed that the IC) was not competent to judge the case.
Learning Objective Summarize the history of conflict between the FARC and the Colombian government Key Points e The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia—People’s Army is a guerrilla movement involved in the continuing Colombian armed conflict since 1964.
In 1985, members of FARC-EP, along with a large number of other leftist and communist groups, formed a political party known as the Union Patridtica.
Towards the end of 1990, the army attacked a compound known as Casa Verde, which houses the National Secretariat of the FARC-EP, justifying the attack by FARC-EP’s lack of commitment to the peace process. e On June 3, 1991, dialogue resumed between the Simon Bolivar Guerrilla Coordinating Board and the government.
The negotiations were broken off in 1993 when no agreement could be reached. e Another round of negotiations began on November 7, 1998, under President Andres Pastrana, who granted FARC-EP a 42,000-square-kilometer safe haven as a confidence-building measure.
In the cities, the FARC-EP began integrating itself with the UP and forming Juntas Patridticas (or ""solidarity cells"") small groups of people associated with labor unions, student activist groups, and peasant leagues, who traveled into the barrios discussing social problems, building support for the UP, and determining the sociopolitical stance of the urban peasantry.
Nonetheless, FARC interventions and violence continued throughout Uribe’s administration and well into that of his successor, Juan Manuel Santos.
Alvaro Uribe President Alvaro Uribe intensified military operations against the FARC-EP, seeking to defeat them.
In 1961, Denmark, Ireland, Norway, and the United Kingdom applied to join the three Communities.
Examples The European Union is a politico-economic union of 28 member states ocated primarily in Europe.
The European Union was formally established when the Maastricht Treaty came into force on November 1, 1993.
The Maastricht, or convergence, criteria established minimum requirements for EU member states to enter the third stage of European Economic and Monetary Union and adopt the euro as their currency.
The four criteria impose controls over inflation, public debt and the public deficit, exchange rate stability, and the convergence of interest rates.
On December 1, 2009, the Lisbon Treaty entered into force and reformed many aspects of the EU, including its legal structure.
No more than 1. percentage points higher than the average of the three best performing member states of the EU. e Government finance: 1.
While visiting Budapest in early 1983, he expressed interest in Hungary's Goulash Communism and that the sheer size of the Soviet economy made strict topdown planning impractical.82 had witnessed the country's worst economic performance since World War Il, with real GDP growth at almost zero percent, necessitating real change, and fast.
Learning Objective Explain Gorbachev's reasons for launching perestroika Key Points e Gorbachev's primary goal as general secretary was to revive the Soviet economy after the stagnant Brezhnev and interregnum years. e Gorbachev soon came to believe that fixing the Soviet economy would be nearly impossible without also reforming the political and social structure of the Communist nation. e The purpose of reform was to prop up the centrally planned economy—not to transition to market socialism. e Gorbachev initiated his new policy of perestroika and its attendant radical reforms in 1986.
Unrest tn the Soviet Union The increased freedoms of glasnost allowed opposition groups to make political gains against the centralized Soviet government in Moscow.
According to Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet Union spent 18 billion rubles on containment and decontamination, virtually bankrupting itself.
Hungary dismantled its section of the physical Iron Curtain, leading to a mass exodus of East Germans through Hungary that destabilized East Germany.
The rest of the Soviet Union, which constituted the bulk of the area, became Russia in December 1991.
AutTaAS Act of Restoration of Independence of Lithuania, March 11, 1990 Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania with signatures of the delegates.
Finally, at 10:45 pm, Harald Jager, the commander of the Bornholmer Straf&e border crossing, yielded, allowing the guards to open the checkpoints and people to pass through with little to no identity checking.
Television coverage of citizens demolishing sections of the Wall on November 9 was soon followed by the East German regime announcing ten new border crossings, including the historically significant locations of Potsdamer Platz, Glienicker Brucke, and Bernauer Strafe.
Constructed by the German Democratic Republic beginning August 13, 1961, the Wall completely cut off West Berlin by land from East Germany and East Berlin.
But in practice, the Wall served to prevent massive emigration and defection that plagued East Germany and the communist Eastern Bloc during the postWorld War Il period.
Berlin Wall Map Map of the location of the Berlin Wall, showing checkpoints.
Demolition Television coverage of citizens demolishing sections of the Wall on November 9 was soon followed by the East German regime announcing ten new border crossings, including the historically significant locations of Potsdamer Platz, Glienicker Brucke, and Bernauer Straf&e.
On June 13, 1990, the East German military officially began dismantling the Wall, beginning in Bernauer StrafSe and around the Mitte district.
Learning Objective Summarize the chain of events that resulted in the dissolution of the USSR Key Points e Since 1985, General Secretary Gorbachev instituted liberalizing policies broadly referred to as glasnost and perestroika.
On August 19, 1991, Gorbachev's vice president, Gennady Yanayev, Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, Defense Minister Dmitry Yazov, KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov, and other senior officials acted to prevent the union treaty from being signed by forming the “General Committee on the State Emergency”, which put Gorbachev under house arrest and cut off his communications.
The organizers were detained and Gorbachev returned as president, albeit with his power depleted.
On August 24, 1991, Gorbachev dissolved the Central Committee of the CPSU, resigned as the party's general secretary, and dissolved all party units in the government.
The leaders of the three principal Slavic republics, Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus (formerly Byelorussia), agreed to discuss possible alternatives to the union.
Learning Objective Examine how racism was institutionalized in South Africa during apartheid Key Points In South Africa during apartheid, institutional racism was a powerful means of excluding from resources and power any person not categorized r marked as white.
The Union of South Africa allowed social custom and law to govern multiracial affairs and the racial allocation, of access to economic, social, and political status.
Many Afrikaners, whites chiefly of Dutch descent, resented what they perceived as disempowerment by an underpaid black workforce and the superior economic power and prosperity of white English speakers.
The Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act of 1949 prohibited marriage between those of different races, and the Immorality Act of 1950 made sexual relations with a person of a different race a criminal offense.
Further laws were designed to suppress resistance, especially armed resistance, to apartheid.
Bantustans Also Known as Bantu homeland, black homeland, black state, or simply homeland, a territory set aside for black inhabitants of South Africa and South-West Africa (now Namibia) as part of apartheid.
Ten were established in South Africa and ten in neighboring South-West Africa for members of designated ethnic groups.
The rapid economic development of World War Il attracted black migrant workers in large numbers to chief industrial centers where they compensated for the wartime shortage of white labor.
In June 1955, the Congress of the People, organized by the ANC and Indian, Colored, and White organizations, adopted the Freedom Charter, the fundamental document of the anti-apartheid struggle that demanded equal rights for all regardless of race. e In 1959, a number of members broke from the ANC due to objections over the ANC's reorientation away from African nationalist policies.
They formed the rival Pan Africanist Congress . e The ANC planned a campaign against the Pass Laws to begin on March 31, 1960.
A military wing was formed in 1961 called Umkhonto we Sizwe , with Nelson Mandela as its first leader. e The ANC was classified as a terrorist organization by the South African government and some Western countries, including the United States and United Kingdom.
The duo also agreed on an interim constitution based on a liberal democratic model, dividing the country into nine provinces each with its own premier and civil service, a compromise between federalism and Mandela's desire for a unitary government. e The National Assembly elected during the 1994 general election in turn elected Mandela as South Africa's first black chief executive. e Presiding over the transition from apartheid minority rule to a multicultural democracy, Mandela saw national reconciliation as the primary task of his presidency.
In France, Mandela was welcomed by President Francois Mitterrand; in Vatican City by Pope John Paul Il; and in the United Kingdom by Thatcher.
Elites in pre-colonial Rwanda propagated an origin myth of the three groups to justify the hierarchical relationship of sociopolitical inequality between them in sacred, religious terms. e Despite sociopolitical stratification, Rwanda was a unified society.
Rwanda Location of Rwanda in the African Union (light blue) The map shows the location of Rwanda.
Learning Objective Explain how European imperialists encouraged categorizing Rwandans on the basis of ethnicity Key Points The construction of divergent ethnic “Tutsi” and “Hutu” identities occurred during the era of European colonization from the late 1880s to the 1950s.
Therefore, their strategy was to reaffirm Tutsi chiefdoms over Hutus to maintain administrative order.
The German presence had mixed effects on the authority of Rwandan governing powers, not only helping the Mwami increase control over Rwandan affairs, but also weakening Tutsi power due to the introduction of capitalist forces and increased integration with outside markets.
Germany’s defeat in World War | allowed Belgian forces to conquer Rwanda, and Belgian involvement was far more intrusive than German administration.
Influenced by racialized attitudes, Belgian social scientists declared that Tutsis must be descendants of the Hamites, who shared a purported closer bloodline to Europeans, and that the Tutsis and Hutus composed two fundamentally different ethno-racial groups.
The Belgians’ pseudo-scientific perspective justified Tutsi racial superiority and Hutu oppression for decades to come.
The RPF made slow but steady gains in the north and east of the country, ending killings in each area they occupied.
At the end of July, Kagame’s RPF forces held the whole of Rwanda, except for the zone in the southwest that was occupied by Operation Turquoise, effectively ending the genocide.
In each case, local officials, responding to orders from Kigali, soread rumors that the RPF had killed the president and commanded the population to kill Tutsi in retribution.
Businessman Felicien Kabuga funded the RTLM and the /nterahamwe, while Pascal Musabe and Joseph Nzirorera were responsible for coordinating militia activities nationally.
Refugee camps were set up by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , but were effectively controlled by the army and government of the former Hutu regime, who began rearming in a bid to return to power in Rwanda. e In addition to dismantling the refugee camps, Kagame began planning a war to remove the long time dictator of Zaire, who had supported the genocidaires based in the camps and was accused of allowing attacks on Tutsi people within Zaire.
The new law established Gacaca Courts at all administrative levels of Rwanda and in Kigali.
It was mainly created to lessen the burden on normal courts and escalate the administration of justice for those already in prison.
Rwandan refugee camp in east Zaire Refugee camp for Rwandans in Kimbumba, eastern Zaire , following the Rwandan genocide.
Francafrique A portmanteau of France and Afrique used to denote France’s relationship with its former African colonies and sometimes extended to cover former Belgian colonies as well.
France and Operation Turquoise During President Habyarimana's years in power, France maintained very close relations with him as part of its Francafrique policy and assisted Rwanda militarily against the RPF during the Civil War.
The French also separated several expatriates and children from their Tutsi soouses, rescuing the foreigners but leaving the Rwandans to a likely death.
After World War I, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes (later called the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, or the First Yugoslavia) was formed, recognizing only those three nationalities in its constitution as Serbian and Croatian nationalists attempted to absorb Bosniak ethnicities into their populations.
The word ""nation"" was used to denote the country's constitutive peoples (konstitutivne nacije), or residents of the federal republics.
South Slavic Europe The green area shows countries where a South Slavic language is the national language.
After the AustroHungarian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878, the Austrian administration officially endorsed Bosnjastvo as the basis of a multi-confessional Bosnian nation.
After World War I, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes was formed and recognized only those three nationalities in its constitution.
After the failure of the plan, an armed conflict sorang up between Bosniaks and Croats over the 30% of Bosnia the latter held.
In an attempt to protect civilians, the United Nations Protection Force , which had been established during the Croatian War of Independence, saw its role further extended in May 1993 to protect areas declared as ""safe havens"" around Sarajevo, Gorazde, Srebrenica, Tuzla, Zepa, and Bihac by Resolution 824.
In 1995, the situation in the UN Safe Areas had deteriorated to the point of diplomatic crisis, culminating in the Srebrenica massacre, one of the worst atrocities in Europe since World War Il.
Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Karremans (the Dutchbat Commander with UNPROFOR) testified to the ICTY that his personnel were prevented from returning to the enclave by Serb forces and that equipment and ammunition were also barred.
In March 1995, Radovan Karadzi¢, President of the Republika Srpska , despite pressure from the international community to end the war and ongoing efforts to negotiate a peace agreement, issued a directive to the VRS concerning the long-term strategy of the VRS forces in the enclave.
Late on July 9, 1995, emboldened by early successes and little resistance from the largely demilitarized Bosniaks and the absence of any significant reaction from the international community, Karadzi¢ issued a new order authorizing the 1,500-strong VRS Drina Corps to capture the town of Srebrenica.
However, on March 28, 1992, Izetbegovié, after meeting with the thenUnited States ambassador to Yugoslavia Warren Zimmermann, in Sarajevo, withdrew his signature and declared his opposition to any type of ethnic division of Bosnia.
The Army of Republika Srpska surrounded the city for nearly four years, deploying troops and artillery in the surrounding hills in what would become the longest siege in the history of modern warfare.
After the failure of the plan, an armed conflict sorang up between Bosniaks and Croats over the 30 percent of Bosnia the latter held.
In an attempt to protect civilians, the United Nations Protection Force , established during the Croatian War of Independence, saw its role further extended in May 1993 to protect areas declared as ""safe havens"" around Sarajevo, Gorazde, Srebrenica, Tuzla, Zepa, and Bihac by Resolution 824.
The Hague revealed that Alija Izetbegovic, President of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina during the Bosnian War, had also been under investigation for war crimes, although the prosecutor did not find sufficient evidence over the course of Izetbegovic's lifetime to issue an indictment.
Most of the Bosnian-Serb wartime leadership, such as Biljana Plavsic, MomCcilo KrajiSnik, Radoslav Brdanin, and DusSko Tadic, were indicted and judged guilty for war crimes and ethnic cleansing.
Ratko Mladi¢, the top military general with command responsibility in the Army of Republika Srpska, is currently on trial in the ICTY, charged with crimes in connection with the siege of Sarajevo and the Srebrenica massacre, following a long period in hiding as he attempted to evade arrest.
The initial investigation into Milosevic faltered for lack of evidence, prompting the Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Dindic to extradite him to the ICTY to stand trial for charges of war crimes instead.
Other Bosniaks convicted of or on trial for war crimes include Rasim Delié, chief of staff of the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina, sentenced to three years' imprisonment on September 15, 2008, for his failure to prevent the Bosnian mujahideen members of the Bosnian army from committing crimes, including murder, rape, and torture, against captured civilians and enemy combatants.
The World Wide Web (sometimes abbreviated ""www"" or ""W3"") is an information space where documents and other web resources are identified by URIs, interlinked by hypertext links, and accessed via the Internet using a web browser and, more recently, web-based applications.
They argued that the activities of users generating content (in the form of ideas, text, videos, or pictures) could be harnessed to create value.
Learning Objective Explain how travel has become easier and more universal in the modern age Key Points As transportation technology improved, travel time and costs decreased dramatically between the 18th and early 20th centuries.
The developments in technology and transport infrastructure, such as jumbo jets, low-cost airlines, and more accessible airports, have made many types of tourism more affordable.
International movement of labor is often considered important to economic development.
More students are seeking higher education in foreign countries and many international students now consider overseas study a stepping stone to permanent residency within a country.
As more people have ties to networks of people and places across the globe rather than to a current geographic location, people are increasingly marrying across national boundaries.
Because globalization has brought people into greater contact with foreign cultures, some have come to view one or more globalizing processes as detrimental to social well-being on a global or local scale, with xenophobia an issue in many modern societies.
Learning Objective Identify how trade has changed since the 1990s Key Points e While international trade has existed throughout history, its economic, social, and political importance has been on the rise in recent centuries.
Offshore outsourcing is the practice of hiring an external organization to perform business functions in a country other than the one where the products or services are actually developed or manufactured.
Capitalist peace theory posits that once states reach certain criterion for capitalist economic development, they are less likely to engage in war with each other and rarely enter into even low-level disputes. e In Thomas L Friedman’s 1999 book The Lexus and the Olive Tree, Friedman observed that no two countries with established McDonald’s franchises had fought a war against each other since those franchises were established in both countries.
The graph shows that O nations scored an 8 or higher in 1800, about 10 scored an 8 or higher in 1900, about 20 scored an 8 or higher in 1930, about 10 scored an 8 or higher in 1945, about 35 scored an 8 or higher in 1980, and about 60 scored an 8 or higher in 2003.
As a result, theorists link causation of peace with liberal economies rather than liberal political systems, with the proliferation of democratic norms occurring only secondarily to the establishment of contract-intensive economies.
As a result, leaders of states give greater credibility to threats made by countries with higher levels of capital openness, causing the aforementioned countries to be more peaceful than others by avoiding the possibility of misrepresentation of information.
This makes the commitments of nations with smaller governments more credible than those with larger ones, allowing for nations with smaller governments, and thus ""capitalist"" economies, to be better positioned for avoiding conflicts.
Although the war was not fought in all possible theaters (such as Rajasthan and Punjab borders), both countries mobilized their military along common borders and both countries made threats involving their nuclear capabilities.
Several eurozone member states were unable to repay or refinance their government debt or bail out over-indebted banks under their national supervision without the assistance of third parties like other eurozone countries, the European Central Bank , or the International Monetary Fund . e The detailed causes of the debt crisis varied.
Launch of Eurozone The currency was introduced in non-physical form (traveler's checks, electronic transfers, banking, etc.) at midnight on January 1, 1999, when the national currencies of participating countries ceased to exist independently in that their exchange rates were locked at fixed rates against each other, effectively making them mere non-decimal subdivisions of the euro.
Euro Banknotes The euro banknotes have common designs on both sides created by the Austrian designer Robert Kalina.
The structure of the eurozone as a currency union without fiscal union (e.g., different tax and public pension rules) contributed to the crisis and limited the ability of European leaders to respond.
Return to economic growth and improved structural deficits enabled Ireland and Portugal to exit their bailout programs in 2014.
Support for the Abkhaz from various groups within Russia including regular military units, and support for South Ossetia by their ethnic brethren who lived in Russia's federal subject of North Ossetia, proved critical in the de facto secession of Abkhazia and South Ossetia from Georgia. e The conflict between Russia and Georgia began to escalate in 2000, when Russia imposed visa regime on Georgia.
In 2008, Abkhazia and South Ossetia submitted formal requests for their recognition to Russia's parliament. e By August 1, 2008, Ossetian separatists began shelling Georgian villages.
In accordance with the Georgian stand, many international actors recognize Abkhazia and South Ossetia as occupied Georgian territories. e The 2008 war was the first time since the fall of the Soviet Union that the Russian military was used against an independent state, demonstrating Russia's willingness to wage a full-scale military campaign to attain its political objectives.
Shortly after the war, Russian president Medvedev unveiled a five-point Russian foreign policy, which implied that the presence of Russian citizens in foreign countries would form a doctrinal foundation for invasion if needed. e Despite being an independent country since 1991, Russia has perceived Ukraine as part of its sohere of interests.
Georgia withdrew its membership in 2008, while the Baltic states (Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia) chose not to participate.
Euromaidan A wave of demonstrations and civil unrest in Ukraine that began on the night of November 21, 2013, with public protests in Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Independence Square) in Kiev, demanding closer European integration.
Viadimir Putin became president of the Russian Federation in 2000, which had a profound impact on Russo-Georgian relations.
The construction of the EU-sponsored Nabucco pipeline in Transcaucasia was averted.
Both sides accused each other of killings and provoking skirmishes but it remains unclear which accusations were true, with both Russia and Ukraine denying the opponent's claims.
A sookesman restated China's belief of non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations and urged dialogue.
Many European countries embarked on austerity programs, reducing their budget deficits relative to GDP from 2010 to 2011.
To fight the crisis, some governments have also raised taxes and lowered expenditures, which contributed to social unrest.
Despite the substantial rise of sovereign debt in only a few eurozone countries, effectiveness of the applied measures, and relatively stable return to economic growth, the debt crisis revealed serious weaknesses in the process of economic integration within the EU, which in turn resulted in the general crisis of confidence that the idea of European integration continues to witness today.
In 1992, members of the European Union signed the Maastricht Treaty, under which they pledged to limit their deficit soending and debt levels.
The ESM was established in 2012 (taking over the functions of the EFSF) as a permanent firewall for the eurozone, to safeguard and provide instant access to financial assistance programs for member states of the eurozone in financial difficulty, with a maximum lending capacity of €500 billion.
From 2010 to 2011, the unemployment rates in Spain, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal, and the UK increased, reaching particularly high rates in Spain and Greece.
This contributed to social unrest and debates among economists, many of whom advocate greater deficits when economies are struggling.
By mid-2012, the Netherlands, Austria, and Finland benefited from zero or negative interest rates, with Belgium and France also on the list of eventual beneficiaries. 100,000 people protest against the austerity measures in front of parliament building in Athens, May 29, 2011 On May 1, 2010, the Greek government announced a series of austerity measures (the third austerity package within months) to secure a three-year €110 billion loan.
By early 2013, successful sovereign debt auctions across the eurozone, most importantly in Ireland, Spain, and Portugal, showed that investors believed the ECB-backstop has worked.
Return to economic growth and improved structural deficits enabled Ireland and Portugal to exit their bailout programs in mid-2014.
Learning Objective Evaluate the effectiveness of the austerity measures advocated by the European Union's leadership Key Points e Austerity is a set of economic policies that aim to demonstrate the government's fiscal discipline by bringing revenues closer to expenditures.
Under the pressure of European Union leadership, many European countries embarked on austerity programs in response to their debt crisis. e In 2010 and 2011, the Greek government announced a series of austerity measures to secure loans from the Troika.
Greeks lost much of their purchasing power, spent less on goods and services, and saw a record high seasonal adjusted unemployment rate of 27.9% in 2013. e The Irish sovereign debt crisis arose not from government over-spending, but from the state guaranteeing the six main Irish-based banks who financed a property bubble.
Unemployment rose from 4% in 2006 to 14% by 2010, while the national budget went from a surplus in 2007 to a deficit of 32% GDP in 2010, the highest in the history of the eurozone. e In 2010, the Portuguese government announced a fresh austerity package through a series of tax hikes and salary cuts for public servants.
Due to reforms already instituted by Spain's conservative government, less stringent austerity requirements were included.
There has been substantial criticism of the austerity measures implemented by most European nations to counter the debt crisis, with economists predicting that the timing and level of austerity would only worsen the recession.
Asa result, Greeks lost about 40% of their purchasing power since the start of the crisis, soent 40% less on goods and services, and experienced a record high seasonal adjusted unemployment rate that grew from 7.5% in September 2008 to a record high of 27.9% in June 2013.
The Irish sovereign debt crisis arose not from government over-spending, but from the state guaranteeing the six main lrish-based banks who had financed a property bubble.
The economy subsequently collapsed in 2008. lreland was one country that initially benefited from austerity measures but subsequent research demonstrated that its economy suffered from austerity.
The Refugee Crisis As millions of refugees escape wars and persecution in their home countries and flee to Europe, both the European Union and the larger European community have been testing the limits of integration and solidarity as some countries accept — and others refuse— the responsibility to deal with the crisis.
Those who have basis to seek asylum in the EU face the rules of the Dublin Regulation, which determines the EU member state responsible for examining an asylum application. e According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , the number of forcibly displaced people worldwide reached 59. million in 2014, which includes 19. million refugees and 1. million asylum seekers.
Most of the people arriving in Europe in 2015 were leeing war and persecution in countries such as Syria, Afghanistan, Irag, and Eritrea.
Germany has been the most sought-after final destination in the EU migrant and refugee crisis. e The escalation of shipwrecks of migrant boats in the Mediterranean in 2015 led European Union leaders to reconsider their policies on border control and processing of migrants.
By default (when no family reasons or humanitarian grounds are present), the first member state that an asylum seeker entered and in which they have been fingerprinted is responsible.
Many criticize the Dublin rules for placing too much responsibility for asylum seekers on member states on the EU's external borders , instead of devising a burden-sharing system among EU states.
According to the UNHCR, most people arriving in Europe in 2015 were refugees, fleeing war and persecution in countries such as Syria, Afghanistan, Irag, and Eritrea.
Wars fueling the crisis are the Syrian Civil War, the lraq War, the War in Afghanistan, the War in Somalia, and the War in Darfur.
Four states received around two-thirds of the EU's asylum applications in 2015, with Hungary, Sweden, and Austria the top recipients per capita.
As a consequence, if member states do not show fiscal discipline , they will sooner or later risk a sovereign debt crisis in their country.
While the latter pushed for the gradual but increasingly stronger integration that would go beyond the common market (economic integration), Britain maintained its stand of focusing largely on the economic union.
Learning Objective Compare democratic and authoritarian countries in the Middle East Key Points e According to the measure of the level of democracy in nations throughout the world published by Freedom House, the Middle Eastern countries with the highest scores are Israel, Tunisia, Turkey, Lebanon, Morocco, Kuwait, and Jordan.
Jordan was upgraded from ""not free"" to ""partly free"" only in 2017 and while itisa constitutional monarchy, the king holds wide executive and legislative powers.
Israel, Lebanon, Turkey, and Kuwait were determined ""partly free"" while all the other countries in the region received the ""not free"" status.
There are diverse theories on why the Middle East remains essentially undemocratic.
Nearly all the Middle Eastern states, including those categorized as democratic, violate some human rights according to international legal standards.
Until 1975, Freedom House considered Lebanon to be one of only two (together with Israel) politically free countries in the Middle East and North Africa region.
Moreover, the constitution of modern Egypt has given the president a virtual monopoly over the decision-making process, devoting 30 articles to presidential prerogatives.
Another example is Iran, where the Iranian Revolution of 1979 resulted in an electoral system , but the system has a limited democracy in practice.
However some elections in lran, such as those for city councils, satisfies free and democratic election criteria to some extent.
Authoritarian regimes (not necessarily monarchies) evolving around a powerful individual holding power has long been the critical feature of the Middle Eastern politics.
Today, Bashar al-Assad, who refused to resign from the presidency of Syria, which is one cause behind the brutal civil war that has been waged since 2011, serves as a symbol of the authoritarian rejection of democratic changes in the region.
Iraqi police show of their ink-stained index fingers proof that they visited the polls to cast their ballot in Iraq’s historic parliamentary elections in 2005, photo by Jim Goodwin.
The escalating armed conflict in Iraq has placed more children in peril.
Israel, the most democratic state in the Middle East, faces significant human rights problems regarding institutional discrimination of Arab citizens of Israel (many of whom selfidentify as Palestinian), Ethiopian Israelis and women, and the treatment of refugees and irregular migrants.
Two of the most important events that fueled the resurgence were the Arab oil embargo and subsequent quadrupling of the price of oil in the mid-1970s and the 1979 Iranian Revolution, which established an Islamic republic in Iran under Ayatollah Khomeini.
Such developments as the Iranian Revolution and the Soviet-Afghan War convinced many that the Westernization of the Muslim world was avoidable and fueled radical Islamism.
It is commonly used interchangeably with the terms political Islam or Islamic fundamentalism. |ts meaning has been debated in both public and academic contexts. jihad An Arabic word that literally means striving or struggling, especially with a praiseworthy aim.
Islamic State A Salafi jihadist extremist militant group led by and mainly composed of Sunni Arabs from Syria and Iraq.
As of March 2015, it had control over territory occupied by ten million people in Syria and lrag, and has nominal control over small areas of Libya, Nigeria, and Afghanistan.
Taliban A Sunni Islamic fundamentalist political movement in Afghanistan currently waging war (an insurgency, or jihad) within that country.
Islamism is commonly used interchangeably with the terms political Islam or Islamic fundamentalism.
Jamaat-e-Islami of Pakistan is basically a sociopolitical and democratic vanguard party, but has also gained political influence through military coup d'états.
Similarly, Hamas is a Palestinian Sunni-lslamic fundamentalist that has been the governing authority of the Gaza Strip since 2007.
Many Islamist movements, such as the Jamaat-e-Islami and Muslim Brotherhood, have used the democratic process and focus on votes and coalitionbuilding with other political parties.
Two of the most important events that fueled or inspired the resurgence were the Arab oil embargo and subsequent quadrupling of the price of oil in the mid-1970s and the 1979 Iranian Revolution, which established an Islamic republic in Iran under Ayatollah Khomeini.
According to polls taken in 2008 and 2010 by Pew and Gallop, pluralities of the population in Muslim-majority countries are undecided as to what extent religion (and certain interpretations of) should influence public life, politics, and the legal system.
The first modern Islamist state was established among the Shia of Iran.
The Islamic State, formerly known as the Islamic State of lraq and the Levant, is a Salafi jihadist extremist militant group led by and mainly composed of Sunni Arabs from Syria and Iraq.
It gained prominence after it drove Iragi government forces out of key cities in western Irag in June 2014.
The two were later joined by other forces. e Although outgunned and outnumbered, insurgents from the Taliban and other radical groups have waged asymmetric warfare with guerrilla raids and ambushes in the countryside, suicide attacks against urban targets, and turncoat killings against coalition forces.
Violence sharply escalated from 2007 to 2009. e On May 2, 2011, United States Navy SEALs killed Osama bin Laden in Abbotabad, Pakistan.
War crimes by have been committed both sides. e The Iraq War began on March 20, 2003, with the United States, joined by the United Kingdom and several coalition allies, launching a ""shock and awe"" bombing Campaign.
However, the power vacuum following Saddam's demise and the mismanagement of the occupation led to widespread sectarian violence and insurgency against United States and coalition forces. e The Bush administration based its rationale for the war principally on the assertion that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction, but no substantial evidence for this claim was found.
President Barack Obama formally withdrew all combat troops from Iraq by December 2011, but Iragi insurgency surged in the aftermath of the United States withdrawal.
The Taliban government refused to extradite him (or others sought by the U.S.) without evidence of his involvement in the 9/11 attacks.
At the Bonn Conference the same month, Hamid Karzai was selected to head the Afghan interim administration, which after a 2002 loya jirga (Pashto for ""grand assembly"") in Kabul became the Afghan transitional administration.
The United States claims at least 44 instances in which militants have used white phosphorus in weapons or attacks.
Iraq War The Iraq War began on March 20, 2003, with the United States, joined by the United Kingdom and several coalition allies, launching a ""shock and awe"" bombing campaign. lragi forces were quickly overwhelmed as United States forces swept through the country.
The lragi Red Crescent organization estimated the total internal displacement was around 2. million in 2008, and as many as 2 million Iraqis left the country.
The invasion preserved the autonomy of the Kurdish region and because the Kurdish region is historically the most democratic area of Iraq, many lragi refugees from other territories fled into the Kurdish land.
Poverty led many Iragi women to turn to prostitution to support themselves and their families, attracting sex tourists from regional lands.
Iraqi insurgency surged in the aftermath of the United States withdrawal.
Terror campaigns involving Iragi (primarily radical Sunni) anti-government insurgent groups and various factions within Iraq escalated.
In the summer of 2014 President Obama announced the return of United States forces to Irag, but only in the form of aerial support, in an effort to halt the advance of ISIS forces, render humanitarian aid to stranded refugees, and stabilize the political situation.
Despite United States bombings and breakthroughs on the political front, Iraq remained in chaos with the Islamic State consolidating its gains and sectarian violence continuing unabated.
Consequences Various scientific surveys of Iragi deaths resulting from the first four years of the Iraq War estimated that between 151,000 and over one million Iragis died as a result of the conflict during this time.
A later study, published in 2011, estimated that approximately 500,000 Iraqis had died as a result of the conflict since the invasion.
As many as half of Iraqi doctors left the country between 2003 and 2006.
By the end of 2015, according to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 4. million Iragis had been internally displaced.
Several scholars stated that the abuses constituted state-sanctioned crimes.
The United States National Intelligence Council concluded in a 2005 report that the war in Iraq had become a breeding ground for a new generation of terrorists.
Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Syria, and Irag, where either the regime was toppled or major uprisings and social violence occurred, including civil wars or insurgencies.
Social Unrest tn the Arab World Tunisia experienced a series of conflicts during the three years leading up to the Arab Spring, most notably in the mining area of Gafsa in 2008 where protests continued for many months.
In Western Sahara, the Gdeim Izik protest camp was erected 12 kilometres south-east of El Aaidn by a group of young Sahrawis (an ethnic groups living in western part of the Sahara desert) in 2010.
Yemeni President Alli Abdullah Saleh signed the power-transfer deal in which a presidential election was held, resulting in his successor Abd al-Rab Mansur al-Hadi formally replacing him as the president of Yemen in February 2012, in exchange for immunity from prosecution.
Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir announced that he would not seek re-election in 2015, as did Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, wnose term was ending in 2014, although there were violent demonstrations demanding his immediate resignation in 2011.
The popular unrest in Kuwait resulted in resignation of Prime Minister Nasser Mohammed Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah cabinet.
Learning Objective Outline the events that led to the Syrian Civil War Key Points Since 1949, Syrian has been under authoritarian rule, with numerous coups shifting the center of power.
Syrian Muslims are 74 percent Sunnis and 13 percent Shias , 3 percent are Druze, and the remaining 10 percent are Christians.
The Christian militias in Syria and northern Irag are largely made up of ethnic Assyrians, Syriac-Arameans, and Armenians.
In the east, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, Known more commonly as ISIS), a jihadist militant group originating from lrag, made rapid military gains in both Syria and Iraq.
As of 2015, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey were openly backing the Army of Conquest, an umbrella rebel group that reportedly includes an al-Qaeda linked al-Nusra Front and another Salafi coalition known as Ahrar ash-Sham and Faylaq Al-Sham, a coalition of Muslim Brotherhood-linked rebel groups.
The program was launched in the 1950s with the help of the United States as part of the Atoms for Peace program. e The participation of the United States and Western European governments in Iran's nuclear program continued until the 1979 Iranian Revolution that toppled the Shah of Iran.
Formal negotiations toward the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear program began with the adoption of the Joint Plan of Action, an interim agreement signed between Iran and the P5+ 1 countries in November 2013.
Iran also agreed not to build any new heavy-water facilities for the same period of time.
To monitor and verify Iran's compliance with the agreement, the IAEA will have regular access to all Iranian nuclear facilities.
With the prospective lifting of some sanctions, the agreement is expected to have a significant impact on both the economy of Iran and global markets.
Despite the restrictions on American investment in Iran, other provisions apply to all foreign investors, and many lranian expatriates based in the United States continue to make substantial investments in Iran.
P5+ 1 A group of six world powers that joined together in diplomatic efforts with Iran with regard to its nuclear program.
The participation of the United States and Western European governments in Iran's nuclear program continued until the 1979 Iranian Revolution that toppled the Shah of lran.
The IAEA launched an investigation in 2003 after an Iranian dissident group revealed undeclared nuclear activities carried out by Iran.
After several rounds of negotiations, in November 2013, the Joint Plan of Action , an interim agreement on the lranian nuclear program, was signed between Iran and the P5+ 1 countries in Geneva, Switzerland.
Following the issuance of a IAEA report verifying implementation by Iran of the nuclear-related measures, the UN sanctions against Iran and some EU sanctions will terminate and some will be suspended.
Many Iranian Americans, even those who fled repression in lran and oppose its government, welcomed the JCPOA as a step forward.
The energy sector is particularly important, with Iran having nearly 10 percent of global oil reserves and 18 percent of natural gas reserves.
Iran is ""considered a strong emerging market play"" by investment and trading firms.
More recently, the government has struggled to contain the social strife and environmental damage related to the economy's rapid transformation. e In accordance with the One Country, Two Systems policy, the economies of the former British colony of Hong Kong and Portuguese colony of Macau are separate from the rest of China and each other.
Both Hong Kong and Macau are free to conduct and engage in economic negotiations with foreign countries as well as participate as full members in various international economic organizations. e The Four Asian Tigers are the economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan, which underwent rapid industrialization and maintained exceptionally high growth rates between the early 1960s (mid-1950s for Hong Kong) and 1990s.
Export policies have been the de facto reason for the rise of the Four Asian Tiger economies although te approach taken has been different among the four nations. e The term Tiger Cub Economies collectively refers to the economies of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
Four Asian Tigers A collective name used to refer to the economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan, which underwent rapid industrialization and maintained exceptionally high growth rates (in excess of 7 percent a year) between the early 1960s (mid-1950s for Hong Kong) and 1990s.
Japan's early industrial economy reached its height during World War Il and its eventual defeat in the war slowed down economic development for a relatively short period of time.
Four Asian Tigers The Four Asian Tigers are the economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan, which underwent rapid industrialization and maintained exceptionally high growth rates between the early 1960s and 1990s.
In 2011, China attempted to keep India away from the South China Sea waters and protested IndianVietnamese cooperation in the oil sector.
The South China Sea had also become known for Indonesian and Filipino pirates. e The United States and China are currently in disagreement over the South China Sea.
The South China Sea had also become known for Indonesian pirates, with frequent attacks on Malaysian, Singaporean, and Vietnamese vessels and for Filipino pirates attacking Vietnamese fishermen. eee 1 Sprenty totem Cewmend armmaty ty One Sommer. erat Views oT Oy Breen Momoyann arate p een eee 4 Scarbereuch Reef Cowmed by Meiers Cw. ord Famer A map of South China Sea claims and boundary agreements, United States Department of Defense’s Annual Report on China to Congress, 2012.
Several states (e.g. the United States of America) are conducting ""freedom of navigation"" operations to promote this situation.
As a result, Kim Dae-jung was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. e The June 15 North-South Joint Declaration the two leaders signed during the first South-North summit stated that they would hold the second summit at an appropriate time.
Under Kim Jong-in, extreme human rights abuses and food insecurity remain major issues in North Korea. e Over the last years, several incidents have contributed to the growing tensions between South Korea and North Korea, including sinking of a South Korean ship caused by a North Korean torpedo, North Korea launching a scientific and technological satellite that reached orbit, and North Korea planting planting a mine that went off at the Korean Demilitarized Zone, wounding two South Korean soldiers.
As part of the program, the Indian government began constructing millions of toilets in rural areas and encouraging people to use them. e In naming his cabinet, Modi renamed the Ministry of Environment and Forests the Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change.
The new ministry also removed or diluted a number of laws related to environmental protection. e Massive corruption, widespread poverty, and violence against girls and women constitute some of the greatest challenges in 21st-century India.
Following the initial incident, there were further outbreaks of violence in Anmedabad for three weeks.
Narendra Modi Narendra Modi is current Prime Minister of India , in office since May 2014.
While officially classified as a communalist riot, the events have been described as a pogrom by many scholars.
India Under Modi Modi led the BJP in the 2014 general election, which gave the party a majority in the parliament, the first time a single party had achieved this since 1984.
Samia India Exports by Product from Harvard Atlas of Economic Complexity Modi's reformist approach has made him very popular with the public.
The largest contributors to the corruption are social welfare programs and social soending schemes enacted by the Indian government.
Using the United Nations definition, it comprised Sudanese Arab tribes, the core of whom are from the Abbala background with significant recruitment from the Baggara people.
In 2011, the leader of the LJM, Tijani Sese, stated that the movement had accepted the core proposals of the Darfur peace document proposed by the joint-mediators in Doha.
The article, entitled Patterns of mortality rates in Darfur conflict, estimated with 95% confidence that the excess number of deaths is between 178,258 and 461,520 , with 80% of these due to disease.
In 2011, a referendum was held to determine whether South Sudan should become an independent country and separate from Sudan..83% of the population voted for independence.
South Sudan, with the majority of population adhering either to indigenous religions or Christianity, formally became independent from Sudan (predominantly Muslim), although certain disputes still remained, including the division of oil revenues, as 75% of all the former Sudan's oil reserves are in South Sudan.
The group had alleged links to al-Qaeda, but in March 2015, it announced its allegiance to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
Boko Haram conducted its operations more or less peacefully during the first seven years of its existence.
Since then, Boko Haram has been attempting to overthrow the Nigerian government through various militant, including terrorist, strategies.
Boko Haram began to target schools in 2010, killing hundreds of students by 2014.
The Nigerian government's response has revealed the political and military weaknesses of the state apparatus and as of March 2017, Boko Haram continues its terrorist activities.
Key Terms Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant A Salafi jihadist extremist militant groups led by and mainly composed of Sunni Arabs from Syria and Iraq.
The group had alleged links to al-Qaeda, but in March 2015, announced its allegiance to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or ISIS) and since then publicly uses the name “ISIL-West Africa Province” or its variants.
This term refers to a political body that has disintegrated to a point where basic conditions and responsibilities of a sovereign government no longer function properly. e The early 2000s saw the creation of fledgling interim federal administrations.
This Islamist organization assumed control of much of the southern part of the country and promptly imposed sharia law.
As the war continues, the country is facing a plethora of challenges caused not only by the decades of fighting but also by hostile environmental conditions.
According to the Central Bank of Somalia, about 80% of the population is nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists.
The group was renamed BRICS with the ""S"" standing for South Africa to reflect the expanded membership. e The economy of South Africa is the largest in Africa.
During the presidency of Jacob Zuma (elected in 2009 and reelected in 2014), the government has begun to increase the role of state-owned enterprises.
Learning Objective Analyze some of the health crises that have ravaged Africa Key Points e A public health crisis is a difficult situation or complex health system that affects humans in one or more geographic areas, from a particular locality tompass the entire planet.
As of March 2017, Somalia and South Sudan are experiencing severe droughts and experts estimate famines will affect millions of people in both regions. e In addition to recurrent food crises, malnutrition and poverty are endemic problems that affect the health of massive numbers of Africans across the continent, with particularly tragic impact on children and women.
Health Crises tn Africa A public health crisis is a difficult situation or complex health system that affects humans in one or more geographic areas, from a particular locality to the entire planet.
Chief among these are traditionally liberal attitudes espoused by many communities toward multiple sexual partners and sexual activity before or outside marriage.
In December 2016, the WHO announced that a two-year trial of the rvVSV-ZEBOV vaccine appeared to offer protection from the strain of Ebola responsible for the West Africa outbreak.
In 2006, an acute shortage of food affected the countries in the Horn of Africa (Somalia, Djibouti, and Ethiopia) as well as northeastern Kenya.
Learning Objective Connect the allegations of widespread corruption to Brazil's economic growth in the 2000s Key Points e In 1985, Brazil entered its contemporary era, ushering in a period of re-democratization after decades of dictatorships and military rule.
His presidency was characterized by major economic growth, increased international prestige, and numerous corruption scandals.
Despite these scandals, Lula's popularity rose to a record of 80%, the highest for a Brazilian president since the end of the military regime.
One major mark of Lula's second term were his efforts to expand Brazil's political influence worldwide, including Brazil's membership in G20, a global discussion forum of major powers.
Amidst political and economic crises, evidence that politicians from all main political parties were involved in several bribery and tax evasion schemes, and large street protests for and against her, Rousseff was impeached by the Brazilian Congress in 2016.
ReDemocratization of Brazil Leading up to the 21st century, Brazil saw a return to democratic rule after a period of dictatorship during the Vargas Era and a period of military rule under Brazilian military government.
On August 24, 2007, the Brazilian Supreme Court (Supremo Tribunal Federal) accepted the indictments of 40 individuals relating to the Mensaldao scandal, most of whom were former or current federal deputies, and all of whom were still allies of the Brazilian president.
Lula is also notorious for seeing himself as a friendly, peacemaker conciliator Head of State, managing to befriend leaders of rival countries from the likes of Presidents George W Bush and Barack Obama from the United States to Venezuelan leader Hugo Chavez, Cuban former president Fidel Castro, the President of Bolivia Evo Morales, and lastly, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, fueling protests inside and outside the country due to Ahmadinejad's polemical anti-Semitic statements.
The ""Bolivarian Revolution"" is named after Simén Bolivar, an early 19th-century Venezuelan and Latin American revolutionary leader, prominent in the Spanish American wars of independence in achieving the independence of most of northern South America from Spanish rule.
Demonstrations and riots have left over 40 fatalities in the unrest between both Chavistas and opposition protesters, and has led to the arrest of opposition leaders such as Leopoldo Lépez and Antonio Ledezma.
Human rights groups have strongly condemned the arrest of Leopoldo Lépez.
Learning Objective Evaluate the democratic systems currently in place in Chile and Argentina Key Points Chileans elected a new president and the majority of members of a two-chamber congress on December 14, 1989, thus ending the rule of the oppressive military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet.
Aylwin was succeeded by another Christian Democrat, Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle , leading the same coalition for a 6-year term.
Center-right investor and businessman Sebastian Pinera of the National Renewal assumed the presidency on March 11, 2010, after Bachelet's term expired, with Bachelet returning to office once again after his term limits ended.
On October 30, 1983, Argentines went to the polls to choose a president; vice-president; and national, provincial, and local officials in elections deemed by international observers to be fair and honest, thus beginning the country's transition to a democratic government.
Since then, Argentina had seen several democratically elected presidents, including Carlos Menem, who embraced neo-liberal policies, and De la Rua, who kept Menem's economic plan despite economic crisis, which led to growing social discontent.
Néstor Kirchner was elected as the new president in 2002, boosting neo-Keynesian economic policies and ending the economic crisis, attaining significant fiscal and trade surpluses, and steep GDP growth. e He did not run for reelection, promoting instead the candidacy of his wife, senator Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, who was elected in 2007 and reelected in 2011. e On 22 November 2015, after a tie in the first round of presidential elections on 25 October, Mauricio Macri became the first democratically elected non-radical or peronist president since 1916.
Key Terms Trial of the Juntas The judicial trial of the members of the de facto military government that ruled Argentina during the dictatorship of the Proceso de Reorganizaci6n Nacional , which lasted from 1976 to 1983.
Peronist A person who follows the Argentinian political movement based on the ideology and legacy of former President Juan Domingo Perén and his second wife, Eva Peron.
As of 2016, Perén was the only Argentine to have been elected president three times.
Center-right investor and businessman Sebastian Pinera, of the National Renewal, assumed the presidency on March 11, 2010 after Bachelet's term expired.
Chile tn the 21st Century The Concertacion has continued to dominate Chilean politics for last two decades.
She was sworn in on March 11, 2006, extending the Concertaci6n coalition governance for another four years.
After 20 years, Chile went in a new direction marked by the win of center-right Sebastian Pinera in the Chilean presidential election of 2009-2010.
On August 5, 2010 the access tunnel collapsed at the San José copper and gold mine in the Atacama Desert near Copiap6 in northern Chile, trapping 33 men 2,300 feet below ground.
Good macroeconomic indicators failed to halt the social dissatisfaction claiming for a better and fairer education, which was traced to massive protests demanding more democratic and equitable institutions and a permanent disapproval of Pinera's administration.
Due to term limits, Sebastian Pinera did not stand for reelection in 2013, and his term expired in March 2014 resulting in Michelle Bachelet returning to office.
The economy began to decline in 1995, with increasing unemployment and recession; led by Fernando de la Rua, the UCR (Radical Civic Union, a centrist social-liberal political party) returned to the presidency in the 1999 elections.
Despite imposing a cap on salaries of high-ranking public servants, Calderén ordered a raise on the salaries of the Federal Police and the Mexican armed forces on his first day as president.
Calderén's government also ordered massive raids on drug cartels upon assuming office in December 2006 in response to an increasingly deadly spate of violence in his home state of Michoacan.
Learning Objective Examine the powerful role drug cartels play across Latin America Key Points e A drug cartel is any criminal organization with the intention of supplying drug trafficking operations, and can range from loosely managed agreements among various drug traffickers to formalized commercial enterprises with billions of dollars in annual profits.
Drug cartels came to power in the 1970s and 80s, controlling the vast majority of illegal drug trafficking throughout Latin America and the United States.
Mexican Drug Cartels Origins The birth of most Mexican drug cartels is traced to former Mexican Judicial Federal Police agent Miguel Angel Félix Gallardo , who founded the Guadalajara Cartel in 1980 and controlled most of the illegal drug trade in Mexico and the trafficking corridors across the MexicoUnited States border along with Juan Garcia Abrego throughout the 1980s.
This was easily accomplished because Félix Gallardo had already established an infrastructure that stood ready to serve the Colombia-based traffickers.
Guzman and Zambada brought veteran Héctor Luis Palma Salazar back into the fold.
Félix Gallardo still planned to oversee national operations, as he maintained important connections, but he would no longer control all details of the business.
As time progressed, Calder6én continued to escalate his anti-drug campaign, in which there are now about 45,000 troops involved in addition to state and federal police forces.
The decrease in eradication and drug seizures, as shown in statistics calculated by federal authorities, poorly reflects Calderén’s security agenda.
By 1993, the resistance group, Los Pepes , controlled by the Cali Cartel, and the Colombian government, in collaboration with the Cali Cartel, right-wing paramilitary groups, and the United States government, had dismantled the Medellin Cartel by imprisoning or assassinating its members.
In 2003, the United States invaded Irag, which deposed the controversial regime of Saddam Hussein, but also resulted in a prolonged conflict that would continue over the course of the decade.
The former World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan during September 11 attacks in 2001 before their collapse.
In 2003, from March 19 to May 1, the United States launched an invasion of Iraq, which led to the collapse of the lraq government and the eventual capture of Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein, with whom the United States had longstanding tense relations.
After his election, Obama reluctantly continued the war effort in Irag until August 31, 2010, when he declared that combat operations had ended.
However, 50,000 American soldiers and military personnel were kept in Iraq to assist Iragi forces, help protect withdrawing forces, and work on counter-terrorism until December 15, 2011, when the war was declared formally over and the last troops left the country.
Though the UN Charter had been written primarily to prevent aggression by one nation against another, in the early 1990s the UN faced a number of simultaneous, serious crises within nations such as Somalia, Haiti, Mozambique, and the former Yugoslavia that tested its founding principles and institutional effectiveness.
In contemporary history, the 21st century essentially began in 1991 with the United States as the sole superpower in the absence of the Soviet Union, while China began its rise and the BRICS countries aimed to create more balance in the global political and economic spectrum. vy.
World Trade Organization rs WTO members and observers Green countries are members, blue countries are members that are dually represented by the European Union, yellow countries are observers, and red countries are non-members.
Most of the issues that the WTO focuses on derive from previous trade negotiations, especially from the Uruguay Round (19861994), The WTO is attempting to complete negotiations on the Doha Development Round, which was launched in 2001 to lower trade barriers around the world with an explicit focus on facilitating the spread of global trade benefits to developing countries.
Australia, the European Union , Belarus, Iceland, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Switzerland, and Ukraine.
Early efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation involved intense government secrecy, the wartime acquisition of known uranium stores (the Combined Development Trust), and at times even outright sabotage.
Earnest international efforts to promote nuclear nonproliferation began soon after World War Il when the Truman Administration proposed the Baruch Plan of 1946, which proposed the verifiable dismantlement and destruction of the United States nuclear arsenal, the only nuclear arsenal in the world at that time.
In 1968, governments represented at the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee finished negotiations on the text of the NPT, which entered into force in March 1970. e Since the mid-1970s, the primary focus of nonproliferation efforts has been to maintain and even increase international control over the fissile material and specialized technologies necessary to build such devices as these are the most difficult and expensive parts of a nuclear weapons program.
The IAEA now operates a safeguards system as specified under Article Ill of the NPT, which aims to ensure that civil stocks of uranium and plutonium, as well as facilities and technologies associated with these nuclear materials, are used only for peaceful purposes and do not contribute in any way to proliferation or nuclear weapons programs.
Learning Objective Describe some of the challenges faced by developing countries Key Points A developing country is a nation or a sovereign state with a less developed industrial base and low Human Development Index compared to other countries.
Economic development originated as a global concern in the post-World War II period of reconstruction.
It is related to the concept of international aid, but distinct from disaster relief and humanitarian aid.
The launch of the Marshall Plan was an important step in setting the agenda for international development, combining humanitarian goals with the creation of a political and economic bloc in Europe allied with the United States In terms of international development practice on the ground, the concept of community development has been influential since the 1950s.
In the 1970s and early 1980s, the modernists at the World Bank and IMF adopted neo-liberal ideas of economists such as Milton Friedman or Bela Balassa, implemented in the form of structural adjustment programs, while their opponents were promoting various bottom-up approaches.
By the 1990s, some writers and academics felt an impasse had been reached within development theory, with some imagining a post-development era. e While some critics have been debating the end of development, others have predicted a development revival as part of the War on Terrorism.
Such efforts include monetary and fiscal policies, regulation of financial institutions, trade, and tax policies.
Programs that provide infrastructure and services such as highways, parks, affordable housing, crime prevention, and K-12 education.
Job creation and retention through specific efforts in business finance, marketing, neighborhood development, workforce development, small business development, business retention and expansion, technology transfer, and real estate development.
Learning Objective Outline some of the criticisms of globalization Key Points The broad consensus among economists is that free trade is a large and unambiguous net gain for society.
The global economic crisis of 2007-2008, the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression, can be credited partially to neo-liberal globalization.
Globalization has fueled the rise of transnational corporations, and their power has vaulted to the point where they can now rival many nation states.
Multinational corporations often benefit from globalization while poor, indigenous locals are negatively affected.
Globalization sometimes requires a country to give up some sovereignty for the sake of executing Western ideals.
International trade in petroleum products has expanded significantly through globalization and the spread of invasive species has also been facilitated by improvements in global transport.
Not everybody affected by globalization believes there are benefits to its soread, however.
