Yet, this man stopped a nuclear war in 1962 and changed the course of history.Keeping your cool, or rather, keeping a stable mind is best during wartime.
Let’s face it, a level head is best in all situations.It’s safe to say that many of us are alive today because of one man’s logical and calm thinking during this time.
In fact, I speak of no American at all. .push;In a sensitive time, this unlikely hero stopped the possible destruction of nations.
His name was Vasili Arkhipov and probably most of you have never heard of him before.During the early stages of the Vietnam War, tensions were heightened.
An integral part of this war was dealing with the Cuban missile crisis.
In 1962, in the climax of the Cuban missile crisis, President Kennedy blocked all access, by sea, to Cuba.
And so, additional conflict arose.The Russian crew sent by sea to Cuba was ordered to stop in the Caribbean Sea.
Here, one sub, manned by Commander Valentin Savitsky, was spotted by Americans.
He was instructed to sink below the surface with the other submarines to avoid being seen.The Russian submarines were so deep they couldn’t hear any United States media and couldn’t move forward because United States Navy had completely cut them off from their destination.
For all they knew, the war between Russia and the United States had begun.Americans begin to drop depth charges from left to right.
He and the other captains had the authority to launch torpedoes at any time deemed necessary, and the final decision was minutes away. .push;Americans had no idea the nuclear tactical devices were on board the Russian submarines and weren’t aware that Savitsky was growing more nervous by the minute-ready to launch the weapons.
He had readied the missile, and the second in command had the approval to launch.
For days, there was no contact with the Soviet Union.Savitsky felt he had a perfect reason to retaliate against what he thought was warfare.
There were 11 United States Naval ships nearby and they were targets for a nuke comparable to the bomb of Hiroshima.Fortunately, Savitsky didn’t do it.
Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov, flotilla commander, responsible for three Russian subs and Savitsky’s equal, somehow thwarted the panic decision.Image courtesy by Olga Arkhipova, CC BY-SA 4.0It’s clear that, in order to launch, there would have to be three senior officers in support of the decision.
Arkhipov did not support launching the missiles against the U.S.According to Russian reporter Alexander Mozgovoi, an American writer and Intelligence officer Orlov, Arkhipov convinced Savitsky that the depth charges were intended to make the submarine surface.
The Russians, according to Arkhipov were not in danger. .push;It’s not known, for certain, what Vasili Arkhipov said, but he apparently had a level head during the crisis.
The Russian submarine rose to the surface, greeted by a United States destroyer.
The Russians, at that point, turned back to the Soviet Union.The conditions of the submarine, as stated above, were horrific.
Anatoly Andreev, a crew member, kept a journal on these conditions:For the last four days, they didn’t even let us come up to the periscope depth … My head is bursting from the stuffy air.
Those who are free from their shifts, are sitting immobile, staring at one spot.
It seems that Arkhipov talked Savitsky down from his decision and was rewarded for his actions, back in his homeland.
Arkhipov was a Soviet hero, and an unsung hero to other nations as well.
As a survivor of childhood trauma and multiple types of abuse, she is an advocate for mental health awareness.
Learning Mind does not provide medical, psychological, or any other type of professional advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
