Sorensen, collaborating with Robert Kennedy, wrote the letter to Chairman Khrushchev that brought a peaceful end to the Crisis.
The language of the letter is of particular interest, as Sorensen used a technique where he used the points laid out in Khrushchev’s letter and interpreted them as supporting JFK’s premise.
This method of communication, and subsequent diplomatic exchanges, amicably ended the Crisis.
We began by researching independent sources about Sorenson and the Crisis and then broadened our knowledge to include multiple perspectives.
We learned the Soviet opinion by examining letters sent during the Crisis and conferences held in the years that followed.
Ted Sorenson's papers are archived at the JFK Library but only some have been digitized.
Due to COVID-19 the Library is closed, so we were disappointed because our research was limited to the online materials.
The biggest struggle we faced in creating our performance was that we weren’t able to follow the same process we have used for the last four years.
Not being able to work in the same room and go through our script whenever we needed to really stifled our creativity.
We didn’t realize how much of an impact that process had on our project’s development.
In creating our set, we chose a fairly simple set-up that would allow us to maintain social distancing.
We chose historically appropriate costumes, keeping in mind the need for a quick costume change between Evelyn Lincoln and the interviewer.
Sorensen’s intelligence and ability to communicate diplomatically are the reasons why the Crisis ended without the firing of missiles.
The letter sent to Khrushchev, which is a prime example of his expertise, set a precedent for ending nuclear and other conflicts between the United States and USSR, and the world could’ve faced catastrophe if not for him.
The immediate reprieve from the threat of nuclear destruction set the stage for long-term precedents in international communication between the superpowers.
No party involved in the Crisis wanted to start a nuclear war, but each refused to betray the values his country represented.
Their ability to come to a solution without violence is what sets those events apart from other negotiations.
While the Cold War remained for nearly another thirty years, the threat of nuclear war was never as tangible as during the Crisis, due to the precedent set by Sorensen with his letter in 1962.
The Letter that Saved the World Annotated Bibliography Primary Sources: Acosta, Tomás Diez.
As the title states, it is an account of the Cuban perspective on the Crisis, including the cause and reason for its resolution.
This helped us to understand what the Cubans in the military thought about the Crisis.
It was interesting to see how Acosta’s perspective and opinions were very similar to Castro’s, but he still felt some of the fear that gripped the citizens.
Reading this book expanded our understanding of the Crisis, which helped us to both solidify and modify our script to best represent all sides.
Understanding why Castro and Khrushchev did what they did, and why the Crisis went the way it did was very important to us, especially in getting the full picture of the Crisis.
It also discusses Castro’s reaction to the removal of the missile, saying that he was defiant and tried to put conditions on Khrushchev's statement of peace.
This helped us to understand not only the American people’s understanding of what was happening, but also what Castro was thinking as his defense got taken away from him.
We wanted to make sure that we portrayed her accurately in our performance.
By looking at what Lincoln did, we were able to make sure that our performance concept was historically accurate, at least theoretically.
This allowed us to look at a large range of primary sources regarding the Crisis, which was invaluable to our research.
They discussed the Bay of Pigs and JFK’s reaction to it, like the changes he made in his administration and how he went about his administration following it.
Gómez was a Lieutenant colonel in FAR, meaning he has first-hand knowledge of much of what Cuba was going through and their actions during the Crisis.
This book focuses much more on the broader details of the Crisis, while still giving an in-depth Cuban account.
This book was also very helpful for us, as it gave us more information on the build-up to the Crisis from the Cuba perspective.
Using this information, we were able to clarify our discussion of the Cuban perspective in the third scene in our performance.
We got a fairly good idea of how Sorensen wrote and therefore talked by reading his book and letters, but we really wanted to make sure that we represented Sorensen accurately in terms of both word choice and cadence.
This gave us an idea of not only what other people were saying, but what stood out to Lincoln.
This helped us gather more information on the perspective of the people in the White House.
He discussed what they would do and what they wouldn’t do, and Eisenhower agreed that an invasion of Cuba was not a move that the United States should make.
Hearing JFK and Eisenhower discuss this matter helped us to understand how strongly JFK was against military action; it was one of the first things he said after he finished explaining the situation.
This gave us an idea of what Lincoln was responsible for as a presidential secretary, as well as what Sorensen did.
This helped build our understanding of how it worked in the White House and how Lincoln and Sorensen would’ve interacted.
This article gave us an insight into how people in the American public viewed what was happening, as well as the major points in JFK’s original demands to Khrushchev.
This also provided us with an example of communication between the American people, albeit from the American people.
This book really helped us to understand what ExComm (the American government group tasked with dealing with the Crisis) did and the conflicts that came from within on how to handle it.
It also helped to understand the feeling of the Americans as they tried to deal with the Crisis.
This helped develop our understanding of the Cuban perspective, specifically Castro’s, following the Crisis.
Understanding perspectives is something we tried very hard to do in this project, and being able to read the correspondence between Khrushev and Castro both informed and solidified our understanding.
This gave us an idea of the amount of reporters that JFK had to talk to in general, but also how important it was to the American people to understand what was happening.
It was clear that people were scared and wanted answers, and being able to be in the White House, talking to the president, was one of the best ways to get answers.
It also showed us what her desk looked like, including the technology of the 60’s that she had on her desk.
This helped us create her desk for our performance that was historically accurate.
It allowed us to understand how the citizens were receiving information about the Crisis, which would influence their perspectives.
This also gave an example of how patriotic the Cubans were and how they blamed the United States for the Crisis, as they painted JFK as the sole perpetrator of the Crisis.
This speech is, in Ted Sorensen’s opinion, one of the three most important speeches that JFK gave, so being able to watch it being given was extremely helpful in understanding what the American public knew as the Crisis happened and how JFK communicated with the American people.
This gave us a first-hand look into the Crisis and the reflections of McNamara, who was part of ExComm.
McNamara talks about his experience on ExComm, with Kennedy, and what he took away from the experience.
This gave us another perspective into the Crisis from the American side, as well as another perspective of reflection from years later.
This article shows that JFK’s actions were heavily supported throughout the US, but specifically in this county.
This provided us an insight into the perspective of some of the American people on JFK’s actions and how he handled the Crisis.
It gave us a good example of what Sorensen remembered from his time with JFK and in the White House.
This helped us to understand the long-term relationship between the United States and USSR, as well as between JFK and Khrushchev.
We play the audio from this video in our performance as an example of JFK’s communication with the American people.
This article gave us more insight into the Cuban perspective of the Crisis, as the Cubans blamed Castro for his exclusion from the decisions.
This was the first conference that the Cubans were invited to, as the first one held earlier only included the Americans and former Soviets.
This helped us to understand not only the Cuban perspective but also the questions that were leftover from the Crisis.
This helped us to understand the opinions of the participants from the Crisis and what they thought about it after time had passed.
This book also gave us insight to Ted’s personality, through anecdotes but also through the writing of the book.
We really got to see how intelligent and experienced he was by just reading how he wrote.
This article gave us another example of Sorensen’s abilities as a writer and his obvious intelligence, but also gave us an insight of Sorensen’s opinions on Lincoln’s writing because we know from Sorensen’s other writing that he used Lincoln’s writing as inspiration in much of Kennedy’s speeches.
All of these combined helped us to further understand how the American people felt about everything that happened in the Crisis.
This was a very clear source of the perspective of the American people, which continued to add to our overall understanding of the Crisis and the international communication and general feeling towards each other.
This article describes the impact he had and the respect he garnered from people like former President Obama.
This showed us how much of an impact he had and how he’s still remembered for his service to this day.
We were able to learn more about the events leading up to the Crisis, as this article included a small timeline which included when the NATO missiles were placed in Turkey, the Bay of Pigs, and so on.
Using the newspaper articles within this article helped give us more information into the American perspective and what the American people knew about the Crisis.
We really wanted to understand the perspectives of everyone involved; and this video helped us to understand the differences in how the American public viewed it and the Cuban public viewed it.
It also gave us an insight into what Khrushchev was thinking and what information he received.
We also learned more about the kind of pressure that JFK was under and the extent of the discourse from the opposing sides within the American government.
This conference included Cubans; including Castro; former USSR members, and Americans, like Sorensen and former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
This was very helpful for us because it allowed us to see the reflections and opinions of the people involved in the Crisis.
Just from the obituary, you can see that people had a lot of respect for him and he was a very intelligent man.
This helped us to understand what JFK was doing during the Crisis and gave us more of an insight into what he was doing.
We learned that JFK continued with his previously scheduled meetings and appearances when the Crisis first began, and this timeline reinforced that idea and introduced some of the forgein officials JFK talked to during the Crisis, not only from the Soviet Union, but also from Japan, Germany, and Portugal.
This information helped us put into perspective how dangerous the situation actually was, which also showed how important Sorensen’s letter was and how important it was that it worked.
It also included some information about how the handling of the Crisis was presented to the public; it was made out to seem like JFK’s toughness is what ended it, when actually it was his commitment to peace.
This really helped us understand the gravity of the situation and how skewed much of the history and records of the Crisis are.
We used this article to help us look at the information we received, specifically the opinions and memories of people involved in the Crisis on the American side.
May 12, 2021 www.pri.org/stories/2012-10-12/looking-back-cuban-missile-crisis.
Khrushchev’s son, Sergei, discusses the responsibility that fell to Khrushchev after Cuba joined the Soviet bloc.
The point of the missiles, from Khrushchev’s perspective, were to send a message to the US, which is something that we discuss within our performance multiple times.
The article was helpful in confirming our analysis and broadening our understanding of the Crisis as a whole.
While it was also a good introduction to Sorensen, it provided the connection between the two topics we had been researching.
It also included a picture taken by United States patrol planes over Cuba of the weapons.
The fact that United States surveillance planes took pictures of the missile sites is stated in almost all tellings of the Crisis, but we never considered the taking and analyzing of the photos.
This video helped us to understand how they figured out what they were looking at in the photos as well as the technological feats that occurred in order to take the photos from that height.
This not only allowed us to gain an insight into a lesser discussed aspect of the Crisis but also an insight into the actions of Kennedy leading up to the Crisis, as he was the one that ordered the planes to take the surveillance photos.
Office of the United States Historian, United States Department of State Archive.
The exceptions, such as the Vietnam War, did not incite the world-ending threats that the Missile Crisis had.
Submitted with your process paper and annotated bibliography, this worksheet will help judges understand your performance’s background, costumes, and props.
Please complete this worksheet with information relevant to your project.
The letter sent to Khrushchev, written by Sorensen, set a precedent for ending nuclear and other conflicts between the United States and USSR, and the world could’ve faced catastrophe if not for him.
Ted Sorensen, arriving for his meeting with President Kennedy to discuss the letter he has written to Khrushchev, converses with Lincoln.
The story transitions to November 1962 as Sorensen and Lincoln reflect on the immediate aftermath of the Crisis.
Character Name Actor Description/background for the character 10 Word Limit per Character Ted Sorensen John Margelony Special counsel, speechwriter, and confidant of JFK Evelyn Lincoln Clarissa Halpryn Personal secretary to JFK Interviewer Clarissa Halpryn Reporter/journalist interviewing Sorensen PERFORMANCE BACKGROUND Over the next 3 pages, provide photos and descriptions of your performance background.
PERFORMANCE COSTUMES Over the next 3 pages, provide photos and descriptions of your performance costumes.
This costume was specifically chosen to be more modern and to make it clear that this was no longer the same person.
PERFORMANCE PROPS Over the next 3 pages, provide photos and descriptions of your key performance props.
The mail is there because in an interview with Lincoln, she said that JFK really loved to read and respond to the mail.
Sorensen stated that he wrote many things on a yellow legal pad, including the letter, so we wrote the letter actually sent to Khrushchev onto the legal pad.
