The intelligence community has now identified and confirmed a total of 15 SA-2 SAM sites.
In the Oriente Province, the identified sites form a triangular pattern around the new military airfield at Holguin.
At the present time, there are no MIG-type aircraft stationed at this field.
The MIGs believed to be assigned to the operational control of the Commander, Eastern Army, are stationed at the airfield at Camaguey, in the Central Army area.
When Holguin becomes operational, these aircraft will probably be moved to that location.
In the Central Army area, 4 SA-2 sites form a rectangular pattern around the military airfield near Santa Clara.
This airfield has had MIGs for several months and is also the field upon which the first MIG 21 was identified.
In the Western Army area, there are 3 and possibly 4 SA-2 sites forming a liner pattern to provide defense for the military airfield at San Antonia de los Banos and coincidentally for the defense of the Havana-Mariel complex.
San Antonio de los Banos is the headquarters for the Cuban revolutionary Air Force and the assembly point for all MIGs, except the MIG-21, which have previously been received in Cuba.
Further west in the Pinar del Rio Province a triangular pattern of 3 SA-2 sites cannot be connected with any significant military installation.
The only known installation within this triangle are 2 underground facilities whose use and purpose are unknown.
The only other military installation in this particular area is the military air base at San Julian near the western tip of Cuba.
However, 1 of the 3 SA-2 sites is located at or very near this military airfield, a most unlikely spot to place SA-2s for the defense of this particular air base.
Therefore, curiosity is immediately aroused to the purpose of this triangular pattern on the far western tip of Cuba.
There are no known military installations in this rough and sparsely populated area.
According to reports from refugees arriving in Miami, all Cubans have been evacuated from this restricted area.
Information concerning the deployment of Soviet military personnel and ""technicians"" recently arriving in Cuba is derived from unevaluated refugee sources, however, an attempt has been made to plot all reported locations to determine whether there is any correlation between the location of Soviet personnel and missiles or missile activity.
So far, the pattern indicates that there is a definite correlation, but significantly the greatest concentration of Soviet personnel, activity and camps is in the western end of the Island of Cuba.
This would indicate a greater interest on the part of the Soviets in Pinar del Rio than in the other provinces.
A single unevaluated report states that the Soviet ""SS-4 Shyster"" missile may have been delivered to Cuba on or about 1 1 September.
The SS-4 missile is nicknamed ""Sandal,"" while the ""Shyster"" carriers a designation of SS-3.
This confusion was caused by the interrogators of the source using a recognition manual which designated the SS-4 as the Shyster.
However, the description of the missiles reportedly observed by the source could have applied equally to either the Shyster or the Sandal.
Both missiles have essentially the same outward appearance except that the Sandal is about 5 feet longer.
In all other respects, including the missile carrier, the two appear identical.
The source of this report stated that on 12 September he had personally seen some 20 such missiles in the vicinity of Campo Libertad, a small airfield on the western edge of Havana.
While this report is still unconfirmed and there are no other reports concerning the presence of either SS-3 or SS-4 missiles, it is significant to note that by using the approximate center of the restricted area referred to above as a point of origin and with a radius of 1100 nm, the accepted range of the SS-4 missile, the arc includes the cities of Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, St.
Louis, Oklahoma City, Fort Worth-Dallas, Houston, San Antonio, Mexico City, all of the capitals of the Central American nations, the Panama Canal, and the oil fields in Maricaibo, Venezuela.
The presence of operational SS-4 missiles in this location would give the Soviets a great military asset.
SUBJECT Policy Toward Non-Bloc Ships in Cuban Trade A Recommended Action 1.
The President should close all United States ports to all ships of any country if any ship under the flag of that country hereafter carries arms to Cuba.
The President should direct that no government cargo shall be carried on a foreign flag ship if any ship of the same owners is used hereafter in Bloc-Cuba Trade.
The President should direct that no United States flag ship and no United States owned ship shall carry goods to or from Cuba.
Alternative I The President should close all United States ports to any ship on a continuous voyage to or from Cuba.
Alternative II The President should close all United States ports to any ship that on the same continuous voyage carried or carries to Cuba items on the COCOM list.
Alternative III The President should close all United States ports to any ship that on the same continuous voyage carried or carries to Cuba items on the positive list under Regulation T-l.
Alternative IV The President should close all United States ports to any ship that on the same continuous voyage was used or is being used in Bloc-Cuba trade.
The President should instruct the Secretary of State to explore every avenue to obtain cooperation from other countries in restricting the use of their ships in Bloc-Cuba trade.
B Legal Authority The President has all the necessary legal authority to carry out the above recommendations without new legislation.
A small supplemental appropriation for the Department of Agriculture might have to be included in the budget to pay for shipping in United States bottoms.
C Action Not Recommended The President has adequate legal powers to adopt more restrictive policies than those recommended above.
There has been some talk, for example, of closing United States ports to the ships of any country which permits its ships to go to Cuba.
Others have mentioned the possibility of closing territorial waters of the United States to such ships, or denying them use of the Panama Canal.
These proposals are not recommended./l/ /1/Printed from an unsigned copy.
The President has approved the memorandum we/2/ discussed at the meeting this morning,/3/ including Alternative IV, under point 5.
A group will be formed to do what is necessary to put these recommendations into effect.
The meeting lasted for 15 minutes and no other participants are listed.
A memorandum for the record prepared by Captain William D Houser, USN, based upon a debriefing provided by Gilpatric following the meeting indicates, however, that Gilpatric and several other concerned officals also participated in the meeting.
FRC 65 A 3501, Cuba, 1962, 000.1-092) George Ball discussed the President's decision on the afternoon of October 2 with Stevenson.
Ball noted that the measures relating to trade with Cuba were ""more for American public opinion"" than for any practical effect they were expected to have on the availability of shipping to the Soviet Bloc for trade with Cuba.
Nonetheless, he added, ""the President felt strongly that we had to do something along this line"" and that it would raise the cost to the Soviet Union of shipping arms and other supplies to Cuba.
During my meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on October 1, 1962, the question arose as to the contingencies under which military action against Cuba may be necessary and toward which our military planning should be oriented.
Soviet action against Western rights in Berlin calling for a Western response including among other actions a blockade of Communist or other shipping en route to Cuba.
Evidence that the Castro regime has permitted the positioning of bloc offensive weapon systems on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors.
An attack against the Guantanamo base, or against United States planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters.
A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, the leaders of which request assistance in recovering Cuban independence from the Castro Soviet puppet regime.
A decision by the President that affairs in Cuba have reached a point inconsistent with continuing United States national security.
The preparatory actions which should now and progressively in the future be undertaken to improve United States readiness to execute these plans.
The consequences of the actions on the availability of forces and on our logistics posture to deal with threats in other areas,e.
Inasmuch as the second objective is the more difficult objective and may be required if the first is to be permanently achieved, attention should be focused upon a capability to assure the second objective.
I have asked ISA to initiate discussion with State as to the political actions which should precede or accompany the various military actions being planned.
Lot 65 D 438, Hearings Before the Committee on Export Controls) Ball noted in his letter to Mahon that, in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis, members of the committee had questioned the accuracy of the statements he had made with respect to the flow of Soviet military equipment and missiles to Cuba.
He provided Mahon with a copy of the October 2 memorandum from Hilsman in order to demonstrate that his testimony was based upon the information available to him at the time.
A copy of Ball's testimony before the Committee on Export Control is ibid.
Since July when the volume of Soviet military shipments to Cuba suddenly increased very substantially, 85 shiploads of various military items, supplies, and personnel have arrived.
In part the Soviet shipments have consisted of types of weapons previously delivered to the Cuban armed forces including more tanks, self-propelled guns and other ground force equipment.
The major tonnage however has been devoted to supplying SA-2 surface-to-air missiles together with all of the related gear and equipment necessary for their installation and operation.
Cuba is now estimated to have 60 older type MIG jet aircraft plus at least one advanced jet interceptor recently received and probably several more in process of assembly.
Sixteen ""Komar"" class guided-missile patrol boats which carry two short range missiles (11-17 miles) were included in the new shipments.
About 4,500 Soviet military specialists have arrived including construction men and technicians.
If the SAM sites are to be operated solely by Cuban personnel six months to a year of training will be required.
There is a considerable amount of other new equipment which has not been precisely identified but it is believed to include a large quantity of electronic gear.
Editorial Note The Foreign Ministers of the Latin American Republics met at the Department of State on October 2 and 3, 1962, at the invitation of Secretary of State Rusk to discuss matters of mutual concern, with a particular emphasis on the problems posed by Cuba.
The invitation was extended on September 5 through the Latin American ambassadors in Washington.
Secretary Rusk opened the first session of the Foreign Ministers meeting at 10:30m. on October 2 with a discussion of the threat posed to the Americas by communism; a threat, he stated, which was rapidly expanding with each shipload of modern weaponry that the Soviet Union sent to the base for Communist penetration it had established in Cuba.
Rusk outlined the magnitude of the arms build-up taking place in Cuba and repeated the warnings President Kennedy had issued against the development of Cuba as a Soviet military base, or the introduction into Cuba of ground-to-ground ballistic missiles.
He noted that there were to date no indications that the Soviet Union intended to violate those guidelines.
Nonetheless, he argued that Soviet penetration of the hemisphere, and the aggressive use of Cuba as a focus for subversive activities posed serious problems, which he invited the Foreign Ministers to consider and address.
President Kennedy hosted a luncheon at the White House for the Foreign Ministers following the opening session.
The Foreign Ministers met again on the afternoon of October 2 and twice on October 3.
The tenor of the remarks by the other Foreign Ministers reflected general agreement with Rusk's emphasis on the need for hemispheric solidarity to face the perceived threat.
In the final communique issued at the conclusion of the meetings on October 3, the Foreign Ministers reiterated the OAS conclusion that the Soviet Union's intervention in Cuba threatened the unity and democratic institutions of the Americas.
SUBJECT Presidential Interest in SA-2 Missile System and Contingency Planning for Cuba 1.
In your memorandum of 21 September 1962,/1/ you noted an apparent lack of unanimity between General LeMay and Admiral Anderson with respect to aircraft losses that might occur in attacking an SA-2 site.
You further requested assurance as to the currency of contingency planning for Cuba.
Admiral Anderson agrees with General LeMay's point that no losses would be suffered from the SA-2 missile since the attacking aircraft would fly below the effective minimum altitude of the SA-2.
General LeMay shares Admiral Anderson's estimate that attacking aircraft might suffer some loss to antiaircraft artillery defenses of the SA-2 site.
The National Intelligence Estimate/2/ credits the SA-2 missile system with a minimum effective altitude of 3000 feet due to inherent radar limitations.
If antiaircraft artillery is employed in direct support of the missile site, losses may be expected.
World War II and Korean experience, updated to reflect current antiaircraft artillery capabilities against modern aircraft, indicates that low level attack forces would incur some combat losses from antiaircraft artillery fire; however, numbers cannot be predicted accurately.
There are currently no known antiaircraft artillery defenses of SA-2 sites in Cuba.
Attack plans can be amended to take the antiaircraft weapons under fire during the attack if reconnaissance shows such defenses and if analysis shows such fire suppression necessary.
Korean experience proved that such fire suppression was unnecessary when surprise could be achieved.
In my opinion and that of the Joint Chiefs, it is not necessary to build a model of an SA-2 site for training purposes.
However, the aircraft revetment of the type found at Santa Clara and Camaguey is a more difficult target than the SA-2 site.
Therefore, the Air Force has found it desirable to reproduce that type aircraft revetment to aid in the selection of weapons, method of delivery and to assist in training crews.
The target was completed at Nellis AFB, Nevada, on 30 September 1962, at an approximate cost of $28,000.
Initial tests indicate that the GAM 83, 20 mm cannon, and napalm is the most effective weapons mix against aircraft in such revetments.
The Navy plans to attack SA-2 targets at low level using 4 divisions of A-4D's (4 aircraft per division) armed with 250#, 500#, and 2000# low drag bombs and napalm.
Similarly, the Air Force plans primary use of napalm and 20 mm cannon delivered at low level, and crews are proficient.
Both have made detailed target studies; target folders are in the hands of crews; and crews are familiar with their assigned targets.
As new missile sites are located, they are picked up in the target and attack plans within a few hours of receipt of photographs.
Clifton, the President's military aide, sent a memorandum to Secretary McNamara in which he indicated that the President had ""read with interest"" McNamara's October 4 memorandum dealing with the SA-2 missile system in Cuba.
A memorandum for the record of this meeting, by Thomas A Parrott, is ibid., Walter Elder Recop.
MEMORANDUM OF MONGOOSE MEETING HELD ONTHURSDAY, OCTOBER 4, 1962 Chaired by the Attorney General.
The Attorney General reported on discussions with the President on Cuba; dissatisfied with lack of action in the sabotage field, went on to stress that nothing was moving forward, commented that one effort attempted had failed, expressed general concern over developing situation.
General Lansdale reviewed operations, pointing out that no sabotage had been attempted and gave general impression that things were all right.
McCone then stated that phase one was principally intelligence gathering, organizing and training, that no sabotage was authorized, that one operation against a powerhouse had been contemplated but was discouraged by group, that he had called a meeting to review matters this morning and that he had observed a lack of forward motion due principally to ""hesitancy"" in government circles to engage in any activities which would involve attribution to the United States.
In effect it seemed to be the consensus that phase two as approved on September 6, was now outmoded, that more dynamic action was indicated, that hesitancy about overflights must be reconsidered (this to be commented on later in this memorandum), that actions which could be attributed to indigenous Cubans would not be important or very effective, and that a very considerable amount of attribution and ""noise"" must be expected.
With respect to overflights, the NRO and Colonel Steakley were instructed to prepare and present to the Special Group on next Tuesday/ 1/ at a special meeting alternate recommendations for overflights.
These to include the use of U-2s on complete sweeps (as contrasted with peripheral or limited missions), the use of firefly drones, the use of 101s or other reconnaissance planes on low level, intermediate level, and high level missions, and other possible reconnaissance operations.
During the meeting McCone reviewed the earlier meeting with General Lansdale, and pointed out to the group that this meeting clarified General Lansdale's authority over the entire Mongoose operation and that the CIA organization was responsive to his policy and operational guidance, and this was thoroughly understood.
X John A McCone/3/ /3/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
McCone reviewed details of the Donovan negotiations, discussions with the President, Attorney General, Eisenhower, the decisions not to approach Congressional leadership, the discussion with Senator Javits, and the final report from Donovan.
McCone stated there was a feeling in CIA and Defense that the ""activist policy"" which founded the Mongoose operation was gone and that while no specific operational activities had been the amount of ""noise""from minor incidents such as the sugar, the students firing on the Havana Hotel and other matters and the extreme caution expressed by State had led to this conclusion.
More importantly, however, the decisions to restrict U-2 flights had placed the United States Intelligence Community in a position where it could not report with assurance the development of offensive capabilities in Cuba.
McCone stated he felt it most probable that Soviet-Castro operations would end up with an established offensive capability in Cuba including MRBMs.
McCone stated he thought this a probability rather than a mere possibility.
Bundy took issue stating that he felt the Soviets would not go that far, that he was satisfied that no offensive capability would be installed in Cuba because of its world-wide effects and therefore seemed relaxed over the fact that the Intelligence Community cannot produce hard information on this important subject.
McCone said that Bundy's viewpoint was reflected by many in the Intelligence Community, perhaps a majority, but he just did not agree and furthermore did not think the United States could afford to take such a risk.
It was obvious that he was not in sympathy with a more active role such as those discussed at 5412 on Thursday /3/ as he felt none of them would bring Castro down nor would they particularly enhance United States position of world leadership.
Bundy seemed inclined to support the Track Two idea and also inclined to play down the more active Lansdale operation.
Bundy had not talked to Lansdale but obviously had received some of the ""static"" that is being passed around in Washington.
McCone in reporting on the discussions at Thursday's 5412 meeting repeated the views of the President and expressed by the Attorney General it was agreed that the whole Government policy with reference to Cuba must be resolved promptly as basic to further actions on our part.
In general, Bundy's views were that we should either make a judgment that we would have to go in militarily or alternatively we would have to learn to live with Castro, and his Cuba and adjust our policies accordingly.
McCone then elaborated on his views of the evolution of Soviet-Castro military capability stating he felt defense was just phase one, phase two would be followed by various offensive capabilities and indeed the existing defensive capabilities such as the 21s a very definite offensive capability against nearby American cities and installations.
McCone stated that he thought that the establishment of a very expensive defensive mechanism could not be the ultimate objective of the Soviets or Castro and therefore the objective was to establish an offensive base or to insert sufficient Soviet specialists and military leaders to take Cuba away from Castro and establish it as a true Soviet controlled satellite.
McCone stated that he felt there were only two courses open-one was to take military action at the appropriate time or secondly to pursue an effort to split Castro off from the Communists and for this reason he, McCone, had vigorously supported the Donovan mission as it is the only link that we have to the Castro hierarchy at the present time.
Note in this connection it might be well to study the evolution of the Toure experience in Guinea when the Communists moved in and captured all elements of the Government and economy and forced Toure to expel the Ambassador and try to rectify the situation.
Bundy read the memorandum covering these discussions 74/ Bundy stated that Adenauer did not express the concern of the United States policy reflected by Eisenhower and reported in the memorandum.
Bundy rejected the idea of regular NSC meetings stating that every President has to organize his Government as he desires and that the Eisenhower pattern was not necessarily adaptable to the Kennedy type of administration.
McCone stated that if this is the case he intended to request occasional NSC meetings to review specific estimates or other intelligence situations and the next one would be a report and discussion of the estimate of Soviet air defense capabilities.
Bundy rejected the idea the several Special Groups 5412, CIA, Mongoose, and North Vietnam together feeling it was better to keep them separated.
It was agreed that we would have a further discussion over the weekend.
It is requested that you present the following proposal to the Special Group for policy approval.
Policy approval is requested to permit the sabotage of Cuban-owned vessels wherever and whenever secure access to them can be attained, normally this will be in non-Bloc ports.
Attacks against the Cuban-owned ships must be considered essentially as attacks against targets of opportunity in the sense that in most cases there will be little advance information prior to the arrival of the ship in a non-Bloc port and the duration of the port call will be limited.
It is necessary to submit the request for policy approval in a somewhat more general form than usual to permit us to take advantage of targets of opportunity as they occur.
In most cases we will not have sufficient advance notice of the arrival of the ship or have sufficient access to the ship to permit the preparation and submission of detailed individual approval requests in advance.
In every case where time and circumstance permit, specific proposals will be submitted to the Special Group for approval.
Any case involving unusual operational or security risks will be submitted in advance for Special Group approval.
Later we will submit requests for policy approval of actions against other ships supplying Cuba.
William K Harvey/1/ /1/Printed from a copy that indicates that Harvey signed the original.
Editorial Note President Kennedy met with the members of the Special Group on October 9, 1962, to consider recommendations for a proposed U-2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba.
The purpose of the flight was to obtain hard evidence concerning the development of suspected MRBM sites near recently established SA-2 emplacements, which suggested the development of concomitant ballistic missile sites.
The President approved the recommendation for a U-2 flight, to be piloted by a Strategic Air Command pilot, or a military pilot attached to the Central Intelligence Agency.
The recommendation for supporting low-level reconnaissance flights was deferred pending a review by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of State, and the United States Intelligence Board concerning the necessity for such flights.
The U-2 flight was expected to take only 12 minutes of flying time over Cuba at approximately 74,000 feet.
It was noted during the course of the meeting that there were no indications as yet that the SA-2 antiaircraft emplacements had reached operational stage, although it had been nearly 2 months since their first installation.
MEMORANDUM ON DONOVAN PROJECT Meeting 10 Oct 62 Immediately after my discussion with the Cannon Committee , I went to the White House and explained to the President and McGeorge Bundy the positions taken by Ford and Mahon, as covered in separate memorandum prepared by Mr Warner ./l/ The President made the judgment that we should proceed with the negotiations, recognizing there would be some political consequences and criticisms, but he, the President, was willing to accept this as a fact.
Furthermore, that within CIA circles a minimum number of experts be informed.
It was therefore agreed that the USIB members would be instructed to restrict the information to their personal offices and fully and currently inform the Chiefs of Staff, the Chairman, the Service Secretaries and the Secretary of Defense.
At this point the President mentioned that ""we'll have to do something drastic about Cuba"" and I am anxiously looking forward to the JCS operational plan which is to be presented to me next week.
McCone effected the above instructions by calling Mr Cline, who was unavailable, and then Mr Sheldon who agreed to prepare a procedure for review on Thursday morning.
McCone then called the Attorney General and advised him of his talk with the Cannon Committee.
McCone reported that negotiations were in progress and he also reported objections stated by several members of Congress.
Eisenhower advised that the negotiations be pursued, indicating his support of it and furthermore stated that if the negotiations were satisfactorily concluded the complaints and objections would, in his words, disappear.
McCone told General Eisenhower there were some defendable evidences of shipments of twin-engined light jet bombers.
On Thursday/2/ morning McCone reported by telephone to Mr Kennedy, reviewing the Eisenhower discussion and stating that he, McCone, was concerned over Donovan's safety in view of the rash of publicity, most particularly the Herald Tribune article, and that he had instructed that contact be made with Donovan and that if things were not proceeding satisfactorily and a conclusion to the negotiations along the lines agreed in sight, then Donovan should come out.
With reference to the political implications, McCone recalled that he had told the President and the AG that he would take all, or his full share of responsibility, that he wished the AG to bear this in mind as the position taken in this respect by Mr McCone in the first conversation after his return from Europe still stood.
John A McCone/3/ /3/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
In furtherance of our discussion of last evening concerning the project included in the reference, we are having a meeting at 1300 hours today of operational and logistical planners from CINCLANT and CINCSTRIKE for the purpose of developing our responses to the contingencies and other matters requested by the SecDef.
Pending completion of the requirement given us by the SecDef, a general picture of each of our military contingency plans for Cuba is tabulated below as a basis for your initial discussions with State.
On the other hand, it may be better to delay discussions with State until we have completed our part of the requirement and have submitted it to the SecDef and the JCS on Monday, 15 October.
Blockade Plan-employs 24 to 36 destroyers, a carrier task force, etc., which can marshal significant strength to blockade Cuba, both air and maritime.
In the event of any execution of this plan steps would be taken to alert all forces allocated to the other assault plans.
Fast Reaction Assault Plan— employs both air-borne and amphibious assault with about 32,000 troops in initial phase, with balance of assault forces arriving in increments as they become available.
Full-Scale Deliberate Assault Plan-employs simultaneous airborne and amphibious assault with around 49,000 troops engaged on D-Day, building to about 60,000 by D+5 days, and again to 80,000 by D+16 days.
Unger/2/ Major General, USA /2/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
Authentic Cuban leadership with a considerable range of freedom to implement ideas and to assume risk. ""b.
A link-up with the scattered and sporadic groups and operations now going forward of their own momentum in Cuba. ""e.
A plan of operation which aims at the overthrow of Castro primarily from within rather than by invasion from without. ""f.
A long enough time horizon to build the operation carefully and soundly.
United States bureaucratic domination; the lack of a Cuban political and organizational base; and a plan of operation that hinged on a type of overt invasion by a fixed date rather than the patient build-up of a true movement of national liberation.
I'm sure it would be easy to argue that such a movement could not be generated against a Communist control system; that the Cuban refugees lack the capacity to play their part in such an enterprise with skill and minimal security; etc.
On the other hand, Cuba is not located in Eastern Europe; and, presumably, some Cubans have learned something from last year's failure, too.
The underlying philosophy is one which we have felt for some time merited exploration.
There is attached as you have requested, a paper describing the more important policy considerations bearing on this course of action.
Also attached /2/ is the ARA memorandum, previously forwarded to you, describing some of the political thinking which leads us to the conclusion that we should experiment with this course of action.
Tab A TRACK TWO A program of ""giving the Cubans their heads"" in an effort to effect the downfall of the Castro regime from within involves embarking upon uncharted waters as far as the United States is concerned.
Grandiose United States plans based upon a substantially unified exile community would be unrealistic.
Nearly all Cuban exile leaders, of whatever political persuasion, are convinced that only overt United States military action can remove the Castro regime.
While we could probably force a semblance of unity based upon the ""downfall from within"" thesis, despite the sharp political rivalry among the exile leaders, our purposes would not be served.
While ""accepting"" our thesis, most of the waking hours of these exiles would be devoted to devising ways of involving the United States militarily, rather than building the internal base of opposition we seek.
We could thereby lose initiative and control over the situation and find ourselves in an untenable position from the international, and, perhaps, domestic, standpoint.
We could cooperate with all anti-Castro-Batista exile groups which we have reason to believe have following inside Cuba, or we could, on an experimental basis work with one such group.
By cooperating with all such groups we run the serious risk of accentuating rivalries among the exile leaders which would be inevitably reflected within Cuba.
Rather than achieving a broad base of political opposition within Cuba, we may only be instrumental in fomenting splinter groups.
In attempting to administer such a program, the United States would probably find itself in the midst of the crossfire of exile politics, very likely satisfying no one inside or outside Cuba.
Working with one group, on an experimental basis, would provide us with experience which could guide our future thinking and at the same time probably prevent problems of unmanageable proportions.
Even then, if we saw no progress in Cuba, we could not be certain that the thesis was impractical or the selection of the group erroneous.
Of all the exile groups the only one which has publicly adopted the thesis of ""downfall from within"" is that known as JURE, formed in September 1962 by Manolo Ray and based in Puerto Rico.
Ray was former Minister of Public Works under Castro, broke with Castro and formed an important underground movement which has since been badly smashed by Castro.
The political program of JURE is one with which the United States can live.
The other feasible possibility is the CRC with which we have had a long standing relationship.
Miro and some of the organizations that form an integral part of the Council, the CRC is not a very effective organization for what we have in mind.
Its background is associated with the Bay of Pigs and its outlook is essentially one of military action.
A new organization which, as such, has no past relationship with the United States 2.
Political ideology which may be attuned to the desires of the Cuban people.
Ray is experienced in underground activities and an independ-ent thinker.
If we embark upon these unchartered waters, and it is recommended that we do so, we must be prepared for increased noise level and press inquiry.
We must be prepared for a comparatively high rate of loss, failures and cries of anguish from JURE for assistance we may not be able to give it.
It is essential that we recognize this and not be permitted to be stampeded into regrettable public postures or actions.
A further important consideration is that Track Two operations may compromise Track One operations.
Another conflict arises from the President's desire that a Cuban Brigade be formed.
While this would not necessarily be a serious conflict with the program envisaged, for there are probably enough exiles for both programs, it should be recognized that a number of young men qualified for infiltration activities will probably join the Brigade.
If we attempt our program on a large scale, or with more than one group, the immediately above-mentioned problems would multiply.
The program we would visualize is one of providing the selected exile group with funds, arms, sabotage equipment, transport and communications equipment for infiltration operations in order to build a political base of opposition inside Cuba.
Our role would essentially be that of advisors and purveyors of material goods— it would be the exile group's show.
We would insist that hit and run raids or similar harassing activities that clearly originate from outside Cuba and do not reflect internal activity not be engaged in.
In sum, we should be cautious about grandiose schemes, a ""major"" United States effort, and deep commitments to the exiles.
We should experiment in this new venture on a small scale with patience and tolerance for high noise levels and mistakes.
REPORT OF CONVERSATION WITH AMBASSADOR DOBRYNIN ON SATURDAY, OCTOBER 13th, REGARDING CUBA AND OTHER SUBJECTS A week ago Ambassador Dobrynin called my office to say that he understood I was leaving for Africa and would like to have our ""long postponed luncheon"" before my departure.
With the exception of an occasional exchange of courtesies at diplomatic functions, this was the first time I had talked with him.
It was a frank, free-wheeling discussion, lasting more than an hour and a half.
Dobrynin's manner was pleasant, with a show of reasonableness and concern about the current drift in SovietAmerican relations.
At my first opportunity, I expressed deep disappointment that no more progress had been made in reducing tensions, and concern over the consequences of a further decline.
I said that since I was speaking wholly unofficially, he should not attempt to read anything into my remarks.
Almost immediately Dobrynin brought up the question of Cuba and expressed worry and surprise at the intensity of United States public reaction.
In response to his question as to why we attached such importance to a relatively small island, I outlined the history of U.S.-Cuban relations and drew a parallel to the situation in 1898, the presence of Spanish misrule, and the United States public agitation that abetted the outbreak of war.
When he protested that the Soviet presence in Cuba was no greater provocation than the United States presence in Turkey, I pointed out that the present Administration had inherited a status quo that had grown up since the war.
In some areas the advantage in this status quo had been with us, in others with Moscow; in still others it was a stand-off.
Our presence in Greece and Turkey, for instance, represented our reaction to Stalin's military and political pressures against these two countries following the war.
It had become part of a status quo which in all its complexity could safely be changed only by negotiation with reciprocal benefits to each side.
The Kennedy Administration had hoped and expected that we could in fact negotiate a more rational set of relationships, easing the various danger points on a basis of reciprocal action to everyone's benefit.
However, in Cuba the U.S.S.R. had unilaterally altered this status quo by introducing a wholly new element.
If this kind of thinking had in fact played a part in the Soviet analysis, it was extremely dangerous.
If we did move into Cuba in response to some overt act or offensive build-up by the U.S.S.R., a global chain of events might be set in motion which could have catastrophic consequences.
For instance, the Soviets might then be tempted to take what they would term ""counteraction"" in Berlin and perhaps Turkey; and the United States, by that time in an extremely tense mood, would react with vigor.
The U.S.S.R., in turn, would feel pressed by the Chinese and other extremists to counter our moves, and we would be on our way together down the long slippery slide.
I urged him to read at least the first few chapters in which he would see a pattern of politico-military action and counteraction that could be repeated in the next six months.
In July 1914, men of intelligence in Russia, Germany, Austria-Hungary, France and England, all quite conscious of the forces which were feeding the approaching holocaust, found themselves enmeshed in internal pressures, commitments and precedents which left them powerless to avoid the inevitable.
It would be the greatest folly in history if we were to repeat this insane process in the nuclear age.
Dobrynin asked me what, in the circumstances, I thought could be done in regard to Cuba.
Stressing that I was speaking solely as an individual, I suggested three moves that the U.S.S.R. could sponsor to ease the situation.
Dobrynin should remind his government of President Kennedy's sharp distinction between defensive and offensive weapons in his recent statement.
I was particularly concerned on this point because current reports indicated that Soviet shipments were in fact beginning to include weapons which had a clearly offensive capacity.
If this continued, it could produce— with the help of some incident perpetrated perhaps by individuals striving to provoke another ""Remember the Maine"" incident-the very conflict which the Administration is anxious to avoid.
President Kennedy had committed himself to act under certain specific circumstances.
This was a clear commitment, and the U.S.S.R. should not take it lightly.
From many reports, Castro now had ample defensive arms with which to protect himself from casual landings.
The U.S.S.R. should tell him that under present circumstances no more arms will be shipped.
The U.S.S.R. should then ask Castro himself to make a statement announcing that the defense of Cuba was assured and that no more arms were needed.
Castro should be asked by Moscow to state that he has no design on his neighbors, that his entire energies would henceforth be devoted to the economic development of Cuba, and that he sought only peaceful competition with other Latin American nations.
His decision not to indulge in further subversion, propaganda, and expansion in neighboring Latin American countries would, of course, have to be confirmed by deeds.
However, Soviet assurances on this point would serve to reduce some of the current tensions and give us all a breathing spell.
If some progress along these lines were not possible, I had deep forebodings about the weeks ahead.
He answered that in spite of our worries, the U.S.S.R. was not shipping offensive weapons and well understood the dangers of doing so.
Moreover, it was unreasonable for the U.S., as a major power, to expect a small, weak country such as Cuba to make such public concessions to United States public opinion even though both the U.S.S.R. and Cuba might accept all three points in principle.
Although the U.S.S.R. could not let Cuba down, they had no desire to complicate the situation further.
Indeed, in 1959 most Americans had strongly applauded Castro's revolution.
If Dobrynin were misinformed about the types of weapons now arriving in Cuba, it would not be the first time in diplomatic history that this had occurred.
As long as Soviet weapons flowed into Cuba and Cuban money was used to subvert Latin American countries which we were striving to assist into the 20th century, the situation would remain dangerously explosive.
I hoped that his government would see the danger and act accordingly to help ease the tensions.
I replied that our government would have no part in such an operation, that we were genuinely worried, and that his government should view the situation with serious concern.
Editorial Note On the morning of October 14, 1962, a U-2 aircraft, piloted by Air Force Major Richard D Heyser, flew a reconnaissance mission over the western part of Cuba, flying from south to north.
Analysis and interpretation of the photographs at the National Photographic Intelligence Center revealed that three medium-range ballistic missile sites were being developed near San Cristobal, in Pinar del Rio province.
Photo analysts counted eight large MRBM transporters at the three locations and four erector launchers in tentative firing positions.
Two further U-2 missions, flown on October 15 by pilots of the Strategic Air Command, revealed a fourth MRBM site near San Cristobal, and two intermediate-range ballistic missile sites were discovered at Guanajay.
Photos also revealed 21 crates for Soviet IL-28 Beagle medium-range bomber aircraft at San Julian airfield.
This was very big news, and its validity would need to be demonstrated clearly to you and others before action could be taken.
The blow-ups and other elements of such a presentation would not be ready before morning.
I was satisfied that the word was going out quietly to those with an immediate need to know.
The one obvious operational need was for more photography, and that was in hand.
It was a hell of a secret, and it must remain one until you had a chance to deal with it.
Thus everything should go on as nearly normally as possible, in particular there should be no hastily summoned meeting Monday night.
Chip Bohlen and I, for example, should not leave a dinner at my house where there were knowledgeable foreign guests, and others, I knew, were in the same spot.
On the other hand this was not something that could be dealt with on the phone except in the most limited and cryptic terms.
So I decided that a quiet evening and a night of sleep were the best preparation you could have in the light of what would face you in the next days.
Editorial Note On October 15, 1962, a major amphibious exercise was initiated in the southeastern United States and the Caribbean.
On October 15 more than 40 ships involved in the exercise were underway.
The objective of the exercise was to conduct an amphibious assault on Vieques Island, Puerto Rico.
The stated intent of the assault was to overthrow the imaginary tyrant ""Ortsac""— Castro spelled backwards.
Approximately 20,000 naval personnel and 4,000 marines were involved in PHIBRIGLEX-62.
The CINCLANT history of the missile crisis notes that ""as early as about 10 October the National Military Command Center began inquiring informally of CINCLANT as to the nature and scope of PHIBRIGLEX-62.
For Taylor's draft account of this meeting, October 16, including a list of participants, and Carter's memorandum for the record, dictated on October 17, see the Supplement.
McGeorge Bundy had informed the President about the U-2 photographs of the missile sites at 8:45m.
October 16, and Kennedy immediately called for a meeting of his principal advisers at 11:45.
Uh, they, uh, seemed to be denying that they were going to establish bases of their own [words unintelligible] with a Soviet base, thus making it Cuban point of view.
The point where we [make or think?], that is the, uh, overwhelming, overriding necessity to take all the risks that are involved doing that.
Uh, or we're going to decide that this is the time to eliminate the Cuban problem by actually eliminating the island.
And I think there are certain military, um, uh, actions that we could, we might well want to take straight away.
That, uh, we then would move openly and vigorously into the, into the guerrilla field, and, uh, create maximum confusion on the island. won't be too squeemish at this point about the overtness, covert of what is being done.
We get Miro Cardona and his group in, Manuel Rey and his group, and see if they won't get together on a progressive junta.
Uh, that would pretty well combine all principal elements, other than the Batista group, as the leaders of Cuba.
And, uh, have them, give them more of a status, whether we proceed to full recognition or not is something else, but get, get the Cuban elements highly organized on this matter.
In any event, we would be prepared, following the air strike, for an air, invasion, both by air and by sea.
Approximately seven days after the start of the air strike, that would be possible if the political environment made it desirable or necessary at that time.
Then, virtually concurrently, an air strike against, as the Secretary said, missiles, airfields, uh, unclear sites that we know of.
What it'd give 'em is primary, it makes the launching base, uh, for short range missiles against the United States to supplement their rather ICBM system, for example.
I think it's really rather unrealistic to think that we could carry out an air attack of the kind we're talking about.
We're talking about an air attack of several hundred sorties because we don't know where these airplanes are.
We're not prepared to report to you exactly, uh, what the Cuban air force is capable of; but I think we must assume that the Cuban air force is definitely capable of penetrating, in small numbers, our coastal air defense by coming in low over the water.
And I would think that we would not dare go in against the missile sites, knock those out leaving intact Castro's air force, and run the risk that he would use part or all of that air force against our coastal areas— either with or without nuclear weapons.
It would be a, a very heavy price to pay in United States lives for the, the damage we did to Cuba.
Uh, we hope to take out a vast majority in the first strike, but this is not just one thing, one strike, one day, but continuous air attack for whenever necessary, whenever we di-, discover a target.
Bundy: I do raise again the question whether, uh, whether we the problem, military problem, but there is, I would think, a substantial political advantage in limiting the strike in surgical terms to the thing that is in fact the cause of action.
I suggest, Mr President, that if you're involved in several hundred strikes, this is what you would-and against airfields— this is what you would do, pre-invade.
And, uh, it would be very difficult to convince anybody that this was not a pre-invasion strike.
I think also once you get this volume of attack that public opinion reaction, uh, to this, as distinct from the reaction to an invasion, uh, there's little difference.
And, uh, from both standpoints, it would seem to me that if you're talking about a, a general air attack program, you might as well think about whether we can eradicate the whole problem by an invasion just as simply with as little chance of reaction.
Well, I would think we would have, should be in a position to invade at any time if we so desired.
Well, let's say we just take out the missile bases, then, uh, they have some more there.
Obviously they can get 'em in by submarine and so on, I don't know whether you, you just can't keep high strikes on.
We set up a, uh, new security classification governing precisely the field of offensive capability in Cuba just five days ago, four days ago, under General Carter.
Oh, that will be a very large number, but that's not generally where leaks come from.
Well, Mr President, I, I think, to be realistic, we should assume that this will become fairly widely known, if not in the newspapers, at least by political representatives of both parties within-I would, I'm just picking a figure-Id say a week.
We have stopped all that, and this, this type of information is going on throughout the department.
And I, I doubt very much that we can keep this out of the hands of, uh, of members of Congress, for example, for more than a week.
Well, Senator Keating has already, in effect, announced it on the floor of the Senate.
I think we can count on announcing it not later than Thursday or Friday of this week.
There is a refugee who's a major source of intelligence on this, of course, who has described one of these missiles in terms which we can recognize, who is now in this country.
My question, Mr President, is whether as a matter of, uh, tactics we ought not to interview Senator Keating and check out his data.
Seems to me that that ought to be done in a routine sort of way by an open officer of the intelligence agency.
I think that, uh, we're committed at any time that we feel that there's a build up that in any way endangers to take whatever action we must take to assure our security.
I spent the weekend with the ambassadors of the Organization of American States.
And, I, the fact that we're talking about our other allies, uh, I take the position that Mr Bundy says, We ought to be living all these years with get your blood pressure up.
One, one of the points you make-that any time the build up endangers or threatens our security in any way, we're going to do whatever must be done immediately to protect our own security.
Uh, I think we have to be prudent and cautious, talk to the commanders and see what they say, what they're .... not much for circularizing it over the Hill or our allies, even though I realize it's a breach of faith.
There are perhaps two or three of our principal allies or heads of government we could communicate, at least on a 24-hour notice basis.
Well, I would think it's almost incumbent upon the Russians, then, to say, Well, we're going to send them in again, and if you do it again, we're going to do, we're going to do the same thing to Turkey, or We're going to do the same thing to Iran.
We ought to just decide who we talk to and how long ahead and how many people, really, in the government.
There's going to be a difference between those who know that-this will leak out in the next few days— there are these, uh, uh, bases, until we say or the Pentagon or State won't be harsh.
Maybe a lot of people know about what's there, but what we're going to do about it really ought to be, you know, the tightest of all because otherwise we botch it up.
Mr President, may I suggest that we come back this afternoon prepared to, to answer three questions.
Another memorandum for the record of this meeting, drafted by Parrott, is ibid.
At 2:30 this afternoon, the Attorney General convened in his office a meeting on Operation Mongoose consisting of General Lansdale and Colonel Patchell, General Johnson of the Joint Staff, Robert Hurwitch of State , Hewson Ryan of USIA, and the undersigned.
He traced the history of General Lansdale's personal appointment by the President a year ago.
The Attorney General then stated that in view of this lack of progress, he was going to give Operation Mongoose more personal attention.
The Attorney General spoke favorably of the sabotage paper which had been presented by General Carter this morning to the meeting of the Special Group 71/ He obviously did not like the earlier memorandum, since he felt it showed no ""push"" in getting on with the acts of sabotage.
When asked for my comments, I stated that we were prepared to get on with the new action program and that we would execute it aggressively.
I pointed out, however, that the objective of Operation Mongoose would have to be determined at some point since the Cubans with whom we have to work were seeking a reason for risking their lives in these operations.
I related my conversation with the young Cuban from the DRE who pointed out that they were willing to commit their people only on operations which they regarded as sensible.
I defined ""sensible"" in Cuban terminology these days as meaning an action which would contribute to the liberation of their country, another way of saying that the United States, perhaps in conjunction with other Latin countries, would bail them out militarily.
He said that these meetings might later be changed to every other day when and if he finds a daily get-together is not necessary.
Khrushchev said he wanted to express his disappointment at one thing that adds fuel to fire of the cold war, namely, that United States now is trying to stop Soviet airplanes from flying to Cuba.
After I interjected confirmation, he said they regard this as unfriendly act.
United States was boycotting trade with Cuba and appealing to all countries to stop their ships from going there.
Khrushchev said that what United States was doing complicated life of simple people and did not simplify it.
When last war started in USSR, on third or fourth day, a certain General came to him, where he was serving as member of military council of front, and said everything was lost, just as in France.
General went to sleep that night and next morning came into peasant hut in which Khrushchev was staying and shot himself.
He was a coward, lost his self-control, and let his nerves dominate his mind.
Not only US, but all Western Hemisphere countries, feel Castro has let Cuban people down.
United States and other Western Hemisphere states are not going to help Cuba.
Speaking as frankly as he had, I felt I must add that size of Soviet shipments to Cuba has increased feeling in United States on this problem.
Khrushchev said we must be responsible, since our countries are great powers.
We cannot demand that other countries live as we like or there would be war.
United States has bases in countries neighboring USSR, such as Turkey, as well as in Greece, Italy, France, West Germany and Pakistan.
USSR does not recognize right of United States to be everywhere in world and to rule everywhere.
It was one thing when United States was very powerful, but now there is a force as great as yours.
Let's respect internal affairs of other countries and not interfere with life of other countries.
President has made it clear we are not going to interfere in Cuba by force.
But we are not going to help Cuba, which does not mean we intend to interfere there.
Khrushchev accepted this, saying he also understood President that way but must still express his disappointment about blockade, which is inimical action.
You should trade with Cuba, as we do with Turkey and other of your allies.
Following the first meeting at the White House the JCS and the commanders involved with Cuba planning met at 4:30 m.
They were joined by McNamara at 5:40m., and agreed that all significant military targets in Cuba and not just the missiles should be attacked.
Following the 6:30m. meeting many of the participants went to the Department of State for further discussions, which ended at approximately IIm.
FRC 65 A 3501, Cuba, 1962) No other record of these discussions has been found.
There's good evidence of their back-up missiles for each of the four launchers at each of the three sites, so that there would be twice the number for a total of eight which could eventually be erected.
This would mean a capability of from sixteen or possibly twenty-four missiles.
We feel, on the basis of information that we presently have, that these are solid propellant, inertial guidance missiles with eleven-hundred-mile range rather than the oxygen propellant, uh, radar-controlled.
Primarily because we have no indication of any radar or any indication of any oxygen equipment.
And it would appear to be logical from an intelligence estimate viewpoint that if they are going to this much trouble that they would go ahead and put in the eleven hundred miles because of the tremendously increased threat coverage.
Let me see that 71/ /I/All brackets except those citing declassification excisions and unrelated material are in the source text.
It was drawn in, uh, some time ago, I believe, but the ranges there are the nominal ranges of the missiles rather than the maximum.
It would appear that with this type of missile, with the solid propellant and inertial guidance system, that they could well be operational within two weeks as we look at the pictures now.
They'll have a refire rate of from four to six hours over each launcher.
They're not nearly as vulnerable as the oxygen propellant, but they are vulnerable to ordinary rifle fire.
We have no evidence whatsoever of any nuclear warhead storage near the field launchers.
However, ever since last February we have been observing an unusual facility which now has automatic anti-aircraft weapon protection.
There are some similarities, but also many points of dissim-, similarity between this particular facility and the national storage sites in the Soviet Union.
It's the best candidate for a site, and we have that marked for further surveillance.
However, there is really totally inadequate evidence to say that there is a nuclear storage capability now.
And they have a four-in-line deployment pattern in launchers which is identical— complexes about five miles apart-representative of the deployments that we note in the Soviet Union for similar missiles.
Well, our people estimate that these could be fully operational within two weeks.
It would be considerably longer since we don't have any indication of, uh, oxygen refueling there nor any radars.
This wouldn't rule out the possibility that one of them might be operational very much sooner.
Our people feel that this has been, being put in since probably early September.
We have had two visits of a Soviet ship that has an eight-foot-hold capacity sideways.
And this about, so far, is the only delivery vehicle that we would have any suspicion that they came in on.
But, uh, part of the central and, in fact, much of the central and part of the eastern was cloud covering.
If the weather is not good, we'll start off with two and we'll have the others ready to go during the day as the weather improves.
We have weather aircraft surrounding the periphery of Cuba, and we'll be able to keep track of the weather during the day over all parts of the island.
We are planning to do this, or have the capability to do this, every day thereafter for an indefinite period.
This is a field-type missile, and from collateral evidence, not direct, that we have with the Soviet Union, it's designed to be fielded, placed and fired in six hours.
Uh, it would appear that we have caught this in a very early stage of deployment.
It would also appear that there does not seem to be the degree of urgency in getting them immediately into position.
Or it could be because it is the shorter-range missile and the radars and the oxygen has not yet arrived.
I don't mean to go behind your judgment here, except that there's one thing that would be really catastrophic would be to make a judgment here on, on a bad guess as to whether these things are.
Only that from the read-out that we have now and in the judgment of our analysts and of the guided missile and astronautics committee, which has been convening all afternoon, these signatures are identical with those that we have clearly earmarked in the Soviet Union, and have fully verified.
We, uh, know something from the range firings that we have vetted for the past two years.
And we know also from comparison with the characteristics of our own missiles as to size and length and diameter.
Uh, as to these particular missiles, we have a family of Soviet missiles for which we have all accepted the, uh, specifications.
Well, we know from a number of sources, including our Ironbark sources, as well as from range firings, which we have been vetting for several years, as to the capabilities.
But, uh, I would have to get the analysts in here to give you the play-by-play account.
In other words, if they are missiles this size, they are missiles of considerable range, I think.
I tried to prove today— I am, I'm satisfied— that these were not MRBMs.
I got our experts out, and I could not find evidence that would support any conclusion other than that they are MRBMs.
Now, whether they're eleven-hundred miles, six-hundred mile, nine-hundred mile is still a guess in my opinion.
But that they are MRBMs seems the most probable assumption at the moment.
The one is, um, the chance that, uh, this might be the issue on which, uh, Castro would elect to break with Moscow if he knew that he were in deadly jeopardy.
But, in any event, um, we, we're very much, uh, interested in the possibility of a direct message to Castro, uh, as well as Khrushchev, might make some sense here before an actual strike is put on.
Uh, Mr Martin will present you with outline, uh, the kind of, uh, message to Castro that, uh, we had in mind.
Uh, first, uh, describing just what we know about what exists in th-, the missile sites, so that he knows that we are informed about what's going on.
Uh, second, to point out that the issues this raises as far as the United States security is concerned, it's a breach of two of the points that you have made public.
Uh, first, the ground-to-ground missile, and, second, obviously, it's a Soviet-operated base in Cuba.
Uh, thirdly, this raises the greatest problems for Castro, as we see it.
In the first place, uh, by this action the Soviets have, uh, threatened him with attack from the United States, and, uh, therefore the overthrow of his regime; used his territory to, uh, make this, uh, to put him in this jeopardy.
And, secondly, the Soviets are talking to other people about the possibility of bargaining this support and these missiles, uh, against concessions in Berlin and elsewhere, and therefore are threatening to, to bargain him away.
Uh, in these circumstances, we wonder whether he, uh, realizes the, the position that, uh, he's been put in and the way the Soviets are using him.
Then go on to say that, uh, we will have to inform our people of the threat that exists here, and we mean to take action about it in the next day or so.
And we'll have to do this unless we receive word from him that he is prepared to take action to get the Soviets out of the site.
Uh, he will have to show us that not only by statements, privately or publicly, but, uh, by action; that we intend to, uh, keep close surveillance by overflights of the site to make su-, to know what is being done.
But we will have to know that he is doing something to remove this threat, uh, in order to withhold the action that we intend to, we will be compelled to take.
Uh, if, uh, Castro feels that an attempt by him to take the kind of action that we're suggesting to him, uh, would result in serious difficulties for him within Cuba, we at least want him to know that, uh, er, to, and to convey to him and remind him of the statement that you, Mr President, made a year and a half ago in effect that there are two points that are non-negotiable.
One is the Soviet tie and presence, and the second is aggression in Latin America.
This is a, a hint, but no more than that, that, uh, we might have sympathy and help for him in case he ran into trouble trying to throw the old-line Communists and the Soviets out.
The disadvantage in that is, of course, the, uh, the advance notice if he judges that we, we would not in this, in such approach here say exactly what we would do, but, uh, it might, of course, lead him to bring up mobile anti-aircraft weapons around these, uh, missiles themselves, uh, or, uh, take some other action that will make the strike that more difficult.
Uh, if we strike these missiles, we would expect, I think, uh, maximum Communist reaction in Latin America.
In the case of about six of those governments, unless the heads of government had some intimation, uh, requiring some preparatory steps from the security point of view, uh, one or another of those governments could easi-, uh, could easily be overthrown— they, Venezuela for example or Guatemala, Bolivia, Chile, possibly even Mexico-uh, and therefore, uh, uh, the question will arise as to whether we should not somehow, uh, indicate to them in some way the seriousness of the situation so they can take precautionary steps, whether we tell them exactly what we have in mind or, or not.
Um, we, uh, we would estimate that the Soviets, uh, would almost certainly take, uh, some kind of action somewhere.
Um, for us to, to take an action of this sort without letting, uh, our closer allies know of a matter which could subject them to very great, uh, danger, uh, is a very, uh, far-reaching decision to make.
And, uh, we could find ourselves, uh, isolated and the alliance crumbling, very much as it did for a period during the Suez affair, but at a moment of much greater danger over an issue of much greater danger than the Suez affair, for the alliance.
I think that these are matters that we'll be working on very hard this evening, but I think I ought to mention them because it's, uh, necessarily a part of this problem.
Uh, General Taylor has just been with the Chiefs, and the unified commanders went through this, uh, in detail.
Uh, to take out only the missiles, uh, or to take out the missiles and the MIG aircraft and the associated nuclear storage facilities if we locate them, uh, could be done in twenty-four-hours' warning.
That is to say, twenty-four hours between the time of decision and the time of strike, uh, starting with a decision no later than, no earlier than this coming Friday and with the strike therefore on Saturday ,/3/ or anytime thereafter with twenty-four hours between the decision and time of strike.
Uh, General Taylor will wish to comment on this, but the Chiefs are strong in their recommendation against that kind of an attack, believing that it would leave, uh, too great a capability in Cuba undestroyed.
The specific number of sorties required to, to accomplish this end has not been worked out in detail.
The capability is for something in excess of seven hundred sorties per day.
Uh, it seems highly unlikely that that number would be required to carry out that limited an objective, but at least that capability is available in the air force alone, and the navy sorties would rise on top of that number.
The Chiefs have also considered other alternatives extending into the full invasion, uh, you may wish to discuss later.
Could be done with twenty-four-hours' notice and would require, uh, a relatively small number of sorties, less than a day's air attack, in other words.
But we then have to come back day after day for several days-we said, uh, five days perhaps-to do the complete job.
Uh, meanwhile, we could then be making up our mind as to whether or not to go on and invade the island.
I'm very much impressed with the need for a time something like five to seven days for this air purpose because of the parachute aspect of the in-, proposed invasion.
You can't take parachute formations, close formations of, uh, troop carrier planes in in the face of any air opposition really.
So the first job, before the, any land, uh, attack, including , is really cleaning out the, the MIGs and the, uh, the accompanying aircraft.
Because the danger of starting military action after they acquire a nuclear capability is so great I believe we would decide against it, particularly if that nuclear capability included aircraft as well as, as, uh, uh, missiles, as it well might at that point.
Now this lies short of military action against Cuba, direct military action against Cuba.
But the third course of action is any one of these variants of military action directed against Cuba, starting with an air attack against the missiles.
And to move from that into the more extensive air attacks against the MIGs, against the airfields, against the potential nuclear storage sites, against the radar installations, against the SAM sites means, as, as Max suggested, possibly seven hundred to a thousand sorties per day for five days.
This is the very, very rough plan that the Chiefs have outlined, and it is their judgment that that is the type of air attack that should be carried out.
To move beyond that into an invasion following the air attack means the application of tens of thousands, between ninety and, and, uh, over a hundred and fifty thousand men to the invasion forces.
Is a great possibility they can place them in operational condition quickly.
Unless, as General Carter said, the system may have a, a normal reaction time, set-up time of six hours.
Whether it has six hours or two weeks, we don't know how much time has started, nor do we know what air-launch capabilities they have for warheads.
We don't know what air-launch capability they have for high explosives.
It's almost certainly, uh, a, a substantial high-explosive capability in the sense that they could drop one or two or ten high-explosive bombs some place along the East Coast.
And that's the minimum risk to this country we run as a result of advance warning, too.
We are very vulnerable to conventional bombing attack, low-level bombing attacks in the Florida area.
So it would be entirely possible for MIGs to come through with conventional weapons and do some amount, some damage.
I would not think that they would use a nuclear weapon unless they're prepared to a nuclear war, I don't think.
That would mean that, uh, we could be just utterly wrong, but, uh, we've never really believed that, that Khrushchev would take on a general nuclear war over Cuba.
We'd have to target them with our missiles and have the same kind of, of pistol-pointed-at-the-head situation as we have in the Soviet Union at the present time.
No question, if this thing goes on, an attack on Cuba becomes general war.
We have a war plan over there for you, calls for a, uh, for a quarter of a million Americans-soldiers, marines and airmen-to take an island we launched eighteen hundred Cubans against a year and a half ago.
Well, it's a psychological factor that we have sat back and let v em do it to us, that is more important than the direct threat.
Let's say we, twenty-four hours ahead of our doing something about it, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] we make a public statement that these have been found on the island.
I think that, uh, uh, anything that shows, uh, our intent to strike is going to place the airplanes and, and the missiles into, these are por-, really mobile missiles.
I think before you make any announcements, you should decide whether you're going to strike.
Well, the only announ-, the only advantage is, it's a kind of ultimatum, it's, there is an opportunity of a response that, which would preclude it.
I mean it's, it's more, a more, for, for the appearance than as for the reality.
Ball?: Uh, and, uh, that this is, you're going to have to do this, you're compelled and you've gotta move quickly and you want them to know it.
And then the question of what you do with these Latin American governments is another matter.
Uh, it corresponds to the, the punishment fits the crime in political terms, that we are doing only what we warned repeatedly and publicly we would have to do.
I'd have to say first find out, uh, the air, so that I would think that we ought to be in position to do one and two.
One would be just taking out these missiles, if there were others we'd find in the next twenty-four hours.
Okay, well, let's say we've decided, uh, we've gotta go in the whole way.
Mr President, it requires no action other than what's been started, and you can make a decision prior to the start Saturday or any time thereafter.
The Secretary has given you the, the time, the minimum time is to make a decision, uh, now to, so that we can brief the pilots and then crank in the new intelligence.
And Sweeney has said that he will take the tape that comes in tomorrow and process it Thursday and Friday and prepare the mission folders for strikes on Saturday or earl-, every day thereafter.
And there'll be, oh, would say four hundred pilots will have to go, to be briefed in the course of this.
So I'm just saying this is widening the, the whole military scope of this thing very materially, if that's what we're, we're supposed to do at this time.
The President does not have to make any decision until twenty-four hours before the strike, except the decision to be prepared.
And the process of preparation will not in itself run the risk of overt disclosure of the preparation.
I'd like to say this, Mr President, the more time you can give, the better.
The problem is that we don't have the unknown targets, specifically these, these, uh, missile-launchers and the nuclear storage, and we won't have that until tomorrow night at the earliest, and it'll be processed photographically on Thursday, interpreted Thursday night, turned into target folders on Friday, and the mission could go Saturday.
This is Sweeney's estimate of the earliest possible time for a spare strike against the missiles.
McNamara: . . . more than twenty-four hours between the time of decision and the first strike, it will run more smoothly.
First, we need to develop a specific strike plan limited to the missiles and the nuclear storage sites, which we have not done.
Since you've indicated some interest in that possibility, we ought to provide you that option.
The second thing we ought to do, it seems to me as a government, is to consider the consequences.
McNamara: ... of any of these actions satisfactorily, and because we haven't considered the consequences, I'm not sure we're taking all the action we ought to take now to minimize those.
I, I don't know quite what kind of a world we live in after we've struck Cuba, and we, we've started it.
We've put let's say a hundred sorties in, just for purposes of illustration, I don't think you dare start with less than a hundred.
Well, you have twenty-four, you have twenty-four, uh, laun-, uh, vehicles, plus, uh, sixteen launchers, plus a possible nuclear storage site, but there's the absolute minimum that you would wish to kill.
And you couldn't possibly go in after those with less than, I would think, uh, fifty to a hundred sorties.
Uh, Mr President, I should say that the, the Chiefs and the commanders feel so strongly about the, the dangers inherent in the limited strike, that they would prefer taking no military action rather than to take strike.
I quite agree that the, if just thinking about Cuba, the best thing to do is to be bold if you're thinking about trying to get this thing under some degree of, uh, control.
In that regard, Mr President, there is a combination of the plans which might be considered, namely the limited strike and then the messages, or simultaneously the messages to Khrushchev and Castro, which would indicate to them that this was none other than simply the, fulfilling the statements we've made all along.
It seems to me a limited strike plus planning for invasion five days afterwards, to be taken unless something untoward occurs, makes much more sense.
First thing, Mr President, my, my inclination all against, against the invasion, but none the less trying to eliminate as effectively as possible every weapon that can strike the United States.
This is why I say I, I think we have to think of the consequences here.
I, I would think an, a forced invasion, uh, associated with assisting an uprising, following an extensive air strike, is, is a highly probable set of circumstances.
I don't know whether you could carry out an extensive air strike of, let's say, the kind we were talking about a moment ago-seven hundred sorties a day for five days-without an uprising in Cuba.
Well, when you're talking about military targets, we have seven hundred targets here we're talking about.
It seems to me if we go in there, lock-stock-and-barrel, we can consider them entirely Cuban.
Ah, well, what we say for political purposes and what we think are not identical here.
Khrushchev himself would never, would never risk a major war on, on a fellow as obviously erratic, uh, and foolish as, as Castro.
We think, Mr President, that under any of these plans we will probably get an attack on, on Guantanamo, at least by, by fire.
They have artillery and mortars in the, easily within range, and, uh, any of these actions we take we'll have to give air support to Guantanamo and probably reinforce the garrison.
Well, that's why, uh, it seems to me that, uh, this, if we decide that we are going to be in a position to do this, either one and two Saturday or Sunday, then I would think we would also want to be in a position, depending on what happens, either because of an invasion, attack on Guantanamo or some other reason to do the inva-, uh, to, to do the eviction.
I just wanted, I just wanted, I thought we ought to be moving, I don't want to waste any time though if we decide that, uh, time is not particularly with us.
I just think we ought to be ready to do something, even if we decide not to do it.
I would say that my answer would be largely planning, particularly in the field of mobilization, just what we wan-, uh, what we will, uh, want to recreate after we, uh, [words unintelligible] these forces to Cuba.
I might say that air defense measures we're going to, we're started to take already.
We moved more fighters into the southeastern United States and gradually improving some of our, our patrol procedures, uh, under the general guise of, uh, of preparations for that part of the country.
We don't think there'd be any, any leaks there that might react against our military targets.
I, I'd repeat that our defenses have always been weak in that part of the country.
No, sir, I believe that the military planning has been carried on for a considerable period of time, is well under way.
And I believe that all the preparations that we could take without the risk of preparations causing discussion and knowledge of this, either among our public or in Cuba, have been taken and are authorized; all the necessary reconnaissance measures are being taken and are authorized.
The only thing we haven't done, really, is to consider fully these alternatives.
This may be incidental, Mr President, but if we're going to get the prisoners out this would be a good time to get them out.
It's not a very loud noise to raise at a meeting of this sort, but I think it would need your approval.
Most of them relate to infiltration of raiders, and will simply be deniable internal Cuban activities.
The question that we need guidance from you on is whether you now wish to authorize sabotage which might have its impact on neutrals or even friendly ships.
We want to have from the department tomorrow in a little bit more concise form whether there is any kind of a we have to give.
Mr Secretary, some of the staff are in trouble with the dinner for Schroeder tomorrow night.
It would be a great improvement not to have any more intense White House meetings— trouble with all the if we could meet at the State Department tomorrow.
All right, then I could meet you, Mac, when I get back tomorrow and just as well, whatever the thing is and then we can meet Thursday morning.
I'm going to see Gromyko Thursday and I think the question that I'd really like to have is some sort of a judgment on, is whether we ought to do anything with Gromyko.
Whether we ought to say anything to him; whether we ought to, uh, indirectly give him sort of a, give him an ultimatum on this matter, or whether we just ought to go ahead without him.
The Attorney General, the ambassador told the Attorney General, as he told Bohlen the other day that they were not going to put these weapons there.
Whether the Attorney General saw Dobrynin— not acting as if we had any information about 'emsaid that, of course, that they must realize that if this ever does happen that this is going to cause this, give a very clear indication of what's going to happen.
What we'd be, Bobby would be saying to them, in short, is if these ever come up that we're going to do, the present state would have to take action.
And, uh, this [words unintelligible], uh, this could cause the most far-reaching consequences.
On the possibility that that might cause them to reconsider their action.
I can't understand their viewpoint, if they're aware of what we said at the press conferences.
Taylor: Why it's, I mean there's evidence of sightings in late August, I think, and early September of, of some sort.
It seems to me, Mr President, there's, in your public presentation, simultaneous or subsequent to an action, your hand is strengthened somewhat if the Soviets have, uh, lied to you, either privately or in public.
JFK: I don't know enough about the Soviet Union, but if anybody can tell me any other time since the Berlin blockade where the Russians have given us so clear provocation, I don't know when it's been, because they've been awfully cautious really.
Now, maybe our mistake was in not saying some time before this summer that if they do this we're [word unintelligible] to act.
Well, I was asking Pat if they had any way of getting quick intelligence, that means somebody in there and out of there so we can really take a look on the ground.
Uh, we can try it, but your problems about exfiltration and your problems with training an individual as to what to look for are not handled in twenty-four hours.
McNamara: . . . using the low-flying planes until shortly before the intention to strike.
This was considered by the, by the co-, commanders today, and they're all of that opinion that the, the loss of surprise would there, was more serious than the, the information we'd get from that.
I would think it would be very valuable to have them go in shortly before the strike, just to build the evidence.
I mean, when you've got pictures that really show what you were, what was there.
We, uh, have a lot on that to discuss which, uh, was halfway in early in the morning.
The big issue that has come up is Schroeder makes a very strong case for refusing visas on the grounds that he thinks that, uh, that would undermine morale in Berlin in a very dangerous way.
I would suggest that we get into this hot water partly because of this.
I would suggest that we, uh, divide the, the, uh, series of targets up by, in effect, numbers of DGZs and, uh, and, uh, numbers of sorties required to take those out for a series of alternatives starting only with the missiles and working up through the nuclear storage sites and the MIGs and the, er, and the SAMs and so on.
So we can say, This target system would take so many points, eighty points and so many objects would take so many sorties to knock out.
What I would suggest is that someone be deputized to, to do a piece of paper which really is what happens.
I think the margin is between whether we take out the strike or take a lot of air bases.
Now, doesn't, overwhelmingly, it may substantially if it doesn't overwhelmingly change the world.
The question is how to get ahead with that, and whether, uh, I would think, myself, that it, it, it, the appropriate place to make this preliminary analysis is at the Department of State.
I think the rest of us ought to spend the evening really to some advantage separately trying to have our own views of this.
And I think we should meet in order, at least, to trade pieces of paper, before two o'clock, uh, tomorrow morning if that's agreeable.
Uh, the situation is that the only one who's tied up tonight is, is the Secretary and he is coming down at eleven o'clock from his dinner to look at what we will have done in the meantime.
Well, the, the, the argument was really between, uh, Hilsman's demonologists, who were already cut in because they your boots, who thought this was a low-risk operation.
Tommy thought it was a high-risk operation by the Soviets, in other words they were taking real chances.
Other people rather thought that they, they probably had miscalculated us and thought this wasn't a risky operation.
Ball?: . . . either impatient like the SAM sites hadn't been set up to protect it, the various factors which suggest to them that they didn't think anything was gonna happen.
Could I suggest that tonight we actually draft a paper and it start this way— just a paragraph or two of, of the knowns.
Let's say the, the probable knowns, because we're not certain of any of them.
The probabilities are that they won't be operational in less than X days, although we can't be certain.
Another known I'd put in is that they have about fifty X, uh, MIGs,-15,-17 and-19s; that they have certain crated, uh, I've forgotten, say, ten, er, X crated MIG-21s, only one of which we believe to have been assembled.
They have X crated IL-28s, none of which we believe to have been assembled.
But then I would follow that by the, the alternatives of, not all of them but the more likely alternatives that we consider open to us.
And would hope we could stay just a second here and see if we could sketch them out now.
I would like to throw one in that I do not think the army and the Chiefs would normally consider, and that is, uh, the possibility of genuinely making a quite large-scale, uh, strike, followed by a drop, followed by a recovery of the people dropped to get these things and not simply to increase the chance that we've hit most of them.
There's always unc-, incompleteness in a military opera-, in an air operation.
But if these things are what the pictures show, you could drop a batallion of paratroopers and get 'em.
I think the risk troubles me, it's too great in relation to the risk of not knowing whether we get them.
Well, it's just exactly this problem, that, that, uh, if Cuba should possess a capacity to carry out offensive actions against the U.S., the United States would act.
This is the, this is the problem, but I've thought something about the others this afternoon.
And I think there is, at least in the sense of the Cuban uprising, which I happen to believe is a most important element of category three, it applies to some elements in categ-, some categories of category three, but not all.
McNamara: . . . under that heading we've got a whole series of precautionary measures that we, we think, uh, should be taken.
I ought to, uh, join the President for the meeting with Schroe-der and I'll be involved in getting some, started for that until ten o'-, uh, from about nine-thirty on.
We'll, we'll go to work tonight and get these numbers of sorties by target systems laid out.
I'll, Reilly's up in Mac's office and I'll go down there now and get them started on it.
MEMORANDUM OF MEETING ATTENDED IN SECRETARY BALL'S CONFERENCE ROOM BY SECRETARY MCNAMARA, BUNDY, GENERAL TAYLOR, ROBERT KENNEDY, MARTIN AND MCCONE AT 0830, 17 OCTOBER 1.
Meeting involved an inclusive exploration of alternatives open to us in connection with the Cuban matter.
Stated Kohler discussions with Khrushchev did not fit in with Soviet action in Cuba./l/ Suggested Cuban situation might be by inadvertance.
Suggested we might give Khrushchev an ""out"" on the grounds that he does not know what is going on in Cuba and discussed various types of action ranging from a limited military strike to minimize losses to the calling of a Summit conference.
During the discussion Taylor and Ball speculated as to whether this whole thing was not a ""mock up"" designed to draw out action by us, and that the war heads were not there.
McNamara urged avoiding taking a position, considering all alternatives, with meetings this afternoon and this evening in preparation of final discussion with the President tomorrow.
About 50 or 60 MIG 17s and 19s now in Cuba and these apparently have no offensive capability.
Warhead locations unknown; also unknown whether MRBM's are nuclear or conventional.
Also feels that if nuclear warheads supplied them Soviet will also supply nuclear bombs for bombers with offensive capability.
Sited at Havana, mysterious excavations, revetments, covered buildings, railroad tracks through tunnels, etc., might be nuclear storage site.
General Taylor and Thompson discussed political nature of problem including possibility of forcing settlement in Berlin and elsewhere— Khrushchev wished show down on Berlin and this gave a show down issue.
Thompson emphasized Khrushchev wants Berlin settlement but on his terms.
Also Khrushchev recognizes that action by us would be devisive among our allies.
McCone reviewed recent Chicadee reports, indicated considerable autonomy in hands of field commanders much more so than we have.
The Deputy Secretary of Defense's handwritten notes on the day are in the Supplement.
The purpose of the discussion was to develop a plan of action in connection with Cuba, and the alternatives are summarized in my memorandum of October 18th addressed to USIB, copy of which is attached.
Secretary Ball emphasized the importance of time, stating that if action was over quickly, the repercussions would not be too serious.
The Attorney General raised the question of the attitude of Turkey, Italy, Western European countries, all of which have been ""under the gun"" for years, and would take the position that now that the United States has a few missiles in their backyard, they become hysterical.
Secretary McNamara made the point that missiles in Cuba had no great military consequence because of the stalemate mentioned in my October 18th memorandum.
General Taylor supported this view in the early parts of the discussion, but in the later meetings expressed increasing concern over the importance of the missile threat from Cuba.
Nevertheless, he and McCone felt that a complex of MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba would have very important military significance.
McNamara took issue claiming that the military equation would not be changed by the appearance of these missiles.
Bohlen and Thompson questioned the real purpose of the Soviet's actions in Cuba and seemed to feel that their acts may be in preparation for a confrontation with President Kennedy at which time they would seek to settle the entire subject to overseas bases as well as the Berlin question.
McCone indicated this might be one of several objectives and undoubtedly would be the subject of discussion at the time of confrontation; however, McCone doubted that this was the prime purpose of such an elaborate and expensive installation as the Soviets were going forward with in Cuba.
Bohlen seemed to favor precipitating talks, and was supported by Thompson.
SecDef and Taylor both objected to political talks because it would give time for threatening missiles to become operational and also give the Soviets an opportunity to camouflage the missiles.
McCone pre-sented most recent photographs and indicated CIA opinion that the first missiles will be operational within one or two weeks.
McNamara agreed that this would be desirable but emphasized the importance of developing sequence of events which would lead to military action.
There followed an extensive discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of a military blockade, total or partial.
It was at this point that McNamara and Taylor presented their schedule of alternative military strikes, copy of which is attached, and which was the subject of continual discussion in the ensuing meetings.
McCone gave an intelligence estimate on the effects of a blockade, indicating its seriousness would depend upon how ""hard"" a blockade it turned out to be, and finally stated that the main objective of taking Cuba away from Castro had been lost and we have been overly consumed with the missile problem.
There is not much profit in preliminary exchanges with Khrushchev and Castro because the President has said that the establishment of Soviet bases and offensive weapons in the Western Hemisphere would raise serious problems and therefore on September 5th and 13th/7/ the President has in effect warned both Khrushchev and Castro.
Rusk continued that more talks with Khrushchev would result in extended parlays and therefore he recommended against such an approach.
McNamara raised innumerable questions concerning military operations; the manner in which the strike could be properly covered with protective air and how it might be restricted and also the advisability of case one, as contrasted with case one, two and/or three.
General Taylor at this point spoke in favor of a military strike taking out the MRBMs and the planes as well, and was supported by McCone, who took the opportunity to cover the points set forth in ""talking paper for principals, October 17, 1962,"" attached.
At the conclusion of the meetings, which served the purpose of airing the views of all parties responsible for giving advice to the President, the alternatives open to us were summarized by the Attorney General/13/ and are covered in my memorandum to USIB, dated October 18th.
On Tuesday, 23 October, inform Western European and some Latin American leaders of the situation.
On Wednesday, attack the MRBM's, issue a public statement, and send a message to Premier Khrushchev.
Same as 1, but notify Chairman Khrushchev beforehand and wait about three days to obtain his reply.
Tell the Soviets that the United States was aware of the missiles and would prevent any more from arriving.
Mr Rusk and Mr Ball seemed inclined to favor this course, but first wanted surveillance without air strikes.
After limited political preliminaries, attack targets in Categories III-IV and prepare for invasion.
Editorial Note At 10m. on October 17, 1962, the Joint Chiefs of Staff met and decided that a surgical strike against the MRBM sites alone represented an unacceptable risk.
They incorporated their views in a memorandum to Secretary of Defense McNamara , which suggested air attacks on a wide variety of military targets.
Letter From the Representative to the United Nations to President Kennedy Washington, October 17, 1962.
I have reviewed the planning thus far and have the following comments for you: As I have said I think your personal emissaries should deliver your messages to C and K There is no disagreement as to C As to K an emissary could better supplement the gravity of the situation you have communicated to Gromyko.
As to your announcement, assuming it becomes imperative to say something soon, I think it would be a mistake at this time to disclose that an attack was imminent and that merely reciting the facts, emphasizing the gravity of the situation and that further steps were in process would be enough for the first announcement.
Because an attack would very likely result in Soviet reprisals somewhere-Turkey, Berlin, etc. -it is most important that we have as much of the world with us as possible.
To start or risk starting a nuclear war is bound to be divisive at best and the judgments of history seldom coincide with the tempers of the moment.
If war comes, in the long run our case must rest on stopping while there was still time the Soviet drive to world domination, our obligations under the InterAmerican system, etc.
We must be prepared for the widespread reaction that if we have a missile base in Turkey and other places around the Soviet Union surely they have a right to one in Cuba.
If we attack Cuba, an ally of the USSR, isn't an attack on NATO bases equally justified.
While the explanation of our action may be clear to us it won't be clear to many others.
Moreover, if war is the consequence, the Latin American republics may well divide and some say that the United States is not acting with their approval and consent.
Likewise unless the issue is very clear there may be sharp differences with our Western Allies who have lived so long under the same threat of Soviet attack from bases in the satellite countries by the same IRBMs.
But all these considerations and obstacles to clear and universal understanding that we are neither rash, impetuous or indifferent to the fate of others are, I realize, only too familiar to you.
I know your dilemma is to strike before the Cuban sites are operational or to risk waiting until a proper groundwork of justification can be prepared.
But the means adopted have such incalculable consequences that I feel you should have made it clear that the existence of nuclear missile bases anywhere is negotiable/1/ before we start anything.
Our position, then, is that we can't negotiate with a gun at our head, a gun that imperils the innocent, helpless Cuban people as much as it does the U.S., and that if they won't remove the missiles and restore the status quo ante we will have to do it ourselves— and then we will be ready to discuss bases in the context of a disarmament treaty or anything else with them.
In short it is they, not the U.S., that have upset the balance and created this situation of such peril to the whole world.
I confess I have many misgivings about the proposed course of action, but to discuss them further would add little to what you already have in mind.
So I will only repeat that it should be clear as a pikestaff that the United States was, is and will be ready to negotiate the elimination of bases and anything else; that it is they who have upset the precarious balance in the world in arrogant disregard of your warnings-by threats against Berlin and now from Cuba-and that we have no choice except to restore that balance,e., blackmail and intimidation never, negotiation and sanity always.
Yours, Adlai S Stevenson/2/ /2/Printed from a copy that indicates Stevenson signed the original.
