Introduction During the early 1960s the intercontinental ballistic missile introduced the world to the possibility of instant total war.
Orthodox history holds that a succession of defensive nuclear doctrines and strategies from ""massive retaliation"" to ""mutual assured destruction"" worked, almost seamlessly, to deter Soviet aggression against the United States and to prevent the use of nuclear weapons.
The possibility of United States aggression in nuclear conflict is seldom considered.
The main documented exception was the Air Force Chief of Staff in the early 1960s, Curtis LeMay, a seemingly idiosyncratic case.
But beginning in 1957 the United States military did prepare plans for a preemptive nuclear strike against the U.S.S.R, based on our growing lead in land-based missiles, And top military and intelligence leaders presented an assessment of those plans to President John F Kennedy in July of 1961.
The meeting recessed under a Presidential injunction of secrecy that has not been broken until now.
The Real Missile Gap In 1960, claims of a ""missile gap"" favoring the Soviets had given the Democrats a critical election theme, and many millions of Americans entered the Sixties feeling intensely vulnerable to the new Soviet ICBM threat.
Kennedy was quickly convinced of this truth, which was further confirmed as new satellites brought back new information.
By fall, Defense Undersecretary Roswell Gilpatric was to acknowledge in a public speech that United States forces were vastly superior to those of the Russians.
It was in this context, of an increasing nuclear edge based on a runaway lead in land-based missiles, that Kennedy faced his first nuclear-tinged crisis, which erupted over Berlin in July of 1961.
Now, the Soviets were threatening to turn control of access to West Berlin over to the East Germans, and to conclude a separate peace treaty with that satellite state.
As Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., then a special assistant, later summarized for the President, adviser Dean Acheson had prepared a paper arguing that ""we are in a fateful test of wills, that our major task is to demonstrate our unalterable determination, and that Krushchev will be deterred only by a United States readiness to go to nuclear war rather than to abandon the status quo.
While not directly challenging Acheson, he encouraged Schlesinger to produce an unsigned memo critical of Acheson's stance.
Before you are asked to make the decision to go to nuclear war, you are entitled to know what concretely what nuclear war is likely to mean.
Declassified only in June of 1993, it has not previously received any public attention so far as we have been able to determine.
The first paragraph introduces General Hickey and his group, the Net Evaluation Subcommittee.
Although the Subcommittee report is described as ""annual,"" this would be the first one given to President Kennedy and his advisors, and it is not clear whether President Eisenhower received such reports in person.
Lemnitzer responded that he would later answer both of the President's questions in private.
December of 1962 was too early for an attack because the United States would have too few missiles; by December of 1963 there would likely be sufficient numbers.
On the other hand, the fact of a meeting, and Kennedy's personal reaction to it, has been reported.
Schelling also advocated centralization of the control of weapons in the hands of the President so as to ""permit deliberate, discriminating, selective use for dangerous nuclear bargaining.
All were to be unleashed in a single paroxysm of mass annihilation, know as SIOP, the Single Integrated Operating Plan.
SIOP was a recipe for blowing up the world, whether in a first or a second strike.
Kennedy also launched efforts to gain operational control of the nuclear force, then far from being securely concentrated in the President's hands.
The Burris memorandum may help to explain both the military's drive for a vast United States nuclear build-up, despite the fact that America was already far ahead, and the resistance from JFK and McNamara.
By October of 1962, the United States nuclear lead remained strong, though perhaps not yet air-tight, given the number of Soviet bombers and the risks to Europe.
Not even the American editors of Khrushchev's memoirs took these remarks seriously at the time they were first published.
Had tensions escalated or been aroused in some violent way in late 1963, the President might have faced an excruciating choice to strike first, or to give up ""victory"" during the last brief moment in all history when it could conceivably have been won.
We cannot say whether Kennedy believed the Net Evaluation calendar, or indeed, perhaps equally serious, whether he believed that others in the government might believe it.
Kennedy's subsequent actions and Johnson's eerie remark are consistent with the possibility that the calendar and risks of a first-strike window remained in the minds of both men as late as November, 1963 and possibly in Johnson's mind for a good deal longer.
In any event, the fact that first-strike planning got as far as it did raises grave questions about the history of the Cold War.
Een reactie posten Nieuwere post Oudere post Homepage Abonneren op: Reacties posten THE WAR WITH RUSSIA WILL NOT END .image { width: 100%; } Een Gevaarlijke Gek: Pieter Cobelens, Generaal-Majoor Buiten Dienst Nederland kent een nieuwe ster aan het firmament.
NOS Propaganda NATO NEEDS WAR Magchiel C Matthijsen 2 Hillary Kills Land of the Free.
