Khrushchev, could not match the United States in nuclear weapons or strategic delivery systems nor push the western nations out of Berlin.
In the east, the Chinese constantly harassed him concerning Soviet weakness.
In 1959, Fidel Castro had overthrown the dictator, Fulgencio Batista, and assumed power.
In mid-April 1961, the Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs and suffered a crushing defeat.
On October 13, Major Anderson deployed to McCoy AFB, Florida, to join a U-2 aircraft ferried in for the special mission.
The wing began immediately to move RF-101 and RB-66 aircraft, personnel, and photographic equipment to Florida.
On October 26, the wing launched the first flight of two low-level reconnaissance aircraft.
For the next three weeks, wing aircraft, by photographic and visual reconnaissance, gathered vital data, including prestrike intelligence, air-surveillance verification of Cuban buildup, and subsequent dismantling of the IRBM and MRBM sites and Soviet IL-28 aircraft.
Other flights returned with highly significant 35 SHORT OF WAR Photo taken by RF-101 of ground-to-ground missile base in Cuba, November 1962. photographs of missiles and related equipment on docks at Cuban ports, the loading of Soviet freighters, and the deck cargo of Soviet ships entering and leaving Cuban ports.
Consequently, the President of the United States was constantly aware of Soviet actions regarding the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba.
Analysis of the 363d photographs provided a wide range of essential intelligence concerning Cuba.
Frequent sorties over major Cuban airfields provided daily information on the number, type, and specific location of Cuban aircraft.
Photos also revealed the number and location of assembled, partially assembled, or unassembled IL-28 Soviet twin-engine tactical bombers with a range of 1,500 miles.
SAC ordered continual U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba, and at the same time, in order to make room for fighter aircraft, ordered the deployment of medium and heavy bombers and tanker aircraft from MacDill, McCoy, and Homestead AFBs in Florida.
In the midst of these preparations, President Kennedy and his advisors debated the sanest course of action.
Fear of Soviet reaction soon eliminated talk of a 37 nuclear strike, but support for a conventional air strike followed by invasion continued to grow.
While the invasion forces gathered in Florida, Kennedy ordered the state department to develop a plan for civil government in Cuba.
Tension mounted as the Soviets continued to work on the missile sites and their ships continued moving toward Cuba.
Then on October 26, Khrushchev sent another message in which he offered to withdraw or destroy the weapons in Cuba, provided the United States would lift the blockade and promise not to invade the island.
Now the Soviets wanted the United States to withdraw all missiles from Turkey.
TAC forces in Florida assumed a one-hour alert and prepared to go to a fifteen-minute alert, which involved pilots waiting in aircraft for launch orders.
Navy, in addition to tracking every known Soviet submarine in the Western Hemisphere, patrolled the high seas waiting for the Soviet ships to arrive.
In Washington, the President's advisors examined the Khrushchev letters and debated the appropriate action.
The launch pads in Cuba were almost finished, and there were already missiles on the island.
The Soviets began turning their ships around, packing up the missiles in Cuba, and dismantling the launch pads.
In addition, SAC initiated shipping surveillance assistance fifteen hours after receiving the request from Commander in Chief Atlantic.
Throughout the crisis the Air Force flew daily highand low-level reconnaissance flights to keep the United States leadership apprised of activities on the island of Cuba and on the high seas.
The airlifters of Military Air Transport Service, Tactical Air Command, and the Air Force Reserve played a vital role during the crisis.
Finally, McNamara noted the shortage of fighter aircraft, pointing out that air defenses in other parts of the United States had been stripped because of the need in the southeastern part of the country.
