The Cold War: 1945-1962 Lesson Plans by Richard Cleggett In the aftermath of World War II, global politics came to be dominated by a struggle between two great powers: The United States and the Soviet Union.
These two nations defined the course of history in the second half of the 20th century, and the legacy of their Cold War continues to the present day.
Students will be able to outline and define the events that led to both the United States and U.S.S.R. being on the brink of nuclear war.
Furthermore, it will highlight major global policies and negotiations that took place to avoid conflict and nuclear destruction.
In addition, this will help summarize the growing tensions that existed between the United States and U.S.S.R. by Kennedy’s presidency, and give understanding as to just how the Cold War was a continuous ideological war.
THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS After the Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro and his forces rise to power.
United States ENDS DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH CUBA CUBA ALIGNS WITH SOVIET UNION CUBA In response to Cuba's open declaration of aligning with communist ideals and the Soviet Union, the United States breaks all diplomatic ties with Cuba.
VS Almost two years removed from their revolution, Castro and Cuba openly align themselves with the Soviet Union, as well as their communist policies.
BAY OF PIGS INVASION Under President John F Kennedy, a group of Cuban exiles and United States military personnel aim to launch an invasion at the Bay of Pigs to trigger a anti-Castro rebellion.
KHRUSHCHEV AND KENNEDY MEET Khrushchev and Kennedy meet in Vienna to try and negotiate terms concerning the growing Cuban crisis.
The meeting, however, does not go well, and Khrushchev leaves with a poor impression of Kennedy.
MISSILE SITES PHOTOGRAPHED CRISIS FINALLY ENDS United States military planes photograph what appear to be constructed missile bases in Cuba.
The United States enters DEFCON 3 as a precaution, preparing for the worst.
Finally, after an extremely tense October, the United States and Soviet Union come to terms.
The United States agrees to remove missile bases in Turkey, while the Soviets agree to withdraw missiles from Cuba.
