See page 23 U ; Anastas I iviikoyan, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Lunisters oi the USSR Ambassador Anatoliy F Dobryuin Air.
Yuriy N Vino-Gradov, Soviet Delegation to XVH General Assembly (Interpreter^ Ivlr.
Igor D Bubaov, Third Secretary , Soviet Embassy Aiter a few brief remarks about lung cancer, The President a, :..;r. iuikoyan how he had enjoyed his stay in Cuba. ivjr. ikdkoyan said that he enjoyed his stay very much.
There is also an older brother who wai one time against the Cuban revolution but who now approves of it.
As a .. of fact, he told his brother Fidel that if he had known how history vould _ he vo uld have joined the revolutionary cause sooner.
Fidel and Raoul gave away their holdings a long ti:..The older brother gave up his holdings only recently.
Their mother has r one-half of hasp h#ldMg§ to pursue the family tradition but 1ms given up.chalf* At the time oi the first visit of Mr Mlkoyan, Fidel Castro was ; ut . .,aMdst and the Hag under which he waged his revolution was that of li^.ra. lie became S MSKS&Si more recently under the influence of the wishes a^u thoughts of the Cabaa people.
Raoul Castro, Che Guevara, and the eldest Castro brother /"",'/ were Marxists already before the revolutionNot so Fidel, who was moved towards Marxism by the play of the revolution itself.
The President said that Mr Mikoyan obviously believes that it will happen to the President's brothers.
He admires greatly the liveliness of the Cuban people and the progress accomplished in Cuban agriculture.
Castro is doing a lot personally to mechanize agriculture and he is personally known by most of the farmers, Mr Mikoyan saw Canadian milking machinery.
All told, more schools were built in three years in Cuba than had been built during the 50 year period before Castro.
The mansions :i capitalists who have left Cuba — which the Cuban Government permits them to do — have been made into youth hostels.
During the recent <. .u the militia has been mobilized though on an entirely voluntary basis.
The President said that now he understood why Mr Mikoyan nau liked his travels in Cuba.
Mikoyan said that indeed hi3 visit in Cuba reminded him of his jtn when he also was working for the cause of the revolution.
He also -ce speeches at several universities and felt that the students greatly dm trust ..d 1538 SECRET secret i£jt distkibutign 6/3 the United States.
He must admit that they have some reasons for such an attitude, -ince, however, it is expected that the exchange of correspondence between Chairman Khrushchev and President is to be registered with the United Nations, it is possible that the fears of the young Cubans will be calmed by the very fact of such a recording of this memorable correspondence.
The President said that the relations between the United states and Cuba are bad. v«hat Mr Iwikoyan said about Cuban internal developments may be quite interesting; however, this is not the part of Cuban events which is of primary concern to us.
Shat we are concerned with Is tfc* use of Cuba as a 3pringboard for subversion, waning both Soviet subversion and Castro's own efforts in that direction.
There is no reason why statements that the United states does not intend to invade Cuba should not go on record.
Yet this is hardly necessary since it is obvious that the United states could have invaded Cuba any number of times beginning with April I960 but did not do so.
As a matter of fact, only recently the President was speaking against those Americans who suggested an invasion of Cuba.
It is difficult for the President to say at the present moment that the situation with Cuba is in any way satisfactory, since it is not known what will happen next month or what *he Chinese will do.
Maybe the Chinese Communists will start an arms. build-up in Cuba in January, or maybe the Soviet Union itself will start agsia sash & balld-up.
After all, what the Soviets did once they could do again sad no one could blame a certain feeling of mistrust on the part of the United States after what had happened.
Mr Mikoyas stated that what the President had said presents an extremely serious matter.
No one can believe that the arms build-up in Cuba was offensive and intended against the United states.
It had, in fact, been decided as early oECRET . aj/in;^isy.RjBu r nQ^a/.s ( SLCIiST LIS1IT DISTRIBUTION I early as June, by Chairman Khrushchev and his colleagues, of whom Sir.
Silkoyan was one, that the United states would be told about the arms build-up, in every detail, by the Soviet Union at an appropriate moment.
First it was intended to communicate with the United states Government on a confidential basis and then to make an announcement to the press.
Of coarse, this was sons thing which the Soviet Union was not obligated to do since after all, the United States do©3 not inform the Soviet Union of its military moves.
As for the purpose of the military build-up, it was obviously not offensive; no military man and not even a civilian could ever believe that rockets in Cuba could be necessary or even useful for an attack against the United states.
The decision had been made to inform the United states after the elections so as to avoid influencing Ja any way the political campaign in the United States.
The President himself certainly would not want to have the elections influenced by Soviet moves.
Of course on the 22nd of October no intimation of the build-up was made by the Soviet Union but even if a disclosure had not taken place the Soviet Union would have brought the entire build-up to the attention of the United states on November 3th or 10th, immeifiately after the elections.
The President said that the problem wa3 not due to the fact that the soviet Union did not make a statement to the United States about the arms build-up — as it obviously has the right to proceed with any such measures without announcing them to the United otates — but on the contrary that the Soviet Union had made a statement according to which no offensive weapons were being sent to Cuba or were going to be sent there.
Sdkoyan said that obviously the two speakers had a different interpretation of the recent events.
The fact remains that the purpose of the arma build-up in Cuba was defensive and not offensive.
They were seat there to defend the island against invasion and for no other purpose.
It is silly to believe that those missiles emplaced in Cuba could be needed for an attack against the United states.
After all, there exist other missiles with a much longer range — so long a range in fact that they cannot be tested within the territory of the soviet Union and must be shot into the sea.
On the >40 ^£CRLT USUT DISTRIBUTION 3/3 SECRET IJMT DISTRIBUTION S/S On the other liand, the President had spoken in his exchange with Chairman Khrushchev of a United States pledge of non-invasion.
Mow, when the United States is making this pledge conditional on .tflte"" ■• conduct of Cuba it is departing from its previous position.
Mr Iviikoyan said he was reminded of conversations he had with President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles.
He had asked Secretary Dulles whether the latter thought the Soviet Union wished to attacK the United states.
Secretary Dulles had replied that he did not think that the Government of the Soviet Union in power at that time wanted to attack* Secretary Dulles then asked j*r. iviikoyan whether the latter thought that the United States wanted to attack the Soviet Union.
Mr iviikoyan replied that he did not think so but that he had some doubts in the matter.
Mikoyan would like to ask once more whether the President thinks that the Soviet Union wishes to attack the United otates.
The President said that he did not know what may have been, the reasons of the .soviet Government to establish the base.
At the end of September and throughout October the President attacked those people in the United States who spoke in favor of an aggressive policy towards Cuba.
J_-;oyan said a decision had been taken by the Soviet Union, that any aggressive mora* tap th* Usitftd States were contemplated.
Had the question been addresao&fd th© President by Chairman Khrushchev at that time, the President wwsld fesv« b«©a glad to say then as he says now that no invasion oi Cuba is Intended.
An invasion of Cuba is not a solution to the Cuban problem. „, euo not live now in the early days of the Twentieth Century.
Unquestionably, as able a man as the Soviet Ambassador in the United States must have been aware of that.
As for •'Soviet intentions, maybe war was not an aim of the Soviet Union but it seems that a policy of threat may well have been the objective.
The entire episode cannot be Interpreted in any other way than as a major attack against the present Administration and the Govexwa«H4 of the United States.
The question Is nocrbow the lack of understanding between the two governments can be transformed into mutual understanding.
Mr Kiikoyan said that he would first speak about the President's concluding remarks.
In regard to the President s concluding remarks he wished to say that he fully agrees that agreement is necessary for peace and tnat lack ot ajgwwmai^ Datween the two great Powers may well lead to disaster.
As to tA* Pr«aWtoA** first remarks, he must emphasise that the Soviet mow 3 a purpose only defense and deterrence.
The Soviet Uate. asSffld i& orte to facilitate an agreement leading to peace.
After all, H is 'ntlt1«»Abt that counter-revolutionary gangs were being trained in camps In the United 3tat©3 and on the territories of other countries of the Western Hemisphere allied with the United States.
Mr Xflkan spoke in favor of an invasion of Cuba, so did Pentagon generals.
Under such circumstances, there was 4542 JECRET Ulvirr DISTRIBUTION J/S 7 . good"" reason to prepare deterrents and defense.
It is quite clear that such was the purpose of the Joviet Union, whldi was going to inform the United states that what it intended through the build-up in Cuba was the defense of that island and not an aggression against the United otates.
Alter all, the soviet Union has more than enough long-range missiles emplaced on its own territory to need anything else.
Forty-two missiles are something insignificant for offense and therefore it is clear that they were meant for defense.
Moreover, these missiles remained in the hands of the Joviet military and could nd have been used without signal authorization from Moscow. .vLr.
States and the ooviet Union and therefor© misunderstandings and threats must be eliminated from those relation*, ivir.
Mikoyan remembers a conversation with tiiat very wise man, Secretary Cordell Hull, bacx in 1926.
At that time, Secretary Hull had said that German fascism and Japanese militarlsrn^e preparing for war.
Only the United otates and the soviet Union rare in a position to demcu peace.
The situation at that time was already what it is at the present. 3oth countries have terrible weapons and therefore both have an overwhelming responsibility before the entire world.
The President said that he did not know what exactly Iat. .axon . -c said.
As for Pentagon g . ., ;-.:..., they are under the control of the Administration and there certainly . .^u be«a lift statements on their part calling for aggression.
There were no United states forces at the time of the hop^i-.i attempt at landing made by Cuban patriots.
There were no statei:' ..u .y any people in positions of responsibility In the United Gtates which . i ;. t oECRET oECEET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S have led to the belief that an invasion was being contemplated.
The problem In fact is not Cuba, the problem is the attitude of the Soviet Government.
States Government has very little liking for the present government of Cuba.
After all, the ooviet Government does not like the present government of Albania.
This does not mean that the ooviet Union will invade Albania, as in such a case as well as in that of a hypothetical invasion of Cuba, international consequences could be very grave.
The President stated that he is not, however, so terribly interested in Mr Castro.
What he is interested in, once again, is the attitude of the ooviet Government.
How is it possible to go through the coming decade if we are, as in the past* to move from crisis to crisis.
The President hopes that some day the Soviet Government will understand thai its main duty should be the defense of the interests of the Joviet Union and not pushing the world from one sin all crisis to another one at the risk of catastrophy which would engulf everything. lAx, Iviikoyan 3aid that Chairman Khrushchev shared the President' 3 opinion that an understanding between the tw governments is necessary for peace.
Therefore, all the points of disagreement have to be taken one by one and resolved.
The first step should be a final resolution of the Cuban affair — as the President himself said.
Much was don© in that direction, but unfortunately, no final situation has been yet achieved.
This is because the United States government's attitude is. not as helpful as it should be.
Once the Cuban crisis is resolved, the next steps might well be a uon-aggressioa pact between the Vvarsacv pact organisation and NATO, the rqtfffiffiMi of aatslear tests, disarmament, and Berlin.
As the President himself ha3 noted, the fact that the Cuban cri3la haa bftsa f resolved proves the necessity of talks and negotiations between ISm tw© gwarnments.
As the President has communicated It to Chairman Khrushchev, negotiations should not stop short of a final solution.
The ><14 JECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION 3/5 SECRET OMIT a STRIBUTION o/5 9Tfee exchange o€ correspondence between the two heads oi state provides a basis for such a solution.
A good way to carry it out would be to place this exchange of correspondence within an agreed protocol, ouch a draft protocol, which would also include the position of the Cuban Government, was drafted by the Soviets.
The President asked whether Mr Mikoyan meant an approval by the Security Council or a recording of the declarations with the Secretory General.
This, as well as the inclusion of a Cuban declaration, would make the entire procedure impossible to accept.
After all, the United states representative in the Security Council cannot be expected to vote in favor of Mr Castro'3 declaration.
Mikoyan said that after all, the Cuban question is on the agenda of the United Nations and, therefore, must be discussed there.
What would be important is that an agreement be obtained between the two Governments before a discussion in the Security Council.
Hie latter, however, cannot be avoided, and the lack of an agreement would amount to keeping alive an international dispute.
The two countries, therefore, should come forward with an agreed position.
As for such points which are ast agmd^ ttagr night be the object of separate statements.
Tfeft PmStaft said that the Cuban Government must be left out of th* aa gQ t&8lt ffl M|» ffi» problem now may be whether there whould be agr««m«ffit' d» «ae or two separate declarations.
Mr Mikoyan said that there should be two declarations, one by each Government, however, that the texts should be agreed upon by the SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION 6/3 10 two Governments.
The Security Council could then approve those two declarations and could call on the two Governments to resolve the remaining points of difference, ft hat is necessary is a preliminary agreement by the two Governments on the texts of two declarations.
The President said that he understood that Soviet representatives did not like the American draft.
Mr iviiitoyan said that the President guessed correctly the opinion of the Soviet Government.
The President said that Soviet missiles, have been removed from Cuba aid that he expects that the Soviet bombers will likewise be.-t&kea out.
He also hopes that the same thing will apply to the other military units and weapons covered by his correspondence with Chairman Khrash* chev.
Mr i-iikoysa said that what Mr Khrushchev has promised to do lias either been done or is being done.
No other weapons, however, beyond those covered by the correspondence, will be removed. /jm unclarity in translation 3eems to have led to a temporary misunderstanding.
Mr Mikoyan 3eems to have believed that the President's remarks applied also to military materiel beyond those specifically ""service or guard"" units.
The condition in question is that the pledge applies only if Cuba abstains from any action which may be considered subversive or of a nature to undermine the governments of others of the Western Hemisphere.
Mr Mikoyan said that Mr Castro was right in saying that noone gave the United States the right to invade or abstain from invasion according to its own interpretation of Cuban actions.
According to the United States, Cuba must not undertake subversive action, but the United States and its Allies are free to undertake such actions.
Castro's demand that the agreement cut both ways la reasonable and in agreement with international law.
Likewise, his de* mands for the liquidation of an economic blockade, the abstention from piratical acts, especially by ships belonging to Cuban counterrevolutionaries but based on United States ports and in particular Miami, are reasonable.
Jo is his wish for a normalization of relations between the two countries.
Even there, however, Mr Castro does not ask for the immediate elimination of tie Base but only for the opening of negotiations to determine the time when it would be surrendered.
The President agreed that the actions of Cuban students shooting at Cuba from small boats are against United States legislation.
Such actions are unimportant and only the sporatic exploits of publicity seeKero.
The United states Goveranaeai IS not training any Cuban forces for action against Cuba and neither MM* such forces trained on the territories of the other nations oi the Western Hemisphere.
The important point is that of a noninvasion policy by the United States.
It is, however, much more difficult to put such a statement in an official document without surrounding it with the necessary guarantees.
Regardless of how the word ""imperialists"" might apply, the President cannot expect to tie the hands of the United States regardless of any situation which might arise.
It applies also to the future, at least to the next two or six years depending on the wishes of the American electorate.
The President is stating once again that the United States does not Intend to invade Cuba.
Any official written document, however, must be 30 drafted as to recognise the international responsibilities of the United States.
Soviets have removed missiles from Cuba, This is the gist of the agreement between the two Heads of State.
After all, no control has been, allowed, as requested by the United States and agreed upon in the exchange of correspondence.
In consequence the United States is forced to carry on the overflights against which the Soviet Union and Castro are protesting.
The only thing that can b© dfitao la to &&&• United States surveillance as unobtrusive as posslMiu;"" A&m all, the lack of international control places the United otataa Qw&mmm& In an exceedingly difficult position, as It makes it almost impossible for it to reply to charges which are being made that there are still Soviet missEes In Cuba, The ><18 SECRET UMET DISTRIBUTION S/S rJECKxiT ulut distribution o/s 13 The President allowed Mr Mkoyan a press clipping containing a statement that there are Soviet missiles hidden in Cuban caves.
Mr Mikoyan said that such articles are obviously written by crooks and thieves.
Mikoyan reiterated that the agreement between the two Chiefs of ^tate in regard to weapons has been reached and is being carried out accordingly.
However, articles in the United States press and the attitude of United otates military constitute an obstacle to the final resolution of the crisis.
Now the United otates is stating that it intends to contiraMi its overflights of Cuban territory.
After all, the United states has aerial cameras which make It possible to photograph Cuba from outside Cuban airspace In spite of that the United Jtates insists on violating Cuban airspace.
The President said that there are no such cameras; the angle at which photographs can be taken from outside the three-mile limit calces the photographs untrustworthy.
The United states, however, endeavors to keep its overflights inconspicuous by carrying them out at hign altitude and avoiding low altitude flights.
Castro is right when he says that he will have to deal with su>h overflights by his own means.
Any country would protest against k state efa&iirs which hurts the legitimate pride and selfesteem of tie Cubans.
Ca3tro has agreed to controJU He only insists that such a control apply to all the parties concerned and not be strictly oECixET LIxvUT DISTRIBUTION 3/S "" ""SECRET * LIMIT DISTRIBUTION 3/3 onesided.
What makes the situation more difficult is the insistence of the United Gtates to place a statement on this ratter in the declaration.
Trying to find out about facts by using ones own facilities is against international law but mig,ht be ignored; however* statement to that effect in a declaration does violate international law and cannot be accepted.
Furthermore, tha statement in the declaration that a noninvasion pledge is conditional on Cuba' 3 abstention from subversive activities cannot be reconciled with international law as it in fact gives to the United States tha right to determine by itself whether an invasion should take place.
The President said that he understands Mr Mikqyan's concern \-i the latter point.
If he keeps peace we shall not invade Cuba, regardless of what Mr Castro does within the borders of his country.
Mr Mlkoyan said that the United States declaration means that the United states intends to control the actions of the Government of Cuba.
What Castro wants is simply that if there is to be control it should be multilateral.
His position is fully in agreement with the spirit of the &&> change of letters between the two Chiefs of state.
On the contrary the President said that Castro is an enemy of the United otatea and that the United States is going to terminate its blockade only under certain conditions.
This n»ana that the United States 13 moving bade |rom the position, agreed upon in the exchange of correspondence.
It means that the United states is to be free to continue its anti-Cuban policies but that Castro would be prevented from doing anything without the permission of the United Multilateral control c&i be accepted, but a situation according to which one government would be in a position to judge the actions of another government is not acceptable.
Furthermore, the fact that the United States has responsibilities under the Rio Treaty does not need to be inctaded, as this la of no concern to the Soviet Union and, nuthei more, as the United states end its Allies have pushed Cuba out of the KIo Treaty organization.
I said that Mr MJkoyan had accused the United States fl£ retreating from the position expressed in the exchange of correspo&daas&ft TMfi la set so.
Soviet Union wnich L3 moving ossfc frss© Ite position, as the correspondence specified Inspection nspection was allowed.
U3yan had said that the declaration should not contain any suggestion that one government might judge the actions of another.
However, some safeguarua 4551 SECRET Iim* DISTRIBUTION 3/S , SECRET IMT DISTRIBUTION 3/3 16 are necessary since otherwise the hands of the United States would be tied even while the policy of the Soviet Union would be free to change.
Nothing was said in the exchange of correspondence about any control of American territory.
Wow, however, Mr Mlkoyan suggests that the United States as well as Cuba submit to control, while no control would be exercised over the territory of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union proposes that the declaration be placed before the Security Council by a simple expression of Soviet will, and describes a state of affairs depending entirely on Soviet intentions.
The United States does not Intend to Invade Cuba and is ready to make that known.
It must, however, insist on a minimum of control, and the expression of its obligations under the Rio Treaty.
The Rio Treaty has been ratified by the United States Senate and is a part of United States legislation to which the President himself is subject.
If the Soviet Union prefers it, however, it may be possible to -,*ue the United States intent known in a waywhich would be quite m clear thougn not imply the same legal complications, for example, through a statement by the President, let us say, a press conference.
In fact, the President has already made a statement of this kind at his last press conference.
If, however, an dfHal declaration is called for it must Include references to all the aspects of the problem.
States does not intend to invade Cuba, with the hope that Castro will not undertake any provocative action and that the Soviet Union does not reintroduce a military threat into the W estern Hemisphere, If Mr Castro wishes to carry on the activities described by Mr Mikoyan such as the education of Cuban children and the mechanization of Cuban agriculture, well md line.
All we ask is that he does not cause any trouble outside of his own borders.
The President said that if no agreement can be reached on formal declarations, then it might be possible for him to clariiy the position; of the United States by means of a statement at a press conference expressing the spirit of the exchange of correspondence between the two Heads of Gtate, As a matter of fact, already at his last press conference the President had said that the United Jtatss does not intend to invade Cuba and that the same applied to the other nations of the Western Hemisphere.
The President also expressed part of what he thinks about Mr Castro, but this is not the same thing as an invasion* Thus a lot of progress was accomplished on the most difficult and important elements of the crisis.
Let us hope that progress will be possible also on its remaining formal aspect through agreed daoiwatlons registered with the United Nations, If not, th* Prams* is racfy to make an adequate statement at a press conference.
A statement by the United States or a statement agreeing with the United states will have to contain references to control and to the Rio Treaty.
At that the two Governments could perhaps pass on to the other problems such as that of disarmament.
In the meantime, the Cuban affair might be permitted to cool off and the President hopes that it will remain cool for a long time.
Mr* fdikoyan said that, in fact, what the President wants is merely to cool off a burning situation, while keeping the fire aiive, wliereas the Soviet Government wants to put the fire out for good before passing on to otharquestions.
The President said that the interpretations of the two parUclpaato in the conversation obviously differ.
Mr Mikoyan suggested that if agreemeit could be obtained on a part of the items to be included in the declarations, such declarations could be registered officially with the United Nations* Any points on whi-n there would be no agreement would then be the object of the statements outside of the United Nations, what should be ind uded in the declarations, Is what was included in the exchange of correspondence.
The President said that he wished to make it quite clear for the record that the United states is not moving back from any position agreen to in the correspondence. i quoted from the exchange of correspondence to tie efiect t&ft the rensewal of missiles and other strategic weapons and miiitftxj UEstt* W&& proceed under the control of the United Nations.
This was a& tftUMe U w* Soviet Union can manage to abide by the exchange of coOTe&pan&ttBee t& he letter, then the United States will abide by that exchange to the letter.
If not, the President can only act in the best way the s ituation permits, Mr Mitoyaa ioS/f. tfECR£T LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S SECRET UMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S 19 Mr MIkoyan stated that the Soviet Union fully abides by the exchange of correspondence.
It had allowed Inspection as the owner of the missiles and other weapons.
Th* permission of the government on the soil of which the missiles were placed still remained necessary, and this is something over which the Soviet Union has no control.
This is what was said in Chairman Khrushchev's letters of October 27 and 28.
The only differences between the two letters being that all mention of Turkey was deleted from the October 28 letter.
Secretary General U Thant was kept informed of what the Soviets were doing.
These means are, however, fully satisfactory, since American newspapers published photographs of missiles being removed and American officers made sure that the removal of missiles was taking place.
At the point where the entire deal is about to be finalised, the United States refuses to move forward but takes a step backwards.
As for the obligations arising from the Rio Treaty, the United States may take care of them as it wishes, either through a statement at a press conference or by some other means.
Th« Presided said that nothing was said in the corresp ondence acout any formal declarations.
The only thing mentioned was an affirmation of United Sts&os lutes* In regard to the question of a hypothetical invasion of Cuba.
TM» i* something which the United States continues to be ready to do, and as a matter of fact, which it has done and is doing again.
As for the draft declaration, it seems that the United S^ ates* draft is not to the liking of the Soviet Government.
The President said that in such a case he does not have anything that should worry him.
Mr Mikoyan said that the United St ates draft proposes that the actions of one sovereign government be subject to the control of another government.
The President said that the United States affirms its intent not to invade Cuba, such affirmations are not usual either.
Mr Mikoyan said that this pledge of naninvasion is made subject to a condition placed unilaterally on Cuba and to be enforced unilaterally by the United States.
The President said that we cannot be expected to let this assuranc e stand if someday missiles or ""Other similar weapons are introduced by Communist China, or once more by the Soviet Union or by somebody eL*e, or if other similarly aggressive steps are taken by Castro.
Mr« Mikoyaa said that the pledge of non-invasion should be stated in the terms Ha which it appears in the correspondence.
If, however, the Soviet Union insists on binding declarations, it must accept the complexities which unavoidably accompany the drafting of legal documents.
McCloy, Stevenson and Kuznetznov, with the repeated understanding that the declaration must include references to the obligations of the United States under the Rio Treaty and, in the absence of United Nations inspection, to some alternate system of guarantee and control.
Thirdly, it must be specified that United States guarantees apply only as long as Castro abides by his peaceful statements.
The United States i3 preparing to consider any draft which the Soviet Union might submit and which would satisfy those points.
Mr Mikoyan said that the Soviet draft protocol contained all the necessary points but wa3 not accepted by the United States.
The United States does not intend ta invade Cuba and never intended to invade Cuba.
If the Soviet Union does not repeat such an action, there may be no problem to worry about in the future.
In any case it is clear that the United States does not intend to invade Cuba.
In fact, the most difficult problem has been resolved, and what remains is only a secondary one.
Mr Mikoyan said that it is true that much progress has been made and that is why he is so surprised at the President's position in regard to the final step of the declaration.
The President said that the difficulty is due to the failure of carrying out control.
The Soviet Union objects to United States overflights of Gab&TlielfefaeA States must insist on some means of control.
If not, a statement on the girt of the President may be a step along the way.
Mti Wkxstfk said that he fully agreed with the spirit of the President's statement.
He realizes that it will be impossible to discuss the declaration paragraph for paragraph in the present conversation.
He is concerned, however, with the proposal to replace action within the United Nations SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S 22 Nations by a simple statement at a Press Conference.
The Cuba affair is on the agenda of the United Nations and failure to agree in that forum would keep the question alive.
In fact* there is no reason to keep it alive SBthe carrying out of its obligations by the Soviet Union hsbeen verified.
Agreement has been obtained on the difficult question, the points of disagreement deal with something which should be easier to resolve.
Mr Mikoyan understands the President's concern, but he does not see why this concern should justify the inclusion of new conditions to the fulfillment of pledges.
As for the question of preventing subversion, it should apply to all parties alike and not on a unilateral basis.
Nevertheless, Mr Mikoyan has not fully understood what he must report to Chairman Khrushchev.
The President said that he already has answered that question and said that the United States does not intend to invade Cuba.
If the Soviet Union abides by the exchange of correspondence so will the United States.
The President said that he had made a statement to that effect already at the proceeding week's press conference.
At the present .moment the only question that remate is that of formal documents.
The Soviet Govearam«st h& anow come up v&tih a proposal of a formal protocol to be sigaedvtt&Cabfe Itot Prmitimi. does not intend to sign any documents with Castro.
A stai©m«St at &|WS3 'conference vo uld be a simple manner of resolving the questions.
An official document signed by all the parties Induces legal complesdties.
Mr Mikoyan 45; ■58 SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION 3/S 23 Mr Mikoyan said that he liked what the President said at his last Press Conference and so did Chairman Khrushchev.
The President said that much progress has been accomplished perhaps more will be accomplished in the next few weeks.
In any case when Mr Mikoyan returns to Moscow he will be able to report to Chairman Khrushchev the precise understanding that the United states has of this matter.
Thompson G Mr Johnson ARA Mr Martin EUR Mr Tyler SOV Mr John Guthrie BTF Mr Hillenbrand INR/D Mr Hilsman ACDA Mr Foster White House 4 cc USUN SECRET LIMIT DISTRIBUTION S/S SlL, LU^ )u^^ (jjjmj ^^mj l oW7 UH\ c>2oo.
