Despite the discoveries of recent research, there is still much more to be revealed about the handling of nuclear weapons before and during the Cuban missile crisis.
First, the volume highlights the importance of memory as an essential foundation of historical understanding and demonstrates how events that rely only on historical records can provide misleading accounts.
This focus on memory extends the scope of the existing literature by exploring hitherto neglected aspects of the Cuban missile crisis, including an analysis of the operational aspects of Bomber Command activity, explored through recollections of the aircrews that challenge accounts based on ofﬁcial records.
The editors then go on to explore aspects of intelligence whose achievements and failings have increasingly been recognized to be of central importance to the origins, dynamics and outcomes of the missile crisis.
Studies of hitherto neglected organizations such as the United States Defense Intelligence Agency and the British Joint Intelligence Committee both extend our understanding of British and American intelligence machinery in this period and enrich our understanding of key episodes and assessments in the missile crisis.
Finally, the book explores the risk of nuclear war and looks at how close we came to nuclear conﬂict.
The risk of inadvertent use of nuclear weapons is evaluated and a new proposed framework for the analysis of nuclear risk put forward.
This volume will be of much interest to students of intelligence studies, international history, foreign policy, security studies and IR in general.
David Gioe is a PhD candidate at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and previously spent a decade working in the United States intelligence community.
Edited by Martin S Alexander Edited by Wesley K Wark Eternal Vigilance The Australian Security Intelligence 50 years of the CIA Organization Edited by Rhodri Jeffreys-Jones and An unofﬁcial history Christopher Andrew Frank Cain Nothing Sacred Policing Politics Nazi espionage against the Vatican, Security intelligence and the liberal 1939–1945 democratic state David Alvarez and Revd.
No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without intent to infringe.
He is a former Central Intelligence Agency Operations Ofﬁcer and Analyst.
David was a Presidential Management Fellow at the FBI and is a Naval Reserve Intelligence Ofﬁcer.
His 18 books include a number on the role and inﬂuence of intelligence services, especially in Britain, the Soviet Union and the United States.
He is the editor of Harold Macmillan’s xiv Contributors diaries and is currently writing a book on religion and politics in inter-war Britain.
Dr Michael S Goodman is a Reader in Intelligence and International Affairs in the Department of War Studies, King’s College London.
Squadron Leader Robin Woolven was a Royal Air Force navigator 1956–78 on tactical and strategic bomber squadrons until 1967, then on maritime surveillance squadrons.
He subsequently spent 17 years in the Security Service before retiring to complete a PhD at King’s College, London where he is now a Research Associate.
She is writing her dissertation on Australia and the Cuban missile crisis.
Her research on this subject has appeared in the Australian Journal of Politics and History, The Conversation and on Australian Broadcasting Corporation radio.
La crisi dei missili di Cuba e le sue percezioni internazionali (Le Monnier, forthcoming, 2014); Non solo canzonette.
A Concise History, and writes frequently on security and intelligence issues.
Canadian Foreign Policy: Selected Cases, Rethinking National Security: The Public Dimension and Hazardous Waste Siting and Democratic Choice.
A former NATO and Fulbright Fellow, he taught at various universities in Canada and has been an academic visitor in the United States, United Kingdom and Japan.
He is currently completing books on the histories of Denmark and St Petersburg, respectively.
He has participated in numerous international conferences in Russia, as well as the Junior 8 Summit in Japan in 2008, attended by Presidents Bush, Medvedev and Prime Minister Fukuda, in which he was one of the authors of the Final Declaration.
For anyone alive, with a pulse to feel and eyes to see, during the days of the Cuban missile crisis, it has left one of the most vivid vapour trails of memory in our lives.
For professional historians and scholars of war, near-war, and strategic studies, the missiles of October 1962 rank with the Guns of August 1914 in their compelling fascination.
They are both subjects and debates that will never wither as long as human curiosity continues to embrace a sense of the past.
And we have within these pages a superb range of scholars to make new sense of that extraordinary crisis for a wider readership.
It was a far, far closer thing than we realized even at our moments of highest anxiety in the autumn of 1962.
That we can recall the crisis and write about it in tranquility – and that the Cold War ended as it did without general war or nuclear exchange – is perhaps the greatest single shared boon for humanity in modern times.
Be fascinated – and breathe as many signs of retrospective relief as you wish.
The authors are grateful to Trish Hayes and the staff of the BBC Written Archives for kind assistance with copyright permissions.
Our special thanks are also due to Chikara Hashimoto for his exceptional organization of the Gregynog Conference in October 2012.
James Blight, Joseph Nye and David Welch1 The actions of the Soviet Union, Cuba and the United States in October 1962 brought those nations to the verge of military conﬂict.
What was not known then, and what is not fully recognized today, was how close the world came to the brink of nuclear disaster.
Anniversaries of, and conferences on, the Cuban missile crisis have been of great value to historians, as well as indeed to the general public.
They have generated new sources of understanding and new interpretations.
Although the release of documents has played an important part in this process much has relied on memory, and in particular the memories of those who lived through the events of October 1962 with varying degrees of responsibility for what did happen, and might have happened.
Recollection, reﬂection and revision Twenty-ﬁve years after the crisis the ﬁrst of a series of conferences organized by North American academics James Bight, David Welch and Bruce Allyn brought together former American ofﬁcials to remember and debate their experiences.
These ventures in ‘critical oral history’ initially involved members of President Kennedy’s Executive Committee of the National Security Council but soon engaged Soviet and Cuban survivors, including diplomats and intelligence ofﬁcers.
Thirty years after the crisis, a conference in Havana brought together American, Soviet and Cuban ofﬁcials.
Most dramatically Fidel Castro attended the Havana conference, exchanging views with his former adversaries, and providing recollections of, and reﬂections on, his own actions.
The conference was also notable for revelations from a former Soviet General, Anatoli Gribkov, that the Soviets had deployed tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba.
McNamara stated that he and his colleagues had not known there were such weapons in Cuba.
Gribkov heightened the dramatic effect of his revelations by announcing that authority for their use had been delegated by Khrushchev to Soviet commanders in Cuba.
The suggestion that an American invasion would have led to the almost inevitable use of nuclear weapons gained immediate currency.
Gribkov’s statements provoked robust exchanges among historians about the value and reliability of oral testimony, in particular that of former Soviet ofﬁcials.
Subsequently, Gribkov clariﬁed his remarks and explained that he had felt constrained about what he could reveal at the Havana conference and did not explain, for example, that Khrushchev had changed his mind and insisted that no nuclear weapons of any kind could be used without his authorization.
Gribkov’s clariﬁcations are reminders that some memories need to conform to ofﬁcial practices.
Much of what we have learned of the crisis has illuminated and challenged the accuracy and at times the veracity of many accounts.
They are, moreover, a means of verifying the accounts of those senior American ofﬁcials whose recollections have helped shape our understanding.
An illustration is Robert Kennedy’s depiction of his own attitude to using military force against the missiles.
However, the secret tapes make clear that in the ﬁrst discussions on 16 October on how to react, RFK clearly supported a military attack.
The Director of Central Intelligence, John McCone, raised the Pearl Harbor analogy with the President on 17 October and George Ball, Under Secretary at the State Department, then spelt out in a memorandum that ‘we tried Japanese as war criminals because of the sneak attack on Pearl Harbor’.10 In Thirteen Days, Robert Kennedy recounts how he had passed a note, via Ted Sorensen, to the President stating, ‘I now know how Tojo felt when he was planning Pearl Harbor’.11 The account suggests the words were clearly intended to signal RFK’s opposition.
The evidence from the ExComm tapes suggests they meant the exact opposite.
Introduction 3 Thirteen Days is based on Robert Kennedy’s diaries and was written as the former President’s brother was preparing himself for a presidential campaign.
He was assassinated before it was published and the ﬁnal editing was completed by Ted Sorensen, JFK’s speech writer and ExComm participant.
Thirteen Days provides an account of Robert Kennedy’s meeting with the Soviet ambassador, Anatoli Dobrynin, on 27 October which has assumed a particular signiﬁcance in debates about the resolution of the crisis.
It is now clear that at that meeting RFK relayed a message to Dobrynin that indicated JFK’s willingness to withdraw Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles from Turkey – a demand that Khrushchev had raised publically earlier that day.
Historians have debated whether Robert Kennedy’s offer to withdraw the missiles from Turkey represented a deal, an understanding or an arrangement.
In this volume, Toshihiko Aono’s chapter sheds new light on this problem.
As the United States itself could not take public initiatives for a Cuban–Turkish deal, Kennedy and Rusk secretly attempted to arrange mediation by third parties such as the UN Secretary-General.
It has also been made clear that the secret undertaking to withdraw the missiles played little role in Khrushchev’s decision to retreat as he had already decided to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in return for a no-invasion pledge, before he learned of Kennedy’s offer.
Indeed it is now clear that Khrushchev had made up his mind – and secured the unanimous agreement of the Presidium – to retreat by Thursday 25 October.
In his chapter, Don Munton argues that analysts of the missile crisis should have come to the conclusion much earlier than most did that President Kennedy had offered the Soviets a deal on the Jupiter missiles.
Munton also argues that the government of Turkey was, by late October 1962, willing to relinquish the Jupiters, and Kennedy may well have been advised of this through allied channels.
If so, the Turkish switch in policy helps explain why Kennedy made the offer he did to Moscow.
In 1989 Sorensen admitted that he had altered Thirteen Days to preserve the myth that the President had refused to compromise and stood ﬁrm on the missiles in Turkey.
Contrary to public statements by the Kennedy administration, the United States government had not ignored Khrushchev’s demand that withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba required reciprocal action in Turkey.
Yet in 1963 Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara both testiﬁed to Congress that the Turkish missiles were in no way connected to the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba.
More generally, the fragility and ambiguity of evidence (oral and written) often present challenges of interpretation for Cold War historians.
As Sergei Radchenko argues compellingly, the evidence about Khrushchev’s motives for the deployment is at times fragmentary.
The argument that a principal reason for the deployment of the missiles in Cuba was to defend Cuba rests considerably on the testimony of former Soviet ofﬁcials, including at the ‘critical oral conferences’ of the 1980s and 1990s.
The conferences in Hawk’s Cay, Florida, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Moscow and Havana brought together senior ofﬁcials, diplomats and intelligence ofﬁcers.
In the 1990s, the historiography of the crisis increasingly began to explore events and incidents at the operational level.
Over the next twenty years the memories of submarine commanders, missile crews and aircraft pilots assumed a growing importance in assessments of the risk of nuclear war.
The fortieth anniversary of the crisis in 2002 generated accounts of events at sea that ﬁrst revealed to Western audiences the activities of Soviet submariners.
Dramatic accounts suggested that commanders of Soviet submarines may have been close to ﬁring nuclear weapons against American warships that were dropping explosive devices to force them to surface.
Greater understanding of the operational level generated increased understanding of the risk of war.
Many of these risks were unknown, or only partially known, to senior political and military ofﬁcials.
Michael Petersen’s essay in this volume offers an explanation for this by placing the crisis in the context of the sweeping military intelligence reform ordered by McNamara the previous year.
Petersen argues that while those reforms helped hasten the discovery of the Soviets’ strategic missiles, their then-incomplete nature and the parochial culture of American intelligence combined to provide a ﬂawed picture of Soviet deployments.
David Gioe’s chapter, like Petersen’s, focuses on the role of intelligence, but at the operational and tactical level instead of the structural understanding.
Speciﬁcally, Gioe reviews and critiques the human intelligence tradecraft that was used by the American Central Intelligence Agency and British Secret Intelligence Service to run Soviet Military Intelligence Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, whose vital information fed many of the Joint Intelligence Committee and ExComm assessments that were provided to both the Kennedy administration and Whitehall.
In the view of Michael Dobbs, the author of an account of the crisis that illuminates many of these risks, the world was at ‘one minute to midnight’ on the Doomsday clock.
Among the new evidence Dobbs provides of the risk of nuclear war are the testimonies of Soviet troops in Cuba, including the crews of the Ground Launched Cruise Missiles that were Introduction 5 forward-deployed within range of their designated target, the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay.
Global scope and focus The historiography of the crisis has also developed beyond America and the Soviet Union.
Most notably, the perspective and role of Cuba has enjoyed a growing salience.
Understanding of the roles of America’s allies, in particular Britain, Canada and Brazil, in addition to third parties, has also developed.
In this volume, Aono’s chapter reveals that Britain, as well as the US, tried to arrange mediation by third parties.
Especially, London worked hard to establish the UN presence in Cuba in order to provide the United States with diplomatic alternatives.
This chapter also argues that Kennedy eventually began to see Britain as one of the possible mediators.
Highlighting the UK angle, Michael Goodman’s chapter on the role of Britain’s Joint Intelligence Committee during the missile crisis draws on the previously closed archives of America’s closest ally to reveal fraught decision-making and a feeling of peril in Whitehall alongside Washington.
Laura Stanley’s chapter on Australia provides the perspective of another American ally and contributes to the growing literature on state viewpoints from across the globe.
Leonardo Campus’ chapter explores the Italian political perspectives on the crisis, using new documents from Italian, US and British archives, as well as interviews.
The divisive nature and the desire for peace that characterized such reactions are highlighted.
Moreover, as the presence of NATO nuclear missiles made Italy both a target at risk and a possible subject of negotiation, it will be shown how Fanfani secretly tried to use them to play a role as a peace mediator.
Such documents traverse diplomatic activity and in some places encompass diplomatic engagement and initiative.
More broadly, the ‘world crisis’ as Harold Macmillan described it in his diary, threatened a nuclear war in which hundreds of millions might die.
This prompted ‘the frightful desire to do something’ he went on to record in his diary,24 which included, as Peter Catterall points out in his chapter here, attempts to manage responses to the crisis in, and through, the United Nations.
No other phenomenon in human history can have so engaged the attention and anxieties of so much of the global population.
A rare example of the social history of the crisis is provided by Alice George’s Awaiting Armageddon, which examines American attitudes.
George begins with the observation that, ‘For a precarious week in 1962, all Americans got a taste of life on death row’.26 How far that was true for people all over the planet remains to be explored.
It was not revealed until 2013 that the United States came remarkably close to the accidental detonation of a hydrogen bomb in North Carolina in January 1961, when three out of four safety mechanisms failed after a B-51 bomber broke up in mid-air.
In October 1962 it was not only Americans who felt that the end of the world might be at hand; in Britain the sense of danger was equally acute.
As the chapter by Rosaleen Hughes and Jean Seaton on the BBC’s role shows, television brought the Cuban crisis into the living rooms of the nation, and the visual images carried on the emergency programme Flashpoint Cuba left an indelible mark on the consciousness of the viewing public and became an intrinsic part of individual memories of the crisis.
While it was a programme put together in an enormous hurry it can only properly be understood as the product both of the BBC’s institutional position and the way in which it practised its journalism.
Fallibility, bias and necessity Memories are fallible – and not just long-term memories.
It’s just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBMs in Turkey.
More understandably, memories of events many years past can also be fallible.
At one point, Anatoli Dobrynin, the highly experienced Soviet ambassador to Washington, mistakenly recalled that his crucial meeting with Robert Kennedy took place on Friday 26th rather than Saturday 27th October, raising the prospect of an entire recasting of the denouement of the crisis.
Historians, of course, seek to use all forms of evidence in devising their narratives and analyses.
The circumstances in which Introduction 7 decision-makers considered the use of weapons of mass destruction – be they heads of state or captains of submarines – require enquiry beyond memory and experience.
Seeking the recreation of the nuclear past and the moment of greatest global peril in October 1962 remains a necessity for those wishing to understand the past and to preserve the future.
The wording Sorenson used could nevertheless be interpreted as denoting a deal.
Schlosser provides a profoundly disturbing account of American nuclear weapons safety during the Cold War.
A possible alternative explanation was that the key word was ‘suddenly’ and that JFK recalled the deployment which as he remarked had been decided ﬁve years previously.
