It has been accepted for inclusion in International Social Science Review by an authorized editor of Nighthawks Open Institutional Repository.
The thirteen days of the crisis—which took place during the latter half of October, 1962—hallmarked the pacifying, diplomatic intentions of the American and Soviet heads of state.
By offering an analysis of the events of the crisis, this paper will demonstrate that cooperation between capitalists and communists could occur in the interests of the preservation of their respective systems and states.
Both superpowers publicized the progress of the situation to their citizens, with frequent updates via newspapers, radio broadcasts, and television features.
However, the diffusion of the Soviet-American tensions around Cuban shores was not won precisely the way either country’s public media announced.
Negotiations focusing on nuclear missiles stationed by NATO in Turkey were central to the rise of the crisis and were an important bargaining chip in American President John F Kennedy’s and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev’s diplomatic strategy, a secret which was held by both parties for over twenty years.
Sputnik’s 1957 success is renowned for bringing the United States and Soviet Union into the Space Race, with humankind taking, as Neil Armstrong famously put it, a “giant leap” into the future.
In October 1959, it was arranged to place fifteen Jupiter IRBMs in Turkey, with the Turkish government agreeing to keep the armaments sovereign to the United States and to keep the negotiations and acceptance of the missiles secret from the Turkish nation.
He believed the Soviets would use the Turkish IRBMs to justify arming Cuba—if Turkey could attack across the Black Sea for the US, Cuba could attack across the Gulf of Mexico for the USSR—so, three months before the crisis, he urged United States officials to see what needed to be done to remove the missiles, telling Undersecretary of State George Ball to progress the issue.
However, Ball, after discussing the issue with the Turkish ambassador, allied with other State Department officials and decided to not try to remove the missiles so as to preserve US-Turkish relations.
Fearing encirclement, Soviet leaders criticized NATO missile installations, with special emphasis on the project in Turkey.
To the Brink Despite Turkey’s façade that hosting American nuclear warheads had nothing to do with the Soviet Union, the installation process of the Jupiter missiles in the subsequent years furthered Khrushchev’s concerns about American encirclement and, along with other reasons, motivated the Soviet Union to covertly install their own intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev had also placed missiles in Cuba, according to historian Martin Walker, because of “honor,” as the Kremlin felt great pride in Cuba becoming communist without the “help” of the Red Army.
To maintain their beloved system in the Western Hemisphere, the Soviets felt duty-bound to defend Cuba against future American invasion.
The threat of nuclear retaliation from Cuban bases would be a sufficient deterrent for the current American president and his successors should they ever consider another assault on Cuba.
Additionally, because the USSR had an inferior set of Inter-Continental Ballistic Missiles , the way for it to create balance in the nuclear field was to place its IRBMs more strategically, which meant locating them closer to the American homeland.
Cuba—a Communist state only ninety-three miles from the tip of Florida that had just survived a United States military incursion at the Bay of Pigs—was prime real estate to host the intermediate-range Soviet missiles.
Both sides concluded that if the Cold War went hot, it would Published by Nighthawks Open Institutional Repository, 3 International Social Science Review, Vol., Iss. , Art. probably also go nuclear.
The American nuclear program expanded as well; at the time of the Cuban missile crisis, the United States possessed approximately 27,000 nuclear weapons, while the Soviet Union had approximately 3,000, which is the same number of nuclear armaments the United States had prepared to launch should the situation escalate.
Three bases at Guanajay were erected to house IRBMs with a range up to 2,200 miles that granted them access to most of the continental United States.
To the Brink gathered over the proceeding thirteen days to resolve the crisis in the way which best preserved the interests of America, NATO, and the world.
The group, which consisted of both civilian and military men, analyzed the situation but were not able to reach consensus on the strategic effect the Soviet missiles in Cuba would have should war break out.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara believed that they held zero net effect, as the USSR already possessed ICBMs which could, from Soviet territory, already assault the United States.
National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy and President Kennedy agreed with McNamara, believing that the Soviet missiles in Cuba, with respect to the other missiles they already had stationed, did not further jeopardize the United States.
Military leaders disagreed, though, believing that Soviet missiles so close to the homeland enhanced their rival’s power, in large part because the Soviet strategies depended on bombing campaigns that featured traditionally difficult paths to the United States.
Regardless of the opposing views as to the military significance of the missiles, ExComm unanimously made the non-negotiable decision that the Soviet weapons must go.
Robert Kennedy, the advisor with the most influence over the President, while not necessarily endorsing an invasion and occupation of Cuba, did call it preferable to an air strike, believing a bombing campaign to be short-sighted as the destruction of the current bases would not be able to prevent further installations a few months later.
In secret, Soviet forces on the Published by Nighthawks Open Institutional Repository, 5 International Social Science Review, Vol., Iss. , Art. island doubled United States intelligence estimates and were equipped with tactical nuclear weapons of which the Americans were unaware.
Local officers who were expected to not have enough time to contact Moscow while defending against a surprise assault were granted authority to use these armaments at their discretion.
On October 22, President Kennedy addressed the nation, explaining the Cuban missile crisis and the American leaders’ decision.
To the Brink of the iron curtain believed they were experiencing their last few days.
Fyodor Burlatsky, one of Khrushchev’s advisors, had telephoned his wife, pleading with her to leave everything and flee Moscow before American bombers could strike.
Accepting exclusively these terms meant ignoring the final term that arrived on the morning of the twenty-seventh which demanded the United States withdraw their Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy publicly accepted the first deal, agreeing not to condone further American or US-related invasions of Cuba.
He then sent his brother to consolidate the second part of the deal in private, agreeing to remove the fifteen Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Publicly, this final term went unanswered, so long as the Soviet Union did not announce its acceptance.
Conditionally, this arrangement had to remain secret on both sides; only about half Published by Nighthawks Open Institutional Repository, 7 International Social Science Review, Vol., Iss. , Art. of ExComm knew about the agreement, and even Lyndon Johnson did not learn about his president’s secret deal with Khrushchev until after succeeding him in office in 1963, but the crisis had been resolved and the threat of nuclear war diffused.
The United States would remove its Jupiter missiles and promise not to invade Cuba; in return, the Soviet Union would withdraw its own missiles from the island.
As a guest at the ExComm session on Black Saturday, Dean Acheson—Truman’s Secretary of State central to developing NATO and the containment-promoting Truman Doctrine—said that if the Soviets did not accept the naval quarantine, they would likely “knock out missiles in Turkey” with the United States likely responding by “knocking out a missile base inside the Soviet Union” in a dangerous escalation of conflicts that could easily end in full-scale war.
Instead of the Soviets responding to the blockade with an attack on Turkey, the two countries had concurred to a mutual withdrawal of overextended missiles, officially ending the crisis on the twenty-eighth of October, 1962.38 Despite all of the Soviet anxieties that surrounded the IRBMs placed in Turkey, their effectiveness had been under heavy criticism from Western officials.
To the Brink armaments, including two new types of self-propelled warheads and nuclear mines, which were designed specifically to overwhelm the Soviet’s vast tank army should a land invasion occur.
The Jupiter missiles positioned in Turkey were stationed above-ground and were not enclosed; they were unprotected to environmental hazards, easily identifiable, and vulnerable to enemy assault.
Additionally, they were dependent on highly volatile liquid fuels that rendered the missiles “too slow in alert reaction,” as painstaking and dangerous procedures needed to be made in preparing the missiles for launch.
Far-reaching ICBMs like the Atlas and Titan missiles and fast, solid-fueled armaments like the Minuteman and Polaris quickly overshadowed the Jupiter IRBM program, causing military and political leaders to favor them over the NATO installments sanctioned by the Eisenhower administration, which added to the desire to pull the Jupiter missiles from their Turkish homes.
Turkish foreign minister Selim Sarper explained that if the installations were canceled before Polaris submarine substitutes were available, Turkish morale and faith in NATO and the United States would be undermined.
Because of this, removing potentially first-strike nuclear weapons from a country that could readily be capricious became a foreign policy concern for Kennedy’s cabinet before the Cuban missile crisis had even started, so the President’s concession to secretly remove the political lightning rods that were the Jupiter missiles may have been a mutual win for both the American and Soviet heads of state.
Additionally, the peaceful resolution of the crisis, facilitated in part by the mutual withdrawal of overextended missiles, fostered a stronger relationship between the President and Premier.
On October 28, the day after the frightful “Black Saturday,” Nikita Khrushchev sent an auspicious letter of praise to John Kennedy, expressing his “great appreciation” toward the young president for having sent Robert Kennedy to negotiate the Jupiter missiles’ removal.
As predicted, Turkey felt it was “being informed rather than consulted” about its national security and foreign policy matters and abhorred its imbalanced relationship with the United States, but the removal of the Jupiter missiles did not cause any serious discord in the Turkish-American relationship.
When the Turks agreed with NATO in 1959 to receive the Jupiter missiles, Ankara and Washington shared desires to establish the nuclear bases, so American-Turkish negotiations had been easy for the Eisenhower administration.
Kennedy four years later, however, experienced a Turkish government very reluctant to remove its new armaments, and negotiations were much tougher.
Despite Ankara’s reluctance to concur at first, the removal of the Jupiter missiles brought benefits to Turkey as well.
More than two thousand sorely needed Turkish technicians were freed for other projects.
With the removal of the IRBMs from Turkey one year after the final missile became operational, “The Jupiter phase-out proved to be as mysterious as its deployment,” but the missiles’ importance during the crisis in Cuban has, through the slow declassification process, become less opaque.
The missiles’ presence in Turkey, so close to the Soviet Union, had furthered Nikita Khrushchev’s paranoia about American encirclement and helped motivate his decision to place Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The tension this reciprocation caused was palpable, often considered the closest the world has ever come to a nuclear holocaust.
Fortunately the Published by Nighthawks Open Institutional Repository, 11 International Social Science Review, Vol., Iss. , Art. situation never escalated that far, and two deals were brokered between the two superpowers, each leader’s demands having been met.
The Jupiter missiles— like many other events in the Cold War—manifested reciprocity.
As the presence of American missiles in Turkey caused Soviet missiles to arise in Cuba, so too did their removal cause a mutual withdrawal of Soviet armaments.
Two administrations after its resolution, President Richard Nixon, upon discovering that the Soviets were constructing a submarine base at the Cuban port Cienfuegos, instinctively scrambled together a plan to install missiles in either Turkey or the Black Sea to give the United States some “trading stock” which could help negotiate the base’s cancellation.
While Nixon never resolved the issue, this incident, according to Philip Nash, “suggests that the Jupiter missiles had maintained some presence in official memory” well after the Kennedy administration removed them.
The Cuban missile crisis surprisingly benefitted the different states involved.
To the Brink mutual understanding between the two leaders; both states had been willing to grant concessions in favor of the other, perhaps opening a new doorway to the mollification of American-Soviet relations.
With President John F Kennedy’s assassination thirteen months after the Cuban missile crisis, and Premier Nikita Khrushchev’s removal the following year, this new passage of understanding was transient at best, and hopes of a mutual movement to ease the Cold War ended with the respective administrations.
Such thought experiments cannot rewrite history, and after the crisis in Cuba, there would be another quarter of a century until the Cold War would end, and tensions between these two bodies have yet to fully diffuse.
Published by Nighthawks Open Institutional Repository, 13 International Social Science Review, Vol., Iss. , Art.
To the Brink 41 Jacob Neufeld, The Development of Ballistic Missiles in the United States Air Force, 19451960 , 232.
