January ■ February ■ March ■ April ■ May ■ June ■ July ■ August ■ September ■ October ■ November ■ December 1962 was a common year starting on Monday of the Gregorian calendar, the 1962nd year of the Common Era and Anno Domini designations, the 962nd year of the 2nd millennium, the 62nd year of the 20th century , and the 3rd year of the 1960s decade.
Buddhist 2506 calendar Burmese 1324 calendar Byzantine 7470-7471 calendar Chinese ^ calendar 4658 or 4598 January February March April May June July August September October November December Date unknown Nobel Prizes References Events January ■ January Stena Line is established as a ferry operator, by Sten A Olsson in Gothenburg, Sweden.
Navy Seal 1 is commissioned in the Pacific Fleet, and SEAL Team Two in the Atlantic Fleet.
February ■ February 3 The United States embargo against Cuba is announced.
A t otal solar e clipse is visible in Asia, Australia and the Pacific Ocean, and is the 49th solar eclipse of Solar Saros 130.
Carol Cox becomes the first woman allowed to race at a Natio nal Hot Rod Association national event; she wins in the Super Stock class.
While aboard Friendship 7, John Glenn becomes the first American to orbit the Earth, three times in 4 hours, 55 minutes.
Kresge Company opens its first Kmart discount store in Garden City, Michigan.
France and Algeria sign an agreement in Evian-les-Bains, ending the Algerian War.
The United States Supreme Court rules that federal courts can order state legislatures to reapportion seats.
April ■ April 3 Jawaharlal Nehru is elected de facto Prime Minister of India.
May ■ May Larry Allen Abshier defects to North Korea, becoming the first of six American defectors to the country.
Benfica beats FC Barcelona 5-3 at the Olympic Stadium , to win the 1961-62 European Cup in association football.
Scott Carpenter orbits the Earth 3 times, in the Aurora 7 space capsule.
The United States Supreme Court rules that mandatory prayers in public schools are unconstitutional.
Supporters of Algerian independence win a 99% majority, in a referendum.
Byrne goes on to present the show for 37 years, the longest period through which any individual hosts a televised talk show anywhere in the world, and the show itself becomes the world's second longest-running talk show.
The ""Small Boy"" test shot Little Feller I becomes the last atmospheric test detonation, at the Nevada Test Site.
The Mariner 1 spacecraft flies erratically several minutes after launch, and has to be destroyed.
W ■ The International Agreement on the Neutrality of Laos is signed in Geneva.
September ■ September 1 ■ A referendum in Singapore supports the Malayan Federation.
Mercury-Atlas 8 Walter Schirra orbits the Earth six times, in the Sigma 7 s pace capsule.
No, the first James Bond film, premieres at the London Pavilion, featuring Sean Connery as the hero.
Pope John XXIII convenes the first ecumenical council of the Roman Catholic Church in 92 years.
Pictures of Soviet missile silos in Cuba, taken by United States spy planes.
A U-2 flight over Cuba in the Caribbean photographs Soviet nucl ear weapons being installed.
A stand-off then ensues for another 12 days, after President Kennedy is told of the pictures, between the United States and the Soviet Union, threatening the world with nuclear war.
In a televised address, United States President John F Kennedy announces to the nation the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The first confrontation occurs between the United States Navy and a Soviet cargo vessel; the vessel changes course.
Soviet Union leader Nikita Khrushchev announces that he has ordered the removal of Soviet missile bases in Cuba.
In a secret deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev, Kennedy agrees to the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey.
The fact that this deal is not made public makes it look as though the Soviets have backed down.
November ■ November Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's novella One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich , the author's semiautobiographical account of life in the gulag, is published in Novy Mir, in an unprecedented acknowledgement of the Soviet Union's Stalinist past.
The United Nations General Assembly passes a resolution condemning South Africa's racist apartheid policies and calls for all UN member states to cease military and economic relations with the nation.
In response to the Soviet Union agreeing to remove its missiles from Cuba, President John F Kennedy ends the blockade of the island.
After a trip to Vietnam at the request of United States President John F Kennedy, United States Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield becomes the first American official to make a pessimistic public comment on the war's progress.
However, the Louvre, its owner, chooses to spend the money that would have been spent on the insurance premium on security instead.
Belgian pirate radio station Radio Uylenspiegel is knocked off the airwaves, never to operate again.
The ""Big Freeze"" begins; there are no frost-free nights until March 5, 1963.
The same day, also, the Netherlands are covered with several feet of snow.
Date unknown ■ American advertising man Martin K Speckter invents the interrobang, a new English-language punctuation mark.
Dey, Indian singer, composer, actor and teacher ■ Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands ■ November 29 Erik Scavenius, 12th Prime Minister of Denmark ■ November 30 Joseph Lade Pawsey, Australian radio astronomer, (b.
