This was one of the earliest day-by-day accounts of the Cuban missile crisis.
Its details have long been superseded by works with a stronger documentary base, but it enjoyed a few moments of relatively positive attention.
Absher summarizes the familiar events of the crisis, emphasizing the mind-sets of key players as they struggled to correlate unsubstantiated agent reports, incomplete U-2 coverage, and political variables as they prepared their estimates.
This scholarly work continues to offer a unique theoretical perspective on the crisis.
I recommend it for people seriously interested in developing their analytical skills.
However, many of the substantive details of the crisis have been substantially enhanced since Allison's work.
In a move carrying some risk, Allison's classic work has been substantially revised to take into account comments similar to those above about the availability of new substantive material on the Missile Crisis.
Additionally, the authors seek to both extend and add depth to the theoretical framework that was the centerpiece of the original.
The author warns that this article is based on his own experiences, rather than on research in original source materials.
Given the lack of the latter, this account will have to stand until the documentary record on the Cuban side is fleshed out.
The author relates the analytic effort to determine what the cargo of a Soviet merchant ship in October 1962 might have been.
A presumptive answer of nuclear warheads was reached, although there is no assurance that such was the case.
According to Sexton, the author covers the German Ardennes offensive of 1944, the Chinese intervention in Korea in 1950, and the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba in 1961.
For Coffey, Studies 57. , it is unfortunate that the authors ""treat the failure to discover the photo gap as something of a cold case.
They focus on McCone's internal assessment of missile crisis coverage, a CIA Inspector General investigation, a review board report, and congressional hearings.
This work ""provides a fine account of the behind-the-scenes maneuvers,"" contains ""superb portraits of KGB agents and heads of state,"" and is ""splendidly written.
