Timelineclaver.gprep.org/sjochs/cuban_missile_crisis time-line chronicle.htmOct 24, 2015 · October 27, 1962.
A new letter from Khrushchev arrives, proposing a public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for United States missile in Turkey.
McGeorge Bundy informs President Kennedy that evidence shows Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy immediately gathers a group that becomes known as ""ExComm,"" the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
Castro allowed the installation of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba which would shorten the time it took for the missiles to reach American targets.
The crisis happened during the period known as the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union.
When the Soviet Union placed missiles on the island of Cuba, the two major countries came to the brink of nuclear war.
President Kennedy discusses what he should do about the ICBM's in Cuba.
October 16, 1962 At the EXCOMM meeting, a CIA photo interpreter shows evidence of missiles sites on Cuba taken by a U-2 spy plane.
October 17 Discussions continue about how to handle the possible threat in Cuba.
Upload; Login; Signup; Upload; Home; Explore; Login; Signup; Successfully reported this slideshow.
Due to the age and poor quality of some of the PDF images, a screen reader may not be able to process the images into word documents.
Timeline of the Key Events October 14 th 1962, a U-2 spy plane spots the missiles.
Here, as the situation escalates, that sense of percieved failure is going to be enormously high.
Charles Multsby, an American driver, is lost by flying a mission in Alaska and ends up in Soviet airspace.
The tension and secrecy almost drove the three nations to the first absolute nuclear war.
In light of the absolute slander this perfect subreddit with absolutely no flaws has received, I present to you my greatest alternate history scenario, maybe the best in the entire world; what if u/AP246 was literally Hitler.1. 47 comments.3.
Cesar Sarmiento Date: 4/27/2021 Hour: _________ DBQ 9: COLD WAR AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, 1962 Historical Background For 13 days, the Soviet Union and the United States were on the brink of nuclear war.
