His voice and witness are indispensable in our efforts to enhance the wretched of the earth.
Juan Gomez Quinonez, historian and writer, UCLA “Just like landmark art work or historically seminal music, Bob Avakian’s delivery and timing is truly inspiring.
The only thing more inspiring is the vision and message he presents to us.
Bob Avakian convincingly argues that morality has to be tied to a vision of a good society, a society free of exploitation and every form of domination.
Even more does morality have to do with the struggle to create such a society.
Avakian points the way toward what some doubt is possible, a materialist ethics.
Political and Social Hermeneutics “With marxist analysis Avakian takes apart the saints of liberal democratic theory: he guts Stuart Mill and shreds John Locke.
Ross Gandy, author of Marx and History From Ike to Mao and Beyond My Journey from Mainstream America to Revolutionaty Communist A Memoir by Bob Avakian © V Insight Press Chicago Front and back cover photos courtesy of the author.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.
Perseverance, and Inspiration About Bob Avakian Photo section follows page 242.
Bob raised the idea to me and a few other people. thought it would be a good way to introduce this revolutionary leader and thinker to a new audience, and so I strongly urged him to take this on, as did others.
He heard us out and agreed, and before too long a few of us got together with a tape recorder and he set about telling the story of his life. 1 was not prepared for what I would learn.
I’ve known Bob for over 30 years, but there are sides to people that you only learn about when they start peeling back a lifetime of experience for recounting and examination.
There is history, drama—with no small amount of tragedy—and plenty of humor over a life that spans more than 60 years.
Speaking as a communist revolutionary, as someone who considers Bob Avakian’s insights and body of work to be on the level of a Lenin or a Mao, a continuation of what they represent but also containing and pointing to some bold new directions—and as someone who considers that to be a very good thing!—I found incredible value in meeting this leader in a very personal way. saw the combination of the experiences and his own individual character and dynamism that gave rise to his particular orientation and outlook and accomplishments.
Above all, Bob Avakian is someone who never gave up his dreams, while he has simultaneously continued to critically and unsparingly interrogate himself as well as the movement he is part of and has contributed so much to.
Bob is someone who came out the other side of that process with the vision not only intact, but greatly deepened in complexity and tempered with what can only be called science—and, as he himself emphasizes, a living, critical, creative approach to that science and its application to changing the world.
As I mentioned, I helped to interview Bob for this work, and we then corresponded on the editing of the material from the transcripts. added a few footnotes to help contextualize things.
Lenny Wolff Summer 2004 Author’s Note In attempting to write a memoir of a life which has already spanned more than six decades—and which has been enriched by a great diversity of people and experiences—it is difficult to decide which events, encounters and relationships are the most important and appropriate to mention.
I have tried to select some which are particularly significant in terms of having a formative or major influence in shaping my life and my view of things.
I have also included things that may seem of lesser significance but that I recall fondly and still find humorous or in some other way interesting—and this too may provide some insight into what I am like and what my life has been, and continues to be, all about.
Although it is difficult to recall with complete accuracy all the people, events and circumstances which are mentioned here, I have done my best and I hope and believe that 1 have succeeded in this, at least with regard to the essentials.
In a number of instances, 1 have given only part of a person’s name or I have actually changed the name.
Despite the limitations necessarily imposed by these considerations, I believe that I have been able to convey, at times indirectly and wherever possible directly, a sense of people who have been important in my life, on a personal level and in terms of shaping my view of the world and my values.
For those who are not directly mentioned, but whom I hold in my heart, you know who you are.
For the ways in which many people have played a positive role in helping me come to the understanding and commitment that has characterized, and will continue to characterize, my life and life’s work, I am very grateful.
All of a sudden contractions had started but she was “holding me in” until we got to the hospital.
So I was actually born in Washington, D.C. but lived my first three years in Arlington, Virginia, across the Potomac.
My mother, Ruth, was originally from Berkeley, and my dad, Spurgeon, was originally from Fresno, California.
My father had become a lawyer by then, and had gotten a job working for the Justice Department as a tax evasion prosecutor.
Armenia to Fresno to Berkeley My dad went to Fresno State for his undergraduate college, and then to law school at Boalt Hall in Berkeley.
He’d gotten a lot of offers for jobs from private firms if he would change his name so it didn’t sound Armenian, but he refused to do that—both out of pride and because it just seemed unprincipled and unjust for him to have to I 2 From Ike to Mao and Beyond change his name and hide his family identity and nationality.
My dads parents emigrated from Armenia, before the big massacre of a million and a half Armenians by the Turkish authorities in World War 1.
Even before the war, the Turkish government had carried out and encouraged brutal pogroms against Armenians for many years.
My grandmother’s and grandfather’s families had both suffered from that, and they had left Armenia and come to the United States when my grandparents were young, where they met each other and married.
So my father was born in the U.S., in Fresno, where his parents’ families had settled as farmers because the climate and the kind of crops you could grow were similar to Armenia.
By the time I was a kid my grandparents’ farm was very small, and they sort of eked out an existence with that plus the income that my grandfather earned by washing windows.
They grew grapes, walnuts, almonds, maybe a few orange trees, apricots—things like that.
The grapes would have taken the most acreage, but the whole farm was only nine acres.
My dad worked on the farm when he was growing up, as did his two brothers.
Later, when he didn’t have to do it for economic reasons any longer, the kind of things that he’d done as a farm kid became a sort of recreation for him.
He came back to Fresno and opened a small business as an auto mechanic.
This was all during the Great Depression of the 1930s and nobody—at least nobody in my dad’s circles—had a lot of money; he went to Fresno State because he could live at home, and then he went on to Berkeley for law school.
When I was growing up we would often go to Fresno to be with my father’s relatives for Thanksgiving, and then we’d stay at home for Christmas, and a lot of my mom’s relatives would come over for that.
The main thing I remember about holidays with my dad’s relatives, to be Mom and Dad 3 honest, is a lot of the food.
I remember the smell of my grandfather barbecuing shish kebab on the farm.
They’d have Armenian pilal, which was very rich with butter, and I would just pile the pilaf on top of this chicken and then I’d put my fork down through the pilaf, and the chicken was so tender it would just fall away from the bone when my fork got to it.
A lot of the relatives in Fresno spoke Armenian, at least among themselves, more than they spoke English.
My father spoke Armenian, especially to his parents and to other Armenians, when they were in that cultural scene.
I learned just a few phrases from being around my father, but neither 1 nor my two sisters really learned how to speak the language.
Yet we did imbibe, so to speak, some of the culture just from being around.
My grandparents were very good-hearted, generous people, and some of my other Armenian relatives were as well.
But many of them were also petty property owners and proprietors, with the corresponding outlook.
I was fond of them, because they were relatives and many of them were very kind on a personal level; but, at the same time, many were very narrowminded and conservative, or even reactionary, on a lot of social and political issues.
And from a very early age, because 1 was raised differently than that, there was a lot of tension, which sometimes broke out kind of sharply.
On one side of the freeway lived all the white people—and essentially only white people lived there.
Ironically, the Armenians, who were not actually European in origin, in the context of America were assimilated as white people, even though they faced some discrimination.
By the time I was growing up, if you were Armenian you were accepted among the while people, by and large, somewhat the way other immigrants, like Italians, might have gone through some discrimination but finally got accepted as being white.
The Blacks and the Latinos and Asians lived on the other side of the 4 From Ike to Mao and Beyond freeway in Fresno, where the conditions were markedly and dramatically much worse.
And none of my Fresno relatives ever ventured, at least if they could help it, across the freeway.
So this was emblematic and representative of a lot of the conflict that came up.
For these reasons, I have acutely contradictory feelings about Fresno and my Armenian relatives.
My dad was very aware of the discrimination against Armenians, and this had a big effect on how he looked at things more broadly.
He ended up setting up his own practice, and practiced law with a couple of partners, partly because he couldn’t get hired by these other firms, even though, as I said, many of them offered him jobs if he would change his name.
I remember his telling a story about when he was on the college debating team.
They were traveling to a debate in Oregon, 1 think, and they went to the house of one of the debating team members for dinner before the debate.
Then all the members of the debating team got this look on their faces, and the parents realized they must have committed a faux pas, and then someone told them what the deal was with my dad.
Those kinds of incidents stamped the question of discrimination very acutely into my father’s consciousness.
Besides learning about this directly from him, I’ve seen interviews that he’s done, or speeches that he’s given, where he has talked about the big impact this had on him and how it made him very acutely aware of the whole question of discrimination and the injustice of it.
This would carry over importantly into his life, when the struggle around civil rights and the oppression of Black people broke open in American society in a big way in the 1950s and ’60s.
I remember running around what seemed like a huge courtyard when 1 was maybe two years old.
I went back and saw it as a teenager and it turned out to be a tiny little space, but at the time it seemed pretty big to me.
But one very strong memory I do have is when my dad got polio and was paralyzed.
This was pretty traumatic for me—to see someone so strong in my life in such suffering.
On top of this, a lot of the other parents didn’t want their kids to play with me or my sister any more.
My mother nursed my dad back Mom and Dad 5 to health while she was pregnant with my younger sister, and she had to keep two boisterous kids indoors because other parents didn’t want to risk getting their kids exposed to polio—and she had to keep us quiet on top of that, since my dad couldn’t lake too much noise.
My dad was determined to regain his ability to walk and even to run and to play sports.
She came running in and his leg was just microscopically off the bed, but he was so excited, because that was the first time, since he got polio, that he’d been able to lift his leg on his own.
It look him quite a while to get back to walking but eventually, with a lot of determination and help from my mom, he got back all of his abilities to do things, though his stomach muscles were permanently weakened.
Compassionate...and Determined My mother was both very compassionate and generous on the one hand, and at the same time very determined if she made up her mind about something.
There was no other way for my father to recover, other than for her to essentially nurse him back to health and assist him with his exercises . 1 don’t remember exactly how long a period that was—it wasn’t years, but it was months.
My parents were very fond of each other and very good to each other — they were married for over sixty years.
But there was also this sort of classical post-World War 2 division of labor where mainly my mom took care of the kids and my dad worked.
I can remember, for example, when my younger sister, Mary-Lou, was born, just before we left Washington, D.C., in 1946.
My older sister and 1 both had the chicken pox while my mom was in the hospital having my sister.
Then my dad had to go out of town for work, so they had to get a baby sitter.
At that point, my sister and 1 were at the totally unmanageable stage ol just getting over the chicken pox, and the baby sitter could only take a few hours of us before 6 From Ike to Mao and Beyond she was calling up my dad and threatening to quit right in the middle of all this.
Eventually, as I recall, my dad prevailed on her to stay, but that gives you a feel for how it was in those days, with the classical postWW2 division of labor.
My mother’s family name was Welch, and she came from a long line of families from Great Britain, both her mother’s and father’s, and that’s a very different background than my dad’s.
But a lot of the religious side of her was this spirit of “Christian giving” and the golden rule and doing for the less fortunate.
Even some of the things that could have been tokenistic were more than that with my mom.
We used to have “sacrifice night” on Sundays during Lent, when instead of having a regular meal, we would have a very sparse meal, and not eat anything for the rest of the night.
Then we would lake the money that we would have spent on having a regular meal and contribute it to a church charity.
Now, obviously, we weren’t sharing the conditions of the oppressed or of the really impoverished people in the world.
To be honest, some of us kids kind of dreaded it, but it also had a good effect on us, even though it was in the context of “Christian charity” and so on.
She wasn’t self-effacing, but she was very selfsacrificing and generous.
Now, my parents weren’t just together for over sixty years, they were extremely fond of each other the whole time.
This was something that I always recognized and appreciated, and in particular with my mom 1 always recognized and appreciated her compassion and generosity and self-sacrificing qualities.
But growing up as a boy in the ’40s and ’50s, in the more middle class stratum that I was from, in a lot of ways I kind of Look my mother for granted.
You know, she was always there, she was always supportive, she was always helpful, she was always so compassionate and sympathetic, and she was always sacrificing for other people in the family or for other people beyond the family.
But as an adult I actually learned a lot of things about my mother, and learned to appreciate her much more fully, than I did as a kid.
For instance, when she Mom and Dad 7 was still pretty young, back in the 1930s, she drove her family across the country at one point, which was not that common for a woman to do then.
Another lime, when she was Leaching high school, there was one student there who needed to get certain credits for college—in particular she needed to take Latin, but there was no Latin class there.
But even more than those incidents, I’ve come to see how I’ve taken many of her values and made them my own.
Also, my mother had a great love of the outdoors that she’d gotten from her family, in particular her father.
She liked taking us to the mountains and out into nature, to all these beautiful places that 1 learned to love.
One time, my younger sister Mary-Lou and myself and my parents had gone up into the mountains and on our way back home, we had to go through the little, dreary town of Merced, just a little ways from Fresno.
It was getting to be about lunchtime, and Merced was about an hour away, and my mother was very determined that we were going to eat in the beautiful setting of the mountains.
But the rest of us wanted to have ice cream or something, down in Merced.
Finally after a long discussion we decided to have a vote, and my father ended up voting with us two kids to eat in Merced.
She said the latter with such disdain that you would’ve thought we were going to be eating in a garbage dump.
Unfortunately, even her way of stacking the argument didn’t lead to her winning out in that case—although it did become a sort of family metaphor for indicating a strong preference while posing as neutral.
She was completely right, of course, and now I would have no hesitation to side with her if she were here.
My dad grew up on a farm, and later on he very much loved a home that my parents had in the Santa Cruz mountains, but as far as roughing it, that wasn’t really his thing so much.
As I said, my dad grew up in very modest cir8 From Ike to Mao and Beyond cumstances, so it wasn’t that he was spoiled.
But “roughing it in nature” wasn’t his idea of an ideal vacation the way it was for my mom.
My mom was a student at Cal, which was also somewhat unusual for a woman at that lime, and then because of the Depression and because my dad was still in law school, they couldn’t afford to get married.
And during that time, after she graduated from Cal and after a year of looking for work, my mom got a job teaching school in a small town a couple of hours from Berkeley—she taught high school there for two years.
She could not say that she was engaged while she was leaching, because then they would think she would leave once she was married and would fire her.
So she had to hide the fact that she was engaged, and a number of the guys who were teaching at the school were trying to ask her out.
But after a couple of years, when my dad finished law school, my mom and dad got married.
While my parents were from different backgrounds, neither of their families resisted their marriage.
Despite a lot of insularity among the Armenian relatives, my father’s parents felt the important thing was what kind of person you marry, not whether they were an Armenian.
My mother was pretty readily accepted both because of the altitude of my father’s parents, but also because she was a very likeable person.
And my mother learned how to cook some of the Armenian foods, and picked up some of the other cultural things.
So the combination of all that meant that she got accepted pretty quickly.
They were nice people generally, although they too were pretty conservative in a lot of ways, and also, to be honest, my father, having graduated from law school, was someone who had a certain amount of stature when my parents got married.
Despite the fairly conservative atmosphere in which she was raised, my mother was very far from being narrow and exclusive in how she related to people.
If she came in contact with you, unless you did something to really turn her off or make her think that you were a bad person, she would welcome and embrace you.
Besides things like the Sunday “sacrifice night” meal, my parents, mostly on my mother’s initiative, would do other “Christian charMom and Dad 9 ity” things, like in that Jack Nicholson movie, About Schmidt , where he “adopts” a kid from Africa and sends money.
But they not only paid a certain amount of money, they took an active interest—they corresponded, they actually tried to go and visit some of the kids or even the people as grown-ups with whom they had had this kind of relationship.
My mother had a very big heart and very big arms, if you want to put it that way.
She was not the kind of person who would reject people out of hand or for superficial reasons.
I remember when I was about four or five years old and somehow from the kids that 1 was playing with.
I’d picked up this racist variation on a nursery rhyme, so 1 was saying, “eeny, meeny, miny moe, catch a nigger by the toe.” 1 didn’t even know what “nigger” meant, I’d just heard other kids saying this.
And she explained to me further, the way you could to a fouror five-year-old, why that wasn’t a good thing to say.
It’s one of those things that even as a kid makes you stop in your tracks.
She didn’t come down on me in a heavy way, she just calmly explained to me that this was not a nice thing to say, and why it wasn’t a good thing to say.
That was very typical of my mother and it obviously made a lasting impression on me.
One thing 1 learned from my mother is to look at people all-sidedly, to see their different qualities and not just dismiss them because of certain negative or superficial qualities.
And 1 also learned from my mother what kind of person to be yourself—to try to be giving and outgoing and compassionate and generous, and not narrow and petty.
Chapter Two One Nation Under God A ’ 50s Boyhood I had a sorl of typical American boyhood lor the 1950s—a lot of sports, a lot of good times with my sisters, and a lot of cutting up in school.
We moved to Berkeley when I was three, and I have a few very sharp memories and some impressions from those days.
I remember when 1 was told there was no Santa Claus, when I was five years old.
We used to have Christmas presents on Christmas eve, and my father or one of my uncles would dress up as Santa Claus.
After you get to be a little bit more of a thinking person, you realize that there’s always someone missing every Christmas eve when you’re passing out presents.
I remember that this led to some tension with some of the other kids in kindergarten because, of course, when you’re a kid that age, you may not have that much awareness of or respect for how other kids’ families are handling this.
So you just start saying, “oh there’s no Santa Claus,” but 10 One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 11 some of ihe kids still believed there was.
To give you a sense of the kind of little kid 1 was, one lime I got the idea that instead of going to school it would be fun to go off and do something else, and another kid and 1 just completely disappeared and never showed up for school.
My parents were panicking, and in particular my mom was trying to find me, and eventually they found us somewhere—we just thought it would be fun to go off and do something else that day.
Another time, some teenager in the area was trying to gel me to jump out of a second-story window, promising to catch me. was just about ready to do it, but my mother came along and just caught it in the nick of time—she stopped me just as I was swinging my legs over the window sill.
She was furious. remember little things like that, crazy things that happen but you somehow survive—or usually people survive them.
Sports Sports has been a big part of my life since I was very, very young. think 1 started playing football and basketball and baseball when I was about five.
True to his word when he had polio, my dad took me out and taught me how to play all these things.
It’s not like my sisters were explicitly excluded from this, but this was more of a thing with me, being the boy.
My dad started taking me to Cal football games and basketball games from the time I was about four or five years old.
I remember every year ihere’d be a parade through downtown Berkeley before the start of the football season, and this was one of the highlights of my year.
Our elementary school was small, but we did have organized teams in baseball, basketball and football.
We played other schools and had city championships; we even had a young kids’ team for first and second graders, and I played on that when I was six and seven.
Whenever he could take off from work, my dad would always come to my games from the lime I was really little.
You’d always see him with his little eight-millimeter camera taking pictures on the sidelines.
When 1 got a little older and I’d throw a pass that was a pretty long pass for a fifth or sixth grader, you’d see my dad pacing down the sidelines trying 12 From Ike to Mao and Beyond to measure how many yards long the pass was.
My dad had this friend—1 think he was a lawyer who worked with him as a government lawyer when we were back in D.C.—and my dad used to write to him all the lime in these deliberately exaggerated terms, bragging about my sports exploits.
He’d write about it as though it were professional teams playing, sort of in a self-consciously exaggerated way, and then his friend would write back.
In her own way, my mom also shared in my enthusiasm for sports, but my dad in particular was just full of passion for it, and he had a lot of pride in whatever I was doing.
But it wasn’t that sort of disgusting thing where you put pressure on your kid and you have no appreciation for other kids.
He wouldn’t yell at me when things didn’t go well, and when we lost the city elementary school championship game in football, my parents consoled me, they didn’t act like I’d let them down.
I just loved sports, and whenever I got a chance I tried to play—I didn’t care if the other kids playing were a lot older than me.
So, from a very early age, around five or so, I started hanging around kids who were older, playing sports—even young teenagers, or tenor eleven-year-old guys.
And, of course, one of the big things when you get into sports, in this kind of society, is that there’s this whole macho element to it, and one part of that is you swear a lot.
Now my parents came from the kind of a background where you didn’t say things like that, especially in public.
They didn’t gel too angry, but they told me that what 1 had said wasn’t a very good thing to say and I shouldn’t do that.
So after a little while I looked up at them and said, “Well, okay then, but is it all right to say ‘hubba hubba?”—which was another thing I’d heard hanging around the older kids playing sports.
My life was kind of seasonal in that way, and I loved all those sports in their turn, in their season.
When I was six we moved into a new house and it was about equidistant between two schools that were in the Berkeley hills.
So, my dad drove me around and we looked at both schools, and 1 picked Oxford because, when we drove by it, I could see the basketball courts on the playground.
He was a student at Cal and took care of the playground in summer and on the weekends and after school.
I remember him fairly fondly—he was a nice guy, not like a military drill sergeant.
To give you the contrast between him and some of what you often see, we had an incident when I was in fourth grade where we were behind by a couple of points in a football game, and on the last play of the game, 1 threw a pass for a touchdown and we won the game.
Nobody had showed up to referee the game, so the coach of the other team was refereeing, and his own team was offsides on this play.
He was thinking this coach/ref was talking about the touchdown, so he said “Okay, we’ll take it,” and then this coach/ref insisted that “it” meant the offside penalty, so we were forced to run the play over again.
We ran the play again, I threw the pass again, but this Lime it was incomplete and we lost the game.
That coach/referee should not have put that kind of pressure on an eleven-year-old kid, he should not have tricked him in that way.
There should not have been that kind of atmosphere, where winning was that important.
Our coach was not like that—he was actually a fairly decent guy as 1 remember, and he didn’t make us feel like we’d failed the universe, or him, if we didn’t win a game, or even a championship game.
But from the time 1 was nine or ten I was pretty regularly playing sports with teenage kids, and they inculcated in me the idea that you had to win, you had to win, you had to win—and that losing was a disgrace.
They had had this drummed into them, and it’s not so much that they sat me down and said, “this is the way it is,” but it just kind of rubbed off on me, along with a lot of macho stuff and the bullshit that boys in general absorb in this kind of culture.
It was generally very pronounced in the ’50s, but especially boys who were deeply into sports got a heavy dose of this.
Those are the kinds of things that more came from hanging 14 From Ike to Mao and Beyond around with older kids playing sports—that was kind of the negative side of it.
There were a lot of positive things that came out of it because of the particular times and because of the opportunities that it presented to have a lot of experience with kids from completely different backgrounds and situations, particularly Black kids.
At the same time, there was the negative side—the sort of macho, militaristic, win-at-any-cost kind of stuff.
But I didn’t get that from my own coach in grammar school, and 1 didn’t get it from my parents.
But, it was kind of a classical situation where my sisters had to do things like iron clothes — they even had to iron my clothes.
When I got into high school I had friends who were from poorer backgrounds who ironed their own clothes.
So there was tension that resulted not just from being siblings, but also from the sort of gender socialization and male domination which I just grew up with—even though I loved my sister, I just assumed that driving the car is what a guy does.
A girl gets a guy to drive her around in a car, girls don't drive cars.
But even earlier, there was tension just because I was always kind of a prankster.
For example, my father would quite often at dinnertime say, “okay gang” and then start telling us about the latest case he was involved in as a lawyer.
All of us got it, but one of the ways in which I used it—because, again, 1 was always sort of a prankster—was, just for the nasty fun of it.
I’d get Mary-Lou, who had her favorite toys, to sign contracts that would turn over these toys and the ownership of these toys to me.
Now Mary-Lou and 1 were very close in a lot of ways, so I don’t want to give a one-sided impression, but these were pranks I liked to play, and then my dad would have to come down and invalidate them.
That is, when Sunday nights came around, I would not want to go to school the next day, so I would start calculatingly coughing about eight o’clock at night on Sunday; and after I went to bed, I’d wake myself up and have these “coughing spells” in the middle of the night.
When my younger sister got a little older, I’d try to get her to do the same thing, and sometimes she would, and we had all kinds of games.
We had a rollaway bed on wheels, and 1 used to tie a rope to the rollaway bed and tie the other end to a door handle, and we could pull ourselves around, and get rides on it and things like that.
I also remember when I was about six, I guess, the big star football player at Cal was a guy named Jackie Jensen, so my dad and 1 were always playing catch and talking about Jackie Jensen.
I remember Mary-Lou, she was just three, picked up a football and ran around the backyard saying “me Jackie Jensen, me Jackie Jensen,” because she was trying to get in on things Loo, she didn’t want to be left out.
My older sister Marjorie would be in charge of us when my parents would go out sometimes.
So then there would be conflict between my older sister and the two others of us, and we’d gel into a lot of fracases.
But, while I’m talking about a lot of the conflicts we had, we were also really good friends.
We would confide in each other a lot, the way kids 16 From Ike to Mao and Beyond do, and conspire against our parents, or complain about our parents, about what they wouldn’t let us do, or what they made us do.
I remember one time my parents went on a trip lor a week and they left us in the charge of this college student who was a friend of the family’s.
He, of course, didn’t know anything about how to raise kids anyway, and he particularly didn’t know how to deal with us.
And so we had all these grievances that had accumulated against this guy, who we thought was a tyrant.
We would get together and conspire against him, and try to give him a hard time because we thought he was just absolutely unbearable.
But I remember we’d do a lot of conspiring together like that, or just getting together and talking about things, the way kids do.
There was the usual tension between siblings, and then there was the tension that came from the larger societal roles that expressed themselves within our family.
Still, the gender conditioning went on from an early age and was pervasive.
I would interact with girls in school—sometimes maybe we’d work on projects together—but as far as things you would do outside of school, at recess, or during your “own time,” the girls pretty much played with the girls and the boys with the boys.
There were the usual grammar school flirtations that went on, but friendships were not really developed that much across gender lines.
With my sisters, it was again a contradictory thing—I really loved my sisters a lot, we were very close in a lot of ways, and I did some things with them.
In some ways, I was the good big brother, and in some ways I was the jerk big brother—or little brother, depending on which sister it was.
When we got older, when we started really getting interested in the opposite sex, we’d talk about that with each other and get advice.
Our worlds overlapped, especially in the family context, but they were also very different.
For instance, there were all kinds of ads on TV at that point and, in retrospect, you see that in addition to the products, they were selling ideology, loo.
You had One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 1 7 Lorraine Day, for instance, who was a spokesperson for Amana, which is a religious group that financed themselves through making household appliances.
She’d demonstrate a refrigerator and show you what a great freezer compartment it had, and so on.
The Lorraine Day thing was directed toward women as housewives, all the latest appliances that they needed to have.
Although my mother was cast somewhat in the role of the classical wife and mother at that lime, there was a lot more to her than that.
She did a lot of substitute teaching, and sometimes her assignments turned into long term substitute teaching.
There were a few Asian kids, and in the sports that 1 watched things were changing, so if you include those kinds of influences, the world 1 lived in was not entirely white.
But the immediate neighborhood and the school I went to were just about entirely while.
And so were the teachers and the principal and all that. 1 liked school alright, but to be honest, if someone asked me what was your favorite part of school when you were a kid.
Even for that lime, a lot of my teachers seemed like fuddy-duddies— old-fashioned, strict, kind of narrow-minded people—and this was from the time I started first grade, back in 1949. 1 remember when I started first grade, we had the alphabet up on a poster on the wall of the classroom, and we were supposed to learn how to write the alphabet—a lot of it was very uninspiring.
You learned how to print the letters and how to write in script, which is necessary, but you can only do that for so many limes until it starts getting to be a bit boring.
Mainly, a lot of what 1 learned, even reading, was from reading the 18 From Ike to Mao and Beyond sports page.
I remember, even before that, around the time 1 was just starting first grade, a friend of my father’s was visiting and my dad starting bragging about what a bright kid I was or something.
When I got a little older, maybe in second, third grade, I started reading other things, like the Hardy Boys mystery stories, but the way I got my introduction to arithmetic and reading was through the sports pages.
Just to give an example of how mechanical teaching was, in California at that time you could start school not only in September, but also in February.
Then your school year would run from February to February, and you’d graduate in February rather than in June.
So, because of that, and because the school I went to was small, when 1 went into the fourth grade, there were also the kids who’d been in the fourth grade for a half year already, who were in the same class.
And I remember this fourth grade teacher had all the kids write the multiplication tables on cards.
Then she’d call on someone and they’d have to stand up, and the teacher would say, “Jenny, do your 6’s”; and Jenny would get up and go 6X1 is 6, 6X2 is 12, 6X3 is 18, like that.
I was just about one week in this class, having come in at the mid-term, and I already knew my multiplication tables.
But 1 didn’t know that you were supposed to have cards with these tables written down on them.
A little later my turn came—the teacher called on me and said do your 8’s.
In anticipation of this, 1 had taken a piece of paper and just scribbled some things on it, and folded it up so it looked like 1 had my multiplication tables written on it; 1 got up and I looked at this card that just had scribble on it, and I went 8X1 is 8, 8X2 is 16, 8X3 is 24, 8X4 is 32, 8X5 is 40, and so on.
The teacher nodded approvingly, and 1 sat down with a great sigh of relief.
But the teacher couldn’t really do anything, One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 19 because after all I had gotten them right.
By the time I got into junior high, and even before that, 1 was notorious for playing pranks in school, and I drove a lot of teachers crazy, including maybe some who didn’t deserve it.
Andy Devine was this old, somewhat over-the-hill actor, and he had this kids’ show; they used to advertise Buster Brown Shoes and some other things.
But the main thing 1 remember about it was a puppet named Froggy the Gremlin.
And all the kids would get excited and start cheering, because they knew what was coming.
Pillsbury would say, “That’s right, you pour it on your head”—and she’d pour it all over her head.
You had to be there as a nine-year-old kid at the lime, 1 guess, but to me it was hilarious. looked forward to that every Saturday morning.
Every kid—at least the ones I knew—wanted to be like Froggy the Gremlin.
But 1 think 1 actu20 From Ike to Mao and Beyond ally carried lhai more into practice than some other kids.
When 1 got into junior high school, I developed this unique voice of my own, which was kind of like the Froggy the Gremlin voice but a little different, and 1 would cut up in class and disrupt the class in this voice whenever the teacher would turn his or her back.
One Nation Under God Since my father was religious and my mother was very religious, Sunday school and church were required—there might be certain special events we could miss it for, but generally we had to go to Sunday school, or at least to church on Sundays.
To me it was another occasion where you would have friends and you’d see other kids.
We’d kind of cut up in Sunday school the way we did in regular school, but going to church was another matter.
My mother was really into music and she’d given us a lot of that love for music, so some of the hymns I didn’t actually mind singing, even as a kid.
But listening to the prayers and then silling through the sermon was just something you did until you could get out of there and go enjoy the rest of your Sunday, before you had to go back to school the next day.
It’s not that I wasn’t religious, or didn’t believe in those things—1 more or less did.
But on the other hand, 1 wasn’t the kind of person who looked forward to going to church or Sunday school or wanted to sit in church all day.
So 1 remember sitting in church, thinking about the shrimp cocktail I’d be eating when the church service got over, or how I was going to be able to go home and watch some sports with my friends in the afternoon, or just go out and play.
I didn’t know anybody who was an atheist, or who openly expressed even agnostic views.
Those were times when if you were in the United One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 21 States, in the middle class and white, then you went to church, and that’s just the way it was. know that there were exceptions to that.
But in the world that I was in, and overwhelmingly among that section of the people, that’s the way it was.
I did in high school, especially, and maybe a little bit beginning in junior high.
In high school, given the nature of the high school I went to, Berkeley High, there were a lot of people whose parents were intellectuals and academics, and they were agnostics or outright atheists, and some were even communists, 1 now realize more fully than I did then.
But that was more in high school, and mainly, in the social setting of my childhood, people were just religious.
One day he had to go off to a meeting or something, so l went downtown to an area modeled after Hyde Park in London—I think they even called it Hyde Park.
Anybody could get up and talk, and some people were giving talks refuting the existence of god and putting forward atheism.
I think that’s the first time I heard somebody put forward a coherent atheist position publicly like that, and even though the people were adults, 1 got up and argued in refutation, or attempted refutation, of their atheism.
I wasn’t one of these religious fundamentalist reactionaries, but I was raised to be fairly strongly and fervently religious.
And while it wasn’t a big deal to me on a day-to-day basis, when it was hit at, I would hit back, because the things I’d been raised to believe deeply were being hit at, and this was like hitting me.
One time, when I was about 12,1 met a Jewish kid while I was taking swimming classes.
This was the first time I talked with a Jewish person about what we believed and didn’t believe.
That was the first time that I’d heard someone put forward, face to face, in a personal conversation, that they didn’t believe in the Christian religion that I'd been raised with.
I wasn’t outraged, I was just taken aback, I just sort of didn’t believe it.
In elementary school we used to say the pledge of allegiance, and I 22 From Ike to Mao and Beyond didn’t question it. actually remember, when I was something like nine or ten years old, literally thinking to myself—I didn’t physically do it, but 1 thought it—that 1 should get down on my knees and thank god for living in this great country that we live in, and 1 should be grateful that 1 don’t live in one of those awful countries that so many people seem to have had the misfortune to be born in.
And talk about being religious, I remember 1 used to tempt god—1 would say things like “fuck” to myself to see what god would do, then I’d pray for forgiveness because I’d said something awful.
A few minutes later, or the next day, I’d say “shit,” because I’d already heard all these words from the older kids I was playing sports with.
So, yes, it was very patriotic, very strait-laced —it was middle class America in the ’50s.
It went along with the whole anti-communist thing, the drills to duck under your desk to save you from a nuclear bomb, to get people into the psychology of maybe we’re going to have a nuclear war with the Soviet Union—though 1 don’t know how ducking under a desk was going to save you from a nuclear bomb.
Traffic Boy We not only had the whole usual patriotic drill, but we literally were drilled in the fourth, fifth and sixth grades as traffic boys.
We didn’t have adult traffic guards at Oxford elementary school, it was the kids themselves— the boys, again—who were organized into squads who would get to school early and go out before school, then at the beginning of lunch, at the end of lunch and at the end of school, when kids might be coming or going.
We had a cop who came from the Berkeley police force, who was assigned to train us.
We had this whole routine where we had the traffic signs we'd hold, and we had whistles.
You were supposed to march out when the whistle blew and stand at attention, and you’d hold your sign out to the front and side; and when the whistle blew again you’d twirl your sign and pull it back in, then march back to the sidewalk.
They used to have parents’ nights, when we would go through these marching formations.
Oh, we wore uniforms and caps, and we’d go through these marching routines.
I remember that when I was in the fourth grade, they had a drilling contest.
There were maybe forty traffic One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 23 boys.
And if you did the wrong command or if you didn’t do it at the right time, then you got eliminated.
I was so proud, because my parents were there, and I was in the fourth grade, first year as a traffic boy, and I'd hung in there all the way to the end, me and two “upper class” guys, fifth and sixth graders.
Then the cop ran all these commands on us, trying to gel one of us to mess up, so he could finish the thing.
So then, finally, he eliminated me because, even though I was standing at attention the way I was supposed to, he said my feet weren’t quite together the way they were supposed to be. was determined to win this contest, as a fourth grader, because that would have really been a big deal, so 1 was bitterly disappointed.
Then there was what they called the “lop sergeant,"" the head traffic boy, who ran all the squads of traffic boys, under the direction of the school officials, of course.
It was always a sixth grader—the boys in the fifth grade would vole for who should be the top sergeant the next year.
I remember one time that the kid who was voted to be the top sergeant had to be put through the paces before they would officially allow him to be it.
So, during school, we all got on our uniforms, and we went out in the yard, and the cop who was assigned to us from the Berkeley police was there, and then he turned us over to the kid who was supposed to be lop sergeant.
And then, all of a sudden, a girl came down from the principal’s office to tell this kid who was going to be the top sergeant that his mother was very sick.
Now he was an eleven-year-old kid, so he just look off running to the principal’s office to find out more about his mom.
And they reprimanded him severely, because he hadn’t put his troops in proper order before he’d gone running off.
I’ve reflected on that a lot of times, how similar it is to the bourgeois military.
The principal, this cop from the Berkeley police force, and the fifth grade teacher who ran the traffic boys—they were all part of this conspiracy.
And it all seemed like this prim and proper and righteous stuff—the “good guys,” as they like to call themselves.
When my turn came, even though that had disgusted me, 1 still wanted to be top sergeant, because it was an honor. won the popularity contest and got to be top sergeant, but it was very clear that the teacher who was in charge of the traffic boys, the principal, and this cop all thought that 1 was not fit material for top sergeant. was too much of a cut-up and loo mischievous, too much of a kid who was always on the verge of being in trouble.
They had to go along with the vote, but they were continually looking for ways to say 1 was messing up.
He really fell in love with this puppy, and so did I, and we used to go every day after school and during lunch lime to play with “Mutt,” and then we'd come back before school started again.
Because I was the Lop sergeant of the traffic boys, 1 had to leave class a little early, and get all the traffic squads out, and then wait until about ten after twelve when they all came back in and turned in their equipment, and then 1 ran up to Ray’s house.
We’d play with the puppy, and then 1 had to get back about a quarter to one so I could get all the squads out.
I did this day after day, and there were never any problems, until one lime, 1 was coming back from outside the school about twenty minutes to one, and the principal and the teacher who was in charge of the traffic boys saw me coming in.
That was my father’s training in particular—they weren’t going to get away with that one.
They just had to shut up and walk off with a chagrined look, but the fact was that they just really didn’t like me as top sergeant.
One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 25 I Liked Ike I first started getting interested in the presidential elections and all that in 1952, when 1 was nine years old.
My parents were going to support Eisenhower that year instead of Stevenson.
They usually voted for Democrats, but they decided to support Eisenhower, who had promised to go to Korea and end the Korean War.
I remember that on occasion, after church service, usually the adults—mainly it was the men, but not only them—would stand around and talk about all these things going on in the world.
This was especially the circle that my dad was most involved in at the church.
And one lime, I think it was the same year, 1952,1 was listening to them talk about the Korean War and what do we do, and then at the end of the conversation I came up with my plan for how the Korean War should be ended.
So I remember starling to get really interested in these things at that time.
I don’t really remember my plan, although I’m sure it was totally unrealistic.
By the lime the Republican and then the Democratic conventions came around that year, my parents had quit supporting Eisenhower when Eisenhower refused to denounce and dissociate himself from McCarthy.
But I was nine years old and they had already gotten me into supporting Eisenhower, so I stuck with Eisenhower, even though my parents went over to Stevenson.
The Republican convention came on in one month and then the Democratic convention the next month, and for those weeks I would not budge from the house.
I was glued in front of the TV all day and all evening, watching these political conventions.
You know, “Mr Chairman, the great slate of Ohio casts twenty-seven votes 1.
Joe McCarthy was a senator from Wisconsin who acted as the spear point of the domestic anti-communist crusade of the late ’40s and early ’50s in the United States During this period hundreds of people were imprisoned and tens of thousands were harassed and deprived of their jobs on suspicion of being communist.
McCarthy was notorious both for the recklessness of his accusations and his calls to purge ruling class institutions like the State Department and Army.
However, this recklessness ran him into serious trouble when he began to target the army, and McCarthy himself was discredited and lost most of his power as a result.
This overall anti-communist crusade occurred in the context where the World War 2 alliance between the United States and the then-socialist Soviet Union had given way to open antagonism between the two countries.
Now, usually during the summers when I was young, every day 1 would get up in the morning and leave the house by nine o’clock, go down to my grammar school where there was a playground, and just stay down there all day, playing ball, mostly baseball.
I’d be down there just playing baseball or sometimes football, all day long.
My parents usually had to drive down there about six or six thirty and pull me off the playground to come home and eat dinner.
But during those political conventions my friends would ring the doorbell.
Then after that week was over, I went back to the playground, the way I had before.
My parents would discuss the paper, or the evening news when it was on television.
Around these elections in ’52 and again in ’56— because I was still an Eisenhower supporter in ’56, though as I remember I didn’t like Nixon even at that lime—I used to read the newspaper when the campaigns were going on, the political conventions, and stuff like that.
I was fascinated with aspects of it, but 1 didn’t really understand the issues very deeply, although I was beginning to think about things like the Korean War. had a loyalty to Eisenhower that I'd developed, and I just stuck with it, you know.
I couldn’t give you then or now any kind of deep analysis of what I thought was good about Eisenhower.
It was just that my parents had liked him and, even though they changed their mind because of McCarthy and 1 became familiar with some of the issues bound up with McCarthyism, it wasn’t enough to make me stop supporting Eisenhower.
I remember there was this Black woman who was brought up before the McCarthy hearings, and they ruined her life.
She wasn’t even the person that they were supposedly going after, she just had a similar name.
Leaving aside the fact that whenever they had the “right person” it was just a witch-hunt anyway.
In my house and among the people that I knew, to be a communist was a bad thing.
But, as we saw it then, McCarthy was falsely accusing a lot of people, ruining them and persecuting them, conducting witchhunts, spreading the net way too widely, and getting people to testify, even falsely, against other people, in order to get out of trouble themselves.
That was the whole thing that disturbed my parents and the circles that they were part of, and that’s what 1 kind of picked up.
McCarthy only really got into trouble when he started going after the people in the army.
Then the powers-thal-be joined ranks and said, “No, no, you can’t do that,” and they pretty much put him down.
Jumping ahead a few years to when I was in high school, Edward Teller’s 2 son was in one of my classes—that was the ugly side of Berkeley, because of the Livermore Lab and research to serve nuclear weapons development and that kind of thing.
In grammar school, while I don’t have a recollection of going around feeling scared all the lime that a bomb was going to be dropped, I’m sure it had an effect on us kids psychologically in a lot of ways to be continually put through drills that were said to be part of preparing for a possible nuclear war.
Still, I don’t remember my childhood having a heavy mushroom cloud over it.
The Lime that I do remember really feeling that, and 1 think everybody did, was the time of the Cuban missile crisis.
At that time 1 really thought the world was going to end, or that there was a good chance of it—and that fear was not unfounded.
Edward Teller was “the father of the hydrogen bomb” and a right-wing ideologue who played a very active role in the anti-communist witch-hunts.
Even in Berkeley, though, the atmosphere was very heavily repressive and any kind of protests didn’t really break through until the late ’50s.
Even after McCarthy got slapped down, things were still pretty repressive; not that you felt like your door was going to be kicked in by the secret police or something, but more like you didn’t protest, you didn’t step out of line, you didn’t call attention to yourself in that kind of a way.
During that lime, when 1 was in the last years of grammar school and the first years of junior high school, in the mid-1950s, there was also a lot of “keeping up with the Joneses”—all this consumerism that came off the victory of the United States in World War 2.
More generally, you didn’t step out of line, you didn’t get yourself branded.
But I do remember a lot of debate about the Korean War, and there would be different occasions when I’d hear adults in particular debating social and political issues.
Becoming Aware of Segregation When I was nine years old or so, 1 began to become aware of segregation.
The YMCA in Berkeley was very unusual, especially for that time, in that it was integrated—there were a number of Black people, including kids, who belonged to “the Y.” 1 went to “Y camp” for about five years, beginning when I was nine, and the main thing 1 remember about the camp is that it was integrated.
Not only was the camp in general integrated, but we stayed in cabins, maybe a dozen kids, and the cabins were integrated.
Each year the same kids would Lend to come back, so there were about three or four Black kids that were in the same cabin 1 was in, year after year.
I remember one time, for example, we were going on a hike—we were hiking up the side of a hill that seemed to me very sleep and high at the time, though I’m Mom and Dad 29 sure it wasn’t really.
I got halfway up and 1 got stuck—one of those situations where, if you try to go ahead, you can’t get secure footing and you can’t go back.
These two Black kids, who 1 think were a year older than me, had already made it to the top; they came charging back down to save me, because it was clear 1 was stuck and I was getting more and more freaked out.
They did this even though they really didn’t like me very much. also remember one time 1 was homesick and 1 knew some of these kids didn’t like me, and 1 just broke down crying on my bunk.
Well, one of these Black kids came in and started talking to me and told me that 1 wasn’t so bad after all, and comforted me.
It was a contradictory experience, because 1 was still coming from where I was coming from and these kids picked up on that and there was a lot of tension, but on the other hand 1 learned a lot out of it, and not just in some academic sense—these experiences touched me and made a deep impression.
As I was only nine or ten years old, 1 wasn’t very deeply aware of these things, but 1 knew these Black kids came from a different part of town than me, and that their lives were different from mine in many ways.
And there was a kid, Fritz, who used to be able to do this thing they called the hambone, where he would slap his thighs and then his chest, pop his mouth and make noise with it—he was really good at it.
I’ve seen adults do it, and maybe it’s my distortion from being a nineor ten-year-old, but I don’t remember seeing anybody do it as well as Fritz.
But on the surface and in their principles, the camp wasn’t run on a segregated basis.
They had some counselors who were Black, they had a lot of staff who were Black, though I don’t think there were as 30 From Ike to Mao and Beyond many Black counselors as staff.
Some of the high school kids who were paid staff would also come out and play ping pong, or tether ball or stuff like that.
You got to see some of these Black guys who were a little older and they had a little different perspective, so you learned.
I remember one guy, I think his name was James, who was about 17 and worked in the kitchen staff.
All the kids really loved it when he came out and played letherball with us, because he was a really nice guy, but he was also hilarious.
He’d let you hit the ball for a while, like you're almost going to wrap it around the pole, and then he’d grab the pole and start shaking it, so you couldn’t hit it.
And I remember being really endeared to someone like that, like an older brother.
But while there wasn’t a lot of overt segregation, I'm sure if I'd been a little older and talked to those guys like James, they could have told me a lot of stories.
But 1 didn’t perceive a lot of it, because what I was aware of—not only things like the dining hall, but the cabins—were integrated.
The people who ran the camp were consciously trying to do something against segregation.
The way I lived in the regular school year was segregated, so you didn’t notice the segregation as much, if you were while.
However, once again because of sports, from about the fourth grade, we’d play basketball, football, and baseball against other grammar schools in the city.
We went to west Berkeley and south Berkeley and played against the Black kids who went to schools like Columbus, Washington, and Lincoln.
I remember one guy named Earl, who played basketball for Washington —he was about 10 years old and really a great dribbler.
I used to pride myself on being able to really dribble the ball well, so there was very intense competition between us when we played Washington.
When you’d go to these schools to play against these kids, you’d see this school was not of the quality of your school, and the playground was not of the quality of your playground.
But it was only later that I put some of these things together more consciously.
I remember my parents talking about discrimination from the time 1 was very young.
It didn’t depend on my asking them, they were already talking about this, so I was aware of these things.
But it was like snippets, what I’d hear from them, what I’d see when I’d go to play a basketball One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 31 game at one of these schools in west Berkeley or south Berkeley, or one of the kids would come up to our playground and maybe you'd talk to him a little bit.
Or you’d go to “Y camp” and you’d get some sense of people’s lives from when you’d sit around and talk at night by the campfire or back in your cabin.
The things that the kids from west and south Berkeley would talk about were often very different.
In some ways they were the same, kids do a lot of the same things, but in some ways they were very different in their experiences and how they saw certain things.
Our family would have dinner table conversations, where we’d talk about segregation and how it was wrong.
The neighborhoods we lived in and the school we went to were virtually all white; but, at the same Lime, it’s not like my parents wanted it to remain that way.
And it’s not just that they talked about it—they became involved and very active in things like the Fair Housing Act and desegregating the schools.
At that time, the public schools in Berkeley were very segregated— until you got to Berkeley High.
This was one of the great things about it — there was only one high school.
At one point there was talk about splitting the city and having two high schools.
I remember all my friends in high school and I were very vehemently opposed to this, for two reasons.
One, and I will say it was the main thing, we knew it was a move to segregate the high schools.
On the first ground mainly, but also on the second ground, we were vehemently opposed to this.
When I went to junior high school, I think there were about twenty-five Black kids, and there were some Mexicans and Chicanos and some Asians, but it was overwhelmingly white.
Still, everybody knew we were going to Berkeley High, which was essentially half Black.
The one I went to, Garfield, was mainly white; another, Willard, was about half Black; and the other junior high, Burbank, was overwhelmingly Black with some Latino and Asian students and a very few while kids, mainly working class.
We interacted with them in sports and in other school programs, and the anticipation of going to Berkeley High was a big deal.
Everybody talked about what was it going to mean when you went to Berkeley High.
There were a lot of episodes and incidents where things would break out between the different junior high schools, or they’d have programs where the ninth graders would 32 From Ike to Mao and Beyond all go to the high school for a one-day orientation, to get them ready for next year, and there’d almost always be a fight.
Among the boys it was often put in terms of “how you gonna fight with the niggers” when you get to Berkeley High—there was a lot of that kind of talk.
Not so much among my circle of friends, but more broadly there was a lot of that.
When 1 was three, when we moved to Berkeley, we took a long car ride across the country and 1 liked that a lot.
And, at the end of the trip, even though we’d driven down in the family car, 1 really wanted to take the train back, because 1 loved riding on trains.
I guess my parents weighed it and decided I was old enough, because they let me take the train back.
But they made a point of talking to the conductor and some of the other people who worked on the train and asked them to keep an eye on me.
It was interesting, there was this kid whose father was a porter on the train, this Black kid named Lynn, and we struck up a friendship during the train ride.
We ran all up and down the train, causing havoc, and he got free food because his father worked on the train.
It was just a natural thing that kids do—we were about the same age, we were traveling on the train, we struck up a conversation, and pretty soon we were running all up and down the train having all kinds of fun.
That was a big deal to me, to be able to ride on the train, and the whole experience.
When I was around nine, we went in the summer to Ensenada in Mexico and spent a week or two there at a hotel on the beach.
There was this kid named Francisco who lived in the town but used to come down to the beach every day and play, so he and I struck up a friendship.
I didn’t speak any Spanish at the time, except for maybe a few words, but somehow we managed—he spoke a little English, and he taught me a few Spanish words—and by the end of the vacation we’d become really good friends.
I would go down to the beach and wait every day for him to come, and he would show up every day.
The water was warm and you One Nation Under God A ’50s Boyhood 33 could go way, way out; it was great for kids, you could go something like a quarter mile out and it would still only be up to a little over your waist.
So we’d swim and come back and build sand castles, and just manage to communicate whatever way we did.
Another time, we took a trip to Reno—my dad was doing some work there—and we got pul up in the hotel owned by his client.
We got these seats for the show in the main restaurant/theater of the hotel right down in the front, really great seats.
I used to love to chew a whole bunch of pieces of gum all at the same lime, and by the time this guy came on to do his act, I think I had something like 10 pieces of gum going in my mouth at the lime.
Then he got to this part in his act when he was going to do this ventriloquist routine.
I thought for a while and then 1 said, “1 want to be a basketball player like Bob Matheny,” who played for Cal at that time.
I was actually taking this all seriously, so I stopped for minute and reflected, and then said, “No,” and the whole crowd just cracked up.
Meanwhile, my mom is furiously signaling me from our table right in front to take my gum out of my mouth.
I’m looking around desperately for a place to put it while he’s talking to me, but I can’t find any place, so I slick it in my pants pocket.
When he said “chomp real hard on your gum,” 1 realized I didn’t have my gum in my mouth anymore, so I reached down into my pocket to get the gum out, and of course there’s this big wad of gum that’s stuck to my pocket.
I’m pulling at it, but it’s stuck to my 34 From Ike to Mao and Beyond pocket and I can’t get it out, and everybody’s just cracking up.
Finally l get the gum freed from my pocket and 1 stick it back in my mouth.
He does this whole routine, whenever he squeezes on my neck I chomp on my gum.
Then, when we finish, he runs off the stage, and 1 run off behind him; he comes back on stage and takes a bow, and 1 come back and take a bow.
The next day we were skiing, and 1 could see these two women were looking at me.
They kept eyeing me, and 1 looked around, wondering if I’d done something wrong.
The Movies 1 didn’t really do that much reading outside of school until 1 got to high school.
Before that 1 read things like the Hardy Boys mysteries and some sports fiction, and sometimes 1 read the Collier’s Encyclopedias we had in the house.
There used to be a theater in Berkeley where they had kids’ movies on Saturday afternoons—and it would always be double features. would often go to those, especially when the weather wasn’t so good.
The movie could be two thirds over and I’d go in and watch the end of that movie, then I’d stay through the next movie and I’d slay through the first movie again until it got back to the point where I came in.
One of the movies that made an impression on me, when I was maybe 13, was this movie about Cochise.
That movie made a big impression on me at that lime because it presented Indians in a very different way than the whole “cowboys and Indians” stereotype that was all over the TV and movies.
Even though, looking back on it now, what this movie showed Cochise doing was actually conciliating with the white expansionists, what struck me then was that it presented Cochise as a dignified person who wasn’t just doing all this really crude stereotypical stuff they had the Indians doing in the average “cowboy and Indian” movies.
One Nation Under God A '50s Boyhood 35 The Baseball Hat There was always stuff “I had to have”—nothing really fancy, just toys, sports equipment, stuff like that.
There’d be certain kinds of clothes you had to have if you were cool—like when 1 was in junior high school it was really cool to have a Pendleton shirt.
When I was a younger kid, they didn’t have any major league teams yet in the Bay Area.
They came when I was in high school, the Dodgers and the Giants came to L.A. and San Francisco.
But in the Bay Area they had minor league Triple-A baseball teams—Triple-A was the rung just below the major leagues.
I used to go to Oakland As baseball games all the time — if you were a kid and you sat way out in the bleachers in center field, where you could hardly see anything, you could get in for nine cents in those days.
So I used to go and sit in the nine-cent seats on Saturday a lot—and more often during the summer months—I’d go with my parents, or sometimes just with my friends.
One year for Christmas my mom gave me a baseball hat, but she got confused and gave me a baseball hat for the San Francisco Seals, which was a big rival of the Oakland As.
So I traded that hat with one of my relatives or friends for something else.
But my mom didn’t gel hurt that often or that easily, so it really made a big impression on me when my dad told me how upset she was.
Not only did 1 get that present back, but after that, whether I liked a present or not, if someone got 36 From Ike to Mao and Beyond me a present, 1 kept it, because the whole incident with my mother was strongly, indelibly burned into my consciousness. learned to see things more from someone else’s perspective, to think more about their feelings.
In high school, I became more socially and politically conscious—a lot of things were breaking out into the open much more, the civil rights movement, things in the intellectual sphere, civil liberties things.
In high school, I was very much conscious of that, and proud of being from Berkeley—the sort of place that wasn’t typical.
Really, insofar as 1 thought about it, 1 probably just thought of myself as an American.
Chapter Three The World Begins to Open Junior high school was a big transition lor me.
I went from a small school to this junior high school which had about fifteen hundred students in three grades — seventh, eighth, and ninth grade.
It was not just a change in size, but it was an open campus, almost like a high school.
Instead of being with one teacher the whole time you went from class to class like in high school.
Testing And then there’s this whole thing—at least in the ’50s, and from what I know it still goes on—when you’re a guy and a new kid, you’re almost forced to fight your way through some situations.
I don’t want to exaggerate, because it wasn’t anything like being in jail in an overall sense, but in this particular dimension it’s almost a modified form of going to jail—you’re new, and people are going to test you out. remember when I first got to junior high, older guys would pick on you and you’d have to stand up for yourself, so you got in fights.
And even people who used to be your friends would pick fights with you to prove themselves to their new friends.
Earlier I mentioned Ray, who was a very close friend of mine during most of my grammar school years.
He lived down the street and we used to spend a lot of lime at each other’s houses.
Then his mom had a stroke 37 38 From Ike to Mao and Beyond when he was slill in grammar school and, while she didn’t die, she also never recovered from it.
So his life became very, very difficult and I think that’s maybe why this stray dog he found was so important to him.
But when we went to junior high school, at one point 1 ended up getting in a fight with him because we kind of went into different worlds and he was in a crowd that didn’t like the crowd that 1 was in—that kind of stuff.
It was just a whole bigger world, and you had to deal with a whole new set of conflicts and contradictions that you didn’t have to deal with in the grammar school that I went to in the Berkeley hills.
At the junior high 1 went to, to a large degree there were the same kind of people, from the same strata and groups in society, as at my grammar school—out of fifteen hundred kids at that junior high, there were maybe twenty-five or thirty Black kids, maybe an equal number of Chicanos, and maybe a few Asians.
It was slill overwhelmingly white, although some of the kids were from more working class families.
One of the Black kids in my class became my best friend at one point, but that didn’t happen until ninth grade.
Yet overall it was a different dynamic—you were swimming in a much bigger pool and it felt like there were more dangerous fish in the water.
So it wasn’t quite so innocent or so safe, even though things weren’t as “raw” as in the other junior highs in the city.
And there was a lot of social pressure to start acting like a “man,” to prove you’re tough.
For example, 1 spent eighth grade carrying a switchblade knife around with me.
Fortunately, I never really had to do anything with it, because I didn’t really know what to do with it exactly, and really 1 didn’t want to do anything with it.
But I carried it around, and I suppose I could have gotten into a situation where the logic of it could have taken over, and I would have been forced to do something terrible, or have something terrible done to me.
There was a lot of posturing—and that was what you were expected to do in a certain way.
It was almost like a ritual, a rite of passage that you were going through, to prove that you were tough, that you could handle yourself.
You developed a certain swagger, you know, you tried to convey a certain image of yourself.
It was a very difficult time—I felt alienated from things, but I couldn’t quite exactly say why, even to myself.
I had a few brushes with the The World Begins to Open 39 police, bul nothing serious—the social stratum that 1 came from meant that I didn’t get in the same kind of trouble as somebody else would have.
But 1 had a lot of run-ins and “friction” with teachers and other school authorities. had a certain kind of posture and a lot of the parents didn’t like the influence 1 was having on their kids—or that they imagined 1 would have on their kids.
Sometimes these parents didn’t know what their own kids were into—or if they did, they wanted to blame somebody other than their own kids or themselves.
Anyway, the word would get around. don’t know how the grapevine of the parents worked, but they knew about me.
I was not into big trouble, but always on the border of big trouble, always on the brink of getting into something bad.
So a lot of parents didn’t want their kids hanging around me, and when my thirteenth birthday came, nobody came for my parly or anything. was all by myself on my birthday— which was, of course, very upsetting to me.
Tournament of Champions But one good thing that came out of that was when my father said, “You know, there’s this high school basketball tournament going on at Cal, the Tournament of Champions.
All these high school teams were playing one game after the other, and the place was crammed with high school students from all these different schools, along with a lot of other people. had missed a great game the night before, where El Cerrito beat McClymonds by one point at the buzzer.
McClymonds was this school in west Oakland that always had these great teams—a little later they won sixty-eight games in a row, and they won this Tournament of Champions something like six years in a row.
I’d missed that game with El Cerrito, but then 1 came the next night and there was McClymonds, playing for third place in the tournament, and they had all these players on their team that 1 still remember.
They had Cleveland “Pete” McKinney, who could really shoot the ball outside and considered himself open for a shot as soon as he crossed half court.
Another legendary player for McClymonds that year was Joe Gardere, who was only about 5’9”, but was a tremendous leaper—he could just about jump out of the gym.
And all these schools would bring their rooting sections to the Tournament of Champions.
So all of a sudden, here you had a whole lot of students from McClymonds in the Cal gym.
There would also be these all-white schools from the suburbs, there would be Catholic schools which were almost all while at that lime, and then there would be schools like Richmond High, which was a real proletarian high school.
Later, when I was in high school, we were in the same athletic league with Richmond High, and over the years if Berkeley High didn’t make it to the Tournament of Champions, Richmond High usually did.
But that first year I went to the TOC was a completely new and different experience for me.
It was a three-day tournament, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, early in March every year, and the first game used to start at 4:30 on Thursday. would always be one of the first three or four people to be there when they’d open the doors for the 4:30 game, and I would always stay until the very end every night.
This was just a wonderful thing—not just the athletics, but the whole social experience.
Going to the TOC completely turned things around for me on my thirteenth birthday—and became an important part of my life from then on.
Cutting Up I had all kinds of friction with my parents in eighth grade.
Usually I got good grades and, while I might cut up in class and be kind of a prankster and cause all kinds of chaos, I didn’t get in big trouble, with the police or with the school authorities.
But in eighth grade I was going through all these changes, and for a good part of one semester in particular, 1 let my grades go.
I had this one English teacher and we just The World Begins to Open 41 clashed all the lime.
For example, we were reading a Dickens novel (I believe it was Tale of Two Cities) and I fell way behind.
At one point, she gave us a test, and as part of it we had to identify a character named Pryor Edwards.
This was a four-point question, and she gave me two points for creativity.
This eighth grade English teacher was also the “victim” of this very unusual “froggy” type voice 1 had developed.
That kind of stuff, and other things 1 did, would really disrupt her class.
She kept me after class, so I’d have detention after detention, and I wanted to be at the playground or off with my friends.
Finally, I wrote this manifesto, some fiveor six-page thing declaring this dictatorial system of detention and the teacher’s word being law to be totally unjust.
Like I said, she wasn’t really a bad person, but she was new to teaching, and I was going through this difficult period, so we just locked horns all the time.
Finally, they got me to “behave” or sort of pull in my horns and gel through this semester because of a track meet coming up.
My dad had taken me to my first track meet at Cal earlier that year, 1956.
On the Cal track team was this great Black sprinter named Leamon King, who had this beautiful running style, which I really just fell in love with.
My parents told me that if they didn’t get a “seal of approval” from this teacher, say42 From Ike to Mao and Beyond ing lhal I was straightening out in class, they would not let me go to these Olympic trials. had my heart set on this, so 1 agonized, literally spending sleepless nights over whether it was worth it to keep cutting up in class, and I finally decided, okay, I'll make a tactical retreat. started studying more, and 1 got my grades back up, and my parents backed off a bit, because at least in the outward manifestations of these things, 1 smoothed out the rough edges.
Arbitrary Authority Even though I did this whole traffic boy thing in grammar school, 1 had also at a very early age internalized the idea that arbitrary authority wasn’t deserving of respect. had gotten from my parents a strong sense that you should not have to follow people who required unthinking obedience— the drill sergeant or the military dictator being the embodiment of that.
I don’t know if they ever articulated it exactly that way, but that was sort of a general value or outlook that I got. 1 remember we had this math teacher in junior high who kept three of us after class one lime, because we were joking around in class.
He started reading us the riot act, and one of the kids started laughing out of nervousness.
He grabbed the kid by the throat and started choking him and almost pushed him out this second story window.
So that kind of arbitrary, dictatorial authority was something that 1 hated from early on.
It was against everything that 1 thought was worth anything and should be respected.
I had also internalized from my parents and from my father in particular that the Constitution provided you with certain rights, and you should stand up for them.
So, in my own mind, with a lot of these teachers, that’s what I was doing.
They were exercising arbitrary authority, insisting on their way in the classroom, and not willing to be flexible or to bend.
Thai’s overwhelmingly the way the teachers taught in the '50s, so I had a lot of conflict with them.
But one time, when I was thirteen, I applied what I had learned from my dad—and got in big trouble with my parents for doing so.
It wasn’t actually on the school property, it was a public sidewalk, or a kind of a paved path The World Begins to Open 4. between two streets, right next to the school.
A couple of my friends were hanging around my old grammar school, so 1 stopped and started messing around with them.
One of the things we liked to do was to climb up on the roof of the cafeteria of the grammar school.
But we knew that you weren’t supposed to do that, that you’d get chased off of it.
So we took our shoes off and threw them up on the roof, and then climbed up—ostensibly to retrieve our shoes.
Understandably, as 1 look back on it now, he was freaked out that we were up on the roof.
The more he insisted that we come down, the more we refused to come down.
Finally he said, “I’m gonna call the police if you don’t come down right away,” and at that point we did come down off the roof.
By that time my friends had split, but I had decided to stand my ground.
I was standing on this pathway, which was adjacent to the school grounds but was not technically school property.
Then he noticed that 1 didn’t have my shoes on, and he said, “What’s the matter with you, you don’t even wear shoes?” —and he started insulting me and told me to go home.
At that point I started riding my bike home. was about halfway home when I see my dad driving down toward me.
And all the neighbors must have figured out that something like that was happening.
Here was my dad, with his stature as a lawyer, having a policeman come to his door to tell him his son was doing something wrong.
Instead of standing up for me, my parents were embarrassed and actually coerced me into writing a letter of apology to this cop.
I held out and held out, but it was gonna be hell for me in the house if I didn’t.
At that point I frankly had pride in being associated with kids from west Berkeley, because I felt that they must know how to stand up for their rights then—I felt like 1 was being cast into good company.
I knew that from my parents, and in particular my dad, all the legal training that I'd gotten, just by listening to him tell stories, but also talking with him about the constitution and everything.
On the other hand, it was an experience that stood me in good stead for the rest of my life, really.
As I said, for a while this really dropped my parents in my estimation.
But I will give them credit that later on they recognized they were wrong and criticized themselves.
My dad, with great chagrin but also with a certain amount of pride in having learned better, would always tell this story from the point of view of how screwed up he was in taking this position.
It was years before they finally recognized that I was right and they were wrong, but they did finally recognize it.
The World Begins to Open 45 Live Oak Park Around this time I also started going to this park in Berkeley called Live Oak Park.
My dad told me that the people around there were afraid that if they built an indoor gym it would attract a lot of the Black people from the ghettos of the city and from Oakland and they didn’t want that—so they didn’t build a new gym.
Nonetheless, kids from other parts of Berkeley started coming and Black kids who went to El Cerrito High School, which was between Berkeley and Richmond, started coming over there to Live Oak Park around the time when I was in eighth grade.
I’d get out of junior high school around three o’clock, and I would go and hang out at Live Oak from say three thirty until my parents came and found me or I got hungry and went home.
Later in the spring and summer, when it would be light in the evening, I would go back and hang out in the evening.
So I was starling to have a lot of new experiences and different influences on me, and I was starling to develop different interests, too.
By that time basketball was my favorite sport—I played it all the time—even later when I played on the football team in high school, 1 still played basketball on the weekends, and I played it all year round.
Teams formed up from McClymonds, Richmond and these other schools and would come over and play in the summer leagues.
Big changes were beginning to happen, and of course there was a lot of tension.
The McClymonds team was “skins” that night—and they were playing an all white team.
For a brief moment nobody said anything, then kind of cautiously people acknowledged the joke with a ripple of laughter, and the tension eased.
White Port and Lemon Juice There were a lot of things that were going on like that.
My older sister, Marjorie, for example, went to the same junior high school I did, three years ahead of me.
They had a yearbook they put out, and they had all these things like favorite movie, favorite song, favorite food, and so on.
It was really improbable for this song to be the favorite song of this kind of a junior high, but that just showed how this culture was beginning to make its way into the larger society.
My mom played the piano and liked to sing and she got us all involved in music in one way or another.
I played the clarinet from age nine until I was fourteen, when it began to take too much time from other things I wanted to do. wished that I’d kept going with it and branched out and learned to play the saxophone, but I never did.
Nevertheless, 1 liked listening to music, and I loved singing—all that I got mainly from my mother.
They had a regular stable of singers who would sing these mainstream, while-bread type of songs, and they’d count down the hits to number one.
I actually enjoyed singing some religious music, and I even went caroling at Christmas a few times, when I was a teenager.
About the only part of church that 1 could stand was singing hymns, just because I liked to sing.
The World Begins to Open 47 Bui now, as 1 was introduced to R&B, it was like a curtain lilting on a whole new world for me.
It was just an old warehouse-type building in Oakland, but we’d heard all these disc jockeys on the radio, so to us it was this magical place.
We went down there and walked through the studio and listened to them on the air, and we almost felt as if we were in some holy presence.
A lot of things were just getting turned very sharply upside down for me, and 1 loved it.
There were all these vocal doo-wop groups who were on the radio and had records out.
There were the Heartbeats (with James “Shep” Shepherd singing lead), “Pooky” Hudson and the Spaniels, Earl “Speedoo” Carroll and the Cadillacs, and on and on.
And, among the “girl groups,"" 1 especially remember the Chantels, whose lead singer, Arlene Smith, was only about thirteen or fourteen at the lime, but she could really sing with a lot of power and beauty.
Then, of course, there was a proliferation of singing groups in high school.
Along with the doowop vocal groups, there was the broader genre of music that was generally called Rhythm and Blues. used to really like Jimmy Reed, a blues singer who had this very characteristic beat—he played the harmonica as well as the guitar.
There were songs like “Guided Missiles,” which was a reflection of the larger world out there.
It was a love song, but it was using this metaphor about how your love is like a guided missile which shot me down.
But it wasn’t just one particular doo-wop group or R&B artist that I liked, it was the whole thing.
When I was thirteen or fourteen, Marjorie took me to San Francisco 48 From Ike to Mao and Beyond to see Chuck Berry in concert.
She told my parents that she was taking me to this concert, but then she dropped me off and snuck out with her boyfriend, and came back and picked me up when the concert was over.
Once my older sister kind of lifted this veil from me and turned me on to what was playing on KWBR, everything about my tastes in music very radically and dramatically changed.
It also struck a chord with my own feeling of alienation and my shifting values.
In ninth grade, my best friend John, one of the few Black kids in the school, got together with me and another white kid to form a doo-wop group for a talent show.
Now John, even though he was only fourteen or fifteen, had this very low bass voice.
This Coasters song was kind of a novelty song. sang the lead, and John came in with the bass part, and this guy Randy—the other while kid—did back-up singing on it.
But when we got to high school, there was this flowering of singing groups on a whole other level, and I’m sure this was also happening at the other junior highs in the city which had a large percentage of Black students.
James Dean Generation As I spoke to earlier, my sisters and I had these contradictory relationships, mainly because of the larger societal relations which figured into our family—the way they had to do a lot of things that girls traditionally had to do, and some of the privileges I had being a boy.
On the positive side, we were close, an example being Marjorie turning me on to this music.
It wasn’t just somebody telling me about music, it was more intimate—like she was sharing with me something important that she had discovered.
But when she was about fifteen, my older sister really started butting heads with my parents.
Especially as this applied to the girls, it was very acute—they were restricted in a lot of ways, a “proper girl” didn’t do this and that.
The World Begins to Open 49 My parents were part of that 1930s Depression/WW2 generation, and while they were very sweet and compassionate and generous people, they were also pretty strait-laced at that point.
So Marjorie came into a lot of “rebel-wilhout-a-cause” conflict with them.
Of course, there were causes, there were reasons, but it hadn’t really formed itself into a conscious rebellion—it was against certain things, but not very consciously.
So it would take a lot of different forms and some of the things she did were kind of stupid, frankly.
Nevertheless, stepping back and looking at it with perspective, you can see the larger thing that was going on, regardless of particular forms it look with her.
My parents were down on smoking, but not just because it was unhealthy—the whole thing about cigarettes and cancer was really just being discovered.
It was more like it wasn’t proper to be smoking, especially if you were a kid, and more especially if you were a girl.
This was the grinding of gears of different social forces and generations in conflict, so to speak.
So there was a lot of that kind of conflict, and it became pretty acute at that time.
That’s why Marjorie would do things like volunteer to Lake me to a concert so she could sneak off and see her boyfriend, because she had to do things like that—she couldn’t just tell my parents she was taking the car and going somewhere with her boyfriend.
Stepping back to get some perspective on this, I think you can see that it wasn’t just a matter of my parents as individuals and my older sister as an individual, but the larger social forces underlying these things — the tectonic plates in society were moving and changing and coming into conflict with each other.
Later on, when 1 rebelled against my parents, it was a more conscious rejecting of a whole set of social and political ideas that was the negative side of what they believed, their acceptance of a lot of mainstream American values from the prevailing institutions.
But with my older sister it was more inchoate, more formless, more beginning, and it 50 From Ike to Mao and Beyond didn’t really have a clearcut stance exactly, except butting up against the constraints and the restraints and the suffocation.
Later on Marjorie was sympathetic to a lot of those social causes and struggles that did arise, at least up to a certain point in a pretty general way.
Still, what was involved was kind of a generational difference—and when I say generational here, I’m not talking about the general difference all of us kids had with our parents, I’m talking about a very compressed difference, with my sister’s age-group just three years older than me.
This difference just between her “generation” and mine gives you a sense of just how rapidly things were changing.
The civil rights struggle broke out in the mid-’50s, but it really became a big phenomenon and had an impact on the whole country in a sustained way by the late l 50s and early ’60s.
That was more my coming of age time, whereas my older sister was a little bit ahead of that time.
But she was sympathetic with those changes, and that’s reflected in the music that she turned me on to and things like that.
Umpire In junior high 1 stopped playing baseball and, although I would still go to baseball games sometimes, I didn’t have the same enthusiasm for it that I did as a younger kid.
I just didn’t think it was as exciting as basketball and football and track.
But I remember very starkly a story involving a baseball game which has a larger social significance.
Even in seventh grade, I was known to kids in my school, including older kids, as being really knowledgeable about sports.
And one day there was a ninth grade baseball game between my junior high, Garfield, and Burbank Junior High, which was overwhelmingly Black, with some Latinos.
The Burbank team showed up for the game after school, all ready to play, but there was no umpire so it looked like they would have to cancel the game.
Usually, even in these junior high school games, you had at least two or three umpires.
Then if somebody was running the bases, I had to run around with them and say safe or out.
Well, the game came down to the last inning and the Garfield team was ahead by two runs.
The batter hit the ball to left field, way past the fielder, and these Burbank guys started running around the bases.
One guy scored, another guy scored, and then there was a question whether the guy who hit the ball was going to get all the way around to home.
The Garfield outfielder finally catches up with the ball, throws it in to an infielder, and the infielder then turns around and throws it to the catcher at home plate.
There’s this cloud of dust coming up from the dirt as he slides, the game is literally in the balance, I’m standing there and there’s like a little delay—and everybody looks up at me.
But 1 made the right call, because if you’re in doubt or it’s a Lie, you’re supposed to say safe, and there was so much dust and everything that I couldn’t really see, and it was really close.
But, of course, all these kids in my junior high accused me of being intimidated by these guys from Burbank, and none of them would talk to me for a long time.
Mcirques Haynes Style 1 played basketball in the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades.
We played Burbank and the other junior high school, Willard, which was about half Black.
These games were not only a lot of fun but also formative experiences, especially given everything that was going on in the larger society.
Schools in Berkeley, up through junior high, were still very segregated, as I’ve been describing.
Usually when we would go play Burbank, we’d go down there in a bus; every year there would be a fight, every year the kids from Garfield would run from the gym onto the bus to try to get away, and every year some of them would get their asses kicked trying to run away after the game at Burbank.
It was like a ritual and an institution, and from the time you were in seventh grade you knew this was going to happen.
He could dribble behind his back, in between his legs, he could lie on the floor and roll over and dribble the ball, and 1 just thought this was unbelievably great.
So 1 practiced and practiced and practiced, learning how to do these things.
There was less than a minute to go when we finally pulled ahead by about eight points.
I’d been practicing and practicing and practicing my dribbling and thinking about the Globetrotters.
So when the game got down to about forty seconds and we were just trying to hang on to the ball, I started dribbling and all of a sudden I went down on one knee, and then went on my back while still dribbling.
And at first everybody thought it was just a mistake, like I’d fallen down.
So 1 got up, dribbled around for a few more seconds and then did it again.
By that time, my eyes had been opened enough that I knew exactly what he meant. was being influenced by a lot of Black culture.
My best friend, John, was Black and 1 was becoming, as they say, sensitized to these things.
So, I knew exactly what the coach meant, I knew exactly what he was saying, and of course, that pissed me off all the more.
But then, on the other hand, I took an “I don’t give a fuck” attitude because we’d won the game and I got to do my thing.
The irony was that I was doing this out of admiration for Marques Haynes—I had modeled myself after him and his ability to dribble.
It wasn’t really that I wanted to show up the Burbank kids, it could have been anybody we were playing against.
The Burbank kids of course took it as an insult, and as an affront and as a challenge, and that carried over to when we went down The World Begins to Open 53 to the game in their gym.
They had this one guy who assigned himself to guard me—his name was Langston Tabor, and he became a friend of mine in high school.
But this was still our last year of junior high, and all the way down the court he would not only stick right with me, but he would push me and bump me; and, three or four limes in the first few minutes of the game, the game was slopped because there were these shoving matches and fights started to break out.
Going into the game, a number of us had decided that we were not going to have this thing happen that had happened every year, where you'd be chased out of the gym.
With some kids, there may have been some racism in it, but actually for some of us in a certain way it was the opposite of that.
But anyway they were angry at us not just because we’d beaten them in our gym, but because of what I’d done, because they took it as showing them up—and I guess there was a certain point they had, even though that wasn’t my intention.
Finally, one of the officials from their school came down out of the stands and said, “Either you guys are gonna play this game or you’re not.
So then we proceeded to go through the rest of the game without a fight, but with a lot of tension.
We ended up winning the game, and after the game we didn’t run—and there was no fight.
First Love When I was fourteen, 1 started really gelling interested in girls and 1 had my first real girlfriend, Nancy.
At that lime, you didn’t see this phenomenon that’s interesting to observe now, where you have boys and girls just being friends and hanging around in a group together as friends.
Mainly it would Lake the form where sometimes, if you were interested in a girl, maybe you would actually develop a friendship with her friends, because if they liked you they would help you gel together.
And so, on that level, you’d kind of become friends and share some intimate secrets about your feelings and things like that.
My parents didn’t like this so much—they felt I was 54 From Ike to Mao and Beyond spending way too much time with her.
They may have had a point, but there was no way they were going to break us up.
In fact, they tried to limit how much time 1 could spend with her, but I found ways to get around that.
For example, Nancy lived about exactly a mile from my house—if you knew how to take shortcuts, which of course I did.
So, especially in the spring, summer and early fall, when the weather was nice, and all the kids in my neighborhood would be out playing in the evening, I would tell my parents I was going out to hang out with the other kids, and then after a little while I would lake off running the mile to my girlfriend’s house.
Then, after a few hours at her house, I would run the mile back to my neighborhood, and then go in my house.
Teacher’s Trial There was one thing that I was really proud of in graduating from junior high.
In our yearbook, besides things like favorite movie, favorite song, favorite food, etc., they also had categories like “most likely to succeed,” “most popular,” and so on.
And I got voted “teacher’s trial,” which meant the kid who gave the most trouble to the teachers.
So even though I had to make certain compromises and pull in my horns somewhat in the eighth grade to not gel completely knocked down from things I wanted to do, 1 didn’t strategically give in on my basic orientation of challenging authority, particularly where I felt it was unjustly or arbitrarily exercised.
A lot of teachers regarded themselves as unchallengeable authority that had to be unquestioningly followed, and that just really rubbed me the wrong way.
And, to be honest, 1 took a lot of delight in finding ways to disrupt the classroom and challenge them.
But there was a lot of tension because I didn’t like their exercise of arbitrary authority and I enjoyed disrupting that.
In my last year in junior high 1 ran for election to this “entertainment coordinator” type post.
You had to put up posters and things like that to get people to vote for you.
I had a few friends who were helping me, but I also wanted to get some help from my family.
So I asked my older sister if she would help me come up with some slogans and make some posters, because she was pretty good at that kind of stuff.
By this time Marjorie was already married and had been out of the house and had a very young baby.
But her husband was in the navy, he The World Begins to Open 55 was at sea somewhere.
That poor guy used to come over to our house and he’d have to pul up with a lot of my antics; for example, I’d get ahold of his sailor’s hat and do “magic tricks” with it—which weren’t really magic tricks at all, so he’d end up with orange soda in his hat, and things like that.
Anyway, they got married and at this lime she was living back in my parents’ house.
So Marjorie made a deal with me that she would help me come up with slogans and make posters if I would get up at night and feed her baby a couple of times during the week.
It seemed like a good deal to me, but 1 found out it was harder work than I thought.
But we did make that deal and carried it out, and she came up with a number of slogans.
So I made posters with that slogan, and pul them up all over the halls of the junior high school.
But although I won the election, the much bigger charge was when John and Randy and 1, with our little group, were the big hit of the talent show that year.
Chapter Four High School I started high school at the beginning of 1958, just a few months after federal troops were called out in Little Rock, Arkansas to protect nine Black teenagers who enrolled in a previously segregated allwhite high school.
Berkeley might seem to be on the opposite end of the spectrum from Little Rock, and in many ways it was.
But Berkeley was nonetheless still part of America, and the same issues would play themselves out—in different ways—in my high school years., of course, didn’t understand it in quite that way when 1 started high school —1 was mostly just a 14-year-old kid trying to figure out where 1 fit in.
We were starting in February, so there was only a one-week break, at the end of 4.
In the fall of 1957, nine Black students attempted to enroll in Little Rock’s Central High School.
On September 4, the Arkansas National Guard with drawn bayonets forced one of the nine away from the school entrance and back into an angry mob of white racists that threatened to lynch her.
Day after day, the mobs howled and attacked students and their supporters, but it took a full three weeks for Eisenhower, the president at the time, to order troops in to protect the students.
A year later, the governor of Arkansas, Orville Faubus, closed all the schools in Little Rock for a full year in order to resist integration.
We’d agreed that the first day of school we’d hook up and kind of go through the experience together and continue to be tight as friends.
But then when I got there, I looked all around for him and he wasn’t there.
He wasn’t there all that week, or the next week, or the next month; and then 1 found out he’d been busted and been sent to juvenile hall.
The second thing I remember is the orientation assembly for all the kids who’d just come into the tenth grade.
The February group was a smaller class than the one that started in September, but still they had a program for all the new kids who’d come from the three junior highs, Willard, Burbank, and Garfield.
I was walking around, trying to find a place to sit because I got there a little late, and a lot of the seats were taken.
There was this one Black kid who was leaning against the wall with his feet sticking out a little bit, just looking around.
As 1 went by him I very consciously made a point of walking around him so I wouldn’t bump into him or anything, because I was uptight—everybody in my junior high had always buzzed about how this was a big deal when you went to Berkeley High and how you were going to have to deal with all this stuff, and maybe get in fights.
Now by the lime I was a senior in high school, this guy, whose name was Odell, was part of a singing group that I was also part of.
On that first day, though, he was just messing with me as part of the general thing that was going on.
Even though John had been my best friend in junior high, he wasn’t there, and in any case that was a somewhat more limited experience.
Although he went to the same school I did, he lived in a different part of town.
We didn’t go to each other’s houses—outside of school, our contact was just mainly on the phone.
All of a sudden you were going to a school 58 From Ike to Mao and Beyond that was about half Black, where there was a lot of cohesion among the Black students as well, so they had a big influence.
Black people were becoming much more self-assertive—proud of being Black and not putting up with shit any more.
As 1 said, there were battles about desegregating the schools beginning to go on all over the country at that lime—even in Berkeley, where the schools had been segregated.
During the time 1 was in high school my father got on the school board and was playing a leading role in the fight to desegregate the schools.
So this was the larger context at that time, and this definitely had an effect where I was.
I was quite nervous—I didn’t react in the way I know some of the kids from Garfield did, with pretty traditional straight-up racist kind of garbage, but 1 was still very uptight about the whole thing because 1 didn’t know what was going to happen.
Especially in my second semester in high school, though, because that was football season, I started having closer interconnections and relations with people of all different races, or nationalities, including a lot of Black people.
But some things happened even in my first semester that started taking me down a certain path, you might say.
I’d already started to make friends with people that I knew were going to be on the football team, including people who’d gone to Burbank or Willard that 1 played against in sports.
We were now in gym class together—all the guys who played a sport were put in the same gym classes—and so we started to break down some of these barriers.
I got to know and started becoming friends with Langston Tabor, with whom I’d been in these shoving matches and near-fights during that basketball game at Burbank.
One day, when our gym class “instruction” was in swimming, I was at the edge of the pool and Langston was just kind of hanging out nearby.
All of a sudden, I looked up and there was this guy kind of looming over me.
Again, I said “yeah”—and now I’m trying to figure High School 59 out where all this is going.
Now I really didn’t know what was going on, but I just gave him a straightforward answer, because I was sort of naive.
So then this big grin came over his face, almost like a leer or a smirk—he just kept that look for what seemed like minutes to me, but was probably only 10 or 15 seconds.
I learned about Jack McRay a little bit more in high school and after high school. even played basketball against him again, at a rec center in southwest Berkeley—it was all cool.
I believe he’s still sort of a legendary figure in the Sacramento Street section of Berkeley.
But this was a very dramatic experience for me, and afterwards Langston kind of joked around with me about it and schooled me in how I might handle this kind of situation better.
This was a time when Black people were fighting for justice and equality in the civil rights movement, and more generally, even in their personal interactions with people, they were asserting themselves more.
As part of this there was a lot of testing—to see how you are going to react, to see what kind of person you are.
Segregation Within Integration While Berkeley High was integrated, in the sense that kids from all over the city went there, within the school it was very segregated.
There was tracking, and the classes were largely segregated—not entirely, but to a large degree.
The lunchroom was very segregated and there would tend to be segregation even within the gym classes, where Black and 60 From Ike to Mao and Beyond while students were mixed together.
Generally people did not hang out together socially, and things were segregated on that level too.
As I started to make more friends among the Black kids in school, and to hang out with them, many of my while friends—or former friends—were not accepting of that.
Not only were things still pretty segregated within the school, the school was very stratified and very cliquish.
Among the white students you had these social clubs, which were basically junior versions of sororities and fraternities.
The clubs were exclusively white, with the exception of one Black female social club, and they were completely segregated—there were no integrated social clubs.
Except for the Black sorority, they were preserves of privilege and bastions of segregation in the school; they exerted a lot of influence, and they were generally haled by everyone who wasn’t in them.
The Black kids especially, with very good reason, hated these social clubs.
And that was the end of that conversation, and of any friendship between us. 1 don’t think that making new friends, especially with Black kids, was any kind of conscious “statement,” or anything like that.
I didn’t really think about it in what you might call “social” or “political” terms, except in situations like the lime this guy Gary challenged me in this straight-up racist way.
For a couple of semesters, 1 regularly sat with this group of Japanese-American kids, mainly girls, during lunch and they would talk about things that I hadn’t really had much experience with or understanding of before that.
I really liked them—they were very interesting, very intellectual, but they weren’t snobbish or stuck up.
Then there was my friend Kayo, who was a white kid that I’d known ever since grammar school, even though he didn’t go to the same grammar school as me.
He was a real sports nut like me, but he also had a lot High School 61 of other things going on.
He was a couple of years ahead of me in school —1 think he was only there for one semester when I was at Berkeley High, and then he graduated.
So after school, that evening, 1 called him up to ask him where he’d been.
And he had this piece of paper with a drawing on it, one of those things where it would wind back on itself, like a moebius strip, or something like that.
This was completely out of nowhere, but he’d been thinking about infinity.
Then another day he comes in talking about infinity, with this diagram to illustrate how he thought infinity was.
From the time I was thirteen, his family—Kayo, his two brothers, and his father—would go to track meets with me and my dad.
He was a world class sprinter, but he was one of these guys who didn’t like to practice.
He’d run down the track a few limes in these old gym shoes, practice a few starts, and that was it.
We’d go to the Cal track where he was “practicing,” and we'd talk to him—ask him how he felt about the upcoming meets and things like that.
They used to have this track meet called the West Coast Relays in Fresno every spring.
We would get in our car, Kayo’s family and my family, or at least my dad and his dad and his brothers.
They were known by everybody in the school—I mean Black, white, whatever—as being the kind of guys who were always causing shit.
For example, when you would come out of the showers in gym class, they’d stand there and snap people with their towels, especially all the white guys, and they had this whole routine they did.
One day I came out of the shower and one of them snapped me in the butt with a towel.
So they had this whole Lonnie-and-Clarence routine they did all the time.
I think even there it had a little bit of a social meaning to it — reflecting what was going on in society on a larger scale.
Now we had an open campus, where you could go out at lunchtime and gel snacks or go up to the stores a few blocks away, and there was one main street where people walked up and down and hung out.
One day some guys from the football team, who were also part of this whole social club scene, were walking down the street, and on the other side of the street were Clarence and Lonnie and some of their friends.
And either Clarence or Lonnie threw an ice cream cone and hit this white guy named John in the face.
John was wearing his social club jacket, so he was like a walking provocation.
Then Clarence starts pretending he’s gonna restrain Lonnie, “Aw c’mon man...”—and all of a sudden he wheels and punches John in the face.
The whole street immediately broke out into these opposing lines fighting up and down the street, Blacks against whites, as if it were choreographed. was hanging out with some kids.
But the fight went on for a while, it became a big deal in the school, and we all got the usual lectures about it.
The footHigh School 63 ball team got lectures about how we all hang together, and blah, blah, blah—as if there were no racism even in the football team.
A few days later, when I came out of gym at the end of the school day, there was this long line of Black guys who’d come from different schools around Oakland, as well as our school.
So I’m walking out and I’m trying to figure out what I’m going to do, because every white guy coming out there in the aftermath of this fight is getting kicked and punched.
I didn’t particularly want to be kicked or punched, and as I’m getting ready to enter into this gauntlet, I see two or three guys that I know.
They nodded at me or said something back, and I managed to make it all the way through the gauntlet without being kicked and punched.
Then l noticed once I was through there were some other guys who came behind me and the kicking and punching started again.
But this was bigger than anything having to do with me, this was coming from the larger contradictions of society and the larger racist relations and racist ideas that were being challenged, and this was breaking out in a lot of ways.
I mean Lonnie and Clarence weren’t politically conscious activists, and they had their own particular characters and things they did.
People have these idealist visions of Berkeley as some place that’s always been the way it became through the ’60s.
But there was a lot of open segregation and overt racism in Berkeley at that time.
A couple of years after I left Berkeley High, in the early ’60s, a really ugly racist incident Look place.
There was this area called the slope, where people would eat lunch outside.
There were certain areas where the white kids ate, and Black kids better not come over and eat there or there’d be a fight.
If you were a white kid you could go eat where the Black kids were, and some of us did.
But if you were Black you did not go in these 64 From Ike to Mao and Beyond other areas.
Finally, this came to a very overt and very ugly head during my younger sister’s senior year.
When the segregationist content became overt like that, fights broke out in the school and then the lines were very clear.
But things were beginning to change, and this guy Jeff and his friends were more isolated than they would have been even when I was in high school. remember my friend Billy—who I’ll talk about later and who was in the same class as my sister—Billy pul out the word when this happened that he was looking for this kid Jeff.
But even in this earlier incident, with Lonnie and Clarence, though it didn’t have the same overt, clearcut social content, we sensed and knew that this had something to do with these larger things going on in society.
To one degree or another, many people, including myself, understood that, even if we didn’t feel like getting into this particular fight.
Basketball, Football...and Larger Forces At that time, the basketball coach at Berkeley High, Sid Scott, was a Christian fundamentalist.
Every year when 1 was in high school, and even before 1 got there, the starting team would always be three Black players and two white.
My friends and 1 used to always talk and argue about why this was, because while sometimes there were white guys who should have been on the starting five, a lot of times you could easily see there were five Black players who should have started, or at least four. thought that this coach’s thinking went along the lines that if he had four Black players and one white on the floor, the four Black players would freeze out the white guy, so then they wouldn’t all play together—even though, of course, this was ridiculous.
And if he had five Black guys out there, he figured all the discipline on the team would break and it would just be an undisciplined mess—also ridiculous.
And he couldn’t have less than three Black players because it would be so outrageous, given who was on the team and how good different players High School 65 were.
But when I would discuss this with a lot of my Black friends, including ones on the basketball team, they would explain to me very patiently, “Look, man, it’s not just Sid Scott, it’s the alumni and all that kind of shit from the school, people who have more authority around the school, they don’t want an all-Black team out there.
My friends and I would go lo each other’s houses, stay overnight at each other’s houses, and we’d talk about this kind of stuff all the time— especially the more the civil rights movement was picking up and the more this carried over into all kinds of ways in which people were saying what had been on their minds for a long time but were now expressing much more openly and assertively.
One time, when I was a senior in high school, our school got to play in a night football game.
We went on a bus trip to Vallejo, which is maybe 20, 25 miles from Berkeley, and the bus ride took about an hour.
And I remember that very, very deeply—1 learned a lot more in that one hour than I learned in hours of classroom Lime, even from some of the better teachers.
Things like that discussion went on all the lime, on one level or another, but this bus ride was kind of a concentrated opportunity to get into all this.
A lot of times when we were riding lo games we’d just talk about bullshit, the way kids do.
But sometimes, it would get into heavy things like this, and there was something about this being a special occasion, this night game—we were traveling through the dark, and somehow this lent itself to more serious conversation.
There were girls who actually liked me, bul they would say ihings like, “You know I like you hut 1 can’t go out with you because you hang around with all these Black people,” and things like that.
There were things that were explicitly said like that, and then sometimes you could just tell the deal by the way people acted.
And all this was being shaped by the larger ihings going on in society and the world.
Whom you were even attracted to and whom you were interested in going out with, whom you were interested in as a girlfriend, and whom you wanted lo be friends with—this was being shaped, or heavily influenced, by these larger ihings going on.
There were a few kids in my class who did, and they took a lot of shit for it.
In my senior year, there was one girl that 1 was very fond of, who was in glee club with me, and we went out for a little while.
Now it was a rule that every social club had to invite at least the president of every other social club to whatever function they had.
So she was invited to a New Year’s Eve dance sponsored by one of these white social clubs, and she asked me to be her dale for that.
Of course, there’s this whole tradition that on New Year’s Eve you give your date a big kiss when it strikes midnight.
So, at the dance there was all this tension because we were there and we were dancing together the whole night, and hanging out together, just like any other couple would.
When midnight came, she and 1 gave each other the biggest imaginable kiss—both because we really liked each other, bul we also really wanted lo make these people eat it.
Of course, I got called things like “nigger lover” and 1 didn’t get invited to join these social clubs—which was nothing, because 1 wouldn’t have wanted to do that anyway.
But whatever ways in which l High School 67 was “ostracized” and “outcast” among the mainstream whites was really nothing compared to what my Black friends went through.
One time Matthew, who was Black, really had a crush on this one white girl; he wanted to ask her out and finally he worked up his courage and asked her out.
And she told him, “Well, you know, I’d like to go out with you, but my parents and my friends...” and all this kind of shit.
That was much more painful than anything that happened to me—it was very painful for me, being his friend, and it was the kind of thing that 1 know left a deep scar in Matthew.
It was just horrible and excruciating, and the scars of that were much deeper than anything that happened to me.
Actually I knew him before high school, because I went to a church in Berkeley where his father worked as the custodian and he would come around and help his father sometimes.
Then, when I went to high school, he was a little bit ahead of me but we became friends and then we became part of a singing group.
That was just Sam, you just knew you should slay away from him then, because he didn’t want to talk, he wanted to eat.
So one day, I had forgotten to bring my lunch money, and I was really hungry by lunch. couldn’t pay for anything in the cafeteria or the snack shack, or anything.
I was walking all around looking for some friend to loan me some money.
So I just finally gave up there, but I started walking all around looking for someone to loan me some money or give me something to eat or something.
What particularly stuck out to me was that he had two pieces of cornbread on his tray.
But 1 was just so hungry, and 1 guess Leo figured, “oh this crazy white boy, he must really be hungry,” so he just let it go.
A few times I went out to his house—he lived right where East Oakland abutted against San Leandro, and it was like in the south.
There was this creek and a fence right outside of 98lh Avenue in East Oakland, and if you were Black you did not go on the other side of the fence into San Leandro or these racist mobs would come after you.
One lime we went to this housing project which was kind of laid out in concentric circles, with a row of apartments, arranged in a circle, and then another circle inside that, and then another one.
And at the very center was the playground, where there was a basketball court.
When we got there, there were some guys getting ready to play ball—I recognized a couple of them who ran track for Castlemont High—so 1 went over and got in the game.
Well, at a certain point, one of these track guys and I got into a face-off—we had been guarding each other, and sometimes bumping and pushing each other, and then it just about got to the point of a fight.
Everybody else stood back and gave us room, but after we stared at each other for a while, it didn’t go any further, and we just got back to the game.
But, as this was happening, 1 noticed that Sam, who had been watching at the edge of the court, was turning and walking away.
High School 69 Another time, Sam and 1 went to a basketball game between Castlemont and Berkeley High.
The game was at Casllemont, but I didn’t have any sense, so I kept yelling shit at the Castlemont players.
Their star player was a guy named Fred “Sweetie” Davis, and at one point he got knocked to the floor by a guy on our team.
So, sometimes, without meaning to, I put Sam in some very difficult situations.
Sam had a cousin named George who played piano, and George could also sing.
And there was this other guy, Felton, who was one of the few Black kids who had gone to junior high school where I did.
And then I asked Randy, this white kid who’d been part of this impromptu singing group with John and me in our last year in junior high school.
We figured out pretty quickly that Sam should sing lead, at least on most of the songs, and then the others of us took our parts.
Then you had to have a second tenor, which was the lower-range tenor, and that was George.
Sometimes we practiced at George’s house, because he had a piano in his house, and sometimes we’d go to my house, because we also had a piano.
We’d spend three or four hours a lot of days just practicing, working on our music.
Eventually, Randy left the group and then Odell—Odell who claimed I’d “stepped on his dogs” way back on our first day of school— replaced him.
When Odell replaced Randy 1 reminded him of that run70 From Ike to Mao and Beyond in we had, and he didn’t even remember it.
We’d practice and we’d try to gel gigs, wanting to get paid and get known a little bit.
There was already the Cadillacs, and the Impalas, so we became the Continentals.
Now we’d also been rehearsing at the rec center at Live Oak, because they had a piano in there.
We rehearsed a lot for this, and we came there that night ready to do this Heartbeats’ song, “You’re a Thousand Miles Away,” and some other tunes.
As we were about to go in the rec center, this friend of Sam’s who had been playing basketball was coming over to get a drink of water.
So before we could go in to perform for the dance, we had to have a sing-off between Sam and his friend—they both did a Spaniels song, and after a couple of verses the other guy threw in the towel, because Sam could really sing.
Another lime my younger sister got us a gig performing at their ninth-grade dance.
But a lot of the white youth were taking it up and were really into it, as exemplified by my older sister’s junior high school class voting “WPLJ” as their favorite song.
They would give you shit for that, but it was just part of a whole package of everything they were down on, and all the things they’d give you shit for.
When 1 was a senior, the glee club teacher talked me and three other guys—two of us Black, two of us white—into doing a barbershop quartet song for the talent show.
Another time, when 1 was sixteen or seventeen, 1 went to a Giants baseball game.
Right before the game starts they always have the national anthem, and 1 was still somewhat patriotic—I wasn’t super-patriotic, but 1 still thought this was a good country overall, even though I was very angry about discrimination and segregation and racism and all that.
So we all stood up for the anthem and, for whatever reason, 1 started singing along.
They were relatives of my father, but they were unlike my father—they were very provincial, very snobbish, very big supporters of Billy Graham and big-lime racists.
One lime my younger sister Mary-Lou and I were staying in their house and we got in an argument about all this kind of stuff.
He didn’t ask her how she’d feel about it—and she was sitting right there.
As I mentioned earlier, Fresno was very segregated at that time, a lot of backward, reactionary stuff was concentrated there, and my relatives were, again, sort of narrow, provincial and into a lot of this backward, reactionary and racist stuff.
When 1 was maybe eighteen or nineteen we were visiting down there on one of the holidays, and they asked me to do a dramatic reading of something that was being circulated in their circles.
When 1 started reading it, it turned out to be this racist parody about John Kennedy’s son marrying Martin Luther King’s daughter—all this racist garbage.
When I realized what they were having me read, I just stopped and 1 got furious, and they must have regretted ever having given this to me to read.
You refuse to go anywhere where they are, you avoid them, you with your freeway through the middle of town and all the segregation,” and so on. don’t even remember everything I said, but it went on for about five minutes and they all just sat there, frozen.
Then I just threw the thing down and stalked out of the room, and it became, of course, a big episode in family relations.
Now, I do have to say that, when 1 was in high school I drove to Fresno with some friends of mine, Black and while, to go to the West Coast Relays, and my Auntie Bit and Uncle Beecher put us up in their house and were very warm and welcoming.
Given the general atmosphere they were a part of, that spoke to how they were very kind and generous people, on a personal level.
They were against discrimination, segregation and racism, especially in any kind of overt form.
But at the lime they weren’t completely free of some of the more “subtle” forms of this. 1 remember, for example, that in the same general time frame as that incident when we were visiting in Fresno , a discussion came up when my parents, myself and my younger sister, Mary-Lou, were on a trip.
My friend Matthew had started flirting with Mary-Lou—writing her poems, calling her up and talking with her on the phone, and all that. wasn’t sure how much this was a situation High School 73 where he was actually infatuated with my sister, and how much it was a matter of his testing us—testing me and testing my parents—to see what we would do. think it was probably a little of both.
Anyway, somehow this led to a discussion during this trip about interracial dating and marriage, and 1 was surprised, and frankly shocked, to hear my parents bringing up all the “difficulties” that would be involved in this, emphasizing this especially to my sister.
After listening to this for a while, I got involved and things got pretty heated.
A kind of irony in all this is that some years later my sister did marry somebody Black—her boyfriend from high school, Buddy—and by that Lime, in the late ’60s, my parents had gone through a lot of changes and genuinely welcomed Buddy into the family.
A lot of the kids I knew who played sports in high school were also into other things.
Some of them came from more academic or intellectual families, but also the people 1 was close with during my junior and senior years in high school— me, Matthew, Hemby, Joel, and some others—used to read Plato and Aristotle, John Stuart Mill and Shakespeare, and things like that.
If we were hanging out having a hamburger, or if we’d be on the playground during a break between games, we’d start talking about all these different things we were reading and we’d have debates.
Some guys would make fun of us, but some others would join in. 1 remember having this one discussion with several people, and there was this question, I think it might have come from Descartes, about how god could draw a triangle without using a pencil.
It wasn’t necessarily about god most of the time; sometimes it was 74 From Ike to Mao and Beyond about John Stuart Mill’s views on liberty, or John Locke and the rights of individuals and how the different rights of individuals conflicted with each other, or about democracy—and of course we talked about slavery too.
Before I got to a certain point in high school, 1 did my school work and 1 read what 1 was assigned to read, but that was it—then all of a sudden, when I was sixteen or so, I became really fascinated with all this discussion and wrangling over different ideas.
This kind of thing may have been going on in other places, but I suspect it was more of a phenomenon in Berkeley because of the particular and almost peculiar mix of Berkeley—you have people coming out of the ghetto and you have a lot of people who were related to the university.
Like I said, even a reactionary asshole like Edward Teller’s son was in one of my classes—we got into a debate where he was justifying the hydrogen bomb.
My friend Matthew actually lived in Oakland, but he wanted to go to Berkeley High—he was a great athlete, and so they wanted him at the school, but he also wanted to go there because he and his parents thought it was belter academically.
So he came to our school, and he was very interested in and fascinated by all these big debates.
It wasn’t just the kids whose parents were professors or something—Matthew’s father was a longshoreman and his mother worked as a domestic worker.
All I could say right then was something like “Oh fuck”—because I’d grown up haling the military and all that kind of military discipline.
Spring Thaw There was a guy in my Spanish class named David, who knew all these obscure facts about all these great literary figures from Latin America and Spain.
I was tremendously impressed by this guy, but he High School 75 wasn’t really a friend of mine—he kept to himself a lot.
But he seemed to be really very cosmopolitan, sort of a Renaissance man and when you could draw him out in a conversation—which wasn’t so easy to do—he was fascinating.
The House Unamerican Activities Committee was going around the country with their anti-communist crusade and they came to San Francisco.
Before then, there had been people who testified before HUAC who had been defiant.
But now a lot of people, more than a thousand 1 believe, demonstrated against HUAC in San Francisco.
This was a massive outpouring, the first Lime that people stood up against HUAC in a mass public way.
I was an aspiring poet and that day I’d gone off to a conference of high school poets around northern California.
But I’d gotten back in time for Spanish class and I’d noticed that David wasn’t there.
He and a number of other kids from my school who went to the demonstration talked about how they’d been attacked by the police, how fire hoses were used to drive them down the steps of the courthouse, and how it was a big outrage.
It became a big deal politically in the society as a whole, and they were all very proud they’d been part of this. was really envious of them—1 felt like I’d really missed out on something important, and I asked them a lot of questions about it.
So, it was kind of a spring thaw, a lot of things were busting loose, a lot of intellectual and cultural ferment was going on.
The Beats were breaking out—they had started up in Greenwich Village in Manhattan and had come out to North Beach in San Francisco.
I remember William Buckley came to debate some liberal about the first amendment, loyalty oaths, and all that kind of stuff, and Buckley started these disgusting antics to distract the audience while the liberal was talking.
At the time, I was of course still strongly opposed to communism and accepted all the conventional wisdom, or “un-wisdom,” about communism and how horrible it was.
He said, “No, but I hale HUAC” and then he explained why he hated it and everything it stood for.
A lot of the girls I knew were influencing me at the lime, including the Japanese-American girls that I ate lunch with who were interested in 76 From Ike to Mao and Beyond a lot of different artistic and intellectual questions.
Just as a side point, 1 remember one of them telling a story about Marlon Brando.
She was talking about how her grandmother, who had come from Japan and lived with their family and spoke no English, was watching a movie about Japan.
Brando was in it and at one point he spoke Japanese, and this girl told me that her grandmother said that if she closed her eyes when Brando was speaking, she couldn’t tell he wasn’t Japanese.
So there was a kind of mutual, or reciprocal thing there, where we influenced each other.
They played an important part in getting me interested in poetry, in philosophy and a lot of the general intellectual ferment that was going on.
This kind of ferment was going on pretty broadly among a number of my friends and people 1 knew, both boys and girls.
But it was significant, and kind of a new thing for me, that 1 developed close relationships with a number of girls, not as girlfriends, but just as friends who happened to be girls.
And that was also a lesson for me, because 1 had had more of a traditional view of girlfriends before then and 1 really didn’t have very many friends who were girls. 1 remember a few teachers very fondly from that time.
Bentley was an English teacher who had us read a lot of Shakespeare, and 1 remember one time I deliberately set out to write a paper about Macbeth to prove a thesis that 1 didn’t actually believe.
I was really angry with her at the time, but she had a point—she didn’t want to see whatever abilities 1 was developing misused for what she saw as paltry purposes.
But she encouraged me to write, as well as opening me up to reading a lot of different things, and seeing the value of that. 1 also learned a lot from Ms.
Later on, she quit teaching and after 1 heard about this I wrote her a letter trying to argue with her to slay on, because she was such a High School 77 good leacher.
She left anyway, but people like her had an influence on me, broadening my vistas about a lot of things.
On the other hand, when 1 was either a sophomore or junior, we had this real “old school” history leacher.
One day we got into class and she said, “Today we’re going to see a movie about “isms,” and we saw this movie that was the equivalent of “Reefer Madness” about communism and socialism.
Of course, there was nothing about individual -ism or capital-ism , it was just about social-ism and commun-ism.
So a lot of that, even in Berkeley, was still being drilled into the students at that time.
Ironically, one of the influences that convinced me not to believe in god was Freud, who actually put forward and reinforced some reactionary notions, including in regard to women, but whose critique of religion I found compelling.
He tied religion in with the tradition of the powerful father figure, and that influenced me to recognize that religion was a human invention and a human device.
At that time, most of my friends were still religious, and in fact, the four of us who hung together all the time—me, Matthew, Hemby, and Joel—all still nominally went to the same church.
Mainly that was because we were playing on the church-league basketball team together and so we sort of had to put in our lime in order to legitimately “represent” the church.
Also, I was still living with my parents, still under their aegis so to speak, and they wanted me to go to church and 1 still went, even after I started not believing, which was obviously a source of tension.
But the intellectual ferment—getting into philosophy, starting to study history as well as literature, and so on—led me to see from a lot of different directions that religion and the idea of god were human inventions.
All these different cultures had different ideas of god that conflicted with and contradicted each other.
Bentley and you could see that different people in different ages believed in all different kinds of gods, and that some of these had passed out of convention and weren’t widely believed in any more.
I talked earlier about how when I was a kid 1 used to “tempt god” by saying “fuck,” then wondering if god would punish me and if l should atone for my sins and pray for forgiveness.
I know some people say that “faith in god” gives them a system of beliefs to live by and to do good things in the world—even some very progressive people say this —but 1 found belief in god to be very intimidating, very oppressive and repressive.
The Christian religion is full of fear—as is Islam—over what’s going to happen to you if you somehow displease god.
I still believed that there was right and wrong; 1 don’t know exactly what I thought it was rooted in, but 1 just believed that certain things were right and certain things were wrong.
You didn’t need religion to tell you what was right and wrong, and you didn’t need the fear of god to make you do what was right.
There were just some things that were right and some things that were wrong, and you acted accordingly.
That might have been somewhat naive, and obviously it’s not deeply enough rooted to carry you a long, long way; but at that time it was very emancipating for me.
My parents were aware of this, especially once I got out of high school and became more intellectually emancipated as well as practically emancipated in a lot of ways.
I just started voicing my view more, and this was the source of a lot of conflict and tension, and we got into big arguments about it.
As for my friends, today there’s all this nonsense about how Black people are just inherently religious—and that’s a whole thing that gets me pissed off, it’s just bullshit.
A lot of my Black friends and a lot of people who influenced me later in life, like the Panthers, were going through the same thing I’d gone through, and recognized that these religious ideas and institutions are human inventions—and not very good ones.
So some of my friends were still religious, but many of them were going through the same general kind of emancipating experience that I was in casting off religion.
I played Peter Van Dam, Anne Frank’s boyfriend. never sat down and memorized my lines.
I just went to rehearsal all the time and by the lime the play was actually pul on, 1 knew everybody’s lines from beginning to end, without ever studying any of them.
If you’d plug me in anywhere in the play, and give me the first word, I could just go forward from there through the whole play.
But I don’t think the full heaviness of that story really hit me until a few years later.
Obviously, I understood it on a certain level, and even though this was just a senior play in high school, 1 actually did try to get inside of the play and understand my character and the other characters as well, and really give some expression to it.
But still, I was a seventeenyear-old kid, I hadn’t lived through an experience like that.
I knew about the Holocaust, but I didn’t really have a deep understanding of it.
I got that later, when I went to college and I had more Jewish friends and learned about it more.
It wasn’t just that 1 had never experienced anything like that, but I’d also never had relationships with friends whose family had gone through that, or who knew people very closely who’d gone through that.
So, although at the time of this senior play in high school I knew about the Holocaust and I was somewhat familiar with the very gripping story of Anne Frank, as I grew and developed my understanding of it got deepened.
Football Playing on the high school football team was very important to me in a lot of ways.
I spoke earlier about how the integrated setting of the team ended up Leaching me more than any class that I had.
And, on the level of football itself, in my senior year things didn’t go so well.
We usually had a really good team, but that year I think we only won four out of the nine games we played, so that was kind of frustrating.
People kept getting injured, people were quitting the team, and the coach was using all these oldfashioned formations which weren’t really working, so he kept shifting them.
From week to week everybody had to learn new assignments, which was part of why we didn’t have such a successful season.
We trav80 From Ike to Mao and Beyond eled 50 miles to play against a school in Stockton in my junior year, for instance.
The socializing was a lot of fun in general, and there would be some occasions like that Vallejo game with the bus ride, where we had that deep talk about racism and discrimination, and we ended up winning that game, and l had a good game that night—so that particular experience was a very positive one.
There were other, more frustrating experiences, but overall 1 have very positive and fond remembrances of this whole experience.
Interestingly, when I went to college at Berkeley, and I was starting to practice for the freshman football team, I already started to get the sense that in college it was going to be much more of a serious affair, like a business, and not nearly so much fun as in high school.
You lost a game on Friday and on Monday you’d be back at practice with your friends and you’d get ready for the next game.
If you had a good game, you’d get written up in the paper for having a good game and if you had a bad game, you had to pul up with being written about for having a lousy game, but it was all part of the fun.
At the same time, there is a lot of militarism, a lot of macho, a lot of downright misogynistic shit that goes along with sports in this society — that whole dominant sports culture.
And that could have had a very negative influence overall if it weren’t for the larger things happening in society and in particular the whole thing breaking loose around Black people, which mainly made this a positive experience and a positive influence on me, even though a contradictory one.
I played quarterback, and when you’re sort of leading a team that’s not doing that well, it can be a pretty sharply mixed experience.
I just thought of it as a position I want to play, largely because I loved to pass in football and 1 developed a pretty good ability to pass.
I remember one game when I was playing on the junior varsity, we came from behind to tie the game, and I completed five or six passes in a row and then we scored a touchdown and that fell really good.
But I never thought of myself as the “field general,” I just thought okay, I’ll call the plays, and 1 sort of led the team in a general sense—but more it was that I liked this position because I loved to pass the ball.
I High School 81 thought that passing, if you could really do it well, was a beautiful art— that’s the way 1 looked at it. 1 also loved track, and our school always had really good track teams.
In my younger sister’s class, there was a guy named Jerry Williams, who was a great sprinter—he broke all kinds of records and had a beautiful running style.
My friend Matthew was on the track team as well as the football team, and he won the state meet one year in the shot-put.
Anyway, 1 really loved track and basketball, and 1 went to almost every one of our school’s basketball games and almost all the track meets.
During my senior year there was a league track meet, leading toward the stale championship meet.
I really wanted to go to this track meet, but it started at something like 2m. on a school day and was an hour drive away.
I was able to gel my parents’ car for that day—of course, I didn’t tell them what my plan was. don’t like to come into sporting events after they start—I wanted to see the meet from the very beginning, but it started at two and 1 didn’t gel out of school until three, and if I left then it would be almost four o’clock and I’d miss more than half the meet.
So I was sitting in my Spanish class, and they sent me a note saying you’re supposed to meet your father outside at one to go to a dentist appointment.
I think I got away 82 From Ike to Mao and Beyond with it mainly because 1 was a good student.
After the football season in my sophomore year, 1 went out for basketball, and the coach tried to tell me that 1 was too short to play on the basketball team.
I’d played with a lot of the guys on the team at the playgrounds, so I knew I could play with them, 1 knew I was good enough to be on the squad.
Then, a couple of years later, the basketball coach was my gym teacher, and we used to play basketball in gym class.
For example, I always tried to get my homework done in study hall—partly because 1 didn't want to be burdened with homework, and partly because 1 was trying to cultivate this reputation of someone who was both a wild kind of guy, but also a surprisingly good student who never had to study.
So 1 really worked hard in study class, and only rarely did I take books home to study—only if I had to write a paper or maybe study for a test.
But sometimes I’d get bored in study class, and I'd think up antics and pranks.
There was a teacher in one study class who was this nasty disciplinarian, and everybody hated her.
Now, if you were in study class and had to do a make-up test or something, you could be excused from study class to go do it.
So I had a friend of mine write a note saying that I had to go take a Spanish test during this study class, and my friend signed the note with the name of my Spanish teacher.
I then walked up to this study class teacher whom everybody hated and presented her this note.
She counter-signed it—at which point I tore it up and threw it in the wastebasket.
She got so furious that she look the note out of the wastepaper basket and meticulously scotch-taped it back together, and then sent it down to the vice principal in charge of discipline for students.
So I got called into the vice principal’s office the next day, and my defense was, “Look, 1 was just having fun, I didn’t actually cut study class.
I was just trying to see if I High School 83 could actually fool her, and once I fooled her, I just tore the note up and threw it away.
I also had a physics class as a sophomore, and I think the teacher’s name was Mr Nelson.
He was a lively teacher, and a pretty good teacher, but he also had this strict thing about no talking out of order in class.
You were not allowed to talk unless you’re called on by Mr Nelson himself.
He would take points off every lime you spoke out of turn in class, and that would take away from your grade average.
One lime he was talking about measurements in physics, one named after Isaac Newton, called the Newton, and the other called the Dyne.
Wild Times and Hairy Situations My love for basketball and music sometimes drew me into some wild situations.
We ended up losing in the final to McClymonds—it was a good game, but they had a better team.
But even before our game on the first day of the TOC, I went with a couple of friends who’d come up to Berkeley High from Garfield Junior High with me—Jim, who was sort of a prankster, and Phil, who was one of the lough kids at Garfield.
We were sitting in the front row right under one basket, and Poly High was playing, a school from the Fillmore ghetto of San Francisco.
Every time he’d line up on the free throw line, he would intimidate everybody around him.
At the end of the first half in this game, when Poly was still behind, the ball rolled off the court and right to where we were sitting.
There were only a few seconds left until halftime, and the ball rolls right to me.
So 1 pick up the ball and 1 try to hand it back to him, but Jim sticks his hand underneath the ball where you can’t see it, and when I try to give it to John Lewis, Jim pulls the ball back.
Then, fortunately, his team went off the court and he turned and ran off with them.
But Jim and Phil both said, “I’m getting the fuck out of here,” and they went and sat way, way up high in the gym, as far away from the court as they could get.
But I loved basketball, and the whole scene by the court, too much to just move away like that.
When John Lewis was maybe a senior in high school or just out of high school, he was arrested for pulling an armed robbery of a store in San Francisco.
Just after 1 graduated from high school, a carload of me and my friends, many of whom were still in high school, went down to see Oakland City College play against San Francisco City College.
This guy, Charles, who had gone to our high school was playing for San Francisco City College, and they won the game.
Afterward, he was standing in the doorway leading down to the locker room and bragging about how he had held down this player named Howard Foster, who had played for McClymonds and was now playing for Oakland City College.
He was bragging about how “Howard Foster ain’t shit, I held him to 8 points, he ain’t shit,” and all this kind of stuff.
Suddenly this guy who ran track for Oakland City College stepped out of the crowd and said to Charles, who was still bragging, “You ain’t shit either”—and boom, he hit him.
High School 85 Charles was standing against the wall and he was knocked out on his feet—he went sliding down the wall.
So they were trying to get me out of there, and on our way out, we passed this woman that I’d always seen at McClymonds games at the TOC—she was maybe in her thirties or early forties, and she always wore this McClymonds sweater.
She opened her purse and said, “No I’m not worried, ’cause I always got my friend with me,” and pointed to her gun.
Then all my friends were saying, “Man we really gotta get out of here now,” and they finally succeeded in prevailing on me to get us out of there.
Another lime, Joel, Matthew, Hemby and 1 had been hanging out on a Saturday night.
There was this place called Bobo’s, a hamburger joint in west Berkeley, and we decided we wanted to get a hamburger.
So we pulled into Bobo’s, and as we come up to make our order, we see there’s this crowd gathered around.
And there’s this other guy I knew from high school named Wazell, with a knife, and the two of them are in a stand-off, going back and forth and threatening each other.
And everybody, including the guy with the bench, takes off running, saying, “Hey, they called the cops, they called the cops,” because naturally the people working at Bobo’s saw something had to be done about this.
We calmly went and put in our order and got it, and we were sitting in the car with our hamburgers and shakes 86 From Ike to Mao and Beyond when the cops pull up.
My friends and I, we wanted our hamburgers, and this wasn’t a big thing to us—Wazell was just this kind of character, always getting into this kind of shit.
On the other hand, we weren’t going to cooperate with these cops either.
Another lime Matthew and I went to the Oakland Auditorium to see a concert with James Brown and the Famous Flames, the Drifters, and 1 think maybe Hank Ballard and the Midnighters—it was a big show.
So part of the floor was cleared and people would stand and also would dance, even before the acts came on—they played music before the show started and in between the sets.
The scene was already a little bit tense, because you had all these rivalries, with people from different schools and different cliques and everything, all there in this Auditorium.
Since Matthew was from Oakland, he knew a lot of people there, and he was going around talking to them.
For a while during the evening, when the acts would come on, and people were dancing, fights would break out.
Then they’d cool it out, the fights would slop, and the acts would start up again—and then the same thing would happen.
This happened two or three limes, and finally Matthew said, “Man, 1 don’t want to get caught up in all this, let’s go upstairs,” because there was a balcony and we could see the whole thing from up there.
So we were sitting in the balcony, and again one of the acts started up, and now this really big fight broke out, much bigger than any of the previous fights.
People were fighting all over the floor, and all of a sudden the main door into the auditorium flies open, and this phalanx of Oakland cops—who were known to be particularly brutal and racist—comes in, pulling out their clubs and swinging on people.
And from where we were sitting in the balcony, we could see all the people down on the floor just rotate and form a kind of phalanx of their own to fight the cops.
It was some of the most beautiful choreography I’ve ever seen—they stopped fighting each other, swung around 90 degrees, got into formaHigh School 87 lion and started fighting the cops.
This was all spontaneous, there was no plan or leadership, but it was very impressive.
I also saved up and bought myself a cashmere sweater when 1 was thirteen because, for whatever reason, that was considered to be the height of cool in the crowd that 1 was in at that lime.
But when I got to high school, again things changed for all the reasons I’ve been talking about, and my sense of cool changed completely as well.
I have to confess that one of the things I prided myself on was what was then called “the mack,” which was how cool you walked.
Of course, you can see the contradictory nature of it because “mack” is another word for pimp, and this was sort of imitating the supposedly cool walk of the pimp.
Now the guys who were into this, most of them didn’t have any interest in being a pimp, but how slowly you walked and how you moved your body when you walked was a barometer of cool.
When I was a senior, I worked in this school office where 1 would sometimes take messages to different classrooms.
And there was one math class in particular where the math teacher was kind of a wild, crazy guy anyway.
So 1 was coming to deliver this message to his class, and 1 just happened to walk in through the back door.
When I opened the back door, everyone looked up to see what was happening, and I think I literally Look forty seconds to walk the forty feel to the front of the room to deliver the message.
The whole class started cracking up because I was really putting on my mack.
After that, there were a number of limes during that semester when 1 would have messages for that class, and every time I would open the back door, all of the students would look up and as soon as they saw me, they would begin clapping their hands and snapping their fingers rhythmically.
This became sort of an institution—it happened maybe ten times during this class, and I could always tell that the students in the class were glad when I opened the back door and they saw it was me because they knew there was going to be a diversion, a little entertainment, a break in the routine.
Then, when I was a senior in high school, we had an awards assem88 From Ike to Mao and Beyond bly.
A number of us on ihe football team decided informally to have a contest to see who could have the baddest mack walking up to gel our football letter, and as part of that, who could take the longest from the time their name was called until the time they actually were handed their award.
So that was the kind of thing that was a matter of style and cool, even though it obviously had a negative aspect, the whole thing associated with the mack.
But it was a much broader phenomenon— you didn’t think of yourself as a pimp, you just thought it was cool.
Brimming With Confidence” 1 would say I graduated from high school at a very optimistic Lime.
A lot of things were changing—there were a lot of challenges, but there was a feel in the air that things could change for the better.
A lot of Black people, a lot of people like those who went to the anli-HUAC demonstrations, a lot of people generally felt a certain optimism.
And the fact that 1 came from the kind of family and the kind of middle class background that 1 did, that can give you a certain sense of confidence too, frankly.
But even for people who weren’t while or middle class, there was in the air a feeling of a positive wind blowing, and optimism about social change for the better and getting out of years and centuries of oppression.
All that was part of the swirl of the times, if you want to pul it that way.
That was how I felt about things, and about myself. remember even though our football team didn’t do very well, I fell good about playing football.
My younger sister, Mary-Lou, used to always kid me because at one time this local sports reporter wrote an article that featured me and at one point he referred to me as “Bobby, a little guy... but brimming with confidence” — that was a phrase that was in the article.
So my sister would kid me about this, but this did sort of capture something about me, personally, but also how I felt about the times.
And speaking of my younger sister, there was this guy Buddy, whom she went out with in high school and later married.
But my first encounter with Buddy was when I was a senior in high school and he was a sophomore.
Some of my friends and I were driving around in Oakland looking for something to do on a High School 89 Saturday night, stopping at different friends’ houses and asking if anything were going on, and finally somebody said they knew something about a parly in East Oakland.
Even though Buddy lived in Berkeley, he had some relatives in East Oakland with a bigger house, so he was having a party out there.
But we got out of our car and went walking up to the door, rang the doorbell, and when Buddy opened the door we could tell there were all these people inside—the place was packed.
So we were pissed off—it was getting late and we’d driven way out there to East Oakland to go to this party.
And they all said to me, “Naw, naw, man, calm down, c’mon, we can’t do that.
But part of the whole culture that 1 had taken up as my own was that you had to be cool and you had to be kind of bad.
Later, Buddy and I laughed about this when I told him this story—he remembered the incident in a general way, but once we became really close and became family, then it had a whole different meaning, obviously, and we laughed about it.
Later on, after they were married for a few years, my sister and Buddy broke up, but even though that was painful, she remained fond of him, and I liked him a lot too.
But Buddy, tragically, died in a car accident not too long after he and my sister broke up.
At the lime I graduated from high school, I didn’t have any clear idea what 1 wanted to do with the rest of my life in the big sense.
I was going to go to Cal and play football. was interested in English literature and history and politics.
So I was going to major in one of those, or some combination of those, and maybe I’d end up in law, or maybe not, I didn’t know.
Maybe I was going to end up being a lawyer, maybe I was going to write poetry, maybe I was going to... 1 didn’t know what I was gonna do for sure.
Coming from this middle class, professional family, we had enough money that 1 didn’t have to work.
But they thought it would be good experience for me to do some work, and I could save some money, so 1 got two part-time jobs.
And in the afternoon and evening I worked in a truck barn, where the trucking companies leave their trucks at the end of the day.
I had to make sure the trucks had enough gas, that the motors were oiled, that what they called the fifth wheel, which connects to the trailer, was greased so everything would fit together right, and things related to that.
I could come in during the afternoon, whenever I wanted more or less, and work in the evening until I finished—I just had to get the job done.
And, at the end of the week, I could work either Friday or come in Saturday morning, because they didn’t run on the weekends, so I just had to gel the trucks ready for Monday.
The office job was the first time I’d worked in that kind of situation, and the people were very narrow and petty.
But interestingly enough, I went back and worked there for a little while about four years later, when the Vietnam War and the protests against it were beginning to become really big, and some of the people working there had really broadened their outlook.
I even saw some of these people at anti-war demonstrations—people you could never have imagined being at something like that four years earlier. 1 worked at those jobs right up until the end of August in 1961, and it was a very good mix and a very good experience—working two different jobs with two very different situations and kinds of people.
One day at the truck barn, for example, a tanker truck came in to fill up the underground lank with gas for the gas pumps at the truck barn.
The guy put the hose down into the tank, and then he went off into the office to do something.
But he hadn’t put the hose in very well, and so the hose started slipping out of the tank in the ground and gasoline was spraying everywhere.
Like a fool, because I wasn’t very experienced, 1 went running up to try to grab the hose and shove it back in.
And, of course, I got this geyser, this torrent of gas, shooting into my face and High School 91 into my eyes.
And even more upselling, I wasn't sure if the blinding was only temporary.
Even though I was working these two part-time jobs, l still tried to have my social life.
After I finished work in the truck barn, 1 would go hang out with my friends.
One night I had arranged with my friend Hemby to go to a party after work.
So then I had to quickly explain to him who it was and remind him we were going to a party—which we then did.
But it was a little nerve-wracking there for a second. 1 still loved the TOC, but now 1 had a problem because the TOC ran from Thursday through Saturday.
Thursday it started at 4:30 and Friday il started at 4:30, and the last game started at nine, so the schedule conflicted with my work.
Somebody got me a pass to the TOC that let me go in and out every time 1 wanted to, without having to pay each time.
McClymonds was playing in the first game on Thursday and I really wanted to see that game.
And in the nine o’clock game Richmond High was playing, and 1 really wanted to see that game too.
So, I figured okay, 1 could miss the other two games on Thursday if 1 had to.
I showed up at the TOC on Thursday at my customary time, about five minutes after four when they opened the doors.
I strategically parked my car and watched the McClymonds game, which ended a little before six.
Then 1 went sprinting out, got in my car—1 won’t say how fast I drove, but I drove the five or six miles to my job as fast as I could, went ripping through the job at the truck barn, finished up about 8:40, got back in my car, went ripping back up to the gym (again, I won’t say 92 From Ike to Mao and Beyond how fast I went) parked the car, got my pass out, ran in and got there just in time for the tip-off of the Richmond game.
Then, Friday it wasn’t a problem, because I could pul the work off until Saturday morning, so 1 went to all the games on Friday I only missed two games that year.
Everybody was wailing to see Richmond and McClymonds play in the final of the TOC that year.
In the first game of the year that season, Richmond had broken McClymonds’ sixty-eight-game winning streak, but McClymonds hadn’t lost another game all year, and they’d won the TOC five years in a row.
Richmond and McClymonds were in separate brackets in the TOC, so they were supposed to meet in the final.
Richmond had this great player named Leroy Walker, who later played for the Globetrotters—he’s the one who really made the difference in beating McClymonds earlier in the season.
But when they got to the TOC, for some reason, he had an off game—I think he only made five out of twenty-three shots that day—and Richmond lost unexpectedly.
So McClymonds and Richmond didn’t have a rematch, but nevertheless there were a number of great games, including the final, which McClymonds won once again.
All the effort 1 went through that year to see as much of the TOC as I could was definitely worth it.
He only stayed there one year before he got disgusted by the racism in the school and in the football program, so he came back to go to Cal.
A couple of weeks before school started in the fall that year, I quit the two part-time jobs.
But, before I started college, some friends of mine and I, including Matthew, who was home for the summer, decided to go for a camping trip to Yosemite.
We were having a great time, but then something happened that changed all that.
Matthew wanted to learn how to drive, but his father was kind of a tyrannical patriarch, who always liked to have something over him.
We’d go to a movie and Matthew would want to borrow some money from his dad, and his dad would basically make him beg for the money, even though his dad had a relatively good job as a longshoreman and could afford a few dollars for a movie.
As part of this whole “lord of the High School 93 house” bullshit, he wouldn’t let Matthew get a driver’s license.
So Matthew was always after me, even though he didn’t have a driver’s license, to let him learn how to drive by driving the car that 1 had.
But the car that 1 had at that point was my parents’ car, so that made me especially reluctant.
We got up in Yosemite and he kept after me, “Let me drive, let me drive, let me drive.” 1 held out and held out and held out.
So the two of us hiked up to the top, and we expected to find the other two up there waiting for us, because obviously you could drive up faster than you could hike it.
We looked all over the parking lot—we looked and we looked and we looked—and all of a sudden this car pulled up.
We got a ride down to the site of the accident, and luckily Matthew and the other guy had only really minor injuries, basically just scrapes and bruises.
But when 1 looked at the scene of the accident, they could easily have been killed.
They’d gone off a mountain road on a turn— they sailed over a pile of rocks, between two trees, and landed on an upside-down fallen tree which acted as a brake and brought them to a stop, nudged right up against another giant tree.
And, even though they escaped serious injury, it was obvious that the two of them could have been killed.
These were friends of mine, and Matthew was one of my very closest friends.
I felt responsible, and then 1 had to call my parents and tell them that their car had been totaled.
They were away somewhere and got a third-hand garbled message, so they thought that I’d been in an accident.
When they found out what had actually happened, they were relieved that 1 hadn’t been in an accident and that nobody had been badly hurl or killed, but of course they were angry about my really bad judgment in letting Matthew drive the car.
And I felt 94 From Ike to Mao and Beyond responsible, not only for their car being wrecked, but lor allowing a situation in which he and the other guy could have been killed.
But then I was getting ready to go to Cal, so I turned my thoughts toward that.
I’d always wanted to go to Cal ever since I was a kid growing up in Berkeley.
I knew Cal was a good school academically, and 1 was interested in the academics, but it had also always been a dream of mine to play football at Cal.
But I still wanted to be on the team, and at least maybe get a chance to play.
I was also excited about all the intellectual and artistic ferment going on.
In my senior year in high school we used to go to jazz clubs, and then at the end of the night, we might stay up all night talking—I can remember arguing one time with people, late into the night, about the writings of St.
Chapter Five Life Interrupted I enrolled at Cal the week before classes formally started, and we began football practice for the freshman team at that time.
Even though I was really looking forward to it and excited about it, they had already given us big play books and I could tell the whole thing was going to be more like a job and a business.
In high school you had to learn plays and you had to practice, but it wasn’t all so serious.
There was a camaraderie about it and there was a particular social experience that went along with it in a school like Berkeley High at that lime.
But 1 could already tell this was going to be a much different atmosphere.
Nevertheless, both because I loved football and because it was sort of a thing I’d always dreamed of doing, 1 still wanted to play football for Cal.
I would be throwing up a lot. noticed that while I hadn’t changed my diet or anything, I was gaining weight really quickly.
Even though a lot of different things indicated that something was wrong, 1 thought that maybe I just had a little bit of the flu.
But this persisted for that whole week, and I kept vomiting all the time.
It’s one thing if you do that a couple of times in one day, or for a couple of days.
Or I’d be hungry and eat food, but as soon as 1 ate I felt ter95 96 From Ike to Mao and Beyond rible.
So 1 went into the clinic, and 1 described my symptoms, and they gave me a urine test and some blood tests.
Pretty soon they came back and said, “We have to admit you to the hospital.
They wanted to see what would happen—and between that afternoon and evening I gained five pounds, because my kidneys were basically shutting down and I was retaining all the water that I was drinking.
At this point my parents called a friend of theirs who was a doctor and asked him to go check and see what was happening.
When they told him what the urine tests had showed, he said, “Uh oh, that’s not good,” and explained to them that it could mean there was a serious problem with my kidneys.
And that was the first lime that I knew that I was very sick. knew from what they said about the tests that something wasn’t right, and the fact that 1 was gaining this weight meant something.
The next day, the head of the medical staff at the student health clinic, who became my doctor—his name was Mori Meyer and he was a really great guy—came in and look over my case, because he recognized it was very serious and he told me, frankly, that I was very sick.
And for a couple of months l was in the hospital, in a bad way, because my kidneys just completely shut down.
They were telling me I was very sick and, obviLife Interrupted 97 ously, the way they were saying it meant they were serious.
But, for whatever reason, 1 didn’t really think about dying. just knew I was very sick and the question was how to get well, that was what was in my mind.
My parents, I know, got the point that 1 was very sick, and the implications of that.
They could pul you on dialysis—where they basically lake your blood out and filter it and put it back into your body, because your kidneys are supposed to do that but they’re not functioning—and they almost did that with me.
But you couldn’t stay on dialysis indefinitely, and dialysis then wasn’t even as good as it is now. know that my parents understood right away the seriousness of the situation.
Although my father was very affectionate and wasn’t one of these fathers who wouldn’t show emotions, he didn’t cry a lot in front of other people.
And 1 was told by my mother and my younger sister, later on, that he went into a closet and just wept, because he understood what this meant.
They would come in every morning and take a bunch of blood tests to see what the chemicals in my blood were.
Since my kidneys weren’t functioning, 1 wasn’t allowed to eat anything for about a month.
I could drink around five hundred milliliters of water and an additional amount of water equal to whatever I was able to urinate for the day—which was often very, very little, because it’s your kidneys that release the urine.
So all this uremic poisoning was backing up in my body, because I couldn’t urinate—the doctor used to come in, look at my eyes and see that I had uremic poisoning in my eyes.
They would come in the morning and take these tests, and if my potassium were too low they would give me potassium during the day, in pills; and if my potassium were too high, they would give me something to counter-balance that.
So I felt as if I were a test lube and they were chemically adjusting what was going on in my body to keep me alive, especially during the acute phase, which lasted more than a month.
Thai’s why I couldn’t eat anything, because they didn’t want anything to complicate things further—every time you eat, it affects the chemical balance of everything in your body.
Despite that, one thing that was hard was that I’d gel very hungry every day There was a guy across the hall from me who had hepatitis.
And, because that weakens the body, they had him on a 5,000-calorie-a-day diet.
He would describe to me how he had two or three milkshakes a day, and I would get really jealous.
You know, in the hospital, one of the things people look forward to, if they’re not too sick, is meal lime—it breaks up the monotony and you get something to eat.
I used to lie there and listen to the dishes clinking on the trays, but I could never eat.
I was hungry, but if I had eaten 1 would have felt even worse. can still remember when, finally, they let me have something to eat—it was a peach.
I remember how grateful I was, and how I profusely thanked the orderly in the hospital who went out and got that peach and gave it to me with some fanfare.
Of course, there were a lot of ways in which this whole thing was very difficult.
The treatment wasn’t as bad as the sickness, but sometimes you kind of wondered, because they’d have to get potassium in me by one means or another.
So one time they gave me these great big horse capsules that were full of potassium, and I’d have to take something like fifteen of them at a lime.
I’d take so many and then I’d throw them up, so then I’d have to lake them again.
One day after I’d passed the most acute stage of this, they brought in this glass of orange juice, and they said here’s some orange juice with just a little bit of medicine in it.
I look one swig, and 1 can’t even describe the taste, it just made my body shiver, it was such an awful taste.
Since then I’ve used this as a metaphor sometimes—the one teaspoon of potassium that ruins a whole glass of orange juice.
But that was not as bad as what I had to go through earlier, when 1 couldn’t orally take in the potassium because I’d throw it up.
Then they decided that the only way they could keep it in me was to give it to me by enema.
So I’d have to have an eight-hour drip of potassium coming in by that means.
It didn’t hurt, but there was a pressure build-up, the way it is with IV drips.
If a nurse doesn’t come around to check it every Life Interrupted 99 so often, then the drip will start going a little faster.
The nurses can get very busy and preoccupied with something else, and it starts going faster and faster—and the more it goes, the more the pressure builds up.
These are the kinds of things you had to pul up with in order to overcome this disease, especially in its acute phase.
And they knew that if I were too sick to even feel up to listening to a football game, then it was very serious.
Because I was young, and even though this hit me completely out of the blue and really knocked me down, 1 felt like “I’m going to overcome this.
But, of course, it is very difficult when you feel the way a lot of youth do—invulnerable and optimistic and enthusias100 From Ike to Mao and Beyond Lie and very confident about life—and all of a sudden everything’s knocked out from underneath you, you’re just barely hanging on to life, and you feel completely vulnerable in a way you never did before.
Friends My friends were a big part of giving me the support and strength to keep going, as well as my father, my mother and my sisters.
When you’re eighteen years old, nineteen years old, you want to be doing a lot of things, but they would spend hours with me, when they were allowed to visit in the hospital, they would come and do all kinds of things to try to keep my spirits up and keep me in the orientation of fighting this, rather than giving in.
I was in the hospital for a couple of months in this sort of acute phase.
After that 1 went back into the hospital to get a biopsy of my kidneys.
The biopsy was actually somewhat encouraging, because it showed that there was damage to the tubes of my kidneys, but not to what’s called the glomeruli, which are the actual filtering units.
So that meant there was a reasonable chance that I would recover, whereas if I’d had serious damage to the filtering units, the glomeruli in the kidneys, 1 would have had a much worse prognosis.
They put me back in the hospital to start these treatments because 1 was very weak and also because they wanted to monitor me.
Cortisone is a very, very powerful drug, and they were giving me very high dosages to begin with.
It can also have very serious psychological side effects, which fortunately I never had.
But physically, you get what is called Cushing Syndrome, where all of the fat in your body gels mobilized into your trunk, your neck gets really thick, your face swells out, while your arms and your legs become very thin and your muscles tend to get broken down.
You look very swollen and sort of disfigured, especially when you’re taking high dosages of cortisone.
I remember there was this guy who was a cook in the hospital where I was then; he used to be on the basketball team at Berkeley High—his name was Lavon “Cookie” Patton—he had been a year or two ahead of me in high school.
And when he found out I was in the hospital, during his off hours or “down Lime” he’d come up and visit with me for a while.
I didn’t really realize then that I still had a long-term battle ahead. was hoping that I would get this steroid treatment, this cortisone, and I’d gel well in a few months, then I’d be back to what I was before.
But actually it was three years before that happened, and a lot went on during that time.
I got sick right at the beginning of September in 1961, and I wasn’t able to go back to school, even on a limited basis, until the next fall.
So there was a whole year when 1 was basically recuperating, and at the beginning of that, after I got out of the hospital and was just getting going with the cortisone treatments, 1 had to spend a lot of time at home, because 1 was very weak and I was only really beginning to overcome the acute phase.
Re-thinking During those years, while it would be an exaggeration to say that l literally didn’t recognize myself when I looked in the mirror, in all but the most literal sense that was true. just looked completely different to myself, really disfigured.
I was altered very significantly in my physical appearance, and not in a good way, and 1 was also very sickly.
I grew up in this society and came of age in the '50s, with all the conventional and superficial ways in which people are conditioned to think about relations between boys and girls, men and women; and I, obviously, was conditioned myself by all that.
For example, I mentioned that among my good friends in high school were girls who were intellectuals and whom I respected for their minds and their thinking.
On the other hand, while 1 didn’t go for the classical separation—where there arc some girls who are smart, and they’re friends, and there are other ones who are pretty or sexy or whatever, and they’re the ones you are interested in romantically—a girl did have to be good-looking, in the conventional sense, for me to get romantically interested.
It wasn’t as if this were an epiphany, and my whole viewpoint changed completely, all at once, but it did start me thinking in a different way and more deeply about what’s really important in people, and in particular women, both as friends and even as people in whom you might be romantically interested.
But it did cause me to start thinking more deeply about what really matters in people, what are the important qualities in people.
Also, my friends were coming to visit me when I was able to go home from the hospital but couldn’t gel out of the house for a while.
My friends would spend their weekends with me, and this meant a tremendous amount to me.
They could have been—and probably, on one level, would have liked to be—out doing a whole bunch of other things.
But they cared about me and it was important lo them to be with me and give me support, and this kind of thing also makes you think differently and more deeply about things, or at least begin to. 1 wouldn’t necessarily have described myself as “popular” in high school. was controversial.
I was popular with some people and very unpopular with other people, including people who were “popular” in the classical and conventional sense.
But I did think of myself as a guy who’s “got something going for him,” and I more or less expected people lo like me.
As for those who didn’t like me, fuck ’em—it was for good reasons they didn’t like me, it was because I was doing things that I believed in and things that I wanted to do that are important and right.
So if they don’t like me for that reason, to hell with them—there are other people who will like me.
That was all part of the whole “brimming with confidence” thing, which also partly comes from the background that I came out of, where the world seems like it’s open to you.
Then all of a sudden you are knocked down, with this serious illness and all its side effects, and you don’t have everything going for you.
For example, I could only have very, very limited amounts of sodium every day.
I used to write up menus, going through books calibrating the milligrams of sodium in different things, then my mom would find the right foods and prepare the meals that fit that diet.
She had to weigh everything, she had to shop at special stores, at a time when they didn’t have the whole broad array of health food stores and different kinds of health foods that they have now.
So this look up a big part of her life, for a couple of years, besides giving me other kinds of practical and emotional support.
At a time when I was beginning to go out on my own, all of a sudden I was forced not only to live at home for a couple of years, but to be very dependent on my family.
She was very supportive, but she also had her own life, and while my parents also cared about her and her life and paid attention to that, they frankly devoted a lot of lime to my needs, and my mother in particular did this on almost an hour-by-hour basis, especially in the early stages, to help me survive and recover.
Of course, I had tremendous appreciation and gratitude for my mom and for everything that she was doing for me.
There was also a more intangible part of this whole experience that was extremely difficult emotionally.
Taking all this medicine all the time, and the side effects it had, including the physical disfigurement, and not being able to go out and do the things that I loved, all took a heavy Loll.
For instance, my family had a recording of Harry Belafonte, whom I really liked, and I used to play that record over and over again, because somehow it lifted my spirits and made me feel better.
Also, by this time I had started to gel really interested in poetry—this started during my last years in high school.
It’s funny, not too long ago I was watching a movie where they quoted a line from a Keats poem without attributing it.
But also, society was changing at this time in dramatic ways, and because of the influence of these larger things, which 1 was still very passionately interested in, I just didn’t think very much about giving up.
Of course, there would be moments of despair when I’d really feel down.
But I’d rebound from that, because I still felt that I was going to overcome this.
As soon as 1 was able, 1 tried to throw myself into things that could give my life some meaning within the severe limitations that it had.
At the beginning, the doctors had been worried that any kind of exposure to infection could just kill me.
And as soon as I was able, I wanted to get back out, I wanted to go and watch sports, I wanted to go to musical concerts, I wanted to go to poetry readings, I wanted to go listen to jazz, and I wanted to follow what was going on in the world.
At the same time, because of the way I felt about being acutely physically disfigured, I was very reluctant to go out and even see anybody that I knew.
One thing that my friends and I were later able to laugh about, but at the time was very painful for me, was that my friends would come over and visit me and say, “Look, you know you gotta gel out of the house, you gotta get out and do things, you can’t just sit here all day—the doctors say you can do it now, let’s go, let’s go do a few things,” and I would be tempted but I’d answer, “Naw, I don’t want to.
It wasn’t because I didn’t feel physically up to it, although I would get tired very quickly, but because 1 didn’t want to face people that I’d known before looking the way I looked now.
So a couple of friends drove me down to the library to meet this other friend of mine.
Art hadn’t seen me since I’d gotten sick, but these other friends of mine had been visiting me all the lime, so they knew what the deal was and what 1 looked like.
But they brought him out to where I was, and he looked around, not recognizing me.
But finally 1 got over that, because there were things happening in the world, there were things I cared about, and there were things 1 wanted to do.
I went to some of the Cal games, but actually I was more interested in high school sports, and 1 mainly went to Berkeley High and other high school games.
Right before 1 first got sick, when I had just come back from Yosemite, a good friend of mine from high school, Jeff, had died from tetanus.
His family was one of many Black families that had recently come up from the south, and he didn’t have any tetanus shots.
He had been working around some construction, they were tearing down some things, and there were all these boards with nails.
It was this horrible thing where, after he stepped on a nail, he wailed a couple of days to go to the hospital, and by the time he did go it was too late.
Soon after 1 had gotten sick, my old high school had a football game and they dedicated the game to Jeff and to me.
Anyway, I finally started gelling out, and besides sports events 1 would go to some of the clubs that 1 could go to, that would admit people under twenty-one.
Then 1 started looking for things to do that 1 thought would be useful, that would mean something.
I started tutoring people at my old high school, particularly some of the guys who were into athletics, but also other students, because that was something that 1 could do and it made me feel as if I were doing something worthwhile.
When 1 went back to do tutoring at my old high school, sometimes I’d help officiate at track meets and I’d see him run.
And I still vividly remember different things that gave a sense of his style.
One lime, there was a meet at Castlemont in East Oakland, and I went out there to see the meet in general and specifically to see Jerry run, because it was always a great thing to see.
Castlemont had these two sprinters who were supposed to be pretty good.
They came off the curve and Jerry was ahead by a few yards, and he lengthened his lead, so he was ahead by more than five yards.
He got down to about 20 yards from the finish line and you could see him just ease up, and then he went through the tape and won by a couple of yards.
Jerry, as you might imagine, had kind of an entourage of people on the track team and others who’d follow all of his exploits.
Jerry had great speed and great style, but training hard was not that much of his thing, let’s just put it that way.
One day the coach comes up to Jerry, and he wants him to run the 440, because he figures he’s so good at the 220, he’d really be good in the 440.
Jerry says alright, and they line up for the race, Jerry and these other two guys, and the coach fires the starter gun.
And then, as Jerry comes off the final turn, he’s ahead by about 60 yards—and he just slows down and starts loping, and wins by about 20 yards.
I knew if 1 came in with a fast time, under 48 seconds, you were gonna make me run the 440.
It turned out that it was a school assembly where they were introducing and giving out this award.
This was the first I had heard of it, so I was very surprised and, of course, moved.
The interesting thing, though, is that after I became somewhat notorious in that area as a radical activist, the award was discontinued.
For the first year after I got sick, I was still taking very high dosages of the cortisone.
I had all these side effects from that—and I had to take other medicines to counteract the side effects—so I felt as if I were a walking pharmacy. had to lake my pills with me everywhere I went. did my best to make that part of my routine, and I’d try to get out and do things that I thought were worthwhile, like tutoring.
But realistically, I wasn’t really able to get back into doing very much for the better part of a year.
Even if I could tutor or officiate at track meets, it was very, very limited what I could do.
I would get very weak, I’d get very tired very quickly, and I had to be very careful not to get injured or get an infection.
It wasn’t just this one incident with Art, but for a couple of years, when 1 would go places—say, to a bookstore, or just walking down the street—I would frequently have this terrible experience where I’d see somebody that I’d gone to school with for years, and I would instantly recognize them, but they would not recognize me.
And 1 would always want to go and hide—sometimes 1 would actually try to hide, or quickly walk out of the bookstore to get away, because I didn’t want to go through the excruciating experience where they would finally realize who I was, and then would react to how different I looked.
Even when they did it in a really good and kind way, I just wanted to avoid it.
One time I was with one of my close friends who’d been hanging out with me all this time and we ran into somebody else that we knew.
This person asked my friend, “So how’s Bobby doing?”—and I’m standing right there.
I told him who I was, of course, but that kind of thing was very painful, and 1 wanted to avoid those situations.
That meant a tremendous amount to me, in a way because it was a small thing.
Here was this guy who, because of his life conditions, had one foot into the criminal life, even in high school, but who had the sensitivity to know that it was important to me for him to see me as still the same person and who recognized that the superficialities of how my looks had changed didn’t matter.
There were times when the whole thing with the illness would be very discouraging.
So they’d knock it down five milligrams, and then after a couple of weeks they’d knock it down five more milligrams, and so on.
All this time I had to go in the doctor’s office twice a week and have tests to see how my kidneys were reacting to the lowering of the dose.
Near the end of the first year, they’d gotten it down pretty low, and I actually fell a little belter, because the medicine Look a lot out of me.
But then the tests started to show that my kidneys were losing function again.
So they had to raise the dosage way back up again and then start again slowly trying to reduce it.
The cycle would lake the better part of a year, and this happened to me twice—two cycles over the better part of two years, where we’d get down low in the dosage, and then, boom, the symptoms would start showing up again, so they’d have to raise it back up.
Coaching When I got a little bit stronger—even though I was still taking a lot of medicine for my kidneys, and other medicine to counteract the effects of that medicine—I started doing more tutoring and things like officiating at track meets.
And one summer, I got together, organized and coached in a summer league the players who were going to be on the varsity next year at Berkeley High.
Berkeley High hadn’t won the TOC in a long, long time and I wanted to make it happen that year.
So I was tutoring some of these guys, along with other people, and then I was coaching them in the summer league.
That was in the second year of my illness, after the first acute phase of a couple of months and the really bad year where I was very weak and it was still kind of touch-and-go in a very real way, even though I was past the most acute phase.
And one of the side effects from this medicine was susceptibility to really bad throat infections.
This happened during the time I was coaching this summer league team, but 1 was determined to keep on coaching, and my dad helped me out.
I managed by sign language or writing things down to indicate to my dad that 1 wanted him to go down to the playground where they had the summer league and be my assistant coach, or my voice.
So we went there together, and I had a clipboard, and whenever anything would happen in the game and I wanted to make a substitution or tell somebody something about what to do in the game, I’d write it down on the paper on the clipboard, and then my dad would be my “translator” and verbalize it to the players.
They got all the way to the final of the TOC, and lost in the final to McClymonds, by one point in overtime.
What made it particularly hard to take is that there was a crucial point, right near the end of the game, where Berkeley High was ahead of McClymonds by three points, and they were putting on a full-court press.
This guy from McClymonds threw a pass downcourt, and my friend Billy, who was a tremendous leaper, went way up in the air and stole the pass; and then he went down and dunked.
They would have been up by five points, with less than two minutes to go.
But they called him for walking, because they said he shuffled his feel in order to get his steps right to dunk the ball.
So that was doubly heart-breaking for me, and of course even more so for Billy.
So, sick as I was and as dangerous as it was for me, I actually tried to challenge him to a light, but he had a big enough heart that he just sort of grabbed me and turned this hold he had on me into an embrace until 1 calmed down.
So 1 went back to Cal on a reduced schedule, and then 1 started being able to get into things a little more than I had before.
I still had to live at home, because 1 had to have a special diet and I had to lake all this medicine and I had all these side effects from the medicine.
So we went to DC, and we saw the Congress building and went in, and even though I had some criticisms of the government, I still looked upon these government buildings and the people in them with a certain amount of not only respect but awe.
Congress was in session, and 1 remember walking in and being really struck that there was nobody in there.
Of course, I was young at the time, but there were these congressmen I’d heard of, and when 1 saw some of them, close up, they looked not just old, but decrepit.
Of course, I found out later that my dad would hold his breath every night until I got back at one or two in the morning, after having been in the Village all that time.
During that period, even though 1 was still very limited in what 1 could do, I started to get involved, in the ways I could, in some of the bigger issues that were going on.
People may not think of Berkeley in this way, but this was at a lime when there was still a lot of open, overt segregation in the schools and in housing, and there was a big struggle about ending that.
There was this ballot initiative to pass a fair housing law in Berkeley, which was narrowly voted down.
I was very much into that battle, even though I could only be involved from a distance, so to speak.
And he had these people on his program, one who was supporting the fair housing ordinance, and then this small property owning, narrow-minded conservative type who was opposing the fair housing law. was listening and getting more and more angry and passionate as this debate was going on, getting infuriated by the arguments of this conservative guy.
This was one outlet 1 had for my passion that was being stirred by what was happening.
I was still very much concerned with what was going on in the larger world beyond me, even though 1 was severely restricted in being able to be actively involved in anything.
Everybody sensed to one degree or another—certainly anybody who was paying any attention, and most people were, they couldn’t help it—that the world could literally end at any time.
I still remember feeling very, very deeply, right down into my bones, that the whole world could come to an end.
At that lime, I was back on a restricted schedule in school, but I followed this whole thing very intensely.
Of course, they always give you only the United States imperialist side of the picture, and that’s what people get drummed into them.
I remember this dramatic incident that they still like to replay from time to time, when Adlai Stevenson, who was the United States representative to the United Nations, gave this speech where he showed these photos of the Soviet missiles that had been brought into Cuba.
But they never show how a year before that, at the beginning of the Kennedy administration, Adlai Stevenson got up and vehemently denied in the United Nations that the United States had anything to do with the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba—which, of course, was a blatant lie.
So they like to show the one thing on TV as a highlight from history, but not the other thing where Stevenson was overtly lying in front of the whole world.
Kennedy tried to justify this—and 1 remember this very clearly—by claiming that the Soviet Union had violated the UN Charier by putting missiles in Cuba.
Now even though I had a lot of suspicions about the government already at that time, and even though I was very angry about a lot of injustices in American society, and especially the oppression of Black people, I still wanted to believe in my government.
I still wanted to believe the government could at least be brought around to doing the right thing.
And I didn’t want to believe that on something where literally the fate of the world was involved, they would just openly lie to everybody.
Of course, there wasn’t anything like that in the Charier either and, as I later found out, the United States had missiles all over the place, including in Turkey, and even though the ones in Turkey were older generation missiles, they were still missiles that could set off nuclear devices.
That was the logic he was using then, and that’s the logic that, right up to Bush, they use now.
The way of thinking, or not thinking, that Dylan captured there—the inability or unwillingness to engage in abstract thought, and to abstract from one situation to another, the refusal to be consistent in applying a principle (what applies to you doesn’t apply to me; I can do what 1 want, and you can’t do it if I don’t want you to) — that same sort of “you’re not him,” or “you’re not me,” logic was being applied by Kennedy.
I knew some things about injustices in American society, but lying on this level, lying before the world with the fate of the world literally at stake, was more than 1 expected.
Of course, this didn’t immediately cause me to become a communist —I was still against communism, as much as I understood it, which was very little.
But it shook me up a lot and kept circulating in my mind as other events, like Vietnam a little later, unfolded.
The Cuban missile crisis and things like the fair housing struggle contributed to my feeling that there were important things in the world and I should do something about those things, I should do something important with my life when I got my life back.
I no longer believed that god existed, and being sick didn’t make me feel any more like 1 should believe that god existed. didn’t think “god” had anything to do with this. didn’t yet have a communist, dialectical materialist approach to things, but 1 did have a sort of basic scientific approach.
But the fact that he didn’t know, the fact that there are things we don’t know at any time, is not a reason to start inventing imaginary causes and forces to explain things.
That just gets in the way of actually learning more about the reality of things.
He never charged us a single thing for the intensive care, and then the years of ongoing medical treatment, because he Look a liking to our family and to me.
He died recently, and when I read his obituary I learned even more what a great guy he was, and how this had been a part of his whole approach to medicine, to give people the medical care they needed, even if they couldn’t pay for it.
He’d finally quit practicing medicine late in his life because these HMO’s would not let him really give people the kind of medical care that they needed.
All during the time 1 was sick, he’d let me come into his office at any time and have the tests done that I needed, and whenever I’d go into his office I would see people who could not afford the medical care he was giving them—he was giving it to them free, or letting them pay what they could, and charging other people who could afford it in order to keep his practice going.
But I never thought it was punishment from “god,” or that “god” had anything to do with it.
This was a medical condition, it came on because of “natural causes,” real-world things, even if the precise causes couldn’t be known.
Just because the doctor was honest enough to simply say, “I don’t know” and couldn’t tell me exactly why this happened, didn’t mean that I started looking to supposed supernatural causes for this.
There are many things we obviously still don’t understand, but there are many things the people thousands of years ago didn’t understand that we do understand now.
They made up myths and stories to explain things they couldn’t explain otherwise, and then the ruling classes down through the ages have found it convenient to keep people believing in these kinds of things.
But 1 had gotten free of that, and there was no attraction to me to go back into believing in that stuff.
This was a real-world thing that had happened to me, and there was a real-world way that 1 was going to get over it, by putting up with all this medicine and struggling to regain my health.
I’d get up and keep going, because that’s the way I felt this was going to be dealt with, not by praying or turning back to some religious views that I’d come to understand didn’t really represent the truth about the way the world is and the way things are.
Turning the Corner After a year oi going to Cal on a limited schedule, by 1963 I was feeling better and able to take a more regular load.
This was a time when important changes were starting to lake place around Vietnam.
In fact, one day I was walking on the campus and all these people started running down toward the gym. didn’t know what this was about.
They said that Madame Nhu had been invited by the university to speak in the gym.
Madame Nhu was the wife of the brother of the president, socalled, of South Vietnam, the United States puppet, Diem, and her husband was the head of the secret police.
She was there speaking on behalf of the United States puppet government and the United States intervention in Vietnam, and people were protesting even then.
People were running to try to gel into the auditorium to protest Madame Nhu’s appearance at the university.
Nhu and Diem had become a liability and had them assassinated—and just before Kennedy himself was assassinated.
But, anyway, there were things like that going on that seemed to come out of the blue.
The thing that kind of turned the corner for me, ironically, actually started when was I was lying in bed one morning—1 think it was in the summer of ’63—and 1 started getting this really severe stomach pain, like I’d never experienced before, as if someone took a two-by-four and hit you in the stomach as hard as they possibly could when you were not expecting it.
This pain just kept getting worse and worse, and I was literally doubling over, so finally I woke up my parents; at first they didn’t realize how serious it was, but as soon as they did they called the doctor, and the doctor said, “He’s got a perforated ulcer”—which means it had broken open and was bleeding into the stomach.
So I had to be rushed to the hospital and they put a tube—but it felt like a hose—through my nose down into my stomach to drain the stomach.
But, because of the ulcer, they slopped the cortisone treatments, and there was a question of what was going to happen as a result of that.
Surprisingly to both me and the doctors, my body didn’t respond Loo badly to not having the cortisone.
The theory was that it was like giving a jolt to the body, almost like a kick-start to get the body to recover.
So they started with this treatment, and as it turned out this was like turning a corner for me.
Just before this I'd gone through my second long cycle of going down, down, down in the dosage of the medicine and then just when l thought maybe I was going to be through with this and get off the medicine, I went in on a Friday, when the doctor was out of town, and the nurses did the tests and discovered that some of the symptoms—in particular the protein in the urine—had begun to reappear.
That was always his attitude, and it helped get my spirits up, even though 1 still had to up the dosage of the medicine again.
But then, not long after that, I had this ulcer perforate and, after seeing that l did pretty well without any cortisone for a few weeks, they decided to try this new approach.
Generally when you have to lake all these steroids it has a lot of different effects on you, and I’d feel really weakened and tired a lot of the time.
But now it was a completely different experience, and eventually it evolved to where I would take the steroids on Thursday, Friday and Saturday—pretty high doses—and then nothing Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday.
I was carrying pretty much a regular load at the university at that point and trying to do other things.
I’d start in on Thursday taking the steroids, and by Thursday night 1 was flying—cortisone is actually an extract from the adrenal gland, so it’s like a jolt oi adrenaline, and by the lime it kicked in on Thursday night, man, I was going.
Then on Sunday 1 would stop the medicine, and by Sunday afternoon it was almost like withdrawal symptoms.
My nose would start running, my stomach would get sick, I’d feel just completely sapped of energy, and I couldn’t hardly do anything.
On Monday I felt really draggy, then by Tuesday, Wednesday I’d sort of feel leveled off and okay, and by Thursday night I was back on the steroids and flying again.
This went on for the better part of a year, but it turned out that either my body was just ready to respond and/or this different treatment actually did work better.
But, for whatever reason, I started noticing real improvement in how I felt, and my body was responding well, so that by the summer of 1964—more or less a year later—they finally Look me off the medicine altogether.
And I never had to go back to the cortisone after three years of taking it.
In 1964, when I was just starling to feel better and on my way to recovery, though not fully recovered yet from all the sickness, I turned twenty-one.
I wasn’t a big drinker at that time, but I liked to go to clubs and see different acts.
I couldn’t find anybody to go with me that time, so I just went by myself.
Around that time the Coasters had out this song called “’Taint Nothin’ To Me”—sort of a novelty song, which was characteristic of the Coasters, a whole funny song that 1 really liked.
And 1 liked a lot of the other Coasters classics, so I really wanted to go see them.
So I went, but the show didn’t start until pretty late, and when you sit in a bar you have to drink, so I had a couple of drinks.
I’m sitting at the bar, I order another drink, and 1 start drinking the drink, and then I set it down— and the next thing I know somebody’s tapping me kind of forcefully on the shoulder.
I look up, realizing that I’ve fallen asleep, and I’m staring into the face of the bartender.
You know, I wonder what the other people in the bar thought, what the bartender thought—but here 1 was, the only white guy in this bar, a little bit embarrassed that I’d fallen asleep and had to be awakened by the bartender.
Chapter Six “Your Sons and Your Daughters ...” l\^Ly family and all my friends and I were still holding our breath, because you don’t know—twice before I’d been through a situation where things were going well with low dosages of cortisone, and then the symptoms of kidney disease would reappear.
So there was the possibility of a relapse now that 1 was completely off the cortisone.
I had been nominated by some of my English professors to be part of an undergraduate honors seminar on John Milton, the English poet who wrote Paradise Lost , over the summer.
There were about ten of us in the seminar, which was taught by Stanley Fish, a big Milton hotshot who was only a few years older than we were —1 think he was 24 at the time.
He's now a big figure in academic and intellectual circles more generally in the U.S., and I’ve written a few things recently commenting on some of his books.
At that time, I hadn’t heard of him but I was into English literature, I was still trying to write poetry, and this sounded like an exciting thing to do.
We met for a number of weeks, five days a week for several hours, and it turned out to be a fun seminar.
One time Professor Fish brought in this guest lecturer who talked about a certain aspect of Milton’s work, and I was wearing my dark glasses in the classroom.
Opening Up 1 met Liz in this seminar, and she had a big influence on me.
I was already anxious to be more involved in political affairs, and she came from a progressive family—her parents had been sympathizers of the old Communist Parly.
She told stories about how people she knew had to bury their Marxist books during the McCarthy period.
She had a radicalizing efTect on me, to pul it that way—for instance, I was drawn to the Free Speech Movement when it broke out that fall, but she had a big influence in getting me more deeply involved in it. 1 was going through a lot of changes in a kind of a telescoped way, the way you do when big, world events happen one after the other.
And he answered, “No, it’s a good thing, because it could mean the United States won’t be able to fuck with China so easily.” 1 still was not by any means a communist and, as reflected in the comment I made about Mao at that time, I still accepted a lot of the anti-communist propaganda and bullshit.
The prejudices 1 had were clashing up against somebody else who had a different understanding and was challenging me—that kind of thing was repeatedly happening.
I didn’t say, “Oh I see” and just agree with him, but on the other hand, it became one of those things circulating in your mind.
In fact, during the Free Speech Movement there were some people in leadership of that movement, including Mario Savio, who were making statements against the Vietnam War.
Tom by Kennedy and the Democrats Just to backtrack for a minute, the Kennedy assassination was a perfect example of the contradictoriness of my thinking.
I came to class at the university that day and everybody was stunned and saddened that Kennedy had been assassinated—they were all openly grieving.
And I remember one of the women in one of my classes got mad at me because I was sort of aloof and not expressing any emotion.
But then, as it sunk in, believe it or not, 1 actually wrote a poem memorializing Kennedy a few weeks after that. sort of felt like Phil Ochs at that time, who talked about his Marxist friends being unable to understand how he could write a positive song about Kennedy—and about how that’s why he couldn’t be a Marxist.
Toward the end of his life, he became more alienated from the whole system and more outraged about the injustices in the United States and what the United States is doing around the world—but for much of his life he was a real liberal Democrat.
In fact, he had been offered a position in the Kennedy administration, but he turned it down because 1 was in the Bay Area and loo sick to move, and he didn’t want to be separated from me while I was sick.
My parents, of course, were very upset about the Kennedy assassination, and in fact I think my dad went to a meeting and read this poem that I wrote memorializing Kennedy.
This kind of contradictory thinking that characterized my parents, and myself, at that time, is fairly common among progressive people.
You see a lot of the injustices and what we sometimes call the “running sores” of the whole society and the way in which it grinds up people, and you see ways in which the people presiding over the society are responsible for this.
That’s an illusion that is often difficult to shed; it takes a lot for people to fully cast that off, and that was true for me loo.
Into the Student Life At this point, in 1964, I was finally able to leave home.
Since 1 had been cut off from a lot of social experiences, 1 wanted to go live in the dorms, even though I was by then in my third year of classes.
But there was still a question of whether my health requirements would allow that.
Among other things, I had this very strict diet, where literally every day 1 was calculating how many milligrams of sodium 1 could eat, and things like that.
I had enough strength, but there was also the question of diet, because something that threw my system off could give me a severe setback.
This friend of mine from high school named Tom was living in the dorms, and we got it arranged so that he and I could be roommates, which made it easier for me.
That was a very important step for me at that lime, given how dependent I’d been forced to be.
Even though 1 loved my family, 1 wanted to be taking steps to be on my own more.
While the dorms, obviously, have their limitations, this was a positive experience for me under the circumstances.
Mainly people go in the dorm when they first come into the university, and then move on—but since I hadn’t been able to do that, I actually enjoyed it quite a bit for the short time that 1 was there.
Tom, my roommate, was a progressive guy and also a big sports fanatic like me.
This was a lime when even life in the dorms was beginning to be affected by the big changes sweeping through society and the world.
That kind of ferment was finding expression throughout university life.
At that lime 1 still physically bore the scars of being sick and I was also struggling to overcome them psychologically.
My friends used to talk me into going to parties, and my love for singing provided a way for me to sort of break out of my shell socially.
J 25 or how 1 gol the nerve to do this, but when I’d go to the parties—and 1 didn’t have to get drunk or high to do this, either—often at a break I would just start singing.
We had four dorms together in a group where everyone ate at the same cafeteria, and at the big meal on Sunday they used to have a microphone for people to make announcements.
So one Sunday at the urging and daring of my friends, and somewhat on my own initiative as well, I actually gol up and just took hold of the mike and started singing this Mary Wells song that I loved, “Bye, Bye Baby” — and the whole place just responded.
Dylan and “Beatlemania” I remember also when the Beatles first came to the United States It was a big deal.
They were on one of those shows like The Ed Sullivan Show, and everybody in the dorms gathered around the TV to watch the Beatles— except for me and Tom, who really didn’t like or care about the Beatles that much and were also making a statement that we had other kinds of music we were into and we weren’t going to get caught up with the herd.
I’ve since come to understand how narrow that was, how 1 failed to appreciate something that was new and breaking with some conventions and molds, and I’ve tried to learn from that, not just about music but more generally.
I remember a friend of mine telling a story about a track meet in L.A. that Look place during this time, and how MickJagger was staying in the same hotel as some of the athletes in the meet.
Later on, 1 came to appreciate especially John Lennon a lot , in a different way—especially for his political and social views, but even musically.
There was this one guy at Cal who used to sing the whole repertoire of Bob Dylan music, and he had the Bob Dylan look as well.
I’m sure there was this kind of phenomenon all over the country, and I’m also sure that this kind of “imitation” was exactly the kind of thing Bob Dylan didn’t like, but this guy had the harmonica and the guitar and everything, and that’s actually where I first started hearing some Dylan songs.
Then, as 1 got more political, I really got into Dylan. remember in particular the album The Times They Are A-Changin\ They were changing, and this brought a lot of generational conflicts.
So, even though 1 didn’t want to have anything to do with the Beatles, there was a way in which Bob Dylan spoke for the whole social and political upheaval that was occurring, especially for a lot of youth out of the middle class, but not only for them.
A lot of his early songs had to do with the civil rights struggle, outrages like the one captured so powerfully in “The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll,” about the killing of a Black maid by this rich young white planter in Baltimore.
And the poetry of Dylan also captured me—because I was into poetry, and the poetry of his songs just really drew me.
I didn’t see him as a white boy who was just mimicking other people’s music.
New People, New Influences 1 only stayed in the dorms for a short time, and then Tom and I and a couple of other people got an apartment.
One of my good friends in the dorm, who later moved into an apartment with me and Tom, was from India.
He was a really good-hearted guy, but he used to recount to us, for example, that when he was back in India, he was awakened every morning by being given a massage by servants.
Then he would walk from his house to his father’s business in Calcutta, where he lived, and he acknowledged to us that every day he would step over the dead bodies of the poor people who had starved to death on the streets of Calcutta the night before.
We struggled with him and struggled with him, and we finally got him for a little while to become kind of a hippie, but that’s as far as we could get with him.
On the other hand, he did share with us a lot of experiences and open us up to an understanding, or at least a glimpse, of a whole different part of the world and different cultures and customs.
Politically at that time—in the period before the Free Speech Movement—there was mainly civil rights activity among students.
In fact, the right to organize for civil rights activities on the campus was the focal point of what became the Free Speech Movement.
It may sound unbelievable now, but in those days, the Cal administration had a rule that you could organize things like student clubs, but you could not carry on political activity on campus for “off-campus political causes,” such as civil rights.
You were not allowed to organize on campus for, say, a civil rights protest or demonstration against a company that wouldn’t hire Black people—it was against the rules and you could be expelled for it.
The FSM not only radically changed the Berkeley campus, but was a major impetus for a wave of changes on campuses all across the country.
When the FSM was going on, people, young people in particular, came to Berkeley from all parts of the country.
He told me stories about having visited Italy, where the Communist Parly was looked at very differently than in the United States — it was a mainstream political party there.
When I put things like that together with things I knew and was learning, from my own personal experience, and especially the experience of many of my friends, it had a kind of cumulative effect.
Malcolm X As 1 described earlier, even when 1 was in high school some of the gathering momentum of the civil rights movement carried over in various ways and found various expressions among the students and within the school, among the Black students in particular.
That immediately struck me as true and important—1 agreed with that right away.
It’s one thing if you want to say there should be pacifist tactics in a particular situation, like a demonstration, but I never agreed with pacifism as a principle —that Black people, for example, should always turn the other cheek.
When 1 heard about the Deacons for Defense in the south, who organized and look up arms to defend the Black community from the KKK and all the racist sheriffs, I thought that was right—it was necessary and important.
So when Malcolm X articulated “by any means necessary,” I fell that was right, and I didn’t agree with the idea that you should confine the people to turning the other cheek or just to passively accepting, for whatever supposedly loftier purpose, being brutalized.
At one point, I got a recording of “The Ballot or the Bullet,” and 1 listened to that over and over.
Straddling Two Worlds My friend Matthew came back to Cal, and he had a circle of friends who were mainly Black that I also got to know and became friends with.
And when 1 went back to Berkeley High to do tutoring and officiating at track meets and coaching summer league basketball teams and things like that, 1 maintained contact with my old friends and that milieu, so to speak.
While 1 didn’t think of it that way at the time, looking back on it now, I feel like I was straddling two worlds, but to me they were both part of my life, they were both part of my world.
And the same kind of shit that 1 ran into in high school came up again —for example, there were people at Cal who would straight up tell me that they would not be friends with me because I hung out in the Student Union and around campus with Black students.
As I said, I was sort of straddling two worlds, but to me this was all part of what I was about.
I wasn’t trying to make a “statement” — these were just my friends, these were the people and things 1 was interested in and cared about, these were just the different parts that made up the whole of my life. wasn’t saying to myself, “Oh, I’m straddling two worlds,” but objectively 1 was.
In a lot of ways, culturally, I was drawn more to things that were from my earlier years, especially my high school years, than I was to the university.
But then politically, and in terms of intellectual ferment, there were things about the university that were increasingly drawing me.
I took courses in Shakespeare and Chaucer, and I’m one of the few people that I know of who has actually read the entire “Faerie Queene” by Edmund Spenser!—which is a classical epic poem, hundreds and hundreds of pages long, written at more or less the same time as Shakespeare.
I read that—1 actually took a course on this poem—mainly because I knew Spenser was a big influence on Keats and 1 was really into Keats.
I also had a goal of learning five or six languages. took Italian and 1 took some Spanish, but I didn’t ever fulfill my goal—other things intervened which became more important to me.
But by taking Italian I got interested in some of the Italian romantic poets from more or less the same period as Keats and the other English romantic poets.
My favorite Italian professor was very progressive, and 1 used to have talks with him about what was going on in the world—as much as I could, I would talk with him in Italian about all this.
You know, most of the people who were big into athletics—let’s put it this way, they were not among the vanguard of the progressive and radical forces on the campus.
There were some friends of mine, like Kayo and my roommate Tom, who were sports fanatics and who also had strong progressive views and radical tendencies, but that was more the exception than the rule.
So, in that way you could say there was a certain conflict in terms of things that 1 was passionate about.
But by this Lime, around 1964, 1 was finally getting back on my feet physically and feeling like I dared to do some things.
So when the summer gave way to the fall and the Free Speech Movement arose, and in addition with the influence of Liz— with whom I was starting to fall in love—I was ready to throw myself into that.
The Free Speech Movement Despite the administration’s rule that you couldn't do “on-campus organizing for off-campus issues,” people at Cal were organizing on the campus to protest against local businesses which they identified as practicing racial discrimination in their hiring, such as the Oakland Tribune and this drive-in restaurant called Mel’s Diner.
Everybody on campus was aware of this, it was becoming more and more of an issue that people were debating and talking about and getting involved in—or not getting involved in and opposing, because there was polarization.
I’ve often said that in the ’60s even fraternity boys grew brains, but that was later in the ’60s—at the time of the FSM they didn’t have them yet.
A guy named Jack Weinberg was sitting at a table organizing for this and he refused to fold up the table.
They arrested him, pul him in a police car to drive him off, and then a bunch of students came and surrounded the police car.
While this sit-in was going on, I was at a reception that the Chancellor, Chancellor Strong, was having for honor students at the university.
Well, he went on to tell us, because of pressure from the Oakland Tribune , which was owned by William E Knowland, who was a well-known reactionary.
The Tribune called up, the Chancellor told us, complaining about the organizing of civil rights demonstrations against the Tribune for discriminatory hiring practices.
I was shocked, first of all, that this was actually how this came about and, second, that he was just saying this so baldly as if everybody would accept it.
But a lot of people there did find this very objectionable, including myself.
I immediately went over to the sitin around the police car and got in line to speak—the police car had been surrounded by the protesters and transformed into a speaking platform while Jack Weinberg was still silting inside.
William E Knowland was nicknamed William ""Formosa” Knowland because of his big-time support for Chiang Kai-shek, who had ruled China with the backing of the United States and other imperialist powers but had been driven from power in 1949 by the Chinese revolution, led by Mao Tselung, and forced to retreat to the island of Taiwan, which was formerly called Formosa.
For more on the author’s views on the Free Speech Movement, see ""FSM Reflections—On Becoming a Revolutionary,” by Bob Avakian, Revolutionary Worker , #882, November 17, 1996, available at rwor.org.
Stepping back, I think the FSM expressed the general feeling that students wanted to be treated as adults and citizens, they wanted to have the same rights as other people.
Phil Ochs had this song where the refrain went something like, I’ve got something to say, sir, and I’m going to say it now.
And as it was in that song, so it was in reality with students and youth at that time.
But, beyond that, there were a lot of big things going on in the world.
Vietnam was already beginning to heat up in the fall of ’64, and there was the civil rights movement.
People wanted to be actively involved in or debating about these things, they wanted to be part of the larger world—they didn’t want to be treated like little children just because they were students.
There were some people who weren’t students who were involved—and they were welcomed, it was good that they were involved.
But the records showed that overwhelmingly those arrested were students.
Then, since they couldn’t deny that most of those arrested were students, they claimed that they were students who were failing or getting poor grades anyway, so they were just being troublemakers.
In response to this, the FSM committee Look a survey of the people who’d been arrested, and among other things asked the grade point average of the students who were arrested.
At this time Liz was more politically aware and more of an activist and radical than 1 was.
It was partly the political discussions we had and partly, to be honest, the fact that I was interested in her romantically and she wanted to be very active in the Free Speech Movement, that led me to be so consistently involved.
When we went into Sproul Hall for the big sit-in, and as the sit-in went on, I was trying to help keep the morale up.
At one point I went from floor to floor organizing singing to keep the spirits up.
But, at the same lime, this sit-in lasted several days and I was still a serious student, so I was also trying to keep up with my school work during the sit-in— until at one point 1 just decided, “Oh, the hell with it,” and threw my homework away.
But this also had a larger symbolic meaning, even though I myself wasn’t fully aware of it yet.
Another one of those ironies of “straddling two worlds” happened to me at the end of the sit-in, when people were arrested in almost an assembly line fashion.
As they were arrested, a lot of people were thrown down the stairs, and the women in particular were grabbed by the hair and thrown down the stairs.
I was on the top floor and saw many people brutalized like that and, of course, this was only a few months after I had finally recovered from being sick.
So besides being outraged generally, I was also a little worried about what would happen to me if I got thrown down the stairs or otherwise brutalized, especially if I got hit in the area of my kidneys.
And as my turn came to be busted, I recognized the cop who was arresting me as someone who had played basketball for a local college.
I saw his nameplate said Gray, so I said, “Aren’t you the ‘Gray’ who played basketball for St.
At the same time, my whole involvement in the Free Speech Movement came shortly after my dad was appointed as a judge by the same governor, Edmund G “Pat” Brown, who sent the police in to arrest us in Sproul Hall.
When I did get arrested, it was another case where both of my parents agreed with the principles of free speech, and even agreed generally with what the students were lighting for, but 1 think were made very nervous, not only in a personal sense but in a larger sense, by the whole turmoil that was being created—the shutting down of the university, in effect, and people getting busted and all that kind of thing, as well as the personal dimension of how this might affect my dad’s standing as a judge.
On the other hand, as soon as they learned that I got arrested, my parents called up my doctor, since I had just gotten over this very serious illness, and I was still in a precarious position.
Actually, my doctor felt so strongly about this that he insisted that my dad get me out that night, so that I wouldn’t have to spend the night on a cold floor under jail conditions.
So I was surprised to get out a little earlier than some of the other people did, though most everybody was out by the next morning or the next day sometime.
Mario Savio Mario Savio, who led the FSM, had a big effect on me, though I didn’t really know him personally.
I was active and involved in FSM pretty much all the way through, from the beginning; l went to all the rallies and heard Mario and others speak.
But while in general 1 was very moved by his speeches, 1 remember one lime right before we all got busied in Sproul Hall, Mario gave a speech.
This was in early December of 1964, and 1 was actively looking into the Vietnam War and trying to figure out what stand to lake on it, but 1 hadn’t made up my mind yet.
As 1 referred to earlier, I was troubled by Mario’s saying this at that point, because 1 felt like we had a certain level of unity in the Free Speech Movement, but it didn’t include opposing the Vietnam War.
You didn’t have to be opposed to the Vietnam War to be actively and enthusiastically involved in the Free Speech Movement, though probably if you took a survey, the overwhelming majority would have been opposed to the Vietnam War.
And, within a short time after this, I myself became convinced that it needed to be very actively and strongly opposed.
But at that lime I was still in the process of wrangling with this—debating and studying and trying to learn enough to make up my mind about it.
So this was a little troubling to me—although, as I’ve said before, as 1 was trying to make up my mind and come to a decision about Vietnam, the things that were said by people like Mario Savio, for whom I had great respect in general, obviously had a big influence and played a role in convincing me to oppose what the United States was doing in Vietnam.
The Assassination of Malcolm X Shortly after this, in February of 1965, Malcolm X was assassinated.
This hit me as a devastating loss for Black people, and also for people generally fighting against injustice, not just in the U.S., but throughout the world. knew Malcolm X was seeking to link up with people in other parts of the world who were fighting against injustices and oppression.
And 1 never believed that it was just Elijah Muhammed and the Nation of Islam who were involved in Malcolm’s assassination.
Whether or not they were involved in some way, I knew that the United States government was somehow behind this.
I hadn’t studied the issue, and a lot of the exposure of how they were involved hadn’t come out yet, obviously.
But 1 just sensed this—1 knew they haled Malcolm X and saw him as very dangerous to them—and it made me really sad but very angry too. 1 had been aware of the transformations Malcolm was going through.
People were debating about the split between Elijah Muhammed and Malcolm X, and most everybody I knew sided with Malcolm X We saw him as more radical, more willing to take on the powers that be, more willing to stand up in the face of any threat against Black people and against their oppression.
So I was following that very closely, and all that was an important part of what was causing me to undergo a lot of changes in how 1 was seeing things and what 1 felt needed to be done. 1 don’t remember exactly where 1 was when I heard the news about Malcolm’s assassination, but 1 do know how I fell immediately upon hearing this.
It is done in the persona of a liberal—it is a biting exposure of the contradictoriness and hypocrisy in liberals—it starts out with how sad this liberal was when Kennedy got killed, and even what a tragedy it was when the civil rights leader Medgar Evers was murdered, but then this liberal says that Malcolm X got what he had coming.
That was a fairly widespread view among a lot of liberals, and Phil Ochs captured that with rather brilliant and biting irony.
So there were a lot of very sharp arguments with some people that I knew, because I vehemently disagreed with that view.
Deciding About Vietnam All these things were influencing me in making up my mind about Vietnam.
Then there were a lot of debates that were sharpening up on the campus and in activist circles.
One thing I remember in particular was a lot of argument about who was responsible for violating the Geneva Agreements that had been made in 1954 about Vietnam, which were to provide for the reunification of Vietnam and elections in 1956/ France was gelling out of Vietnam—they’d been forced out by the struggle of the Vietnamese people, having suffered this devastating defeat at Dien Bien Phu.
In fact, Malcolm X talked about that—about how the Vietnamese sent the French running.
As I looked into these arguments, and when 1 went to the university library and read the initial Agreement and most of the reports of the commission it set up, I found that their reports overwhelmingly demonstrated that the United States was systematically sabotaging this Agreement.
I learned that Eisenhower, who was then President of the U.S., recognized that Ho Chi Minh would have been overwhelmingly elected to head any government of a reunified Vietnam.
And I discovered that it was unmistakably true that the United States had sabotaged this Geneva Agreement and prevented the reunification of Vietnam, because they knew that things wouldn’t go their way if this Agreement were implemented.
The 1954 Geneva Agreements came out of a conference that included China and the Soviet Union, which were then both socialist, as well as the U.S., France, Britain and other lesser powers.
This conference occurred in a situation where liberation forces in Vietnam, headed by Ho Chi Minh, had delivered a devastating defeat at Dien Bien Phu to the French colonialists who were attempting to maintain their domination of Vietnam—and in doing so were receiving major backing and aid from the United States The Agreements set up a commission to oversee the reunification of Vietnam, which was temporarily divided into north and south along the 17th parallel; the Agreements called for elections in 1956 throughout Vietnam to establish a single government for the country as a whole.
That was the thing that led me to be firmly convinced that 1 had to become actively involved in opposing the Vietnam War too.
There was still a lot of division, even in the city of Berkeley itself, on these issues, however.
As I’ve described several times, 1 grew up in a pretty well-off middle class family.
And among people coming from that part of society, there were very strong generational divisions developing.
And there were also political divisions in line with larger economic and social divisions in society as a whole.
The ’60s were a time when the universities were opened up to broader sections of society.
But it was still largely the middle class whose kids went to college, and largely white students who came to a university like Cal at that lime.
Among the students, there was tremendous conflict developing with their parents over a whole host of issues, including Vietnam.
For example, my parents were troubled by the Vietnam War, but they were still supporting it.
Times and is more or less a liberal, but at that time was more radical.
He’d written this pamphlet making very strong and cogent, very well-documented arguments about the Vietnam War and what the United States had done and why it was wrong, and I was using this pamphlet to argue with my parents.
But 1 didn’t appreciate this sort of nitpicking way in which he was approaching the question of Vietnam—a way in which things would be argued to actually gel away from the truth.
I got very frustrated with this, and I look this Bob Scheer pamphlet and threw it across the hall and stomped out of my parents’ house.
So 1 wrote a several-page letter laying out my arguments about what the United States was doing in Vietnam and why it was wrong.
He sent me back what was pretty much a form letter—and 1 probably only got that because he knew my parents and didn’t want to insult them.
He just ran out the standard government propaganda about what the United States is doing and why it’s good for the Vietnamese people, and he quoted something from this professor, Robert Scalapino, at Berkeley, whom I, and many others, simply regarded as a Slate Department professor.
That just infuriated me more and convinced me even more deeply that what the United States government was doing in Vietnam was wrong; and they weren’t going to listen to people who had real arguments about why it was wrong.
Getting In Deeper At the time there were students who were aggressively supporting the war, like the Young Republicans.
And then there were people who would come from off campus and seek us out to debate.
The anti-war organization on the Berkeley campus was called the Vietnam Day Committee, because they’d organized a big teach-in called “Vietnam Day” in the spring of 1965.
People from off-campus would seek out the Vietnam Day Committee table—and this included many soldiers who would do a one-year tour of duly in Vietnam and, if they didn’t volunteer to be sent back again, would then come back and do the rest of their time in the military somewhere in the United States Or they’d come on leave, on their way back from Vietnam before going to somewhere like Germany.
They would often seek us out to argue—sometimes they’d be in their uniforms, sometimes in “civilian clothes,” but they would identify themselves as soldiers and talk about how they’d been in Vietnam and how we didn’t know what we were talking about.
Many of these soldiers would try to hold sway by acting as if they knew all about Vietnam, because they’d gone there to conquer it and occupy the country and oppress the people.
A few years later, there would be many, many soldiers and veterans of the Vietnam War with a very different viewpoint, but this was earlier, in 1965 and ’66, and the soldiers were still mainly defending what they were doing.
A lot of times it would go from the level of all this bullshit about fighting for freedom to talking about their buddies.
But first they would try to give us more lofty-sounding arguments about freedom, in terms of what was happening in Vietnam—the same kind of bullshit the United States uses about Iraq now.
Then they’d sort of hem and haw and we’d get back to the substance of the issues, once we got rid of that ridiculous line of argument.
Besides being actively involved in demonstrations, what I loved most was being in all these vibrant discussions and arguments.
Knots of people would form around the table and then they’d break up and another knot would form, and more people would come to the table and new discussions and debates would break out, over these tremendously important issues.
Sometimes the arguments got pretty heated, even with people that you would expect would be on your side.
The hippie thing was generally cool, as far as 1 was concerned, even though that wasn’t really what 1 was “into,” as we used to say.
But I didn’t have any patience for some of the “hippie/dippy” stuff about “everybody do your own thing,” without regard to what “your thing” was.
One lime I was at the office of the Berkeley Barb newspaper, which was kind of an alternative newspaper that was pretty radical at the time.
I was talking to some other people in the Barb office about the Vietnam War, denouncing it and exposing different things that were going on.
And I was really ripping into Lyndon Johnson, what a mass murderer he was—everybody hated Lyndon Johnson, because he was both the symbol of continuing and escalating the war and the president who was actually doing it.
During this period, Liz and I had continued to become closer, and then to become lovers.
I was an activist and wanted to remain an activist, but I was thinking about what 1 wanted to do as my life’s work, so to speak. didn’t want to become a doctor so I could go to the golf course.
I wanted to become a doctor so 1 could give people medical care who didn’t have medical care.
I went to the university administration and asked if I could withdraw from school that semester.
Because I had a good standing as a student, they allowed me to withdraw that semester “without prejudice,” and I became much more of a fulltime activist.
Remember, they had a whole history of being political activists and communists perhaps, or at least radical people who were communist sympathizers.
They weren’t so upset when we became active in the Free Speech Movement or even opposing the Vietnam War.
But when 1 took this step of withdrawing from school to become involved full-time in anti-war activity, as well as civil rights and things like that, they got very upset.
I argued vigorously with him that this wasn’t true, because at the lime I didn’t think that was where I was headed.
But ironically he, who had had some experience with things like this, could see it more clearly than 1 could—and of course, in retrospect, he was right. mean, it wasn’t bound to turn out that way, but he recognized the trajectory that I was heading off on.
Are Beyond Your Command ” I was now a full-time activist in the Vietnam Day Committee.
We had rallies on campus, but we would also organize marches and demonstrations in the broader community—against politicians when they’d come into town, or against shipments that were being sent off to the Vietnam War, and other things like that. often spoke at these rallies and demonstrations, and then 1 signed up to be on the speakers bureau, and would go speak at everything from junior high schools to Rotary Clubs, or I’d debate the Young Republicans or the Young Americans for Freedom, which was another right-wing student organization.
I did go back to Cal for one more semester as a student, even while I remained very active in the political movement.
But then I finally dropped out of college altogether, about a year’s credits away from graduating, in 1966.
And that caused tensions and conflict with my own family and also with Liz’s family.
From the conversation I previously described with her father, you could tell they were worried, very worried, about the direction I was taking.
When I went back to school maybe they were temporarily relieved, but then when 1 dropped out altogether and didn’t even talk about going back any more, they were really upset, as were my parents.
He had a big influence on me at that Lime and generally a positive one in radicalizing me.
Scheer went on to Ramparts magazine, which had originally been founded as kind of a liberal Catholic journal; as things got more radical in the ’60s, the magazine drew more radical people into it and it became an important voice opposing the Vietnam War, supporting Black people’s struggles, and so on.
It was still within a certain framework, but it was an important radical voice at that time.
Scheer asked me if I wanted to come work there, doing research and helping to prepare different articles.
That sounded like a good way for me to combine earning a living with doing something worthwhile, and it also gave me a job where 1 didn’t have to do the 9-to-5 thing.
I would gel my research assignments done, but 1 also had a lot of freedom to be involved in the things that 1 thought were most important.
One of the important stories we did at Ramparts concerned Donald Duncan.
One day some people from the Berkeley anti-war movement came to me and said that they were talking to this guy who was a soldier who was questioning the Vietnam War very seriously and deeply.
They wanted me to talk to him because 1 had done a lot of public speaking and study around the war.
So I spent quite a bit of lime over at their house talking to this guy, who turned out to be Donald Duncan.
Duncan had been a soldier in Vietnam—he was at the rank of master sergeant when he left Vietnam.
He’d come back very disaffected by and very bothered by the war—questioning it and thinking it wasn’t right, but not that clear on a lot of things about it, understandably. asked him a lot about his experiences in Vietnam and did what 1 could to help him come to a clearer understanding of the nature of the war and what was wrong with it.
And at a certain point, I suggested to both the Ramparts editors and to Donald Duncan himself that they do an article in which he would tell his story and come out and denounce the war.
At that lime, there weren’t that many soldiers who’d been in the war itself and come out and publicly denounced it.
Ramparts had a circulation of a couple hundred thousand or so, and this article had an impact even beyond the readers of Ramparts.
As a matter of fact, I would, and did, uphold those people who dodged the draft as doing something truly heroic— not George W Bush, but people who dodged the draft because they opposed the war, not just to save their own ass.
People who evaded the draft, or outright refused to be drafted, or refused to go to Vietnam once they were in the military—people who did these things because they opposed the war—they were doing heroic things, definitely more heroic things than United States soldiers who, with all their destructive technology, were massacring and slaughtering the Vietnamese people.
Nevertheless, for the United States population broadly, for someone who’d been in that war to speak out against it had a very big impact. 1 also worked on an article about discrimination in professional sports.
This was right up my alley, combining my love for sports with being able to do something to expose injustice.
So 1 interviewed some professional athletes—and I tried to interview Bill Russell, who had been a big hero of mine when 1 was a kid. described the article and the magazine to Russell, and he refused—I’m not sure exactly why.
But Jim Brown, one of the great running backs in football history, did agree to be interviewed, and this was interesting.
This was around the lime when I first met Eldridge Cleaver, who had gotten out of prison on parole.
Ramparts had given him a job as a writer, and I’d met him in that context.
He and 1 went to L.A. together to interview Jim Brown, who had these programs that were supposed to improve the lives of Black people, with small businesses and things like this.
And, let’s pul it this way, he didn’t like that question—he got very indignant and gave me some answer which 1 don’t remember in all its details, but which didn’t really answer the question.
But the article did end up being mainly a positive one, focusing largely on Jim Brown—which partly reflected where people at Ramparts , including myself, were at then, and partly the fact that Jim Brown was in certain limited ways standing up against the Establishment at that Lime, although the main aspect of what he was doing was very well within the system.
When we were leaving, after interviewing Jim Brown, Eldridge told me, “This guy’s just bullshit, man.
That verdict from Eldridge obviously made an impression on me, even though the article ended up being mainly positive in its presentation of Jim Brown.
Getting with Eldridge, Huey and Bobby Eldridge Cleaver was much more radical than people that I’d known before.
When 1 first met him, he was talking about how, when Malcolm X had been assassinated, Malcolm had been trying to get together this organization that he called the “Organization of Afro-American Unity,” inspired by the Organization of African Unity, 8 and Eldridge was talking about trying to revive that organization.
But generally he was very radical, and through him 1 met people who were associated with SNCC 9 and things like that.
The Organization of African Unity was formed in 1963 by newly independent governments of Africa.
SNCC, or the Student Non-Violent Co-ordinating Committee, grew out of the civil rights sit-ins and voter registration drives in the South during the early 1960s.
What’s wrong with Israel is not the Jewish character of it; it’s the fact that it’s an instrument of imperialism.
I made these arguments and I made the point in writing the letter that 1 was a strong supporter of SNCC and of Black liberation, but this bothered me because it wasn’t the right way to look at the problem and to analyze friends and enemies, and so on.
Before that I had met them through some old high school friends of mine.
One night at a rec center in Berkeley, my friend Billy introduced me to this guy who was nicknamed Weasel, who was going to the community college in Oakland—he had formerly gone to McClymonds and played on the team that beat Berkeley High in overtime in the 1963 TOC—and he told me about this African-American cultural program that was being held by a group on the community college campus called the Soul Students Advisory Council.
In 1967, Israel launched a surprise attack on Egypt, Syria and Jordan, and seized the Gaza Strip, the West Bank, and the Golan Heights, further dispossessing the Palestinian people, who had already been turned into refugees by the 1948 war which created the Israeli settler state.
The United States left as a whole not only did not take a clear stand against this, but many actually supported the Israeli attack.
SNCC stood out at the time for taking a stand against the Israeli aggression, and lost quite a bit of financial and political support as a result.
Bobby Seale was actually the emcee of this Soul Students cultural program, and there were a lot of different performances that night.
But what 1 remember most was Bobby Seale—both because he was very effective at this and also he was hilarious.
I found out from him later that he’d actually been a comedian for a while after he got out of the Air Force.
He would do really great impressions of everybody from Kennedy to Bill Cosby and was just really hilarious as well as being very penetrating with some of his satire and the ways he was going after the government.
Huey, Bobby and Eldridge saw themselves as the heirs to Malcolm X, taking up what Malcolm X was doing when he was assassinated and carrying it forward.
In my eyes, they were taking it and becoming even more radical with it.
They had this revolutionary stance, they were indicting the whole system — that’s what they got from Malcolm X—but they were calling for revolution, too.
The Early Years...and What’s Up Today""—a four-part interview conducted in May 1989 immediately after Newton’s death, which touched on his relationship with Newton and Newton’s strengths and weaknesses as a revolutionary leader and the tragedy of his life.
Are Beyond Your Command” 1 49 talking and debating and struggling over things.
That struck me as well. 1 remember one time I was down at the same community college and there was this other Black nationalist group meeting in a classroom and the door was open, and this guy was giving an agitational speech about the blue-eyed devils, and so on. couldn’t help it, I was interested and l was drawn to listening.
But what struck me about Bobby Seale and Huey Newton and Eldridge was that their indictment of the system was more powerful and more profound than this, but along with that they were open to anybody else who was opposed to the system and they would try to push you to become more radical.
That was a lot of the influence that Eldridge and Bobby and Huey had on me, pushing me to become more radical, to move more toward a revolutionary position, because they were taking up things that 1 felt very passionately about and they were doing it in a way that 1 saw as being very uncompromising—and at the same time they were willing to argue and debate and struggle with you.
So all this had a tremendous impact on me in the context of everything that was happening in the United States and in the world at that time, and everything I’d learned up to that point.
The CP claimed to be for socialism and ultimately communism and a whole different kind of world, but the people who were in the CP were very conservative to our eyes—always trying to appeal to the mainstream and to the lowest common denominator—and the CP as a whole was always opposing and denouncing the most radical things that were coming forward.
However much the movement advanced and become more radical, they were always trying to drag it back down to the lowest common denominator.
Within the Black liberation struggle they wanted to support only things that they could present in the context and the confines of civil rights, and especially someone like Malcolm X was way too radical for them.
When he tried to make it an issue of human rights and put it in the context of the whole international struggle against the United States and against imperialism, they didn’t want any part of that.
They denounced him as an advocate of violence the same way the bourgeoisie did.
I’ve written about this elsewhere, but it may be hard today to realize just how radical and, yes, shocking the Panthers were when they came onto the scene.
There was nothing remotely like this on the scene in terms of the specter it raised and the impact it had, and I’ll get more into this in the next chapter.
But here I want to speak to the impact that my relations with the Panthers had on my relations with my family.
And with that, I really crossed a line with both my family and Liz’s family— and Liz herself.
I remember there was something almost like a “summit meeting” where both sets of parents came over to our apartment and basically read me the riot act for what was I doing.
Liz’s father, who was the most political, actually tried to engage me on an ideological level, criticizing the Black Panther Parly for speaking in the name of the “lumpen proletariat” as if that were the most revolutionary force.
The Panthers were really talking about sections of Black people who were largely proletarians, in and out of jobs, especially a lot of youth—while the “lumpen proletariat” actually refers more to people whose whole life is centered around crime.
Now there aren’t hard and fast divisions there, especially when you’re talking about an oppressed people, but really the people the Panthers were rallying were a lot of proletarian youth by and large.
But a lot of them were also in and out of jobs and actually had a more proletarian position.
He tried to argue with me ideologically and politically as to why the Panthers were wrong and why 1 was wrong to be uniting and working closely with them.
All of the parents were arguing that I was wrecking everybody’s future—my future, Liz’s future, everybody’s future was being dragged down by what I was doing.
As I said, when we first met Liz was more politically experienced, more politically advanced, more politically active than I was, and she had a very positive influence on me in that kind of way.
But at a certain point—and I’ll try to gel into some of the complexity of it—she began to pull back from more radical positions, and especially to pull back from political activism.
Now, part of the basis for that was that the women’s movement was beginning to develop, feminist ideas were beginning to be brought forward more forcefully within the movement and also more broadly in society, even though this was the beginning stages of that, the mid to late 1960s.
She was upset, for example, that when I dropped out of school, she was working while I was being a political activist and she felt like this is the traditional way in which things have always been done—a woman working to support a guy while he pursues his interests—although that situation did change once I got a job at Ramparts and we were both earning money.
Women were examining their position and role in society—and they were demanding changes in their personal relations.
Liz was part of that in an overall sense, but one aspect of this was that she began to see things more in personal terms, to more and more turn inward, and to pull back from involvement in political struggles.
As I was coming to see the problem as the whole system and starting to consider the question of communism, I remember at one point we had an argument where she was reading this book and she said, “Listen to this.
As part of this, I was talking about moving from Berkeley—where we were living—to Richmond, which, as I mentioned before, is a more proletarian town.
She was still progressive, she still had enlightened views on all these questions, she was still sympathetic to these struggles; but, partly out of feminist concerns and partly out of the fact that, as exemplified by this passage she read from that book, she didn’t see how you could change things on a big scale in society, she was turning away from efforts to do that.
She thought that the enemy was too powerful, that what you were up against was too great, or that in any case this wasn’t the right way to go about changing things.
So we were going in very different directions at that Lime, and it was a very emotionally difficult thing because we still shared a lot in common, but we had these fundamental differences about the direction of our lives and our priorities were becoming very different.
Meeting and Rejecting PL At this time 1 didn’t yet consider myself a communist, but I was exploring a lot of different political tendencies and groups with different political programs and lines, as we say. was open to a lot of things, 1 was in a lot of flux at that time, 1966 and into ’67. remember, for example, when the Cultural Revolution in China was in high gear, around 1966, PL was sort of known as the Maoists in the movement.
Just about everybody who considered herself or himself even sympathetic to communism thought PL was the most radical version of communism.
That’s why Huey was talking about PL the first lime I met him—they were supposed to be the most radical communists and even pro-Mao.
I was taken in by a lot of the bourgeois propaganda that this was just a lot of chaos and madness and Mao had gone nuts and was just making the whole society go crazy.
He just backed off entirely from defending or explaining the Cultural Revolution, or even trying to analyze it.
That turned me off more to PL than to the Cultural Revolution because, although 1 still had my questions and ways in which I was confused and being influenced by the bourgeois slander about it, I knew better than that.
I knew you had to learn about things like this and do your best to analyze what was going on, and this guy’s backing off just made me lose respect for him much more than it turned me off to the Cultural Revolution and Mao.
There were huge debates in the movement in Berkeley about whether you should vote for Johnson.
A lot of my more radical friends were insisting that you shouldn’t vote for Johnson, that it was all the same thing, but I have to admit that I did actually vote for Johnson because Goldwater was so terrible.
By 1967, I was turned off to the bourgeois political parties and the whole bourgeois electoral process and all that machinery of deception and lies.
So in the spring of’67, if 1 recall the year correctly, I was actually part of a slate of candidates—I think it was called the “New Politics Slate” — that ran as sort of a radical reform slate for city council in Berkeley.
When I ran for office, a number of candidates came before this New Politics Group to ask for its endorsement.
One of them was a Black candidate who got up and basically gave a riff about how, if this group really was opposed to racism, they should endorse and work for his candidacy.
This made a deep impression on me—no matter who gets up and fronts off, and no matter what they might say is your obligation, you 13.
At the time of Johnson’s election as a “peace candidate” in 1964, there were 25,000 United States troops in Vietnam.
Our reform slate had a program of taking over Pacific Gas & Electric and making it publicly owned.
And, of course, supporting civil rights and opposing the Vietnam War was part of our platform too.
As part of our campaign we managed to raise some money to have a few billboards around the city of Berkeley listing the candidates and several slogans.
They didn’t get anywhere with that suit, and all this controversy around the billboard turned from a bad thing into a good thing in a certain way.
This whole experience gives both a flavor of the times and a sense that, even though 1 was learning about imperialism and becoming very radical in many ways, 1 still hadn’t completely broken with the idea of reform on a local basis by running radical reform candidates for office.
By the way, we didn’t win, although our slate did get about 30 percent of the vote.
The Summer of Love At that time, change was coming from a lot of different directions.
You had people organizing for “Stop the Draft Week” and you had the “Summer of Love” going on at the same Lime.
These, of course, were very different phenomena, even if they were both in a broad sense part of the same developing opposition to the way things were.
You were up against powerful forces that weren’t going to be changed by your loving them or trying to leach them to love.
Nor was it possible to change things by somehow creating a powerful wave of love that would sweep away unjust war and other injustices.
So I went to some of those loveins and all that kind of stuff just for the vibe, if you want to put it that way—to be part of all that.
That wasn’t my thing, but in a larger sense it was part of the thing that I was part of, too.
At that time, I was listening to R&B and Motown and things like that, on the one hand, and I was also listening to Bob Dylan, although the crowd I was in were all very, very disappointed when he came out with Nashville Skyline.
It was one thing when Dylan did “My Back Pages” and in effect denounced his association with radical and even revolutionary political groups, but as long as he was still doing other things that were giving inspiration to the youth rebellion and things like that, we were still pretty deeply into him.
But when he came out with Nashville Skyline and that whole direction, that was too much.
But I listened to some of the music that was associated with the youth culture of the time, like Jefferson Airplane or the Grateful Dead or things like that, although that wasn’t really my favorite kind of music and I had kind of conflicted feelings about that. appreciated it on one level, but I didn’t really get into it deeply, even after the JefTerson Airplane came out with music that actually had an unmistakably radical content.
I later drew some lessons from this, about not just jumping to oppose things that arc new and different, and learning to appreciate things that are coming at the world from new and different angles, not just in music but more broadly.
But at that time 1 was not that inspired by it, and even turned off in some ways by it.
Then later it became an arena where these other groups like the Jefferson Airplane or Janis Joplin played, and I looked at it somewhat negatively as a hippie haven.
In fact, there’s a funny story which kind of highlights some of the points I’ve been making.
I talked earlier about how 1 had started getting up in the dorm cafeteria on Sunday and singing.
After that had gone on for a while, some of the people in the dorm who were organizing a dance asked me if, during one of the breaks in the dance, I would sing a few songs.
So 1 came there and when the group that was playing took a break, I got up and I sang some old doo-wop and Motown songs.
Well, an ironic footnote to this is that the band that was playing there was Big Brother and the Holding Company, with Janis Joplin as their singer.
But there was still a feeling of solidarity there, between the hippies and the people, like myself, who were more into going up against the way things were in a more directly political way.
When 1 was working at Ramparts I had a press pass authorized by the San Francisco police, and one time 1 was driving through the Haight-Ashbury area and I saw all these police cars around—they were clearly busting some people in this house.
I stopped and 1 went up to the house and I saw it was some kind of drug bust, and they had all these people who looked like I did sitting on the floor handcuffed.
But even though I was working for Ramparts and had a press pass, to the police and to the “straight people"" 1 was dressed like a bum.
I asked the cops a few questions, and they didn’t answer much of anything.
I showed him my press pass, and he said, “Well, you look just like one of them.
So that kind of gives a flavor for how even though the hippie thing wasn’t my thing, you felt an affinity, that you were all part of the same sort of opposition to the establishment or the power structure or the “straight world”—however people saw it.
Stop the Draft Week “From Protest to Resistance” “Stop the Draft Week” came later in 1967, in October, right around the same time as when Huey Newton ended up arrested and charged with murdering an Oakland cop and a massive struggle developed around that.
During that lime there were people, including myself, who felt that the opposition to the Vietnam War needed to become more active and militant—and that it should appeal more directly to the soldiers and the people being drafted and more directly oppose the machinery that was carrying out the war.
We came up with the idea that we would shut down the Oakland Induction Center, which was one of the major centers where they inducted people into the Army. 1 myself at one point was actually called in for induction, but I had a letter from my doctor which explained why 1 couldn’t serve in the military, given the whole history of my illness.
But 1 also went there and passed out a leaflet exposing and denouncing the war and I was prepared, if 1 hadn’t gotten the medical deferment, to refuse to go into the military.
Huey Newton was accused of murder after a shootout in Oakland in which Newton himself was wounded and later handcuffed to his hospital bed during surgery.
The Panthers led people to very aggressively take up Huey’s defense with the demand to “Free Huey,” and this campaign helped catapult them to national prominence.
We got there—more than a thousand people—and there were just massive phalanxes of Oakland pigs all around.
One of the things that was so heroic in what the Panthers were doing was going up against the Oakland police.
Those cops were notorious for being especially brutal toward Black people in particular and toward anybody whom they saw as an enemy of the status quo.
In fact, one of our early anti-Vietnam demonstrations was supposed to go through Berkeley and Oakland; the Berkeley authorities gave it a permit but the Oakland authorities refused and then had large numbers of police out to prevent the march from going into Oakland.
There was a whole court battle before the Oakland authorities had to back down and allow a march to go into Oakland.
As people got there that day with the aim of shutting down the induction center, the Oakland police were just everywhere in formation and obviously prepared for battle.
And as soon as the first group of people sat down in front of one of the doors of the induction center, the police viciously descended on them and brutally attacked them.
They attacked people from the media to prevent them from covering this, and they even attacked bystanders as well as people who were there to demonstrate, and not just the people sitting in around the doors.
Speaking of the media, a reporter for one of the local TV stations was knocked unconscious by the police and was in a very bad way, and some other demonstrators and I picked him up and carried him away from the scene and got him some medical attention.
There was a real irony here, in that the media generally were slandering every demonstration and all the political activity we were involved in, but we ended up carrying this guy away before the Oakland police would have maybe even killed him, because they were just going viciously after anybody.
And for some lime afterward, whenever we wanted to get something into the media, we would contact that reporter, and he would actually try to get it on the air.
That day at the induction center was kind of a setback, but people learned a lot from it.
We went back to the campuses and other places, and I remember there was heated controversy about whether to go back again, in the face of this, to the induction center.
And when we came back, we came padded up and ready, with football helmets and other protective gear.
So then when the police attacked, which they did as soon as we started rallying again there, it didn’t have the same effect.
That day they had these county sheriffs and highway patrol and Oakland police, and I remember it was almost comical in the midst of this very intense situation as these pigs would take their nightsticks and smash you on the top of the head with it—and it would just bounce off and you would keep on going because you had a helmet on.
So that ended up being a very militant demonstration where traffic got blocked and cars got pulled out into the street; and although the original idea of doing these sit-ins around the induction center didn’t succeed and they were still able to draft people that day, this actually became a much bigger thing, and it had a very powerful impact in terms of rallying opposition to the Vietnam war and raising the opposition to a more serious level.
In fact, the famous demonstration to surround the Pentagon Look place literally the day after, and someone who was involved in that told me how, the night before the Pentagon action, a bunch of people who were going were simply ecstatic and inspired from reading the Associated Press account of “Slop the Draft Week” in Oakland.
There were arrests off it, obviously, and a political defense and legal defense had to be mounted, and this happened more or less in the same Lime frame as the Huey Newton case.
As part of the whole swirl of activity in those days, a core of us were going all over.
We went to anti-war rallies in the Bay Area and also in L.A. 1 went to the Century City anti-war demonstration that was viciously attacked by the L.A. police, and I remember going to a rally a little later in L.A. where, after he’d refused to go into the Army, Muhammad Ali came and signed autographs and generally expressed support for the demonstration.
Speaking of Muhammad Ali, I remember a convention of CORE— the Congress of Racial Equality, one of these reformist civil rights groups — that was held in San Francisco.
I remember Ron Karenga was there speaking—and of course people reputed to be members of Ron Karenga’s organization United States were responsible for murdering two Black Panthers later, John Huggins and Bunchy Carter, whom I knew—but this was before that happened.
The Panthers were already in a lot of political conflict with Ron Karenga because they saw him as being just a reformist and basically a bourgeois nationalist.
All these kinds of conflicts were going on within the movement, but they weren’t just personality disputes, or “ego conflicts”; they were conflicts about what kind of program, what kind of politics and ideology were necessary to really end all this oppression, and what were you up against.
So Eldridge urged me to go to this CORE convention and check it out. did, and at one point during a break in the meetings, I went into this room with some people that 1 knew there—and, all of a sudden, in came Muhammad Ali.
And Old Also around that time—the summer of ’67—there was kind of a loose grouping of people who were trying to do radical reform politics in the electoral arena that got together and had this New Politics convention in Chicago.
More than a thousand people came to that convention, mainly people from the middle class, mainly white, who were undergoing some of the radicalizalion of the time, but still trying to work within the electoral arena.
As I’ve described, they were always trying to keep things within the framework of bourgeois politics and reformism, and even when they’d run their own candidate for an office, at the same time they’d support the Democrat for whatever electoral office was being contested.
But if they’d opposed that straight up at that convention, they wouldn’t have won.
This Black Caucus met separately, and at a certain point they set down a bunch of demands on this New Politics Convention.
Well, some of them were legitimate, taking up the fight against racism and discrimination, and some of them were ridiculous—for example, that white people should form “white civilizing committees” to go into the white community and civilize white people.
Now I and the people I was with were there supporting the Black Panther Parly—and some of us were preparing to move to Richmond because we were taking up the call of SNCC and other radical Black forces that if white people really wanted to do something good, they should go organize poor white people around radical politics, including the fight against racism.
So there were some ridiculous things like that as well as some more valid and important demands they made.
While there were other forces with other agendas within this Black Caucus, the CP manipulated and maneuvered to get it to move on this convention in a certain way so that it ended up disrupting the whole thing of breaking with the Democratic Parly and took things off into a whole other place.
In the guise of radical, militant politics, they were actually maneuvering to keep these people from the middle class who were becoming radicalized from breaking with the bourgeois electoral framework, or at least with the two-party, Republican and Democratic, confines of it.
We walked up to him and asked him what he was doing, but he refused to answer.
So we started marching around his car chanting, “No more FBI, no more FBI...”—and, after a little while, he lore out of there.
Then, as we were driving back from Chicago to the Bay Area—we were kind of crazy youth, and we didn’t have much money, so we just look turns driving and didn’t stay anywhere overnight—I ate a sandwich that had been sitting in the car, exposed to the sun for about 24 hours.
And, of course, I got very sick, so that by the lime we reached the mountains in Utah, we were having to stop the car every few minutes so I could throw up.
Finally, we stopped in Winnemucca, Nevada and found the cheapest motel we could.
In the middle of the night in that motel, 1 went down the hall to go to the bathroom, and after 1 finished, I was getting ready to head back to our room, and suddenly I felt a powerful blow against my cheek—I had passed out and hit the edge of the toilet.
I managed to get myself up and barely made my way back to our room, nearly passing out again.
I opened the door to the room, turned on the light, aimed myself at the bed and let myself fall straight forward onto the bed.
The next day, as we started out again for the Bay Area, I called my doctor, Dr.
Meyer, and told him what had happened and asked anxiously if this could cause me to have a relapse of my kidney disease.
He gave me some advice on how to recover from this bout of food poisoning and told me to come see him when I got back to the Bay Area, but he also said that he thought I wouldn’t suffer a relapse.
Restless Farewell As I said, about the time of this New Politics convention, l was getting ready to make the move to Richmond, with my friend Kayo.
After Kayo had gotten out of high school I’d lost contact with him, and when I got back in touch with him, he was working in some dead-end job and his life was kind of dreary.
I was still in college at that time, and 1 prevailed on him to get out of there and he decided he wanted to go back to college, which in those circumstances represented a break from the dead end his life had gone into.
Then he also became very active politically—and here we were, going to sporting events and then going to political demonstrations all the time.
These were our passions, and at a certain point, he and 1 became very active in supporting the Panthers and the Black liberation struggle, so we decided to take up this call of going to the poor whites, taking radical politics to them.
Actually, we ended up working with poor whites and Blacks and Latinos and Native Americans after we started doing work in Richmond.
But our original mission was to lake radical politics to poor whites, and this was one area, in Richmond and San Pablo next door to Richmond, where there were actually a lot of poor white proletarians.
So we were on the threshold of making this move, but it was a very wrenching thing, a real change in our lives.
She went back and forth and agonized over it, but she finally decided that this was not the direction she wanted her life to go in.
But I was still in love with her. have to say, and maybe it’s obvious if you’ve read things I’ve written, that I’ve always been kind of a romantic.
Even when I became a revolutionary, I remained a romantic—so it was heart-breaking to me.
It was a lifechanging decision in many ways, but l felt this is what needed to be done.
And, as 1 said, she did agonize over it, but when she decided that this wasn’t the direction she wanted to go in, that was the final blow to our marriage.
When I moved to Richmond, I also to a large degree broke off relations with my parents, because they were still trying to influence my life in ways that I needed to break with, and I felt the terms of our relationship had to be radically changed.
It had to be on the terms of what I was doing, there had to be a radical break and rupture there.
In fact, I didn’t see my parents very much over the next several years, and when I did see them it was when I would take initiative to get in touch with them, because they didn’t even know how to reach me—I basically cut off any kind of direct contact with them for that period of time.
It was very painful, but it was another break that I needed to make in order to carry through with the way my life was going and the way it needed to go.
I think there’s an important lesson to this whole trajectory which ended up rupturing the relationship between me and Liz.
She was still a progressive person, still someone sympathetic to and supportive of many of the things that I was active in, but our lives were just going in different ways, and the way she saw changing things was taking a different direction.
Throughout her life she remained, as far as I know, a progressive person.
Things can develop, your paths can diverge, in such a way that you can’t maintain an intimate relationship and you don’t even see politically and ideologically eye to eye, in one sense.
Any other romantic relationships I’ve had since that time have had their own personal dimensions, of course—it is not the cardboard “commie” stereotype, or caricature, where supposedly there is no personal side to things, and people are stiff and unfeeling on a personal level.
The relations I’ve had of an intimate character have always had that personal side to them, but in a larger sense, the direction those relationships have taken and whether or not they’ve continued has been largely influenced by the political and ideological direction and content of my life and of the other person’s life.
And fortunately, at this time in my life, and for quite some lime now, I have found someone who deeply shares the commitments and the goals that define my life, and though we have had to be apart at times, even for long periods, our relationship has grown deeper and closer as soulmates united in romantic love but also in our common goal of radically changing the world and achieving communism.
Beginning in the fall of 1964,1 was in a real sense able to move beyond this whole battle with disease as the defining thing in my life—1 had overcome that— although for a number of years after that I still had to be in touch with my doctor and to have tests to make sure that I wasn’t having a relapse.
So everything for me was changing very rapidly, and by 1967 “everything” included my views toward revolution and communism.
One of the main things that turned me in a communist direction, as I was becoming more and more radical and starling to have a revolutionary edge, even while it was still mixed in with some reformism, was something that happened one day when I went over to Eldridge Cleaver’s house.
Now Eldridge had some definite weaknesses, things that ended up pulling him back away from the revolutionary road actually, including some of his views toward women, but nonetheless he also had a lot of positive qualities and strengths.
And I remember 1 went to his house one day, and there was this big poster of Mao up on the wall.
So I thought, “Wow, that’s heavy,” because I knew that these Panthers were pretty bad, pretty heavy, politically and in every other way—standing up against the police and all that brutality and murder and the whole system, really.
That was the character of the times, this was the direction in which a lot of people were being moved, and I was being moved that way too.
In this period of three years, more or less, from the fall of 1964 to the fall of ’67,1 had gone through many changes in my personal life, but above all in the whole way that 1 saw society and the world and the struggle to change it and where that all had to go.
Chapter Eight Getting Down with Revolution O ne day in early 1967 I just happened to come into Ramparts about an hour after a very dramatic thing had happened, and when I heard what went down 1 was really upset that 1 missed it.
Betty Shabazz, the widow of Malcolm X, came into town, and one of the things she was going to do was an interview with people at Ramparts.
Huey and some other Panthers met her at the airport and escorted her into San Francisco, to the Ramparts office.
They had their guns with them that they carried for self-defense, and as they got out of their cars, some cops drove by and saw them and screeched over to a halt, and they jumped out and pulled out their guns.
Huey had his shotgun pointed down, so it wasn’t aimed at the cop, but he was clearly not going to back down.
This whole tense showdown occurred, and finally the cops had to back down.
The Panthers had protected Betty Shabazz, and they had taken a clearcut stand.
This was electrifying, and people were still buzzing about when I got to Ramparts.
The Panthers in Action Although 1 was extremely frustrated about having just barely missed this, 1 got a very vivid account of what happened, especially from Eldridge.
And I’d heard other accounts of other very intense encounters and confrontations the Panthers had with the police.
And he went to bed and slept for something like two days before he could get up, because this was so intense.
Shortly after that, and this was not long before I moved to Richmond, there was a police murder in North Richmond, which was this unincorporated area just adjacent to the city of Richmond itself, and right near San Pablo.
This young Black guy named Denzel Dowell was shot and killed by the police out there—they claimed he was burglarizing a liquor store and that he tried to run away, so they shot him and killed him.
Of course, it was deemed justifiable homicide, and the Panthers had gone out there to the Sheriffs office (the cops who had jurisdiction in North Richmond) to register their outrage, and they’d taken their guns with them. 1 still vividly remember this story where one of the Panthers was quoted in the paper.
This was close to the time when the Panthers went to Sacramento with their weapons to make a political statement, to protest a law that was being passed that would make it impossible for them to do their armed self-defense patrols in the way they’d done them.
Even the people I knew who were generally considered to be really “bad” regarded North Richmond as a place you didn’t go.
In fact, right around this same Lime, I went with some friends of mine to a basketball game between Contra Costa College, which was in Richmond, and Merritt College in Oakland.
People didn’t know me and they were kind of reluctant to talk to me, so I asked my friend Billy to go out and talk to people—I got him paid by Ramparts as an investigative reporter.
He came back and told me that most people said that Denzel Dowell might or might not have been involved in a burglary there, but the cops just shot him down, just murdered him. did some other investigating in addition to that and we ran the story in Ramparts.
They had a couple of rallies in North Richmond, one of which 1 spoke at along with Eldridge and some others, but even before that, there was this really dramatic rally at the house of Denzel Dowell’s family.
So 1 got in my car and I drove out to North Richmond, still having this whole image of North Richmond in my mind from people 1 had grown up with and these stories I had heard—but it was important, so I went.
I got there and I parked my car, and they had this rally going on at the home of Denzel Dowell’s mother.
Up and down the street were these armed Panthers in a very disciplined formation, and Bobby Seale was on lop of the garage roof giving a speech.
The cops didn’t dare come right into the area, but they had a helicopter circling above, and Bobby Seale was giving this speech, pointing at the helicopter, saying, “This is what the pigs do” and comparing it to what the United States military was doing in Vietnam.
So that whole scene and Bobby Seale’s speech and then what that guy said to me made a dramatic impression on me.
This was just as I was getting ready to move to Richmond, so in a sense this was another introduction to that whole move.
Moving to Richmond Toward the end of 1967, it was time to make the move.
So, in a basic sense, that was our mission, but we didn’t really have any idea how to go about it.
We had an orientation that we were still going to relate politically to things happening at Berkeley and other parts of the Bay Area and other important political struggles, but we were going to try to orient ourselves toward really, deeply immersing ourselves there in Richmond, and not just always go back to those places that we were more familiar and more comfortable with every lime we wanted to do anything culturally or socially.
We thought of ourselves as revolutionaries and we were for socialism—sort of—but with a little bit of Mao, a little bit of Che, the influences of the Panthers and revolutionary nationalism all part of this mixed bag.
That’s where we were at and it was typical of a lot of radical people at that time.
And it wasn’t just the radicals in the Bay Area who were into this kind of mixed bag, but people more generally throughout the country and even in other parts of the world.
Things are very different now, but at that lime, even a lot of bourgeois heads of government in the Third World—say in Algeria or India—would talk about socialism of one kind or another in some sort of favorable way.
So there was a lot of mixed bag ideology around and we were just a part of that.
So we started hanging out in bars to get to know people and going to local events. always hated beer, but I started drinking beer so I could hang out and socialize with people.
So one of us went to this meeting of the local group that was set up under the whole Johnson “Great Society” anti-poverty program.
And we did meet a few interesting people that way, but I remember the person who went to the meeting coming back and describing how it was just this whole bureaucratic thing.
Now, as it turned out, as we did more work there, we started working among all different kinds of people, women as well as men, Black people, Latinos, Native Americans—but our goal initially was that we were going to hook up with poor white people.
And so the first people we started drawing around us a little bit were a number of these young white working class guys, poor whites who lived in the area where we were.
Well, we lived in this house where the bedrooms we were slaying in were upstairs and the living room was downstairs and we used some other rooms downstairs for a mimeo machine—back in those days, that’s how you did things, you ran off flyers on mimeograph machines—and we had typewriters and things like that down there.
So we took all the newspapers we could find—movement newspapers, regular newspapers —and we clipped out everything we could find where people had gotten into it with the police, like a police attack on strikers in Newport News, Virginia, cases of police murder, cases where the Panthers were defending themselves and Black people against the police, cases where Latinos were getting into it with the cops.
All the way around the living room walls we pasted up these pictures and then we put captions below all of them.
So one day, okay, here it goes—some of these guys we were hanging out with came over to our house.
We opened the door and welcomed them in, and their eyes went really wide and they started walking around the living room almost as if they were in a museum, quietly looking at these pictures from beginning to end.
They identified with the people who were being brutalized by the police and the people who were fighting back, and so this broke the ice politically.
So, more to make a statement that we were aware of this than to actually get it fixed, we called the phone company and said we wanted someone to come out and see if our phone was being tapped.
We started increasingly to involve the people we were meeting in various political activities— both things we did locally but also having them go with us to demonstrations in other places, and political meetings, and things like that.
And then pretty soon through these first contacts and in other ways we started meeting other people; and again, while our initial mission was to go work among especially the poor white youth but more generally among poor while people, our contacts had friends who weren’t all white and many different kinds of people were attracted to what we were doing— mainly younger people but some who were older, women as well as men.
We started developing a kind of a political center there and of course it became known after a little while to the police in San Pablo and Richmond and the Sheriff’s office, partly because we were also doing support work for the Panthers there.
This was after the Huey Newton shootout incident, and his case had become a major political battle.
So we started doing work around that in Richmond and that created quite a bit of controversy, but also brought forward some more advanced people.
Practice and Theory As 1 mentioned before, moving to Richmond was a big step we knew we had to take, and it had to be a situation where we were standing on our own in every way, so we had to work to support ourselves.
Things came down in small ways as well as big ways, like during what became known as “the May ’68 events” in France, when France was basically shut down by the combination of a youth revolt and younger proletarians getting into it, and this led to a general strike for a short period of time.
This was a major event in the world at that lime, and I brought a big article about it from one of the local mainstream papers in to work with me during the course of this.
There was this young Black guy named Leon who worked in the same part of the steel mill that 1 did, and I was becoming friendly with him.
I wanted to involve him in talking about what was going on in France, but under the circumstances 1 wasn’t going to go eat lunch with the group he was hanging out with.
And that’s actually what happened, and we all talked about the May ’68 events in France.
So on the job, as well as in the neighborhoods, we were trying to do a lot of political work as we got to know people.
Then you’d drive them for a few months and junk them, buy another one for a couple of hundred bucks and do the same thing all over again.
Some of the places we lived in, you’d go to bed and turn off the lights, and then if you’d get up and go in the kitchen and put the lights on—roaches everywhere.
Some places, the roaches were crawling up the walls even before you turned out the lights.
These were the conditions that the people we wanted to work among had been living in and suffering under their whole lives.
We were reading The Wretched of the Earth, by Frantz Fanon, reading a lot of stuff from revolutionaries of various kinds—nationalists, Marxists, and so on—and reading the Black Panther paper.
But we started doing some deeper study, loo, from a lot of different sources at that lime.
Not only did we understand that it was important to go to the proletariat in the way we were doing, but we also recognized that you had to get a deeper theoretical understanding to give a framework for everything you were doing.
So even though we were still in somewhat of a mixed bag ideologically at these beginning stages in Richmond, we did appreciate from the beginning the importance of theory.
At the same lime as we were very active in a lot of different things, we were reading everything that we thought had anything to do with radical politics and revolution and socialism and communism.
Peace and Freedom We still fell it was important to relate to all these movements—the students and the youth, the Panthers, and other radical movements in society.
We still considered ourselves part of that whole broad general uprising, if you want to put it that way.
In particular, and this is actually portrayed briefly in the movie Panther , the Panthers and especially Eldridge were interested in forming some kind of an alliance with the Peace and Freedom Parly, another one of these radical reform movements focussed on electoral politics, which was developing in California and working to get on the ballot.
But, on the other hand, its politics were directly in opposition to the Vietnam War and part of the general radical politics of the Lime, even though it had mainly a middle class base and its politics reflected that.
In fact, the Peace and Freedom Parly spread beyond California, and it eventually ran Eldridge Cleaver for president in 1968, although that was a process of a lot of struggle.
Time was running out to get on the ballot and they still were short of the signatures.
Someone came to me and asked me if I wanted to be part of this tour that they were putting together to help make a final concerted push to get over the top and get the necessary signatures.
A small core of people from the San Francisco Mime Troupe volunteered to do agit-prop skits as part of this crew, and then I was the speaker.
One guy had bought an old farmworkers’ bus and converted it for his own use, and he volunteered to drive us around.
We’d pull into an area and the musical group would get on top of the bus and they’d play music and gather a crowd.
Then the Mime Troupe people would do a skit about the CIA and Vietnam and things like that.
One of the interesting sidelights to this story is that the musical group who did this was actually Santana.
This was just when they were starting out, and they volunteered to be part of this and they stayed with it for a few weeks under very difficult conditions.
A lot of limes we slept on the floor, or we slept in the bus, and they had to get up on lop of a moving bus and play music.
They even felt a little badly that they finally had to leave, so then they did a benefit for Peace and Freedom later, which also contributed to getting it on the ballot.
Of course, at the time, they were just starling out—so Santana, if i 78 From Ike to Mao and Beyond you want to pul it that way, wasn’t Santana yet.
Carlos Santana and the band were literally there, but it wasn’t the Santana that it became.
Bakersfield is a very proletarian town but it’s not what you think of as a center of radical political activity.
As we were heading out of L.A. for Bakersfield, we were going through Hollywood and we recognized that we had a few hours extra, so that we could relax a little bit.
We had been going, going, going, and sleeping on the bus, sleeping on the floor, and often doing two or three rallies a day.
So we said, “Let’s take a little lime out, have a little fun before we go at it again,” and we decided to catch a movie.
We found a parking space for the bus right next to a high school, about a block away from the movie.
But the guy who drove the bus remembered that while he could lock the front door in the bus, there was a little door, almost like a trap door, at the back that he needed a padlock for.
We were hanging out there, just waiting for him to gel back, and all of a sudden we notice we’re right next to the athletic field in this high school, and here’s the high school ROTC marching around, being put through its paces by this guy acting very much like a drill sergeant.
And of course, as we sat and watched this a little while, it was too much of a provocation—we started chanting anti-war and antimilitary slogans.
So we’re singing these and other similar songs like this, quite loudly, while the ROTC is being put through its paces.
This created a big uproar, and the drill sergeant guy comes over and starts yelling at us and telling us to get the hell out of there.
We hadn’t planned a demonstration, we were just frankly goofing a bit, but there was a serious side to it, too, because this ROTC marching around in our faces was a provocation.
Well, we weren’t really looking to get arrested that day, so we decided to get out of there and go see the movie.
And we had all this band equipment, people had all their belongings, and we often had to leave them on the bus overnight and one or more of us would have to sleep on the bus to protect all this stuff.
But we did feel we needed to be able to defend ourselves in case we were attacked at night or something like that.
And in California at that time, even though they changed the laws to try to prevent the Panthers from doing their armed patrols, there still were ways you could legally carry guns in the state, and we were very conscious of staying within those rules.
They were just pistols, they weren’t howitzers or anything, but they might make something out of it.
So we made a difficult but in the end a foolish decision, which was that 1 and this other guy would lake the guns with us, and just get out of there with them so they wouldn’t be an issue.
So we headed off, but 1 didn’t want to put the gun I was carrying in my pocket, or under my shirt, or anything like that, because then it would be a concealed weapon, which was illegal.
I was holding it out where everybody could see it, which made it in conformity with the law, but also much more of a big deal.
We’re still naively thinking we’re going to go to this movie which, ironically enough, was Bonnie and Clyde.
We get a couple of blocks away and this police car comes tearing around the corner and screeches to a halt.
He’s trying to pull it out, but he’s got this snap on his holster, and he’s having trouble undoing it, so he can’t get his gun out right away—fortunately.
But, of course, he doesn’t give a shit if it’s loaded or not, let’s put it that way.
Then a bunch of other police cars come up and the cops take us and slam our heads down on the hood of the police car and handcuff us.
I’m getting into it with these cops even while they have us handcuffed and are holding guns on us.
So ihey lightened ihe handcuffs more and look us down lo ihe local precinct, and a detective comes in and he starts giving us a bunch of shit —and I’m giving it back to him.
When we went lo trial we were charged with loitering around a school and disturbing the peace.
We were discussing our legal tactics and I said, “Look, 1 know all about relying on the people and everything.
But our defense is going to be very technical because we got busted in the area of a school; we had guns, even though we weren’t intending to shoot anybody, and we didn’t do anything illegal with the guns.
A middle-class jury we’re likely to get is not going to be very sympathetic to us in this situation.
So, at my suggestion, we decided to just go with what they call a “bench trial”—in other words, lo be tried by the judge, without a jury.
This, again, came out of the legal training I got year after year as a kid.
So, during the trial, every lime he got a chance, our lawyer would get up and remind the judge that we would appeal if we lost.
So we ended up getting out of that whole mess, but it was a pretty hairy thing.
We went to San Jose State to do one of our Peace and Freedom rallies, but it turned out that there was a demonstration that day against Dow Chemical.
Dow Chemical made the napalm that the United States military used to terrorize the people of Vietnam—napalm is this burning jellied gasoline, just a horrific thing.
There was that famous picture, which was printed in Ramparts and many other places, of this small Vietnamese girl running naked down a roadway after a napalm attack.
When we got to the San Jose State campus, we didn’t even know about the demonstration; we were there to do our Peace and Freedom thing, but there was this rally, so we joined in. think that there were Dow Chemical recruiters on campus or something like that, so there were hundreds of students there protesting.
And, sure enough, after a little while, the police attacked the demonstration.
Very early in this whole fracas that broke out, this one cop started going after me.
He threw a punch at me, and I blocked his punch, and I managed to land a punch to defend myself.
And before I have a chance to do anything, two other cops come from behind me and jump me, and then one of them put his nightstick across my throat.
This happened to other people as well, and a number of us, including myself, were very close to passing out from this, or worse, and the only thing that saved us was the presence of the media there—whenever someone from the media would be around, the cops would loosen the chokehold just enough for us to breathe.
Just like in L.A., when they busted me, I started mouthing off to them.
The cops were trying to instigate these Hells Angels to attack us, but that did not happen.
So then they took me into this holding room to Lake my fingerprints and they were taking down my “facts,'"" like name, birlhdale, and all that kind of stuff.
When we were having our court hearings, we had these plea bargains— that’s how 1 got five days.
We’d get up before the judge and plead guilty, but unless they had something really big on somebody, the judge agreed to give light sentences, because it was a political demonstration and they kind of wanted the whole thing to go away. still remember very vividly that there was one guy who got up before the judge—a guy 1 later found out was in the CP—and he started telling this story about how he was just there to protest and he didn’t believe in violence and he didn’t get into any violent activity.
But that gives you a flavor of the times, not only the activism of people but also the intellectual, theoretical, and ideological ferment and debates that were going on.
It was a good thing they were becoming radicalized, but they also had their limitations.
During this same time period, early in 1968, the Panthers had a big rally for Huey in the Oakland Auditorium, to build political support on the occasion of his birthday.
They had that famous chair that the Panthers had taken the picture of Huey silting in—they had made a poster out of that, and it was a very popular poster—and it was sitting there empty to symbolize the fact that they wanted Huey back among them.
Many people who had been part of SNCC were there—James Foreman, Stokely Carmichael, Rap Brown.
And 1 remember even Curtis Mayfield and the Impressions came there to lend their support.
They couldn’t come there in their “official capacity” with a band because of contractual complications, but they came and sang “We’re A Winner” a capella—and that was a really nice moment.
I went to a number of Huey’s court appearances—in fact I happened to be there for some of the dramatic moments in the Huey court case— and I went to the rallies that were held outside.
On one of these occasions, somebody pulled down a flag from a flagpole around the courthouse, and different people were passing it around; some people were trying to tear it, and others were trying to burn it, but it turned out that it was very difficult to tear or to burn.
Film of this rally, containing portions of the main speeches, is currently available in the videotape Black Panthers, by the French filmmaker Agnes Varda.
And there was this underground passage that went underneath the street, so you could go from the courthouse over to Lake Merritt.
I’ll lake this flag, run through that passageway, get over to Lake Merritt, and just throw the flag in the lake, and that'll be the end of it.
It will show the “appropriate respect” for the flag, but we’ll be done with it.
So I get about halfway through this tunnel—I’m running—and all of a sudden I hear footsteps behind me.
I look over my shoulder and someone who is obviously a plainclothes cop is chasing me.
At the other end of this tunnel, there are two stairways that go up, one to the right and one to the left, and they go out to the grounds of Lake Merritt.
This cop is running behind me, when all of a sudden two other plainclothes cops come down the stairways in front of me—one from my left and one from my right.
I'm running with the flag, and I’m not going down, I’m not going to get tackled.
So, when the cops in front of me get to within a few feet of me, I lower my shoulder into them and, one after the other, they go down.
I managed to shake him off—but, unfortunately, as happens sometimes in football, too, I lost my balance and fell just at the crucial moment, and then they all three piled on me and busied me.
As it turned out, the courts were forced by the struggle that was waged to hand down sort of a mixed verdict in the Huey Newton case — they found Huey guilty of manslaughter, not murder, and he was sentenced to something like fifteen years.
Beyond that, though, taking up this legal defense in a very politically aggressive way played an important part in spreading the politics and program of the BPP and helping them to expand— though, ironically enough, this very expansion brought with it contradictions that they were ultimately not able to surmount, especially in the context of the vicious, literally murderous, repression that was brought down on them.
In April 1968, Eldridge Cleaver and Bobby Hutton and some other Panthers were involved in a shootout with the police in Oakland.
Bobby Hutton was shot down and murdered by the Oakland police as he was coming out of a house where he had taken refuge.
And there was, of course, great outrage in the Black community and among people who were supporting the Panthers and progressive people generally.
The Panthers held a rally at one point in the aftermath of this, and Marlon Brando came and spoke.
He also went on “Johnny Carson” at this Lime, I remember, and created a tremendous uproar by telling the truth about what had happened, how the Oakland pigs had murdered Bobby Hutton —it was such an uproar that Johnny Carson invited the Oakland police chief on his show to give his version of what happened, to try to whitewash the whole thing.
Anyway, Marlon Brando came and spoke at this rally and then afterward a few of us went back to the rather small Panther community office.
Just a few people could fit into the office and eventually the others there left to go off and do things, and Marlon Brando and I were sitting there.
It was like the incident when I was sitting in the room with Muhammad Ali.
Actually, I was just becoming a communist at that time, but anyway, that’s what I said.
He looked at me and he launched into a long story which, as I recall, was a story of one of the Native American peoples, and I believe the point of the story was to promote the collective and cooperative way of life.
And then there was a long silence after that, before people came back to take Marlon Brando to the airport.
Chapter Nine Becoming a Communist A jLjLL that Lime, there were just a few of us in our core group in Richmond who considered ourselves conscious revolutionary activists.
But we were meeting a lot of people, and people were starling to hear about some of our work and to call us from different parts of the Bay Area, and even other parts of the country, asking about what we were doing.
Also, we started hooking up with other people who had similar politics to ours.
We were moving more in the direction of recognizing that we had to gel much more clear ideologically and in particular that we had to become more firmly grounded in communism and communist theory.
So, we were moving in that direction, and we were meeting with, talking and struggling with other people who had similar politics.
At a certain point, we decided that we needed to form some kind of an organized group, not just in Richmond but more broadly in the Bay Area.
So 1 wrote up a position paper, which we took around to other people, and it became the basis of discussion and the basis of unity, more or less, for drawing people together—originally just a handful — to form some kind of a group.
It was still sort of a mixed bag ideologically, but clearly we were for revolution, as we understood it, and moving in a direction of being for socialism and communism, as we were beginning to understand that more fully.
Khrushchev did this largely in the form of denouncing Stalin, but this was part of his renouncing the basic principles of socialism and communism.
Leibel had criticisms of Stalin, and as we developed our theoretical understanding in the Revolutionary Union we began to deepen those criticisms of Stalin, but we saw that just negating and trashing the whole history of the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership was going to lead you back into the swamp of embracing capitalism.
That’s one of the things that 1 came to understand through a lot of discussions with Leibel.
He had written a paper criticizing this move on the part of the CP in the U.S., to take up this Khrushchev program.
In other words, Khrushchev started promoting the idea that revolution was no longer necessary, that somehow through electoral parliamentary 17.
Shortly after his death, Nikita Khrushchev look the reins of power and instituted a form of capitalist rule under a fairly threadbare socialist cover.
For more on Bob Avakian’s evaluation of Stalin — his overall positive historical role and accomplishments, along with his serious shortcomings and grievous mistakes—see, among other works, Conquer the World—The International Proletariat Must and Will.
Leibel rejected that, and he wrote a paper criticizing it which got circulated in the communist movement not only in the United States but internationally.
So he’d gone to China around 1965, and he was there when the Cultural Revolution broke out.
He thought I had the potential to be a communist, and he decided to work to develop me into one.
I was also discussing and struggling over big political and theoretical questions with Leibel.
Leibel would struggle with me—sometimes subtly, and sometimes quite sharply.
For example, there was a meeting in Berkeley which had something to do with supporting the struggle of the Angolan people— Angola was still a colony of Portugal at that time, and Angolan revolutionaries were waging an armed struggle for independence.
Leibel was there at the meeting, and afterward he talked to me about this.
It’s not a matter of what anybody, even the Angolan people, just thinks.
And since it is true that they are an oppressed nation, a colony, then they should be supported in fighting for liberation.
Around this time a book came out that had a lot of influence in the radical movement.
It was written by Regis Debray, who is now a bourgeois functionary in France, and it was called Revolution in the Revolution.
It basically pul forward the Castro-Che Guevara line on how you make revolution, particularly in Latin America, and argued that you didn’t need a parly to lead it, you just needed a military “foco,” as they called it—that is, a military force that would be both a political leadership and a military leadership and would go from place to place fighting and supposedly spreading the seeds of revolution.
I was very influenced by this book, and so were many other people I knew.
But the thrust of the book, the essential position it was putting forward, was not correct and influenced people in the wrong direction.
I recall arguing vigorously with Leibel about this for hours, because 1 was being swayed by Debray’s arguments.
And at one point he got very frustrated with me—in the course of this argument, he slapped me on the thigh and said, “You know, you’re an asshole” because I was being stubbornly resistant to his arguments, which were actually more correct than mine, and he got frustrated.
The military is a separate force, which may do political work, but it can’t substitute for sinking deep roots and leading the people to carry out these transformations.
That was a very profound point; it struck me very penetratingly at the time, and it has stayed with me since.
Then the next year, 1969, there was this major oil workers strike in Richmond, which became a big deal in the whole Bay Area and even had a big impact around the country.
We were actively involved in that strike, and in building support for it, and I wrote a number of articles about this for a movement newspaper, appropriately called The Movement. 1 was also doing more theoretical writing because we were starting to form these collectives of revolutionaries which we then united into the Revolutionary Union, and we were writing position papers to develop the basis of unity for that organization.
So I was writing a lot at that lime, as well as being involved in internal discussion and debate with others who founded the Revolutionary Union, including Leibel.
In forming the Revolutionary Union, one of the things we recognized as crucial was the question of what kind of leadership is needed once you start confronting the fact that a revolution is necessary and you understand it has to be socialist and that the ultimate goal is communism.
And I thought about this and discussed it with people I knew, and I think he discussed it with some others in the Panthers.
By “multinational” we meant that people of all races, or nationalities—Black, Latino, Native American, white, Asian—would all be united in this one vanguard party.
And that was our objective in forming the Revolutionary Union—to contribute to the development of such a multinational communist vanguard.
There were a lot of other significant forces out there at that lime, like the Panthers, which had come out of a revolutionary nationalist current; other groups which had developed among Latinos and other oppressed peoples, and others who had come out of radical “New Left” politics; and there was a question of whether and how we were all going to make a leap to unite on a communist basis—which, when we formed the Revolutionary Union, is what we understood to be necessary.
We tried to present what we were doing in forming the Revolutionary Union modestly—not in the bourgeois sense of being self-effacing or something, but corresponding to what we actually represented.
We were just a fledgling organization that was putting forward these principles.
We wanted to discuss and debate this with people, and we wanted to move to an eventual vanguard party.
But we were trying to move toward that and make as much of a contribution as we could to it, through practical work and also through theoretical work and ideological struggle with other forces.
And we put forward our views of a communist understanding of United States society and of the world and of revolution.
I jumped right into it and talked about why we’d pul Stalin on the cover.
There were several hundred students and others there, and there was a lot of back-and-forth about this.
But we were also opposed to groups like PL and these Trotskyite groups who had a very narrow—what we call today “workerist” and “economist”—position of “it’s just the workers against the bosses,” who saw everything in very narrow terms like that.
PL (and most of the Trotskyites) actually saw revolutionary nationalism as a negative phenomenon.
They did not recognize that, although contradictory, it was mainly positive—even overwhelmingly positive, and in some ways representative of the most advanced revolutionary expressions of masses of people at that time.
In essence, they reduced national oppression to a matter of ideas —just racism—without recognizing that Black people are actually an oppressed people and indeed an oppressed nation within the U.S., and there are other minority nationalities in the United States which have a whole history of being oppressed, which isn’t only a matter of some racist ideas or simply discrimination, but has a whole historical development, an economic basis, and political and social and cultural manifestations.
PL and the Trotskyites—or at least the more “pure” Trotskyites—failed to recognize all that and denounced and opposed struggles against national 1 94 From Ike to Mao and Beyond oppression lhal were expressive of nationalist ideology.
Earlier I mentioned the book by Regis Debray, Revolution in the Revolution , and how Leibel Bergman sharply struggled to get me to recognize what was wrong with the basic position Debray was seeking to popularize.
But there was one sentence in that book which still makes me laugh, though I became convinced that the basic line Debray was putting forward was fundamentally and seriously wrong.
Although that may have been a slight exaggeration, Debray was getting at something very real there—hitting at the completely idealist tendencies of the Trotskyites (followers of Leon Trotsky), who instead of proceeding from reality in the struggle to transform society, seek to impose their fanciful notions on reality.
Although they are always talking about “socialism”—and often seeking to make support for “socialism” the dividing line in all kinds of mass movements — the only kind of “socialism” that people like that will ever have anything to do with creating is a “socialism” that they imagine in their own minds.
And their outlook, and actions flowing from it, actually works against the living struggle to bring socialism, and ultimately communism, into being, in the real world.
Concrete analysis of concrete conditions has never been the strong point of the Trotskyites—I remember laughing uproariously in agreement when reading that line from Debray.
So, as we were forming our principles of unity in the RU, we recognized the importance of combatting these various trends—revisionist and opportunist lines which were posing as “socialist” and “communist” while objectively opposing revolutionary struggles, and thereby doing a great deal of harm.
We were putting forward a position sharply opposed to that and carrying out polemics and ideological struggle against these various trends.
By 1969, SDS (Students for a Democratic Society, formed in the early 18.
In neither case were the Trotskyite groups able to see the ways in which nationalism could take on an “againsl-the-syslcm"" character, even as it fell short in being able to provide a way for people to rupture with and overthrow capitalism.
With many Trotskyite groups it is a matter of fixating on one aspect—the shortcomings of nationalism—while Trotskyite groups like the SWP uncritically tailed various expressions of nationalism and failed to acknowledge its shortcomings.
Thousands of people who were in and around SDS were debating questions of revolution and socialism and communism.
All these different trends were contending within SDS, struggling over what direction this very broad revolutionary current among youth, in particular white youth, should take.
And so we felt it was important to get into these debates and try to influence them in the direction of communism, as we understood it, and we got involved, in a big way.
SDS had these quarterly national conventions in different parts of the country, and the first one that I went to was in Austin, Texas in the spring of 1969.
Three of us who were part of the RU got in a little VW bug and drove from the Bay Area to Austin, Texas, in a couple of days, without slopping.
At that time, the focus of the struggle was against PL, which was opposing struggles for ethnic studies on campuses, denouncing this as nationalist and bourgeois.
There was a lot of struggle against PLs attempts to take SDS in this narrow “bosses vs. workers...all-nalionalism-is-reactionary” kind of direction.
But not only were we trying to win people away from that, we were also very importantly working to expose that what PL was putting forward was not communism, was not Maoism. talked earlier about how someone I knew in PL wouldn’t even defend the Cultural Revolution when 1 raised questions about it.
But PL was still identified in a lot of people’s minds with China and with Maoism until 1971, when they denounced China and actually jettisoned the whole idea of supporting socialism and instead started coming out with the notion that you should leap immediately from capitalism to communism, without going through the transition phase of socialism, because socialism had too many problems.
Of course, this was a leap—directly from capitalism to communism—that could only 19.
For further discussion of the problems in PLs approach on this, sec Bob Avakians “MLM vs.
Making Revolution for Real in the Real World,” Revolutionary Worker #923, at rwor.org.
Nevertheless, they were still identified in 1969 with China and Maoism even though, as exemplified by the conversation I had with that PL guy, they were not really defenders of the Cultural Revolution and of Mao, even at that time.
Some people might be drawn to it initially because it was always raising the slogan “fight racism,” but when you got closer, you’d see that PL would denounce any kind of national liberation movement that didn’t declare socialism as its goal.
They posed the fight for socialism against national liberation movements and struggles.
So this turned a lot of people off, but in being turned off, they thought this PL line was communism, that this was even a radical communism, that this was Maoism, or what was represented by China.
The next big SDS convention was set for Chicago, and everyone knew that this was going to be a major political event and that there would be a big showdown there.
At that time it was already legal to make a right turn on a red light in California, though in a lot of other states, including Illinois, it was not yet legal.
We stop and there’s no traffic, and so we make a right turn while the light is red.
We go a couple of blocks down the road, and we get pulled over by these Chicago cops—one was a Black cop and one was Puerto Rican.
So I turned to one of the cops and say, “Look, are you talking about when we pulled up to a red 20.
I say, “You see, we’re from California, and in California it’s legal to blah, blah, blah, blah, blah...” and they finally let us off with a warning.
But even then you could see that further splitting was going to go on, and it did—and SDS as an organization soon ceased to exist.
The bourgeoisie, and others who want to paint radical and revolutionary politics in a bad light, present this now as if this were just a case of people becoming dogmatic fanatics and eating each other up in these sectarian squabbles.
But mass movements like SDS, which had started off as a sort of radical bourgeois-democratic organization of students whose objective was to make American democracy live up to its professed principles and ideals, had developed together with the limes into a much more radical and revolutionary organization that had thousands of active members around the country and Lens of thousands or more who supported it, who had come to a general revolutionary position.
These were questions that were bound to come on the agenda as the times were developing; the struggles in society were intensifying, and thousands and thousands of people were coming up against these questions.
Naturally, there is going to be debate and struggle, and not everybody is going to agree.
And this wasn’t because everybody overnight became sectarian or “the revolution was eating its own children” and all that kind of bullshit.
People were running up against these big questions because they had made advances.
They were moving beyond the position of seeking to reform an unreformable system.
What became the Weathermen, or the Weatherpeople, represented another trend and then what was, broadly speaking, represented by the RU was a third trend.
These were the struggles of the day, and 1 would still say today that our position was, among the three, the most correct or the most in line with the actual way in which the struggle had to be developed and what the objectives of that struggle should be, how it should be led and what forces should be mobilized as the main forces, who were the key allies, and so on—even though our understanding was very undeveloped and was obviously not fully correct in many particulars.
Our basic position was that we needed a socialist revolution, as part of the worldwide revolutionary struggle whose ultimate goal was communism; that the proletariat would be the backbone force of this revolution, but that at the same time it was necessary to build a broad united front, unifying many diverse forces fighting against the injustices and outrages of this system, and that a key force for revolution was the struggle of the various oppressed nationalities; and that, to lead all this to revolution, there was a need for a single, multinational revolutionary communist party.
Now, if you think about it, it’s one thing for Bob Dylan to write that, but it’s another thing to take that up as an ideological stand.
It’s correct to have a stand that we should not be armchair revolutionaries, that you actually have to change the world in practice and through leading masses in struggle; but if you throw out the need for theory and adopt that kind of pragmatic orientation, you’re going to be whipped around by many different events and currents, and end up in a bad place and a dead end eventually—which in fact is what ultimately happened with the Weatherpeople, even though many of them were very sincere and dedicated people and very revolutionary-minded.
I said okay, and we got together the money and got me an airline ticket.
I went back there and showed up and, since 1 knew some of them from SDS, I found out where they were staying and went and knocked on their door.
And even after that, when they split off and formed their own grouping within SDS, we continued to struggle with them because it was the view of people like Leibel and myself that there were many dedicated revolutionary-minded people among them who were going off in the wrong direction, and that it was important to try to win them to a more correct revolutionary orientation and program, as best as we understood that.
People’s Park During this period we still maintained our connections to the Berkeley movement, and in fact the RU had collectives in Berkeley.
When the oil workers strike broke out in Richmond in 1969, we went and talked about that to people in the student movement and others in Berkeley and mobilized people from the campus and among other forces in Berkeley and around the Bay Area to come out to Richmond in solidarity with the strikers.
Simultaneously, there was a Third World student strike at San Francisco State, which was a very crucial struggle, and there was a similar strike at UC Berkeley.
We developed ties with people in these strikes and also helped mobilize people from these struggles to link up with the strike of oil workers.
And people in the RU were continuing to build the anti-war movement in Berkeley and other parts of the Bay Area.
Those of us based in Richmond at that lime took part in that in various ways, both building opposition to the war in Richmond itself but also being involved in other protests and demonstrations around the Bay Area more generally.
As 1 recall, people associated with Jerry Rubin, 21 Stew and Judy Albert and some others, discovered this property that the university owned but was not using at that time, just a little bit off campus in the Telegraph Avenue area, which extends out from the south end of the campus.
The university was planning to turn this into a parking lot, and these activists took the initiative to turn it into a park instead.
This developed into a major battle because the university was completely unyielding and was determined to “pave paradise and make it a parking lot,” as the Joni Mitchell song says.
The university administration threw down the gauntlet, and the people who were building People’s Park refused to back off and carried forward what they were doing—and it became a gigantic struggle.
That might sound a little improbable, but if you think about the context of things at that time and that the people involved were part of a broader movement, you can see why other people—even if they weren’t actively involved at first or didn’t think that was the main kind of activity that people should be directed toward— would still see this, in a broad sense, as part of the whole movement that they were part of.
And when the university moved against People’s Park and brought the police down on it, people responded accordingly.
This developed into a major struggle in which eventually the National Guard was called out.
As a result of and through the course of this whole struggle, there was actually a form of martial law implemented in Berkeley during this period.
If you gathered on the street corner, the police would come and break it up.
People would come by on motorcycles with slacks of literature and throw them on the corner and then drive off, and then other people would scramble, pick them up, and distribute them, because you weren’t even allowed to do that.
Jerry Rubin, along with Abbie Hoffman, had founded the Yippics, a group that tried to infuse radical and confrontational politics into the hippie communities that had grown up around the United States Rubin and Hoffman played a major role in the Democratic Convention of 1968 and were subsequently tried for conspiracy, along with Bobby Seale and others, in a very wild trial.
So I got out of my car, and the cop wheeled and pointed the gun at my head.
So things became very intense, and we in the RU decided that even though this wasn’t the form of activity that we would have pul our main energies into or focussed our attention on, and we weren’t the initiators of this by any means, once it became a much bigger issue it was important to relate to it.
So we put out leaflets and tried to mobilize as many forces as we could to support this struggle.
I remember we put out one leaflet to the National Guard itself, because a lot of the people in the National Guard were not really M gung-ho” types—quite a few of them were sympathetic to the struggle and some of them were even people who had been involved in the movement.
We passed out thousands of copies of that leaflet, to people in the National Guard as well as others.
And we pul out a number of other leaflets as well, calling on people to support the battle for People’s Park.
Even though 1 was living in Richmond at that time, I myself got actively involved as the People’s Park struggle crescendoed.
At the high point of the struggle there were tens of thousands of people mobilized, with many of them demonstrating at the fence that the university had put up around People’s Park to keep people out.
I remember being right at the fence, and the National Guard was on the other side, inside the park, with their weapons loaded.
And it was very clear that had we brought the fence down, they were going to open fire.
It was also clear that people were not prepared to lake that next step, that it would have been a massacre that people weren’t prepared for.
Confronting the Implications During that upsurge around People’s Park, a guy named James Rector was killed in one of the demonstrations.
I was in that demon202 From Ike to Mao and Beyond slration, but a few blocks away from where he was killed.
Thai same day, the police not only shot live ammunition at people but also fired a lot of tear gas.
And they had started using these tear gas grenades instead of just tear gas canisters.
These were more dangerous because they not only had the tear gas and all the effects of that, but they would explode, on a delay.
I remember the same day that James Rector got killed, I picked up one of these tear gas grenades to throw it back at the cops, and it exploded in my hand—and it took me about two or three seconds to work up the nerve to look and see if I still had a hand.
Then 1 discovered that it was just a tear gas grenade, and my hand was still there.
As a footnote to that story, my father was a judge then and the deputy in his courtroom was a member of the county sheriffs who’d been mobilized as part of the police force attacking the demonstration that day.
The tear gassing affected thousands of people, and many people had this experience of these tear gas grenades going off near them, if not literally in their hands.
But the James Rector murder by the police was yet another step, another outrage, beyond that.
People had to confront the implications of this, but generally they were not freaked out by it.
And, in fact, during that time I knew that there were attempts to set me up to be killed.
But I don’t remember, to be honest, a lot of talk among activists about dying or the fear of dying.
To tell the truth, 1 felt, and most of the people I knew felt—and this might sound like a funny word in this context—very joyous about being involved in the struggle.
So that’s what motivated you, and sure, I think there was a feeling that you could die, but 1 don’t think that preoccupied people.
The thought would go through your mind, but we were motivated in a different way and weren’t thinking that much about whether we might die.
Richmond Oil Strike And Taking Revolution to the Working Class When we started taking up what we then called Marxism-Leninism, Mao Tsetung Thought , we recognized that in order for there to be a revolution, it had to involve and activate people beyond the students and youth, even though there were millions of them who were actively involved in radical struggles and politics in one way or another.
It had to spread beyond the Black people and Latinos and Native Americans and Asians, beyond only the oppressed peoples.
The revolutionary movement had to reach more broadly in the society—that was really what the call from SNCC to Lake radical politics to poor whites was about.
Originally, we’d gone to Richmond to work among the poor whites —and we continued to work among them as well as people of other nationalities—but, as we became more Marxist, it was contradictory.
We understood we had to be more scientific about all this, but as we took up a more scientific, Marxist approach, we also took up some ideas from the international communist movement that had actually gone away from the revolutionary core of Marxism and had taken things more in the direction of trade unionism and economism—that is, the idea that the key thing is to center everything around the immediate economic struggles of the workers—and toward a “lowest common denominator” kind of politics.
We picked up some ideas from the history of the international communist movement which, since the 1930s, had been influenced by a lot of economism and reformism, and which more and more identified socialism with trade unionism and gradualism.
We began to see the more stable workers in larger factories and other workplaces as being the key force for socialism and communism and revolution, and put less emphasis on those proletarians whose life conditions were more unstable and volatile.
Now the one thing that characterized us in the Revolutionary Union —and this is something that has sustained us all the way through—is that we knew you needed revolution.
We knew you needed a socialist transformation of society and that the proletariat had to rule and lead society in doing that.
We never let go of those things, and we kept reading theory and carrying on ideological struggle and debates and polemics about what lhal meant and how to do that.
Even when we made a lot of mistakes, which of course we did, and even when we were pulled in the direction of wrong lines, and in particular these “workedst"" or trade unionist tendencies, we never let go of that fundamental revolutionary and communist orientation.
Actually, in the United States at that lime, the workers in the larger plants and the unionized workforces were relatively better paid and relatively well off, and were not the most readily radicalized sections of the proletariat.
But that’s something we had to learn through practice and also through continuing to study.
Sometimes they meant that as a criticism, as if 1 were loo ideological or spent too much time studying theory and things like that.
But it’s because we were very ideological and recognized the importance of theory, that even when we got off the track, we could eventually correct our errors by summing up both our own practice and historical experience much more broadly and by grappling with theory and ideological struggle.
So we were still working our way through all this, and that was kind of the good and the bad, or the positive and negative aspects, of how we got into the Richmond oil strike.
Their jobs were actually for the times relatively “high tech,” as we’d say now, even though it was manual labor.
I remember at one point one of the workers who was actively involved in this oil strike, and with whom we were working, said something which captured the contradictoriness that I’ve been speaking about.
He was talking to a group of students who’d come out to join the picket line.
There was a battle with the company goons, and then we went back to the union hall.
This was a section of workers that thought of themselves in that way, but through this whole experience, not just of their own strike but also having these Third World students, as they were called—Black and Latino and Asian and Native American students, coming from Berkeley, coming from San Francisco Stale and bringing a radical alienation and radical politics to them—through that mix these workers were becoming more radicalized.
We were trying to integrate, as Mao said, with these workers, at the same time as we were discovering, and discovered over a number of years in the course of doing this, that while it’s important to win over this section of the working class, this was not the force that was going to be the most radical backbone force for revolution and that actually we were closer in our original orientation of going to the poor whites and going to lower sections of the proletariat overall, not just whiles, obviously, but all nationalities.
These are things that you learn through the back-and-forth of theory and practice and the turmoil of all of that.
But, as I said, we understood the importance of theory; we understood it was good to be very ideological; we understood the importance of summing up practice.
We’d carried out a lot of practice, but we also saw the need to sum it up as scientifically as we could at any given Lime; and we understood that this all had to be in the service of making a revolution and getting rid of this system and bringing into being a socialist system in which the proletariat would take the lead in ruling and transforming society; that you needed a parly to lead this, you needed a vanguard force; and that fundamentally this had to be an international struggle, that the final goal was communism throughout the world.
Of course, the CP had a long history of being pulled more and more to reformism. 1 mean, after all, it supported Roosevelt and the New Deal as far back as the 1930s.
So this was a long-standing tendency in the CP, but then it had gone completely into the sewer when Khrushchev came to power in the Soviet Union and put forward his “peaceful transition” and all that.
The Revolution Comes to Richmond Because of the whole general upheaval that I’ve been describing, and all the back and forth over different ideas and programs, people were following closely what was happening all over the country.
People in other parts of the country were very intensely following what was happening with things like People’s Park, and people who didn’t go to the Democratic Convention in 1968 were very intensely following that, and there were a lot of people who felt themselves a part of a whole movement, wherever things were happening.
As one important dimension of this, there were over a hundred newspapers that eventually developed that were either written by or directed to Gls in the United States military—radical and revolutionary newspapers.
And in different locales around the U.S., a lot of people were putting out their own newspapers.
There were many different ways in which people were circulating their ideas and their experience, and many, many people were wrestling with all this.
Of course, there were differences, but people were struggling out their differences, and even where you had differences, you would still unite in a lot of ways.
A number of people were attracted to that, and people would get in contact with us.
Some couples moved to Richmond and there were also individuals who’d come.
A number of women came on their own to become part of this, and that was significant.
As 1 said, we sort of started out, a few of us, with this view of ourselves as “macho revolutionaries,” but we were changing—and being changed—in that, too.
The women’s movement was beginning to develop, and expressing itself in different ways throughout society.
The RU initiated a major International Women’s Day rally in San Francisco in 1970, but well before that all these different influences were all part of the ferment and upheaval that we were part of, and that were influencing us in important ways.
So we had sort of an inner core of RU people there in Richmond, but then there were broader groupings of people there who were working collectively and struggling collectively, and there were a lot of things going on in Richmond.
At the same time, the RU was developing as more of an organization throughout the Bay Area—in San Jose and Stanford, in San Francisco and Berkeley, and in Oakland as well.
And one of the most lasting and important things is that there are some people who got involved, who came to Richmond at that time, and who have stayed with things, in one way or another, all the way since then.
So all of that was important at the lime, but also made a lot of lasting contributions.
We would meet adults who had kids, or we would just meet kids who were in junior high or high school. remember one great walkout where the kids in one of the junior highs in Richmond busted out and climbed over the fence.
This was in support of the farmworkers, so they went down to the Safeway, which was being boycotted by the farmworkers, and trashed it.
Dozens of them were busted and the action was written up and denounced in the local paper.
But we mobilized support for this, and they all got off without having to go to juvenile prison.
In fact, some of the kids we knew hardly ever went to school, and one of the rare times they’d go is when they could take our pamphlets or leaflets in and pass them out and stir shit up.
So we were doing a lot of that, and then in 1969 there was this antiVietnam “moratorium” declared, with big demonstrations against the war back east and in San Francisco.
As part of that, we got together with the Panthers, who were also in Richmond, and decided to call for a walkout and rally on the same day in Richmond.
This had some really key elements that were missing from a lot of the other anti-war demonstrations.
We knew a teacher who taught at Richmond High. went to his class one time, not long after we moved to Richmond, and I gave this whole rap about Vietnam—the history of it, what the United States was doing and why it was wrong, and so on.
And 1 could tell that the students in the classroom had never heard this kind of stuff.
Their teacher was progressive, but they’d never heard this whole thing laid out like this, and maybe part of the reason he invited me to talk to them was that he figured I could do this more easily than he could—he could just say he was having visiting speakers or whatever.
So, while I’m laying out this rap on Vietnam, I can see in their faces and their body language that this is new to them.
Finally a guy raises his hand and 1 was preparing myself for an argument, because I knew kids like this were bombarded with the standard pro-war propaganda—and this was a new experience for me, too.
Then, at the end of the rally about two to three hundred of us went over and surrounded the draft board in Richmond, which was drafting people out of Richmond but was also a good symbol of the whole war and the military.
We found out later that the draft board was packed with pigs, just waiting for any excuse to attack, though things didn’t come to a major confrontation that day.
But we made our point, and it was very important to those who Look part, and the youth in particular, that they were part of this whole bigger anti-war movement but had also made their statement right there, in Richmond.
A little while later, when students were shot and killed at Kent State and Jackson Slate, 21 we were already doing work at the junior college in Richmond, Contra Costa College, as well as other places.
We had waged a struggle together with students at Contra Costa to get the college to fund a day care center, because there were a lot of proletarian students there who couldn’t afford childcare in order to go to school.
That was an important battle, but we were also doing a lot of other kinds of political organizing and educational work—passing out leaflets, having rallies, giving speeches, and holding protests.
So when Kent Stale happened, 1 remember speaking at a rally at Contra Costa College.
Basically the whole college, or a large part of it, had come to a standstill, and the level of unity there was very high.
There were some students there, including some veterans of the military and the Vietnam War, who had some differences with us, but on that day we were all very tight in our outrage and our support of the students at Kent Slate.
And then we learned about the murders of Black students at Jackson State, and that became a question that we look to the students and others in Richmond as well.
It was a very powerful day—basically the campus at Contra Costa College came to a standstill.
Because of all the weight that proletarian people have on them, Contra Costa College, 21.
Shortly after that, on May 15, state troopers killed three Black students demonstrating at Jackson State, in Jackson, Mississippi.
The killings sparked a nationwide student strike, massive demonstrations and, in many cases, further baldes with police and National Guardsmen.
And, as that high school student had spoken to, people weren’t coming to them to bring them an understanding of these things and to enable them to learn about the world.
But this was changing through our work and through the general upheaval that was going on.
Learning From The Proletariat Deep Bonds Mao wrote about revolutionary youth going to the masses of working people and how, in his own experience, he learned a great deal more from them than he brought to them, even though obviously what he brought to them was very important.
And this was also our experience in Richmond and my personal experience.
We made not only many political lies but deep personal ties and friendships and relationships of various kinds with people that 1 still look back on very fondly.
I think of the people often and feel strong bonds with them, even today.
There were many people who taught me many deep lessons. remember this one white proletarian youth who was really just a beautiful guy.
He was open to learning a lot of things, but he also taught me a tremendous amount, coming from his whole life experience and what the practical realities were, the difficulties of becoming politically active with the weight that was on him and on his mother, who was working a low-paying job trying to support the family.
I still think about him a lot, and I remember very sadly, in fact, the last time I saw him.
He came forward and became very revolutionary-minded and, as 1 said, he taught me a lot, but he was also pulled down by drugs at the time, and the last time I saw him we had a very deep-going, honest talk for several hours sitting in a car in Richmond, and he confided in me that he was hung up on heroin, and therefore he couldn’t stay active in the revolution.
There were also some individuals in particular with whom I developed very deep bonds, people who mean a lot to me personally, and from whom I learned a great deal.
For example, William Hinton wrote this book Fanshen about the experience of the Chinese Revolution. used to read that book to some people in Richmond who didn’t have a lot of formal education.
So, after a while, when I was reading to them, I would be looking out for this and I would change some of the wording as I was reading, breaking words down into other words, while keeping the meaning so that they would get the essence of it.
I wasn’t watering down what was being said, but 1 was changing the language as I read, because the people I’m talking about had been denied almost literally any kind of formal education because of the poverty and difficulty of their circumstances.
So I had to break this down into language that would convey the same meaning, but that they would be able to get.
I would always do my best to read in a way that wasn’t leaving them behind.
I still remember this very vividly and fondly to this time, and I also learned a great deal from it.
And I would cite this experience as one of the main ways that I learned the importance of doing that.
This is mainly a question of your political and ideological understanding, or political and ideological line, as we say, and how to actually understand things well enough to be able to break them down and popularize them; but there was this dimension as well that was crucial for me.
Along with the deep personal ties I made, this was also a great learning experience for me.
I was very fortunate to have this experience where I had these kind of ties and personal relations with people where they would speak honestly with me, let me know when what I was saying, or reading to them, was getting across to them, and when it was missing the mark.
And, on a personal level, I still have very fond remembrances and strong deep feelings of affection for the people I was so close to then.
Chapter Ten Taking Responsibility It was the Panthers who turned me in the direction of revolution and turned me on to Mao and who were the main impetus initially propelling me in the direction which led to communism; and this is true even though they themselves were a mixed bag ideologically, with revolutionary nationalism mixed in with some communist inclinations and communist tendencies and influences.
Then, in 1968 and '69, Leibel Bergman was the person who in a more systematic way steeped me in Marxism and actually helped me make the leap to taking up the ideology and the theory of communism.
Overwhelmingly, his role was a very positive one, even with some of the views and tendencies that he still carried from the old CP, which would later grow and come to eat up his better side in the context of new challenges.
The Panthers Differences Develop As I developed more as a communist, 1 also began to develop some differences with people like Eldridge, Bobby Seale, and other Panther leaders. still respected them greatly as revolutionaries, and had tremendous appreciation for the kind of vanguard role they had played in putting revolution on the map when the CP and others who were supposed to be radically changing society had basically ruled revolution out of order.
And, as I was making that leap, I developed differences and struggled with them, even while 1 was still actively working with and supporting them.
They were encountering severe repression and they were being influenced by groups like the CP, which was sending members into the Panthers at the same time as they were viciously attacking them in their official capacity as the CP The CP would work to influence things in many different ways; for instance, it would help with legal assistance, but then use that to try to exert ideological and political influence.
I’m not saying the problem was all the CP or mainly the CP More, the fundamental thing is that you have to make a leap and a rupture to become a thoroughgoing communist and Lake up Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, as we say today.
And if you don’t make that leap and rupture, then you gel pulled by a thousand different influences and forces—especially when you are facing the kind of brutal and vicious repression that the Panthers were facing, when they were at the leading edge of the revolutionary current and force that was developing.
And, in turn, when you face that kind of repression, that can make it even more difficult for you to make crucial ideological leaps and ruptures.
As I was moving more fully in the direction of communism and they, frankly, were not, naturally our differences became more pronounced.
By 1969, partly at the suggestion of the CP and partly from the Panthers’ feeling a need generally to deal with the repression they were facing, they came up with this idea of building a united front against fascism.
They were basically saying that United States society was already fascist. remember having a discussion with Bobby Seale where he put that forward, and I didn’t agree with that.
I didn’t think it was scientific analysis. knew there was tremendous repression the Panthers in particular were facing, being in a real sense at the leading point of the struggle against this system.
But it was not scientific and correct to say that the society as a whole was fascist.
Taking that position, and calling for a united front against fascism, was a way of trying to build a broader united front but doing it, frankly, by watering down the political stance somewhat and appealing to people more on the basis of bourgeois democracy.
Now, it’s not wrong to appeal to people whose viewpoint is still in the framework of bourgeois democracy to unite with you against repression.
But essentially to make upholding bour214 From Ike to Mao and Beyond geois democracy the basis of unity, in the name of fighting fascism, represented a backing off of some of the more revolutionary positions the Panthers had taken, although they still upheld some of these revolutionary positions—I don’t mean to oversimplify it. 1 remember in the midst of this, there was a meeting in Oakland that the Panthers had called to organize for this conference to build a united front against fascism.
We in the RU had decided to take part in this and to fight to bring a more revolutionary and anti-imperialist line into this conference, as opposed to the more bourgeois-democratic line that people like the CP were pushing and that the Panthers, frankly, were being drawn to.
So 1 came into this meeting in Oakland, and Bobby Seale was leading the meeting.
As I walked in, 1 recognized a number of Black people that I knew were members of the CP, and my heart just sank because I knew what that represented.
As I said, many people regarded me as “very ideological,” and sometimes they used that as a point of attack, as if being very ideological were somehow bad.
And then it seemed that the temperature in the room dropped twenty degrees, and there was a tense pause before we went on with the meeting.
Later in 1969, around the same time that Fred Hampton was killed by the pigs in Chicago while he slept, and about the same time as the L.A. police launched a massive assault on the Panther office in that city and sparked a shoot-out lasting several hours when the Panthers inside defended themselves, it became clear that there very well could be a plan by the government, coordinated nationally, to attack all the Panther offices and to murder as many Panthers as they could.
So the leadership of the Panthers in the Bay Area, where the national headquarters of the 23.
At that particular lime no attack came on the Panther national office in Berkeley, but while we were there some of the Panther members decided to do some political education.
This was after Eldridge Cleaver, who had gone into exile, had gone to North Korea and sent back word about how great it was.
And 1 didn’t agree with this at all, because I’d done some reading about Kim 11 Sung and North Korea, and I viewed Kim 11 Sung frankly as more like a feudal monarch than anything having to do with socialism and communism.
So when this Panther guy stood up in front of a packed room of people in the Panther national office and started saying, “Well, Eldridge has told us that Kim 11 Sung is the real revolutionary—he’s much more revolutionary than Mao Tsetung,” I just couldn’t let that go.
Even though I was there to do whatever it look to defend the Panther office if it were attacked, I had to speak up.
So I said, “Well, I just don’t agree with that, Kim 11 Sung is not more revolutionary than Mao.
So, of course, a lot of tension resulted from this, and it carried over beyond this particular situation.
We were developing some differences with the Panthers, but when it was a question of defending them, particularly against vicious attack from the state, there was no question that we were going to rally to their defense and put ourselves on the line for that—even while we carried out struggle with them over major ideological questions of great importance.
Now, the ideological struggle I was engaged in with the Panthers was complicated because some of the Panthers’ thinking about what section of people are the revolutionary force, what they called the “lumpen proletariat,” was a matter of their partly talking about the lumpen proletariat but largely talking about lower sections of the proletariat that 1 have since come to more fully recognize are a driving force and a key force in revolution, especially the youth among them.
And, as 1 said ear216 From Ike to Mao and Beyond lier, we in the RU at that time had this view of going more to the organized, unionized workers in some of the larger factories and plants.
So, it was contradictory because in one sense their idea of who was the revolutionary force might have been closer to reality than ours at that lime, but the ideology that they were mobilizing or seeking to mobilize people around was not a scientific revolutionary ideology and couldn’t lead all the way to revolution, and definitely not to socialism and communism.
But, despite our ideological differences, we did participate in the united front against fascism conference that the Panthers held, and 1 spoke there, struggling for an anti-imperialist and revolutionary line in opposition to particularly the influence of the CP and the way in which the CP was once again seeking to drag things down to the “lowest common denominator,” raising the banner of fighting fascism in order to uphold bourgeois democracy and make that the basis of unity of the movement.
The RU Goes National By 1970, it had been a couple of years since the RU had been formed.
The RU had developed into a fairly significant disciplined, organized force of revolutionaries in the Bay Area.
Forming such a party was still our objective, but we realized that we would have to play more of a role in this than we’d recognized before or were capable of playing before.
We saw that, all around the country, there were people who had formed revolutionary collectives and generally associated themselves with communism.
Perhaps, if you weren’t part of that whole experience, it’s difficult to really grasp this, but literally millions of people were, on one level or another, sympathetic to and supportive of the idea of revolution at that time.
Hundreds of thousands who were actively involved in the struggle had revolutionary sentiments and aspirations, and there were literally not just hundreds but thousands of people who were trying to organize themselves in some kind of revolutionary way, although often with a mixed bag of ideologies.
If we didn’t make a leap then to being organized on a higher level, if we didn’t take more responsibility for this struggle to form a new, genuinely communist and revolutionary party, however long that took; and in particular if we didn’t go throughout the country and try to pull together, into a single organization, people of all different nationalities who could be united on the basis of a communist line, then the prospects for bringing such a new party into being would be greatly set back.
There was the political upsurge and crisis around Kent State and Jackson State, which came in response to the Nixon administration’s expanding the war much more fully into Cambodia, bombing and invading Cambodia.
This was in the face of years and years of protests and rebellions and militant demonstrations and fighting in the streets against this war— Johnson had even been forced to not run for reelection—and yet here’s the government escalating the war again.
This radicalized millions more people and helped—or propelled—them to make another leap.
And this was on top of all the protests and rebellions that had gone on, and reached a high peak, for several years, throughout different parts of society.
So the situation was very ripe, but partly because of our own primitiveness, ideologically and politically, we in the RU didn’t fully recognize the potential right then.
But, what was of great importance, and what we did recognize, was that in order for there to be a revolution, there needed to be a vanguard force, a united revolutionary communist party, and people of all different nationalities and groupings, who had come forward in different parts of the country, had to be pulled together.
We recognized that it wasn’t yet time to form the party, but that a crucial next step had to be made.
That would be a key step in laying more of the groundwork for the formation of a vanguard party that could lead the revolution.
For that reason, as the summer of 1970 approached, Leibel Bergman came to me and some others in the RU and proposed that we go on a nationwide tour—gel in a car, a few of us, and drive around the country and try to link up with and win over all these different revolutionary forces throughout the country.
We’d borrowed a car from one of these newer comrades in the RU, but it wasn’t a very big car and it was so loaded down that when we got a few miles out on the highway it started rocking from side to side, and when we put the brakes on, it would start shaking.
That wasn’t going to work, so we went to another comrade and borrowed his car.
So fairly frequently during this trip 1 had to gel underneath the car and get a screwdriver and pul it to just the right spot on the starter motor to get the thing to spark and start up.
We went to Baltimore, where we stayed in an apartment in the city that was too small for all of us, so a bunch of us slept on the floor, including Leibel, who wasn’t that—I was going to say, “wasn’t that young then,” but he was actually younger then than 1 am now, so I have to be careful.
But we slept on the floor and stayed with these people who had a collective in Baltimore.
There were four of us—Jane Franklin (who would later split from the RU), Leibel, another comrade, and myself.
We’d stay at people’s places, we’d get into a lot of discussion and struggle, and sometimes it went better than others.
When we went to places like Jersey City, 1 remember being struck at the time by the devastation of large parts of the city.
Even at that lime, three decades ago, there were just huge numbers of burnt-out buildings that looked like they’d been through a war or just allowed to rot.
In Ohio, we met with a group of people based at Antioch College who had formed a more or less communist collective.
But it was a newly formed collective and they were still going through a lot of changes themselves.
But that was the CP and that was the tradition that he came out of, even though he broke with it when they followed Khrushchev all the way into the swamp of just totally betraying revolution, socialism and communism.
And this came out when we were meeting with this collective of people at Antioch.
We started getting into this discussion, and the question of Stalin in particular was very controversial.
Now, again, we didn’t uphold Stalin uncritically, we had many criticisms and we’ve since developed them further and deepened them in the RCP But still, from an historical perspective, we were upholding Stalin as the leader of the first historical experience in building socialism, in the Soviet Union.
We were, and are, firmly of the view that in evaluating and, yes, in criticizing, what was done in the Soviet Union it is necessary to keep in mind—and is completely ahistorical and nonmaterialisl to ignore—the extremely difficult circumstances in which this took place.
This was an unprecedented struggle, there was no prior experience in building a socialist society, and it had to be carried out in a situation where the Soviet Union was, from the beginning, surrounded, threatened, and outright invaded and attacked, by imperialist powers, with tremendous losses, including more than 20 million Soviet citizens killed during World War 2.
All this was a big issue in general in the movement that developed during and out of the ’60s, and it was an important question for the people in this collective at Antioch.
Well, we finally resolved that, on the correct basis, through further discussion and struggle, over the question of Stalin and other important questions.
Cuba, Vietnam...and the Soviet Union It was important, as a matter of principle, that the basis of unity on which we built the RU really be founded on something real, that it be deeply founded and not just superficial.
But the importance of this was further underscored, as 1 was becoming increasingly aware then, by the fact that differences were beginning to develop inside the RU itself.
These differences centered around a range of ideological and political and even organizational questions, and a different line on these questions was being formulated and fought for by Bruce and Jane Franklin, who had been part of the RU since shortly after its formation.
The Franklins claimed at the lime to be upholding Mao and to be organizing people on the basis of the RU’s principles, but increasingly they were doing something different.
The Vietnamese seemingly maintained an independent stance, siding with neither China nor the Soviet Union in the great struggle and split that had developed in the international communist movement, once Khrushchev had come to power and began pushing his revisionist theses and in fact moving to restore capitalism in the Soviet Union.
But in fact, despite their seeming “neutral stance,” the Vietnamese were largely and increasingly in the Soviet camp.
So there was a lot of turmoil about that kind of thing, because those of us who wanted to be consistently Maoist, as we say now, didn’t want people coming into the RU who would be bringing in these seemingly centrist but in reality pro-Soviet revisionist positions.
It is important to realize that at that Lime most people who were coming forward as radicals and revolutionaries and beginning to consider themselves communists were very turned off by the Soviet Union, because they could see that there was nothing revolutionary about the Soviet Union.
However they understood it, and whether they had a really deep scientific understanding of this or not, they saw the Soviet Union as just another world power contending for its interests—and they recognized that its interests and what it was doing in the world had very little, or really nothing, to do with revolution.
Revolutionary-minded people were turned off by that, but then these other countries like Vietnam, which was standing up to the U.S., or Cuba, which in its own way was defying the U.S., were more attractive to people who were radical but hadn’t really gotten deeply into communist philosophy and its scientific viewpoint and method for understanding the world.
So a lot of ways in which the Soviets tried to influence people like that would be through the Vietnamese or through the Cubans.
And, with regard to people in the United States in particular, Cuba was a very important vehicle for this—hundreds, probably thousands of people, mainly youth, went down to Cuba on these Venceremos Brigades.
Around the same time as we were doing this tour around the country, the RU sent a few comrades to be part of one of these Venceremos Brigades and to struggle with people during the course of this.
Since we recognized that a lot of radical and revolutionary-minded people were being drawn to these Brigades, we wanted to influence them toward Maoism, as we would now say.
So we sent these comrades down there, but when you are among other people, in certain circumstances you may influence them but they influence you as well.
And that is what happened with the comrades we sent on this Venceremos Brigade.
This came out when we had a meeting with these comrades after they had come back from Cuba.
So this was the situation and the struggle that was developing inside the RU itself at the same lime as we were setting out to spread the RU around the country.
As a matter of general principle 1 was concerned that we not bring people into the RU on the kind of pragmatic, “whatever works,” basis that Leibel Bergman was pushing.
Especially in those circumstances, I was very concerned to ensure that, when we went on this Lour to spread the RU around the country, we would be spreading communism and not some centrist, eclectic mish-mash of communism and revisionism, which wouldn’t have any solid foundation and would fall apart or degenerate into an opportunist organization.
You see, one of the characteristics of the movement at that time was a lot of eclectics—a little bit of this, a little bit of that, without clear lines of demarcation over some fundamental matters of principle.
People were newly coming forward and hadn’t sorted out a lot of these things.
Anything and everything that was more or less opposed to United States imperialism was often thrown together by people, or seen as all part of the same thing.
And it was very important to draw the distinction between what characterized the broader movement, on the one hand, and what characterized those who were uniting on the basis of communism, and seeking to build a new, genuinely revolutionary and communist party that could act as the vanguard for the whole struggle.
Within the broader movement, to have many different ideologies and programs contending, and even mixed up with each other, was natural and, in a basic sense, fine.
But to have that within a communist organization was the kiss of death.
In the RU, as a communist organization, we had already drawn certain clear lines of demarcation.
We already were very clear on the role of Cuba—that Cuba was in the camp of the Soviet Union fundamentally, and in fact its apparent centrism actually served the Soviet Union as a revisionist power which was itself “social-imperialist,” socialist in name but capitalist and imperialist in deed and in essence.
We’d drawn those distinctions and understood the role of Cuba in that way.
Yet, even though the RU as an organization had made these analyses and drawn these lines of demarcation, people like the Franklins and others were trying to blur those lines and to bring people into the RU who were, at best, unclear about these crucial questions and at worse represented a kind of centrist, pro-revisionist position.
They were trying to come to an understanding of the “correct line,” as we say.
Today, when 1 hear all these attacks on “political correctness,” 1 shake my head, because smuggled into this seems to be the notion that somehow being “politically correct” is a bad thing, as if being politically incorrect were somehow a good thing.
Of course, dogmatism is not a good thing, being unable to distinguish between what is really a major matter of principle and what is a minor matter is not good and can lead to bad consequences.
But, really, much of the attack on “political correctness” is an attempt to undermine the very necessary opposition to and struggle against profound injustices and outrages which are in fact built into the system in the United States and its role in the world.
By “line” 1 mean your analysis of reality and of how to change it—what kind of change you see as necessary and how you see going about the realization of that change.
So there was all that ferment at that time, as a result of the whole upsurge through the ’60s and into the early 70s.
I and other leaders within the RU fell that if we didn’t dive into this ferment and struggle to win people to a communist line, then we would lose a lot of these people, a lot of them wouldn’t get clarity on these questions.
And, if we didn’t bring people together in one organization, then even if some people got more clarity on these questions, they would remain sort of isolated from each other—and it’s very difficult to maintain yourself as a communist organization with just a small number of people isolated from others in pockets around the country.
It was necessary for people to become part of an organization nationally that could all pull together and struggle out some of these questions together, and on a certain foundation.
So we really felt we’d be dissipating a lot of this development if we didn’t expand.
All these big questions were getting thrown up by the development of things, and lots of people around the country were forming groups and collectives of various kinds to try to grapple with them.
So we felt that, in a real sense, there was opportunity but also a necessity to go out and link up with and struggle with these groups and try to pull them together on the basis of the line that the RU had in fundamental terms united around.
But just because you have principles that you united around at one lime doesn’t mean that that’s the way things stay.
Struggle develops, different things happening in the world influence people, different trends develop and take shape within any organization, and especially if you’re engaged in practical struggle and engaging with other trends and other forces in the movement, it is once again a matter where you influence them and they influence you.
You’re not existing in some sort of rarified, “pure” situation, sealed off from the larger society; these trends penetrate into your organization and exert their influence.
But at this lime, in the summer of 1970, this hadn’t fully developed yet, it hadn’t yet come to a head.
If, as happened a few months later, we had been right in the midst of an all-out, full-blown struggle between two different lines, two fundamentally different positions and analyses, then we wouldn’t have been able to go on this lour to spread the RU, or it would have been a big mistake to do so.
But things hadn’t yet ripened to that level, and it was actually a good thing we did embark on this tour, because we were mainly able to win people to the correct position, in accordance with our principles of unity, and to build the RU as a national organization, which was the outcome of this tour.
Nationalism...and Marxism The tour itself was full of interesting and challenging experiences, which shed more light on key questions of line.
Within the CP some sort of a caucus, or a sort of a semi-secret group, had formed that was supposed to be more radical than the CP itself.
And this guy DH had been part of this grouping in a loose sense, even while he had also been part of the Chicago area Panthers for a while.
DH’s father had been in the CP, and Leibel had known his father, and so, when we went to Chicago, DH was one of the people we met with.
We got into a discussion about the RU principles and how we were based on Marxism-Leninism and Mao Tsetung Thought, as it was then called.
So we started discussing and debating a bit about how this ideology applied to different questions in the world and in the United States itself.
And, at one point, we were talking about the national question—that is, the oppression of Black people and other oppressed nationalities, what the socialist revolution represented in terms of ending that oppression —and how the RU approached that.
This was directed at me, because he and I were getting into some struggle about certain aspects of this.
What 1 was saying was, “Look, if you want to talk about the direct aspects of this experience—what it feels like, what it means in that sense, to be Black in America, of course what you’re saying is true.
Somebody who is not Black is not going to be able to know that in the same way and experience that directly in the same way.
Otherwise you would gel into “identity politics,” as it’s called now, where only people who have a direct experience of a particular kind of oppression are said to be able to really analyze or have anything substantial to say about that, and fundamentally you can’t have a unified understanding of reality and you can’t unite people around a larger program to transform the society as a whole and uproot all oppression.
That is what we were battling out—and the same question, of course, is being battled out now But through the course of this, for whatever reasons, DH did decide to become a part of the RU, and in fact after a certain while he became a leader within the RU, and then later a struggle sharpened up with him and others over some of these same questions, when these questions posed themselves more acutely a few years down the road.
Anarchism...and Marxism That was one important experience of this lour, but it was one of many.
With different groups and different collectives there were different experiences and different questions that came up as key things to dig into and struggle over deeply.
Questions of this kind had to be battled out in order to unite people on the basis of a communist line.
And we had a basic understanding that, besides the overthrown capitalists, new elements will emerge within socialist society who don’t want to see the socialist transformation of society carried out, or don’t want it carried beyond a certain point, because they still enjoy certain privileges—these forces will jump out to oppose the advance of the socialist revolution, and you have to have a state that prevents them from seizing power, or else the old society will in fact be restored, with all the suffering that means for the masses of people.
Dogmatism...and Marxism Many of these questions got battled out on this tour, and it was a very lively and exciting process.
There were just the four of us out there on the road, and besides all the ideological struggle, we had some hairy experiences driving late at night, or early in the morning, when we were all exhausted.
One time Leibel took a wrong turn and was going the wrong way on an interstate highway in Ohio.
Somehow, we managed to turn the car around quickly and avoid a disaster.
In Maryland we heard about this guy named Robere who had committed to memory a large body of the “scripture” of Marxism, as he treated it—in other words, he’d memorize it and then recite it and try to intimidate people.
These people in Maryland told us how he’d come in and destroyed their collective with his dogmatism.
Most of these people in this particular collective were white and Robere was Black, so they were reluctant to struggle with him, and that kind of merged with the way in which they were awed by the fact that he could regurgitate long sections of what Mao or Lenin had written.
People, of course, did need to grapple with theory at that point, and many were.
People were also studying things by Marx—at least the Communist Manifesto and perhaps some other writings by Marx—and maybe a very few people had read Capital.
Thai’s why this guy Robere was able to influence and awe people— they had some appreciation of the importance of theory, but some of them had a hard time distinguishing the living study and application of theory from an approach that reduced theory to dogma, and even went to ridiculous lengths of memorizing and regurgitating it.
Marxism is not a scripture, it’s not a religious dogma, it’s a scientific approach to reality.
At that time, many people were new to this theory, and there is a tendency, whenever you’re new to anything, to be somewhat mechanical about it.
If you recognize at a certain point that you need to take up theory, there can be a tendency to take it up somewhat mechanically, to not really have a correct approach to theory itself or a correct understanding of the relationship between theory and practice.
So, especially when you are new to this, you can get into a kind of dogmatic tendency yourself, and then if somebody comes along who is even more dogmatic than you are, or has committed to memory and can regurgitate a lot of theory, it might seem as if they are really deeply steeped in it.
This is a wrong and harmful approach to theory in general, and it is an especially wrong and harmful approach to Marxism.
Marxism is, and must be, a living, critical, creative, scientific approach to reality—Marxism is not a dogma.
And if it gets turned into a dogma then it becomes something very bad instead of something very liberating.
This Robere was a peculiar case, but among other people, including some students and intellectuals who take up Marxism, there can be a tendency toward a “scholastic” approach to Marxism.
For example, 1 knew someone who was reading all forty-plus volumes of Lenin’s Collected Works.
He was reading all of Lenin’s works, but he was doing it in a way that was divorced from practice, and so it was turning into its opposite.
They didn’t recognize or appreciate the need lor revolutionary theory to guide what they were doing.
These different tendencies existed within the various collectives we met with, and we were struggling through all this as best we understood it at the time. 1 think that we in the RU were able to handle the relationship between theory and practice in a basically correct way because, from early on, there were a few veterans of the communist movement— Leibel Bergman in particular, but a few others as well—who helped us develop an understanding of the importance of theory, and of linking it with practice.
A couple of years later, we in the RU had an encounter and confrontation ourselves with Robere.
We had decided in the RU that, while it was good to have these broad-based demonstrations, there was a real problem in that the leadership of these things was generally pretty mainstream, with a lot of mainstream politicians and other similar types featured as the spokespeople of these demonstrations, and this set the tone for the whole thing.
We knew that there were a lot of people who opposed the war with more advanced sentiments, and that it was important to organize a more advanced or more radical expression within this larger demonstration.
So we set out to organize what we called an anti-imperialist contingent, and when it finally all came together on the day of the demonstration it was really beautiful—there were something like five thousand people in this contingent, and it was bordered by red flags.
This contingent put out very advanced slogans in support of the Vietnamese people and calling for their victory in the struggle against United States imperialism.
There were thousands of people chanting these slogans, people in the contingent and others among whom these slogans resonated and caught on, and as we marched into the stadium where the rally was being held, the sounds of these slogans were reverberating and the red flags were flying, and it was very powerful.
But in building this contingent we got into a lot of struggle with people who wanted to turn this into a very sectarian kind of thing, in the guise of being super-revolutionary.
They were running this dogmatic kind of nonsense that would have been laughable if it weren’t so potentially damaging—like insisting that there be something against feudalism in the name of this contingent, even though that did not make any sense in the context of this demonstration.
So we had to fight to defeat this kind of dogmatism, and in the course of this we encountered this character Robere, whom we had heard about from people in that collective that he wrecked in Maryland.
He had come into the Bay Area and was part of this whole dogmatic, sectarian effort to in effect wreck the anti-imperialist contingent we were building for this anti-war demonstration.
I listened to her account of this, and it struck me that this sounded very much like this guy Robere, and it turned out that it was indeed him.
Well, we were able to successfully defeat these efforts to turn this contingent into a sectarian fiasco that would have turned off many people, and we did have this beautiful contingent—but these are the kinds of things you have to deal with, some of the craziness that would grow up sometimes among people who were trying to lake the revolutionary upsurge of the lime and turn it inward and distort it into something very sectarian and dogmatic.
From what we’d heard from people in Maryland, and then through further investigation we’d done, we had learned that he had a whole history of leaving groups in shambles around the country, playing on people’s egos or intimidating them and setting different people off against each other.
But as soon as we recognized what this was, we were able to repulse and defeat it, because even though we were still primitive in a lot of our understanding of things, we had certain fundamental principles that we were united around, including that when there were differences you had to struggle things out in a principled way, and we were about trying to mobilize people as broadly as possible to take on this system, and not just attempting to grow a little sect in a hothouse.
It’s one thing to challenge people with revolutionary politics in a lively way; but it’s another thing to come to them like a religious sect and turn them off in the name of revolution and turn them off to communism.
Also, we’d fought through the question of what kind of organizational principles a communist organization or party has to base itself on, so that it can pull together in a united way and can struggle in the correct way over differences, or just over questions that are unresolved.
And because we'd fought some of this through, this kind of assault on our organization didn’t have the effect of disrupting it and reducing it to a shambles, as it had with some groups.
Despite the negative character of all this, it did provide another valuable experience in recognizing the real destructive effect of sectarianism and dogmatism, and how that really has nothing to do with making revolution and nothing to do with communism.
There were also other influences—the women revolutionaries that I knew, the beginning upsurge of a women’s movement.
But it was particularly the whole tradition and theory of communism that had a big influence on me in that way.
There were certain influences from the history of the international communist movement that were in the direction of trade unionism and reformism, but there were also some very important positive traditions and influences—including International Women’s Day, that had been institutionalized in a positive sense and made a significant part of the history and tradition and ongoing practice of the communist movement internationally.
And there was the whole analysis, from Marx and Engels, down through Lenin and Mao, about the emancipation of women and how that was an integral part of the whole socialist revolution and the struggle to reach communism.
Becoming a communist and taking all that up was the central way in which I began to undergo radical transformation myself on this question.
There were women who came to Richmond, sometimes as part of couples who moved there and sometimes on their own, and that had an important influence.
Some of them were very strong and independent, both in terms of their thinking, but also just in the whole way they dealt with everything.
And there was the radical development inside the movement, as well as more broadly in society, of what became the feminist movement, or the women’s movement, and some of it wasn’t just more narrowly feminist, some of it had a communist perspective, at least in a general sense.
All these different influences had an important efTect, but I think what was most essential within all this was a communist understanding of the oppression of women and the pivotal role this played in the development of class divisions and oppressive society overall, on the one hand; and, on the other hand, the pivotal role that abolishing all that and completely emancipating women played in the overall struggle to end all oppression and establish a society, a world, without class divisions and without oppressive relations.
When you start studying and learning more about the Chinese revolution and the experience building socialism in China, you very quickly come to see what it meant that this was a society that was steeped in feudal oppression before the revolution triumphed in 1949.
And not only in an overall sense, but specifically with regard to the role and status of women in the society.
I still remember, for example, seeing Barbara Walters on a morning talk show in the early ’70s, doing this little segment on shoes from all different parts of the world.
And when she got to China, she had these shoes that were worn by women who had bound feet in the old feudal Chinese society, where the feet of women would be bent under and their bones broken to make their feet petite and “dainty,” and supposedly sexually appealing in that way.
Still, the transformations they had carried out—and the contrast not only with feudal society but with a “modern” bourgeois society like the U.S.—was very striking. saw this very clearly when I visited revolutionary China.
This was true on every level—the relations among people, and in particular between women and men, were so radically different from anything I'd seen before.
For example, the kitchen workers and waiters in the hotel where we were staying would engage you in friendly casual conversation but would also talk with you about world affairs and what was happening in the U.S., as well as what was going on in China.
Some young women who were university students from another part of China were spending a certain amount of time working as staff in the hotel, and there was no subservience in their relationship, nor was there any standoffishness.
They came up and were very interested in who we were and what we thought about all kinds of things.
I remember that when I came back from China and put on the TV in the U.S., how starkly it stood out—everything is this fucking commodification of sex and in particular of women’s bodies.
Going Forward The summer 1970 tour to expand the RU had been very successful.
We had engaged in many important discussions and struggles, influenced many people and deepened our own understanding in the process.
And yet, at the same time, a struggle was ripening right within the RU and came to a head only a few months after this tour was completed, in the fall of 1970.
A 11s we developed the RU as a national organization, we were still looking beyond that to how we were going to get to a single unified party that could be the leadership of the whole revolutionary movement that had emerged, and could go out and do revolutionary work among people in society who hadn’t yet been brought forward into the revolutionary movement.
The Questions Are Posed The RU had now spread throughout the country and had an organized, structured way of relating to the people and collectives in other parts of the country who had joined it.
But the leadership of the RU was still centered mainly in the Bay Area.
And as we started having discussions in the Bay Area about how the party was going be formed, it turned out that people grouped around the Franklins had a vision that we needed to go over to the armed struggle against the system more or less immediately and that the parly had to be built in accordance with that.
Now, there were millions who were sort of generally favorable to a revolution at that lime, but there were still millions and tens of millions more who were not—not necessarily that they were opposed to it, but they hadn’t been brought into the stream of struggle and the upheaval of the time.
You needed to go “lake the revolution to them,” so to speak— not in the sense of actively “getting it on” right then, but by spreading the message of revolution and going out and uniting with them and leading them in struggles that they were prepared to, or could be won to, take up, while at the same lime moving and leading them to lake this in a more radical direction, toward the goal of a revolution.
They argued that the “third world peoples in the U.S.” were already ready to get it on with the system right away, and that was an essential reason why the armed struggle had to be launched right then.
Furthermore, those “third world” forces had to be declared and institutionalized as the leadership of the revolution.
That’s what revolution in the United States was about, as they presented it.
Our argument was that, yes, there was a revolutionary mood broadly among Black people, Latinos, Native Americans, Asians and so on, but first of all, that wasn’t uniformly true.
There were definitely revolutionary elements and revolution had a lot of initiative among these sections of the people, but even there, in their broad masses, people were not yet won to revolution, especially as something to be immediately fought for.
And more than that, they existed within, and were aware of existing within, the larger society where people were not so much in a revolutionary mood.
Yes, there were sections of the youth, including youth and students among white people, who were radicalized and in a revolutionary mood.
And even if you haven’t studied all kinds of theory and thought it through in that way, you still have a certain sense of this, and you have a sense that unless more people are brought to the revolutionary side, you will be crushed.
So even that tends to Lemper your revolutionary mood—not that you don’t have certain radical sentiments, and not that you wouldn’t love to see a revolution, or a radical change in society, not that you don’t burn to get this oppression and the whole long history of that off your back.
And we felt that even that revolutionary inclination, if you will, among large sections of the oppressed couldn’t be given full expression unless we won broader sections of the people to revolution by taking revolution to them, linking up with them in struggles that they were more prepared to wage and then developing and, as we say, diverting that onto the revolutionary course.
We fell that revolutionary preparatory work, of a political nature, needed to be done and that this needed to come together at some point in the future with the development of a profound, radicalizing crisis in society overall; the Franklins, by contrast, were saying that “third world people in the U.S.” were ready for revolution, they were going to lead the revolution, and the vanguard had to be built and structured in accordance with that.
When you're talking about how to make revolution, how to understand the society and how to change it, that’s something that has to be put on the table, studied, wrestled with and struggled over by everyone who is willing and anxious to lake up that challenge.
Coming to that understanding is a matter of taking this up scientifically and getting into the theory of it, studying society and the world in a deep and comprehensive way, and grasping the essence of things and the way in which they are moving and changing.
Everybody who wants to bring about this kind of change should be brought forward and unleashed to take up this challenge, and everybody has to pitch in and do that.
There are no people who, merely by virtue of being part of an oppressed group or nationality, are “automatically” able to do that, or inherently able to do it better; nor, on the other hand, are there people who, merely by virtue of being from the dominant, oppressor nationality , have less ability, or somehow less right or responsibility, to contribute to that.
So that was another key part of the struggle we had with the Franklins.
It wasn’t just the RU that was going through this, nor is it just some sort of inevitable feature of communist formations that they turn inward and fight among themselves.
Big questions were up, which I’m speaking to here, about how to actually Lake up the challenge of making revolution and transforming society.
Making a radical change in a society like the U.S., completely overturning the system and bringing into being a socialist society, doing that together with people throughout the world who are fighting the same battle, and getting to a communist world— that is a big, big, big challenge.
People who had become radicalized and revolutionary-minded through the whole ’60s experience were coming up against these problems.
Let’s say you start out among Black people and you’re building the struggle there.
And you come to realize that you can’t solve these problems within the confines of this system.
The Split in the Panthers Lots of different forces were confronting the same objective problems of making revolution, especially in a country like the U.S., that the RU was running up against.
Now the Panthers weren’t founded on thoroughgoing communist principles—their ideology was a mix of communism and other ideologies, in particular revolutionary nationalism—but nonetheless they were coming up against the same contradictions.
Although they were not proceeding systematically and thoroughly as communists, they were trying as revolutionaries to figure out what to do.
With that orientation, it wasn’t just a matter, on his part, of recognizing that revolution was not immediately on the agenda, but it basically got pul off the agenda into never-never land.
The politics of Huey and those who followed him became essentially reformist and based on meeting the needs of the people within the system, which you can’t do on a mass level—if you could, you wouldn’t need a revolution; and if you approach it in that way, you don’t actually build toward a revolution.
The important point here is that these struggles were not a matter of a bunch of communists and other revolutionaries fighting among themselves simply for petty and sectarian reasons.
We were running into big questions, big contradictions as we say, in terms of how to make revolution in a powerful, imperialist country like the United States The whole movement was running up against them and struggling out these questions, in one form or another.
Settling the Questions Inside the RU, as this struggle was going on, there were some peo242 From Ike to Mao and Beyond pie who were firmly in the camp that myself and some other leaders of the RU were in, and there were other people who were firmly in the camp of the Franklin group; and then there were a number of people in the RU who were unclear about this, especially at the beginning—this is often how things are at the beginning of a major struggle.
But waging this struggle was complicated by the fact that while the RU was a communist organization, founded on communist principles, within the RU there were also some of the influences of what was called the “New Left” at that time.
But it also had some influences from the mainly middle class forces among which it had emerged and in which it was mainly based.
So the political unclarity and differences merged with a certain antileadership tendency that existed more broadly in the movement, but was reflected inside the RU, and as the struggle unfolded within the RU, there was a widespread feeling among RU members that they didn’t want “the big leadership honchos” battling it out.
I wrote many of the papers that refuted and polemicized against the Franklin position; and they, in turn, wrote up their position papers, and then we circulated all these papers in the organization.
Our forces were mainly centered in the East Bay, in Oakland, Berkeley and Richmond, as well as in San Jose, and we would meet with the people on the next levels or the basic levels of the organization, have sessions with them to go deeply into the questions, and then they would go to the areas where the Franklin people were stronger, or to other places like San Francisco, where people were more confused and unclear, and they would battle it out with the forces who represented the other line.
As for the Franklin trend, they went off, joined with a few others and formed a group called Venceremos and tried to pul some version of their line into practice.
This didn’t last very long and, while it lasted, it had a negative effect in a number of ways.
Dad Spurgeon, older sister Marjorie, Bob, his mother Ruth, and younger sister Mary-Lou.
Traffic boys “being put through their paces”; the author in inset photo.
On the docks, Shanghai, 1971; the author in the center, and Leibel Bergman, second from left.
Bob Avakian outlines his analysis of the massive changes in China following Mao's death.
Posters building support for Bob Avakian’s defense against felony charges as a result of the demonstration against Deng Xiaoping.
The author on a nationwide speaking tour as part of the effort to politically defeat the charges and develop a revolutionary movement, 1979.
The author in exile, in front of the Wall of Communards in Paris, 1981.
Revolution or Adventurism 24. and basically nothing positive came out of that.
But so long as the Franklins were in the RU and there was a chance to win them to a correct line, we did not want to publicly air the debate; doing so would have made it more difficult to carry out the struggle within the RU on a correct and principled basis, and then to settle the question within our organization.
And, if the Franklin group could have been won away from their position, that would have made it possible to unite virtually the whole organization around the correct line.
But once the struggle within the RU had been resolved, and led to a split, we thought it was very important to pul out these documents, as a way to enable people very broadly in the revolutionary movement to grapple with the issues more deeply.
Taking on Baggage from the International Communist Movement Even though we were essentially correct, and the Franklin group fundamentally wrong, our position was contradictory.
On the one hand, even looking back on it now, more than 30 years later, with everything we've learned since, I would say we were overwhelmingly correct and positive.
In other words, we were correct about what was necessary to make a revolution in basic terms.
And we were correct in rejecting a path that would lead people to getting isolated and crushed, no matter how good or even heroic their intentions and desires might be.
At the same time, in carrying out this struggle we had gone more deeply into the history of the international communist movement to draw lessons to apply to our situation.
While we were essentially and even overwhelmingly correct in this, we also got from the international communist movement certain tendencies which had developed over a number of years, especially under Stalin's leadership, toward reformism and toward economism—that is, a basically trade unionist approach of centering the struggle of the workers around their economic demands and basically reducing the workers’ movement to a battle around day-to244 From Ike to Mao and Beyond day needs.
Along with that, we saw the workers who were in more stabilized employment situations and in larger factories as being the most important force for revolution and socialism, and in this there was a significant aspect of a mechanical approach that we’d taken from the international communist movement.
One of the distinguishing and most controversial features of the RU, which I’ve spoken to, is that we upheld Stalin.
Of course, we did not uphold Stalin uncritically—we recognized and spoke to serious errors that Stalin made, and since then we have continued to deepen our understanding of that—but we have upheld Stalin with historical perspective.
Stalin led the first attempt to build socialism, under very difficult circumstances, and led important advances in building socialism in the Soviet Union over several decades.
While there were many mistakes made in the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership, some of them quite grievous, there were also many great achievements.
But, at that lime, we hadn’t fully recognized and taken account of the fact that, to put it somewhat provocatively, while Stalin had led in the building of socialism in the Soviet Union and had made contributions to the international movement, at the same time over the period of several decades and up through World War 2, Stalin had basically undone a great deal of Leninism in the international communist movement.
For example, Lenin had said that the model for a communist should not be a trade union secretary but a “tribune of the people,” someone who exposes the system in all its manifestations (and not just the struggle of the workers against the employing class) and on that basis shows people the need for socialist revolution and leads people in that direction.
But, to a significant degree, Stalin made the model of a communist a good militant trade union leader, who talks about socialism.
Not instantly and immediately, but over a period of decades, that had been a significant aspect of Stalin’s influence.
And while we never look this up in its crudest form, or simply reduced our work to the trade union struggle—while we never abandoned the goal of revolution, nor failed to do agitation and propaganda about the need for revolution, socialism and ultimately communism— these economist tendencies exerted a significant pull on us.
And, in fact, in World War 1, the Bolsheviks were literally the only socialist parly of a major power who held to and applied that internationalist and “revolutionary defeatist"" position.
He came out with this whole theory about how, in the several decades after World War 1, the workers in the imperialist countries had actually gotten a stake in the fatherland— they’d won certain concessions, they’d formed trade unions, they’d won more democratic rights—and so they actually had something to defend in the fatherland.
That’s the line that Stalin and the Communist International put forward in the period leading into World War 2 and then during World War 2 itself, once the Soviet Union was invaded by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union became a major battleground of the whole war.
In other words, what we were getting from the international communist movement was contradictory, very sharply so in some important respects.
We got the basic principles of communism, which we have kept and which have kept us going in a revolutionary direction, but we also got a lot of things that were corrosive of those correct communist principles, and they influenced us in the direction of trade unionism and even reformism.
As Maoists we say, “things divide into two"" — that is, into their contradictory parts, or aspects—and you have to determine what is the principal and defining aspect.
We were correctly assessing this, in the main and in essence, even though our understanding was primitive, and even though it was significantly influenced by these negative tendencies.
Both of these holidays had been popularized and given expression throughout the world by the international communist movement, and we revived these as communist traditions in the United States And, again, though there was some influence of reformism and economism, essentially we took these as revolutionary holidays of the working class to the working class.
In 1970 the RU sponsored and organized the first International Women’s Day rally in San Francisco in many years.
It was a real revival of this as a revolutionary holiday, which was taken to working women, as well as men in the working class, and to other sections of the people as well.
As I recall, it was in Delores Park in San Francisco, and it was a powerful and moving, revolutionary International Women’s Day of several hundred people.
It consisted of theoretical and strategic analysis of the oppression of women and how it can only be ended through revolution and advancing to socialism and communism, as well as reports about the work that comrades in the RU were doing in various parts of the country, working for example in the phone company and among other sections of women workers.
In 1971, we had a May Day rally, and it was the first time that May Day had been taken to the working class, especially as a revolutionary holiday, in quite some lime.
I had moved to San Francisco at that Lime, in order to help provide leadership for the RU as a whole in the Bay Area, and 1 was mainly organizing in San Francisco for May Day, but the actual celebration was set for a park in Oakland.
We came up the hill, and the road leveled off, and there was the park—and we could see there were already a couple of hundred people gathering in the park.
So that was one of the fruits of our generally coming to a communist position, but also of the struggle with the Franklins and the deepened determination that we had to take revolution and socialism and communism broadly to the working class and win people to this.
Chapter Twelve Going to China nder the influence of first Eldridge Cleaver and then, much more deeply, Leibel Bergman, I had really gotten into studying Mao and the whole experience of the Chinese Revolution, especially the Cultural Revolution.
When I get into something, 1 like to get into it deeply , and this was no exception.
But even more, what was compelling to me was that the more 1 got into this, the more I began to get a sense of how you could make a revolution and prevent it from being sold out and betrayed—how you could keep it going until you really did uproot, as Marx had said, all the oppressive social and class relations, and all the oppressive ideas that they generate. 1 was far from unique in this.
Tens of thousands of people in the U.S., and millions worldwide, looked to China as a beacon and, on one level or another, had some sense of the importance of the Cultural Revolution.
But if you were living in the United States back then, the possibility that you could actually go there and see it for yourself didn’t seem in the offing, so to speak.
Henry Kissinger had made his secret trip to China, and Nixon would make his first trip to China the next year, in ’72.
But because of the changes in U.S.-China relations, a greater possibility of going to China was opening up.
Someone from the Young Lords Parly, Pablo Guzman—who at that time called himself Yoruba, and that’s what we called him, Yoruba—was also a part of this delegation of people that went to China in the fall of 1971.
In fact, 1 think we actually left for this trip just before the Attica uprising came to a head with the bloodbath that occurred, unfortunately, when Governor Rockefeller called out the state troopers to put down the uprising, and the state troopers murdered dozens of prisoners in cold blood and even killed a number of guards whom the prisoners were holding as hostages.
There was still a lot of revolutionary upheaval going on at the same time as we were embarking on, and extremely excited about, this trip to China. remember we had to wail and wait and wait to go, and up to the last minute there was the question of whether the whole thing was going to fall through—and then we finally were able to go.
We took the long way around on an Air France plane that stopped in places like Athens, Cairo, and Karachi, which I believe was then the capital of Pakistan.
The anticipation and excitement was building up as we flew from one place to another, just touching down for a few short hours, then taking off again, and it reached a high peak as the plane came down over China and we flew over miles and miles of cultivated farmland.
Then an airport came into view, I think it was in the city of Canton where we first landed, 1 can’t remember that for sure, but I will never forget the large portrait of Mao that greeted us at the airport.
I was unbelievably excited—here we were, finally, in the People’s Republic of China.
Struggle in the Chinese Leadership But big historical things were going on in China at the lime that hadn’t yet come to the surface.
Mao’s position was that China should stand up to the Soviet Union, but at the same time, and as part of that, it should try to deal with the Soviet threat partly by opening to the West and using that as a way of lining up forces against the Soviet Union.
So we were coming in all excited, full of wide-eyed enthusiasm about going to China, in the midst of all this struggle going on, which we weren’t, by any means, fully aware of.
Then, a few days before October 1st, some of the people from the Chinese government who were relating to our delegation came to us and said, “Well, this year we’re going to do things a little differently.
We were all disappointed, because we weren’t going to be able to see Mao and masses of people in Tienanmen Square.
You know, I laugh when 1 hear people talk about how everything is so tightly controlled in “totalitarian” societies, that the only source of information people have is the official government source.
There was all this talk, rumors flying all around, among the Chinese people—much of which proved to be rather accurate.
I’d gone there full of almost naive enthusiasm, and then 1 was hit with this.
We got into these big arguments, because he was saying, “Oh that Mao—anybody gets close to him and down they go.
He could see that Liu Shao-chi’s policies would weaken socialism and were not about supporting revolution in the world—and that, in fact, they would lead back to capitalism—so fine, criticize him and knock him down from his leadership position, which they did through the Cultural Revolution.
But now Leibel started looking at things the way the bourgeoisie does, as if struggles among communist leaders are all just a matter of personal power trips and ego. 1 was familiar with this outlook, even from my own limited experience, because within the RU, as the struggle with the Franklins had come to a head, we had a meeting with a broader grouping of people in the RU from different parts of the country.
It took a while to win people to see that, no, there were important, fundamental issues that were being fought out, different lines that led in very different directions, and the outcome had real consequences.
We’d won these new people in the RU to that understanding, but it took a while; and here was Leibel, taking the same kind of stance toward what was happening in China, even though he had a wealth of experience to enable him to know better.
So we got into a very sharp argument. was responding to him by saying, “That can’t be the issue—just that somebody gels close to Mao, gets too powerful, and so Mao has to knock him down.
We went back and forth on that, and 1 was shocked not only to hear about this struggle in China but also to see indications that Leibel was abandoning a Marxist approach and falling into bourgeois theories and bourgeois ‘'psychological analysis” in confronting what was happening in China.
Transformations Seeing a New Society Of course, those of us on this delegation had all gone to China with great enthusiasm.
We wanted to see first-hand this vibrant revolutionary socialist society where the Cultural Revolution was going on and the Red Guards were going out to the countryside and linking up with the peasants and taking revolution to them, and the people were bringing about all these changes in all the different spheres of society.
And within the limits of what you can do on a trip of this kind, which only lasted six weeks, we did get to witness many of these great transformations.
Even though 1 had been hit with this whole Lin Biao thing, 1 nevertheless continued to have tremendous enthusiasm for what I was seeing and learning there.
We had a lot of discussions with people, and we visited a number of different places in the country.
We went, for example, to one of the rural areas, where they had built the Red Flag Canal.
They were diverting a river through a mountain so that a whole, larger commune of people would have irrigation for their farmland, rather than just one or a few villages closest to where the river ran.
We talked to the Iron Women’s Team that had drilled through this mountain—they told us how they had lowered themselves, on cables, down a sharp rock face, so they could plant dynamite to blast through the mountain, in order to divert the river through it.
This was in a society where, only a couple of decades before that, it would have been impossible to imagine people doing something like that—and impossible in particular to conceive of women doing anything like that.
We felt the whole spirit of “serve the people” that was popularized throughout the society, and we saw living examples of revolutionary transformations.
We’d come upon situations where the men and women would be engaging in friendly competition to do things like sweeping up in the house.
Again, you think about China coming from a feudal society less than Going to China 25. twenty-five years before that, and here you had these big changes in the relations between men and women.
Even though this was a small example, in a sense—and even though, of course, many backward ideas and practices still persisted and were still contending with these more advanced things—this friendly competition captured both the “serve the people” spirit and the pervasiveness of the changes that were going on between men and women.
We would have discussions in factories with workers who were reading Engels’ Anti-Duhring , which is a major theoretical work of Marxism, and who were reading other works of Marxist philosophy and debating all these big questions.
In a number of factories we talked to members of what they called “three-in-one leadership committees,” or revolutionary committees, in which party members and administrative personnel from the factory, together with workers selected from the shop floor, made up the committee that led the whole factory.
This was a very exciting development and a whole new thing even in the history of socialism, let alone in contrast with what goes on in capitalist society.
We visited a hospital and saw how, as a result of the Cultural Revolution, they had actually instituted the practice of doing anesthesia with acupuncture.
Our delegation went to three or four operations—for things like stomach cancer—and it was very advanced medical practice, but they were also integrating traditional practices from Chinese culture into an overall system of medicine which for the first time was geared toward serving the ordinary people, and as a result of the Cultural Revolution was being spread throughout the countryside, where the vast majority of Chinese people lived.
China was still a backward country, it was only a few decades from feudalism and domination by imperialism—a society where, for generations and centuries, the masses of people in the countryside were barely hanging on and millions were regularly starving, even in the “better” years.
Things like movies and other cultural productions were known in the cities, although even those were overwhelmingly for the elite, well-to-do Chinese and foreigners, and virtually none of this existed in the countryside, before the revolution.
We saw people who, on bicycles, were taking movie projectors to spread revolutionary culture, the culture of the new socialist society, in the countryside.
Beginning in the late 1960s, the Soviet Union was actually developing plans, it seems, for a major attack on China, including perhaps the use of tactical nuclear weapons.
I remember that our Chinese hosts took us through these air raid shelters that they had in Peking and other cities, vast networks of air raid shelters under the city.
This threat was very real—and increasingly it was coming from the Soviet Union.
So this set the context for what became a big struggle within the Chinese party, with Lin Biao arguing against an opening to the West and insisting that they should more or less conciliate with the Soviet Union — that this was the way to deal with the Soviet threat.
Lin Biao was the Defense Minister, and he was formally the head of the army, although Mao was still acknowledged as the ultimate leader of not only the parly but the army as well.
Essentially, the army was led by the party, so really the party—and Mao, as the head of the party—were the leaders of the army.
And, while the army played largely a political role through the Cultural Revolution, it was after all the army, and after a certain point there was a tendency for the country to be turned into something like an army camp.
Not that they had guns pointed at everybody’s head, but from what a number of people have said, the whole society had the feel too much of an army camp.
In the revolutionary days, when China was a socialist country, they didn’t have all those stripes and fruit salad all over the officers, and they didn’t have saluting and yes-sirring and all that absolute authority of officers.
Still, you don’t want the whole society to be run even like a revolutionary army.
At a certain point in the Cultural Revolution, Mao said that it was lime to move away from that, and to reduce the role of the army in everyday life and in the political affairs of society.
All these different issues were being fought out, and they’d just come to a head when we got there.
On the one hand, I was tremendously inspired by these real-life transformations that we were seeing all over the country.
But, at the same time, I was learning about all this struggle that was coming to a head, and they were canceling the massive October 1st celebration in Tienanmen Square.
A Lesson 1 also got a lesson in what we communists call democratic centralism— the way in which issues, including differences within the party, are discussed and struggled out through the channels of the party, and then are decided by the leadership of the party, drawing on the discussion and struggle throughout the ranks of the party, and how decisions of this kind are not broadcast to the world until these issues are resolved and the party is unified around them.
I got a living illustration of that because we had a group of translators accompanying us as we went around visiting all these different parts of China and—as I learned when 1 went back to China a few years later and talked to some of the same translators—by the time we were traveling around the country, they already knew about the struggle with Lin Biao and the fact that Lin Biao had died in an apparent attempt to flee the country.
This had happened by the time we arrived in China just before October 1st, 1971.
So we would go to a museum, for example, in a remote rural area, and here was a picture of Mao and right next to that a picture of Lin Biao, and they were still being presented as close comrades.
Of course, at that point, Lin Biao was no longer considered to be Chairman Mao’s closest comrade-inarms and successor.
But that hadn’t gotten out to this remote rural area, so the translators were dutifully translating all this talk about Lin Biao in very glowing and positive terms.
So 1 learned a great lesson from that about the correct way and the correct channels and means through which you do things, and the systematic way in which you do them, so you don’t have a parly degenerate into factions, and become a bunch of bourgeois cliques.
It is not a matter of keeping things from the people, but of finding the way that they can take them up systematically and dig into them deeply.
But it was quite a jolt to learn this about Lin Biao, to be there less than a week and be confronted with this reality. didn’t agree with the approach that Leibel was falling into.
It didn’t make sense to me that something of this magnitude could be reduced to just a matter of ego and personal power struggles—I wanted to know what the fundamental issues were.
I wanted to know what was in contention, what were the different programs that different forces were fighting for.
We had been through this kind of experience within the RU, in our struggle with the Franklins, and so I had at least a beginning sense of how these things go.
I won’t say that ego never plays any part in it, but essentially and fundamentally when you have a split of that proportion, it’s because there are fundamental differences about the direction that people think things need to take, and what policies are needed to deal with what people are confronting.
I was trying to figure this out, in terms of what had happened in China.
It wasn’t discouraging to me, but it was a jolt and it immediately caused me to come to grips with the fact that all this is more complex than I’d understood up to that point.
Running Into Huey So all these exciting and inspiring things were going on at the same lime as I was learning about the complexity of it.
As it turned out, Huey Newton was on a trip to China at the same time as our delegation.
I was developing a friendship with Yoruba at that time—we were hanging out together and talking about a lot of things, we had a lot of the same musical interests, and so on, and there were a lot of things we could talk about that we had in common, as well as some experiences that were very different.
And then at one point we saw Huey Newton walking around in a park while we were in Peking.
As 1 have discussed earlier, we had developed our differences with the Panther Parly, and things were even a bit strained, but 1 knew Leibel was right.
Yoruba wanted to go meet with Huey, too, because he’d always looked to Huey as a revolutionary leader and admired him.
So the two of us, along with another person from our delegation, went and approached Huey and we arranged to go over to the room where he was staying.
But as we were silting in Huey’s room talking, it didn’t feel like the same Huey Newton.
This was a very painful experience for me, because it just reminded me that this was not the Huey Newton that 1 had known and learned so much from a few years before.
And Huey seemed very pained and anguished himself—it seemed to me that, while he was doing his best to maintain a friendly and cool exterior, just beneath the surface was a very troubled person, who did not seem comfortable in his own skin.
The Chinese gave us their explanation for why they opposed the creation of a separate stale of Bangladesh in what had been East Pakistan.
In essence, they were supporting the ruling class in Pakistan in forcibly and brutally attempting to suppress the breakaway of Bangladesh, which, partly because of the intervention of India, Pakistan was ultimately unable to prevent.
Now this was a big, controversial issue in the movement around the world, including in the United States We listened to this explanation and then, when we got back to the U.S., a number of us actually worked on a pamphlet that put forward the Chinese explanation, and we tried to defend it as best we could.
And there were also other issues, like Chinese support for this oppressive government in the Sudan, which had brutally repressed the opposition—we tried to explain that too, on the basis of what the Chinese had told us.
But basically the Chinese position came down to opposing whatever the Soviet Union was supporting.
Especially around the Pakistan issue, there was also the fact that India was a long-standing enemy of the Chinese revolution and there had been border clashes where India made incursions into Chinese territory, and more recently the Soviet Union had aligned itself to a significant degree with the Indian ruling class as part of an encirclement of China by the Soviet Union.
Basically, China’s actions were dictated by a certain kind of realpolitik , to be honest, which was based on seeking to prevent their own country from being attacked, and dismembered, by the Soviet Union.
But, at that time, we became convinced by their rationalizations— we actually got drawn into the logic of what they were putting forward —and so we publicly, and even somewhat aggressively, defended this.
We put out this pamphlet and distributed it within the broader movement, and we boldly argued for it, and I guess it had some influence.
But these arguments were really not defensible, and we later summed up these were errors that China was making in the face of very real threats and dangers.
It was not a minor matter that you had the U.S., which was still fundamentally antagonistic toward China as a socialist country, despite the Nixon visits—that was just a tactical maneuver by United States imperialism— and you had the Soviet Union, right on the border with China, which was very hostile to China and regarded it as a thorn in its side and a threat to its role as the head of the “socialist camp” and which was anxious to weaken and cripple China, if not outright subjugate it and dismember it.
So these were very real threats and dangers that China had to deal with.
Nevertheless, the positions they took, and still more the rationalizations they developed—for example in the case of Pakistan, where they ignored, or didn’t base themselves on, the fact that besides the maneuvering of certain bourgeois forces in what became Bangladesh, and besides Indian expansionism and the Soviet Union behind it, there was a genuine mass upsurge of people against the highly oppressive and brutally repressive rule of Pakistan —these rationalizations were wrong.
So we learned through that, we summed up fairly soon after that this was wrong, that the Chinese were making errors and that we should not join in seeking to rationalize those errors.
We learned the importance of thinking critically, and not blindly accepting or following anything, even in relation to China, which remained, despite some errors it was making, a genuine source of inspiration and strength for the whole revolutionary movement around the world.
And overall, we returned to the United States with an even greater determination to carry forward the revolutionary struggle and even deeper confidence in our cause.
Chapter Thirteen Consolidating the Revolutionary Union I went back lo the United States and the Bay Area.
But since we'd developed the RU into a national organization, it became increasingly clear that we needed to establish a national leadership that wouldn’t be just what had grown up sort of “organically” in the Bay Area, but would be more able to act as a leadership for the whole country.
So we made a decision lo lake another step in more fully consolidating the RU as a national organization, by establishing its headquarters and its leadership in Chicago.
The RU already had organization in Chicago, but we decided that it was necessary for me, and a few others, to make this move to Chicago in order to strengthen the RU as a national organization and in its ability to contribute lo the formation of a new vanguard communist parly.
We didn’t see ourselves as immediately moving to build the new parly, however.
We thought there still needed to be a period where those who were basing themselves on communist principles accumulated more experience in applying that in practice, in taking it to the working class in particular, and lines and approaches could be clarified on that basis.
Moving to Chicago 1 moved to Chicago in the spring of 1972, and this was a big move for me.
Since the time I was three, 1 had lived in the Bay Area. had been to Chicago for a New Politics Convention in the ’60s, and one of the first things that struck me was how dirty it was.
It was a gritty, industrial city, and you could smell it from twenty miles away.
We got one of these deals where you gel somebody’s car that they'd left in one part of the country and basically you could drive it back for them for free.
Actually, the owner of this car lived near Detroit, in Grosse Point, Michigan, but he’d left his Lincoln Continental in the Bay Area, so we drove it to Chicago, and then I drove it to Grosse Pointe, Michigan, after dropping off the other person who was with me.
I delivered this car to this exclusive residence in Grosse Point, where I couldn’t even get inside the guard gate.
Finally, the guy came down and 1 turned his car over to him, and then I got on the bus to downtown Detroit, and from Detroit took a bus back to Chicago. 1 hadn’t yet gotten an apartment in Chicago, so I didn’t have a place to stay.
Although there were RU members in the Chicago area, 1 didn’t know too many of them yet, and 1 didn’t have their phone numbers or their addresses for the most part.
I knew the general area of the city that DH lived in, so I took the “el” train up to that area and when 1 got close I called, to let him know my situation and ask if 1 could slay with him.
So here I was—stuck out in the street at midnight, nowhere to go and no one else I could contact very easily.
I walked over to his house, carrying a suitcase. knocked on his door, and I could see that there were some lights on.
So I wandered around, feeling increasingly uneasy, because I was caught between whoever is out in the street at that time of night, doing whatever they are doing, on the one hand, and the pigs on the other hand.
So finally, I had just enough money to gel a cab—there was no more public transportation running at that hour—and I went out to Maywood, west of the city, and after wandering around for a while longer, 1 finally found the house of somebody 1 knew, and they let me sleep on their floor. 1 later found out that the reason DH let me wander around in the streets in this kind of frankly desperate situation for hours is that he had a woman with him and he didn’t want to be bothered letting me in.
Maywood After a short time, 1 got an apartment in Maywood, a suburb a few miles west of Chicago.
Maywood was a very interesting suburb—at the time I moved there, I think it was about half Black and half white, and a very proletarian town.
Maywood also had this high school, Proviso East, about a mile from where I lived, that usually had a good basketball team, so 1 liked that, too.
For three years while 1 was there Glen Rivers, who later played and then coached in the NBA, was on their team.
I went to a lot of their games. also found out where the playgrounds were that had good basketball, and 1 started hanging out there and 1 would play ball with some of the guys who were on the high school team or who had just graduated.
The negative side was that, in this midwestern setting, the town would like roll up the sidewalks at 9 o’clock.
I was used to a little more night life than that, a little more vitality.
But the fact that Maywood had playgrounds with good basketball where I could hang out made it easier for me to gel to know a number of people, and that kind of eased the transition for me.
There were mainly Black people living in the apartment building 1 first moved into, but the discrimination was very blatant. didn’t have a job at the time, 1 had no references or anything, and still I got the apartment.
But 1 later found out that if you were Black and wanted to live in that apartment building, you had to have employment, you had to have references, and so on.
Anyway, 1 moved into this apartment and the unfortunate people living underneath me were this working class Black couple—they both had jobs and they both had to leave early for work.
And when I first moved into the apartment above them, l didn’t have much money, I couldn’t afford much furniture, and I certainly couldn’t afford rugs in the apartment.
I would have people over, and sometimes we would talk loudly, the way you do when you have a bunch of people all together.
We would walk on the bare Boors right above these people who were trying to sleep, because they had to gel up early to go to work.
Finally one day, one of them came up and knocked on my door—I think I had been vacuuming the Boor, and obviously it was making a big racket.
He went on to say that 1 was making a terrible racket and they couldn’t rest, and a lot of limes I kept them awake at night, and it was disrupting their whole rhythm.
When you drank this it just tasted like a real sweet fruit drink—and then all of a sudden it would sneak up and lower the boom on you.
I think DH wanted to get me drunk to see what would come out of me when 1 was in that state, because he always liked to probe for people’s weaknesses—he was that kind of an opportunist, with a real hustler streak.
But the more I drank these “black pearls,” and the more they affected me, the more I started talking, with unrestrained enthusiasm, about how great socialism was going to be.
Then, about two in the morning, after we had been drinking these “black pearls” for quite a while, things started getting really loud and raucous.
And these two guys, “Home Before Dark” and Jerry, who were both very big, started wrestling in my apartment, in a mainly friendly way—and then, all of a sudden, my apartment door was open and they were out in the hallway wrestling.
And then, worse yet, they tumbled down the stairs—1 was on the second floor, and there was this railing at the edge of the stairs and then a little space behind the railing where the wall was.
And one of them, “Home Before Dark,” went crashing through the railing and fell a whole floor down on his back, while Jerry was teetering there, about ready to fall. ran over and helped him get back away from the edge, and then we went running downstairs to see if “Home Before Dark” was okay.
Ironically, because he was so drunk, it turned out that he actually wasn’t badly hurt, just a little bit bruised.
I felt badly about that, and it didn’t exactly improve my relations with my neighbors, but stepping back from this a bit, the whole thing was sort of funny.
Fred Hampton’s Legacy Fred Hampton was from Maywood, and he had led the Panthers in the Chicago area.
I had followed very closely the whole outrage when he, along with Mark Clark, was murdered by the pigs in Chicago in December 1969.
The newspapers and the authorities had put out this story that the Panthers were the aggressors, that they’d fired on the police and the police were only firing back in self-defense.
But then the Panthers led tours of people through the apartment where Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were shot, showing that all the bullet holes were made by bullets coming from the outside in, and that what the police and media claimed were bullet holes from inside out were actually nail holes, and things like that.
When 1 got to Chicago, 1 discovered, not surprisingly, that all the comrades in the RU had been tremendously influenced and inspired by Fred Hampton and, of course, tremendously devastated by the way in which he was murdered.
Even though we had developed differences with the Panthers, the influence of Fred Hampton was a very positive one overall.
He would openly proclaim that he was an all-lhe-way proletarian revolutionary—he would popularize that stance.
By the time I moved to the Chicago area, it was several years after he had been murdered, and the Panther organization wasn’t at the high point that it had been while he was alive, although there were still Panthers in that area, and there were some people who had been in the Panthers who either joined the RU or worked very closely with it.
When people saw how he was just shot down in cold blood by the police, this caused even more people to make the leap to becoming revolutionaries.
The RU’s Early Practice As I referred to earlier, from the international communist movement the RU had taken up the orientation that you have to go to the working class.
There was the positive side, and the main aspect of things, which was that we were taking revolution, and socialism and communism, to the working class—to Black workers, Latino workers, white workers, and so on.
On the other hand, our understanding of that and how to do that was colored by a lot of the influences that 1 described earlier from the international communist movement as it had developed under Stalin’s leadership, with a lot of what we refer to as “economist” tendencies, tendencies toward narrowing the struggle of the working class to its own more immediate and narrow interests.
There were things of an explicitly communist character in them—articles about China, for example, as well as articles supporting revolutionary struggles around the world, including the Vietnamese people’s struggle against United States imperialism—but that wasn’t their level of unity.
We were mainly directing these newspapers to the workers in the factories, although we did sell them more broadly—we would sell them at demonstrations as well as in different neighborhoods.
This reflected the fact that, on the one hand, we had a national organization, but we hadn’t yet developed it to the point where it could put out a single newspaper that would be a unified voice and instrument, if you want to put it that way, of the organization as a whole, on a national level.
These local newspapers had generally the same perspective, but they wouldn’t always have exactly the same take on different issues that arose, or they wouldn’t all emphasize the same things at the same lime.
The strength is that we were able to speak to local issues more, and there was a certain diversity that was good.
But these monthly papers could not make an analysis of key issues in a timely way, because they were monthly papers, and they didn’t have a unified analysis coming out from a single center that the whole organization could pull together around, and then take initiative around in accordance with the particular conditions that comrades were working in, in the various local areas.
We were also continuing to work in the anti-war movement and among the students, although this was after the big upsurge of the ’60s, and after Kent State and Jackson State, and the student movement was not on the same mass scale as before, and didn’t have the same powerful revolutionary current.
But there were still fairly broad sections of students and youth who in various ways were in rebellion against the system, and we were trying to relate to that, while our focus was on going to the workers in the factories and taking revolution, socialism and communism to them, as best as we understood that.
So we didn’t want to be, in effect, pre-empting some things by declaring a leader, in a public way at least.
Developing theory—actually applying Marxism to the questions we faced and learning in the process—was essential at this point.
In the movement of that time, no one had yet made a thorough and thoroughly correct analysis of this question.
Other forces had gone with a view that focused almost exclusively on the privileges that had been granted to white workers as the heart of the matter—this was the “white-skin privilege” line.
A few groups tried to claim the situation of Black people still fit into the 1928 resolution of the Comintern (Communist International), which characterized Black people as primarily peasants and said that the heart of their struggle revolved around their right to self-determination, the right to form a separate Afro-American Republic in the south; while this reflected at least some of the reality of the period in which this Comintern resolution was written, by 1972 it was badly out of dale and something of a theoretical Procrustean bed.
So clearly a great need existed to arrive at a correct analysis of this decisive question.
It had a big impact within the RU but also in the movement more broadly—a lot of people and groups united with it, and there was also a lot of criticism and debate—so this was one of the most important ways in which 1 was providing leadership at that time.
The Guardian Forums The “Guardian forums,” which took place during this general period, were also part of the “pre-party ferment” that was going on.
They were sponsored by the Guardian newspaper and billed as party-building forums.
We saw this Loo as an important arena to address and a way to sharpen up the big questions in the movement.
The Guardian actually represented a form of “revisionism-lite,” 1 guess you could say.
I talked earlier about how the CP openly and viciously attacked the Panthers, for example, and many people were obviously disgusted by that.
But the Guardian represented a slightly more left version of fundamentally the same politics.
The RCP has held to this essential position ever since, even as it has modified and deepened its analysis as it has learned more and things have further changed and developed.
So we took part in these—1 spoke at one of them and other RU comrades spoke at others.
These forums were a part of the sorting out, if you will, of different lines; and from our point of view, it was part of drawing a clear line of demarcation between real communism and phony communism, or “revisionism,” which means revising the revolutionary heart out of Marxism and communism and reducing it to just drab reformism—sometimes reformist dogma, but reformist nonetheless.
Although we didn’t have a weekly newspaper at that time, the RU did begin a monthly newspaper, Revolution , shortly after we set up our national headquarters in Chicago.
Revolution both wrote about the struggles going on and tried to put them in a revolutionary context, and also did exposure of the imperialist system and carried out polemics with other trends and organized forces in the movement, and addressed important theoretical issues.
So this too became a critical element in our all-round efforts of the time.
Agonizing Over McGovern Shortly after we set up in Chicago, George McGovern came on the scene as a presidential candidate running on a promise to get the United States out of Vietnam.
Many people who had been drawn into supporting the “peace candidate” Eugene McCarthy or then Bobby Kennedy in the ’68 election had since become totally alienated from the bourgeois electoral process and become much more radicalized.
But, in 1972, the McGovern campaign was drawing a lot of people in the movement—many who hadn’t moved to a full revolutionary position, but even some who had been inclined in that way—back into the bourgeois electoral framework.
We didn’t just say, “oh, McGovern, he’s a bourgeois candidate, end of discussion.” 1 personally agonized over this a lot; I did a lot of reading, a lot of study, trying to understand in a general sense what is represented by conflicts within an imperialist ruling class, and then more specifically what was represented by this conflict—not just the electoral contest in itself, but what larger conflicts within the ruling class and the imperialist system did this represent, or not represent.
I came to the conclusion, and the RU as a whole was won to the position, that we should not support McGovern, and that in fact whether or not the Vietnamese people would prevail in this war and whether the United States would be forced to withdraw from Vietnam would not be determined on the basis of whether McGovern or Nixon got elected.
In fact, Nixon was re-elected in a landslide, and a lot of people who were drawn into the McGovern campaign got very demoralized by that.
And yet, within a few months after Nixon’s re-election, even though Nixon ordered a Christmas-time escalation of the bombing in Vietnam, in January of 1973, the agreement was signed which began the withdrawal of the United States from Vietnam.
So this whole idea that only by electing McGovern could the Vietnamese people prevail and could the United States be forced out of Vietnam—this was proven in practice to be completely wrong.
We had to study and wrangle deeply with this to come to a basic understanding of what was correct and would really represent the upholding of our internationalist responsibilities.
Through that process, we united the RU around the position of “Victory through our struggle not through the elections,” and fought for that line within the broader movement.
We actually wrestled very deeply with the concrete situation, as well as the larger questions that this was bound up with, to figure out what stand to lake.
So we “stood aside” from the elections in the sense of not supporting one candidate or another.
But life is always changing, and you have to examine things in real life and not have a dogmatic approach.
So when the whole Watergate thing broke out, and Nixon started gelling in trouble and there was a real question of whether he’d be impeached, or forced to resign, Leibel came forward with something that 1 did think was correct.
He came up with the idea that we should pul forward the slogan “Throw the Bum Out, Organize to Fight,” which is what we did.
But if you take that kind of stand in the context of an election, you’re saying hold your nose and vote for a Democrat, whether you say it openly and explicitly or not.
And when you do that, you essentially pul people in a passive, politically disarmed position.
This was taking advantage of a conflict that was becoming very acute within the ruling class, in order to advance our struggle.
By the end of 1972 we had made important progress in consolidating the RU as a national organization and in laying the basis to form a genuine communist party.
An important aspect of this was a developing unity with other revolutionary groups.
This unity would pose new opportunities and new challenges—though not precisely the ones we anticipated.
Chapter Fourteen Unity ; Struggle...and Principle 1—) uring the early 1970s, we in the RU continued to work toward the development of a single multinational revolutionary communist party, and a key part of that was focused in our efforts to link up with and unite, and struggle, with other forces that had come out of the different streams of the movement and the radicalization that had gone on in the ’60s.
And, of course, among the most important of these streams were the different struggles of the oppressed nationalities—Black people, Puerto Ricans, Chicanos, Native Americans, Asians and others—in the United States 1 mentioned earlier that Yoruba from the Young Lords Parly had gone with our delegation to China.
And there was the Black Workers Congress, which grew out of the development of revolutionary organization among Black workers in the auto plants in Detroit, and then organized Black revolutionaries in other parts of the country.
At this time, the Black Workers Congress too was moving more fully in the direction of taking up Marxism and Maoism.
And through the course of discussion we united around this as a common objective.
This Liaison Committee actually had a significant effect in mobilizing masses of people, including around revolutionary May Day, but also in other struggles that were going on, on various fronts, and in developing closer ideological unity and more of a common approach toward a party.
But within this there were a lot of contradictions that were yet to be fully confronted, and would have to be struggled through in order to make the leap to unify all these forces into a single party.
And, as is not surprising given the nature of United States society, one of the main questions on the table was the national question.
These were questions that the whole movement was confronting, and contradictions and conflicting views on these crucial questions remained within the broader framework of unity that was being forged in practice and in theory within the National Liaison Committee.
Here I have to say that an important question arose when we were deciding who should represent the RU in this National Liaison Committee.
DH, who joined the RU during our national tour in 1970, was more and more asserting that he should be playing a leadership role in relation to the Black members within the RU in particular, and he was pushing that he should be the RU representative on the Liaison Committee.
Leibel, interestingly enough, was opposed to this, on what I later came to see was a correct and important basis.
Revolutionaries of different nationalities were confronting the question of how to develop closer working relations and, more fundamentally, ideological and political unity.
People who had come out of a more nationalist framework and had then taken up Marxism were confronting what it means to be working in a common way with white people who had become communists.
Leibel was arguing that we should confront this straight up, and that I should be the representative to the Liaison Committee.
Rather than having this issue be sort of “an elephant in the room” that nobody is talking about directly, let’s get it right out there by having me there as the RU representative, and in that context lets work together and work through this issue as part of the broader struggle that needed to be waged to develop the unity to a higher level.
And let’s not make it more complicated by adding the factor of myself, as a white communist, being the RU representative.
As it turned out, DH didn’t put forward our line, he put forward a rank reactionary nationalist line, not even a revolutionary nationalist line.
He was sort of a combination of a pseudo-communist revisionist from the CP and a very narrow, reactionary nationalist, which actually included a lot of racism and chauvinism toward other nationalities.
But the other, and more fundamental, problem was that, even though everybody had moved to a position of considering themselves communists, there was tension because people who are not while have a lot of negative experience with while people, even white people who seem on a certain level to be friendly or comradely.
And Leibel was right, the best way to deal with that was to put me in the Liaison Committee as the RU representative, to directly confront this problem and struggle il through in that context, rather than seeking to avoid or “soften” this contradiction by having DH be the RU representative.
But, partly because I was confused about this and didn’t join with Leibel’s more correct approach, we ended up with DH as the RU representative.
As it turned out, there was a lot of forward motion through the Liaison Committee.
But even more central in the way this came out was the whole question of whether in the communist movement, and within the party that was to be formed, there needed to be some formal “guarantees” or builtin structures to make sure that the Black people and people of other oppressed nationalities wouldn’t be sold out by the white people.
No Guarantees Against Selling Out Well, as bitter experience has shown, the fact is that just having people of a particular nationality in leadership, or having a majority of leadership drawn from the oppressed nationalities, doesn’t provide a guarantee that you will stay on the revolutionary road.
Staying on the revolutionary road is a matter of struggle—struggle to grasp, and win people to, a revolutionary line and to forge ahead on that basis, resolving the very real contradictions that have to be confronted in seeking to make revolution.
And the problem is that seeking illusory “guarantees” of that kind, based on percentages of different nationalities in leadership and so on, undercuts the actual and essential struggle to grasp and apply the correct line.
The “correct line” isn’t some abstract dogmatic notion; it involves developing your understanding in a living sense of the actual problems that you’re up against in making revolution and how you solve those problems.
Questions and challenges of this kind are very acutely posed, particularly in a country like the United States All these are big questions that don’t get resolved on the basis of having so many people of one nationality or another in leadership, but can only be resolved on the basis of struggling to gain a correct understanding of these contradictions and fighting through all the complexities that are involved and which continually arise, often in new forms, at each new stage of the struggle.
Grasping and uniting around the correct understanding and orientation toward all this was the leap and rupture that needed to be made in order to bring into being a party that really could be a communist vanguard, out of this whole revolutionary upsurge that had occurred through the period of the 1960s into the early ’70s.
And this was the stumbling block that the leaders of the BWC and the PRRWO could not get over or did not leap beyond—this was the rupture they would not or could not make.
They insisted instead that not only in the broader movement, but also institutionalized within the parly itself, you had to have structures in which a certain number of people, and even a majority, would be of the oppressed nationalities to supposedly guarantee that they wouldn’t be sold out.
Ideologically, this represented not rupturing with nationalism, it represented the expression of nationalism within a communist organization, and an undermining of the principles on which a communist organization has to be based.
In the United States you have many different nationalities of people, and one of the key factors in making a revolution in this country is going to be developing the struggle, including among white people, to take on and uproot the whole history of oppression of Black people, Puerto Ricans, Chicanos, Native Americans, Asians, and so on.
You are never going to make a revolution in this country without that being central and pivotal.
But you’re also never going to make a revolution without a vanguard that bases itself on a scientific approach to these questions—and to every other decisive question—a vanguard in which everybody contributes and struggles with each other on the basis of striving to grasp that scientific approach, and on that basis battles out what is required to make revolution and to transform society and the world, to put an end to all oppression.
This is what we were confronting at the lime of the National Liaison Committee.
This is what we, in the RU, were fighting for as the basis on which the party and its leadership had to be unified, whatever particular individuals made up that leadership.
And this is what the leaders of the BWC and the PRRWO, whose ideology was still a mixture of communism and nationalism, balked at.
We criticized some tendencies in our own work to limit our work with while workers to trade-union issues, and among Black workers to tail—in other words, to just go along with and not challenge—a certain nationalist understanding and to confuse that with communist consciousness.
Both of these tendencies expressed a lack of faith in the ability of workers, whether oppressed nationality or white, to grasp their interests as a class —not in a narrow sense, but as the class whose mission it is to do away with capitalism and, eventually, abolish class divisions altogether.
We also criticized a tendency that we had fallen into, to in effect put off the question of actually building the parly, and we said that now the different approaches had pretty much sorted themselves out and it was time to move more seriously towards an actual plan to build that party.
Of course, these problems weren’t limited to us, and we gave this internal bulletin to the other organizations in the Liaison Committee as well, with the hopes of generating struggle with them on a good basis.
Well, it did generate struggle, but of a rather antagonistic character.
When this didn’t happen right away—and it didn’t happen mainly because of larger factors, having to do with the general ebb in the revolutionary struggle in society—they began casting about for something else “that would work,” and began pushing for a more nationalist approach.
They argued that they needed to build up their base before a party could be formed—again, as part of that “guarantee” thinking 1 spoke to earlier—and that combining more nationalism into their communism was the way to do that.
In this we were drawing from the history of the Russian revolutionary movement.
Russia, before the revolution, was called “the prisonhouse of nations,” because there were so many nations and different national minorities that were oppressed under the regime of the Czar.
Within the socialist movement in Czarist Russia there was a group based among Jewish workers that called itself the Bund, which wanted to be part of the overall socialist movement but said that it had a special role in upholding and protecting the interests of Jewish workers, who were bitterly oppressed in Russia.
He pointed out that communists have to base themselves on the interests of the proletariat as a whole.
The goal of socialism and communism, and the radical restructuring and transformation of society and the world on that basis, is what all communists, of whatever nationality, have to base themselves on; and trying to have different communist organizations that see themselves as upholding the particular interests of a particular oppressed group within the proletariat would lead back to nationalism and to the reinforcing of national divisions and not to a revolutionary transformation of society.
Now this same basic line was finding expression within our movement and specifically within the Liaison Committee.
This struggle also erupted very sharply within the RU because DH, who was supposed to be representing our line and our organization within the Liaison Committee, was actually pushing this nationalist line within the RU as well as promoting it on the Liaison Committee.
We insisted on the need to unify on the basis of analyzing reality as it actually is, in all its complexity, and in all its changingness, as the common scientific method and approach.
BWC and PRRWO saw this kind of method and approach as a fetter and, after the painful break-up of the Liaison Committee, they thought they would roar ahead on the basis of what was objectively a combination of dogmatic pseudo-Marxism and revolutionary nationalism.
To a significant degree, that was because we were all confronting the fact that the movement of the ’60s had ebbed, and it wasn’t going to be continuing forward on a high tide in the way it had; and we didn’t know when there would be another high tide—nobody could predict that with certainty.
These were the questions everybody was confronting, but because BWC and PRRWO came up with wrong answers to them, and clung to and refused to rupture with their attempt to eclectically combine nationalism with a Marxism that was becoming more and more dogmatic, they didn’t go forward, and in fact they turned more and more inward and began to get more and more sectarian and even split apart among themselves.
These were people with whom we’d worked closely, people with whom we had developed a real comradeship; we had hopes and expectations of uniting to form a party together with them—which would have been a tremendous thing, if we could have done it on a correct basis.
They were supposed to get in touch with us to let us know about the arrangements for the meeting.
We waited and we waited, and waited and waited, and they were having trouble getting a place for the meeting.
Finally they told us they would call us back in a number of hours, and we were getting so tense, in anticipation of what we knew would be a very heavy meeting, that we decided that we needed some relief.
We picked out the stupidest movie we could find, one of these schlock horror movies called The Night of the Lepus, about these mutating gigantic rabbits that were going around rampaging and ravaging the people in the surrounding towns, eating people and generally creating havoc.
The whole thing just unraveled and blew apart on the basis of the differences that were becoming extremely sharp in the context of needing to make the leap that was before everybody, in order to form the party—the leap and rupture to being communists, in a consistent and thoroughgoing way, to being internationalists, to being Maoists in the fullest and most fundamental sense.
There were a lot of people, particularly within the oppressed nations and nationalities around the world, who admired and respected Mao because he was a leader of an oppressed Third World country and had led the people there to stand up.
That was the question before people, and that was the stumbling block the leaders of PRRWO and the BWC could not or would not get over.
This was heartbreaking, and the meeting was wrenching, because that was the question on the table and it lay at the root of a number of bitter disputes.
It would have been easy, on a certain level, for us to just accede to their demands, but that would have been forming an organization on an opportunist basis, not on a basis of everybody striving to be communists and to grasp the communist outlook and methodology and apply it to all the extremely difficult and complex problems that lie on the road to making revolution.
Instead, we would just have had different “interest groups” and factions within the party, and that would either have ripped the party apart or turned it into a bourgeois mishmash masquerading as a communist parly, like the CPUSA, a party with no unified line or orientation towards making revolution and radically transforming the world.
It was tempting to give in, because it would have smoothed some things over in the short run, and we could have all gone off together to form a party.
But it would have been a serious setback to form a parly on that basis.
Deepening the Struggle Against Narrow Nationalism Instead, we carried forward and deepened the struggle of Marxism vs.
We were firm lhal, if we are going to form a genuine communist vanguard, then we have to unite on the basis of communism, not on the basis of nationalism of even the most revolutionary kind.
We can unite with all kinds of people in the practical struggle who are nationalists of various kinds, including obviously revolutionary nationalists.
But as communists , in forming a communist party , we have to unite on the basis of communism— that has to be the common basis of unity and the common principles that everyone strives to apply.
Many people were arguing that you could combine nationalism and communism, or that revolutionary nationalism was ‘'applied communism” if you were part of an oppressed nation or an oppressed national minority.
So we had to carry out an ideological struggle to clarify these questions and draw crucial lines of demarcation; within our own ranks there were some people who had followed DH, or on their own had gravitated toward the line of confounding and eclectically combining communism and nationalism.
I remember, for example, a big controversy at that time was around whether the struggle to establish a separate stale in the Black Belt South was the heart of the Black people’s struggle.
The BWC was arguing that it was, while our position was that there is a right for Black people to do that, and this right must be firmly upheld, but that was not the heart of the struggle, and to make it the heart of the struggle was to take up a nationalist position that led away from the objective of socialist revolution to transform all of society and uproot all oppression.
We emphasized that the right to do something, including the right to set up a separate state, is not the same thing as the advisability of doing so under all conditions.
Beginning around the time of World War 1, and then really accelerating during and after World War 2, Black people in large numbers were dispersed from that area, both through being pushed off the land because the white owners were mechanizing and didn’t need as many Black laborers on the land, and through the “pull” of better jobs and better social conditions in the north.
The conclusion to be drawn from this extensive research and study was that, on the one hand, large numbers of Black people still lived in the Black Belt South, but even there they were now living mainly in the urban areas, not in the rural farmlands, because of profound changes that were occurring in southern agriculture; and, at the same Lime, millions of Black people had left the south altogether and were now living in urban areas in the north.
And under these conditions, the setting up of a separate state in the Black Belt South, while still a right of Black people, was not at the heart of Black people’s struggle—it didn’t correspond to breaking the most decisive chains of oppression that were shackling them, in the conditions in which they were actually living, with the changes that had gone on in the several decades since World War 2 especially.
Our understanding of this was greatly deepened as a result of extensive concrete investigation and analysis, and theoretical work and a lot of ideological struggle to get further clarity on this question.
On the Real During this lime, I had some interesting personal experiences which served as sort of a commentary on, or perhaps a counterpoint to, this whole ideological struggle we had been engaged in.
When 1 moved to Maywood and I sought out and found the good basketball courts to go to, there were a number of occasions where people were testing me out.
For example, there was this ice cream and hamburger joint in Maywood called the “Cock Robin,” and one of my favorite things to do, after a day of playing basketball, was to go to the Cock Robin.
One day 1 was at the Cock Robin having a hamburger and a milkshake—it was early evening, and one of the guys I knew from playing basketball was sitting in his car.
See “Living Socialism and Dead Dogmatism,” The Communist, Volume I, Number 2.
There was another guy 1 knew from playing ball, and one day I walked into McDonald’s and he was working there.
I’m standing in line, the line is moving and I’m getting close to the cash register where he’s working. know he’s seeing me, but he’s not saying anything to me or making any gesture to acknowledge me.
And obviously this was another situation where he was wondering if 1 was going to act all different and not even acknowledge him.
This guy who worked in McDonald’s, 1 think his name was Raymond, and he had an older brother named James.
James was a very good basketball player, he could really leap, and for whatever reason he liked to play on the same squad with me.
At about the time the struggle with the Bundists was coming to a head, James and 1 were talking about different things going on, and in particular what was happening with Black people.
And thinking of what people like DH were always arguing, I said, “Well, you know, some people say that really, deep down.
And James replied, “Well, not really”—and then we went into a whole discussion of the complexities of this.
Another lime in the same period, for some reason there wasn’t much going on at the basketball courts where I usually hung out, so 1 asked somebody where was another place to play ball, and they directed me to this park on the west side of Chicago.
I drove down there and 1 got into some games, and the team 1 was on won a few games, but then we lost so we had to sit down and wait until our turn came around again.
It was a Saturday afternoon and a lot of people were playing, so we had to wait quite a while to get back on the court, and I got into this conversation with this guy who'd been on my team about what was going on with the government and politicians, and in particular how did you look at Kennedy.
This guy was talking about how when Kennedy came in, it made a lot of difference for Black people, Kennedy did a lot for Black people, and so on.
And 1 was arguing, it’s not really that Kennedy did things for Black people, Kennedy wasn’t really for Black people, it’s just that there were changes he had to go along with.
I’m not saying that there were no changes made from the time Kennedy came in.
What I’m saying is that it wasn’t Kennedy who did this out of the goodness of his heart.
We had tried to go down the road together with these other forces to forge the unity to build a party and then that was blown apart, for the reasons that I’ve discussed.
Once we’d come to the understanding that we had to carry forward with the building of the party, even in the face of this setback with the National Liaison Committee, then we recognized that this had to become the main and central task for the period of time until the party was formed—and this had to be a relatively short and telescoped process.
We couldn’t drag it out or we’d lose the momentum and we would lose and dissipate the people who’d come forward out of this whole upsurge of the ’60s and into the early 70s—we would lose the chance to bring them together as an organized vanguard force, and therefore nothing permanent, in terms of revolutionary leadership, would come out of that whole upsurge—which would obviously be a major setback and defeat.
They concern the basis on which people are going to be and need to be united in order to form the party.
But they are especially important to be battled out, and to get the most clarity and unity around, in a country like the U.S., given everything that you’re up against.
It is a major, even a monumental challenge to make revolution in a country like this while at the same time doing this in a way that contributes to and is part of the whole world revolutionary process to abolish imperialism and thoroughly transform all societies and relations based on exploitation, oppression and inequality.
Especially given this momentous challenge, you have to struggle to get clarity and to determine what really is the road that will lead toward that, even while you will continually have a great deal more to learn as you carry this forward.
So, in order to have a solid foundation, you have to recognize and draw basic dividing lines, and sharply distinguish what will really lead to revolution from what will lead away from it.
Going on Tour We were carrying out discussions and struggle with different forces around the country, but as one leading edge of this party-building process in 1974 1 went on a speaking tour around the country, representing the RU and putting forward our views on the building of the parly.
In connection with this speaking tour, we organized private meetings and discussions with different people and groups in many cities across the country, from the northwest to the Bay Area to the midwest, the east, and the south.
As I said, we had to draw lines of demarcation clearly and sharply in order to unite people on a solid and correct basis to actually take up the challenge of leading a revolution in a country like this.
So the speeches would lay out the need for a parly and why that was a crucial thing to bring forward out of this whole upsurge, but then they would criticize different lines that had currency in the movement.
They put forward that basically the only task was to build the party, and they made theoretical work essentially the beall and end-all in relation to building the party.
Lenin meant that when you’re working among the masses, you shouldn’t just tail after their understanding and where they’re at, at a given time; instead you have to, as he pul it, divert them and their struggles onto the revolutionary path, and through the course of all your work show them the necessity and the possibility of revolution and organize and lead them for revolution, and not for something else, something less.
This was just a dogmatic distortion that was combined with their retreat into nationalism.
There were also forces who were falling into the opposite error, putting forward the position that Lenin actually was polemicizing against— that is, a reformist position that would pul revolution off the map, or into an indefinite future that really had nothing to do with the work you were doing today.
In their view, you did have to completely immerse yourself in the day-to-day struggles, whatever they were, and leave the goal of revolution out of the picture, or talk about it only as a vague abstract thing.
These speeches and public meetings were, as you can imagine, very lively.
There would usually be hundreds and hundreds of people at the public meetings, because the question of the party was a big question among a whole section of people who’d come forward out of the upsurges of the ’60s and early ’70s.
I’d give a speech, and it was very polemical, and then we had question-and-answer sessions, which were generally very heated, because many, many groups and tendencies would mobilize people to come and raise their questions and disagreements.
That was the level of “ideological struggle” they often dragged things down to.
There had been a big strike in the Bay Area, and my father had issued an injunction against the strikers, limiting the picketing.
Second, let’s put this into context and draw the most important lessons from it.
I happen to know this judge you’re talking about, and on a personal level he’s a good guy, and on some issues like discrimination, and the rights of defendants, he’s made some good rulings.
But the point is, this is all within the framework of an oppressive system and a set of laws that serves this system.
So in the final analysis, it doesn’t matter whether he’s a good guy or not, he’s following the law and the law represents the interests not of the proletariat, the working class, but the interests of the capitalist class.
So I tried to use even these personal attacks to make some important political points and bring out the nature of the system, and how even a good-hearted person, which my father was, when acting as a judge was operating within the confines, and had to follow the logic and mechanisms, of a system that is oppressive and exploitative.
A couple of other comrades accompanied me on this Lour, and they would also take part in the private meetings with different people and groups.
The RU and the Mass Struggle Even as we recognized that party-building had become the main task and we had to pul our main emphasis into that for a certain telescoped period of lime—and this party-building lour was one major reflection of that—we also were continuing to carry out mass work of various kinds.
As 1 said, we rejected the dogmatist position that the BWC and the PRRWO were retreating into, which insisted that you should withdraw from the mass movements.
There were still mass demonstrations in the early 70s against the Vietnam War, until the United States actually began withdrawing.
Very importantly, the struggle we waged against narrow nationalism had actually unleashed the comrades in the RU to more aggressively and dynamically take up the struggle against national oppression, in many different forms.
In the Bay Area, the RU took on a dragnet against Black men in San Francisco and the police murder of a Black youth in Oakland named Tyrone Guyton.
We were able to both unite with the outrage within the community and help give that organized expression and, very notably, comrades were able to mobilize workers in the factories, other workplaces and the unemployment lines to take on these struggles, both at work and in the streets.
In the Mines One of the main struggles that we were involved in, in the period of ’74-75, even as we were moving toward the formation of the party, involved the miners in West Virginia.
So we decided that we would, in fact, send some of these people who’d been in West Virginia before, as well as some other comrades, to the mines.
It was really a tremendous thing that people volunteered to go to the mines.
Working in the mines is a very difficult and dangerous job, and life in those areas of Appalachia is not an easy life by any means.
And a number of comrades, including the ones who made the suggestion to do work there, and others who volunteered, plunged right into this.
We set out to lake socialism and communism to what we saw as an important section of the working class.
And we did play a leading role in the formation of what became known as the Miners Right to Strike Committee, which led a number of major strikes in the area of West Virginia, in which tens of thousands of miners were involved.
At the same lime, as we learned more fully through our work there, there was a big “disconnect” between the trade union militancy of a lot of the miners, which was very developed, and their political consciousness and ideological outlook, which was not on a very high level.
This was a rural area, steeped in a lot of religious, even fundamentalist religious, tradition.
The comrades who worked in the mines would talk about the raging debates they’d have with the other miners, some of whom were also part-time preachers, who would always be going around Bible-thumping.
Working in the mines leaves people covered with coal dust, so at the end of the shift everybody heads for the showers and then people would hang around in the shower rooms afterward and there would be these arguments and debates.
So he was able to argue very strongly about why evolution was a fact and lake on all this fundamentalist religious nonsense.
So this gives you a sense of both the atmosphere and some of the ideological work and struggle that our comrades were carrying out within it.
I also know from talking to some of the women comrades who were down there that this was a very difficult area for them to try to live and work in.
On the one hand, there were just beginning to be a few women coming into the mines as workers during the lime our comrades were there.
Overwhelmingly, and almost entirely, this was a preserve of men — the men worked in the mines and the women mainly didn’t work or sometimes had jobs, or part-time jobs, in various places but, with very few exceptions, not in the mines.
In general, it was a very suffocating atmosphere for the women who had grown up there, and in certain ways it was even more suffocating for the women comrades who had come out of a whole different scene, where culturally and politically and in other ways they were actively involved in a lot things.
They would tell stories of how they would meet women in West Virginia who had this hunger to know about the broader world, but who then at a certain point would often retreat and pull back, because it was very difficult for them to break out of the narrowing and suffocating confines of the situation there, and many of them didn’t see any realistic alternative.
We did lead a lot of mass struggle and we were trying to do revolutionary work and bring forward socialism and communism.
But, while the miners would unite mililantly with us in trade union struggles, it was very difficult to win them to a revolutionary, communist class consciousness.
This work we did in the mines had its own particularities but it was also representative of the kind of work we were doing in many different parts of the working class.
And we were continuing to take part in the broader political movements, although these were undergoing something of an ebb.
The Vietnam War, or at least the massive involvement of United States forces in that war, had come to an end, and other struggles that had come out of the ’60s were also ebbing to a certain degree.
There was a significant amount of unemployment in the early and mid ’70s.
We were not only trying to organize people to fight for jobs and benefits but also, once again, seeking to bring broader political consciousness and the goal of socialism and communism to the unemployed workers.
And we would mobilize people who were unemployed not only to fight around that issue but to take part in broader political events and struggles, including bringing them to May Day and International Women’s Day rallies and demonstrations, as well as involving them in other political struggles of the lime.
This was all part of our understanding of how to develop an all-around struggle in which the working class comes to the fore as the leading force and allies with and leads other strata and movements in society toward the goal of a socialist revolution and ultimately communism.
Several times I’ve mentioned my friend Billy, whom I’d known since high school.
He had been in my younger sister’s class, a couple of years behind me, but we overlapped for a brief time in high school, although we only casually knew each other at that time.
Then, when I’d gotten sick and I’d gone back to do tutoring and working with some of the athletes in other ways at the high school, I'd gotten to know him in a deeper way.
I remember very fondly that, when 1 first started going out of the house, after I got sick and was engaged in a long struggle to get over the kidney disease, and 1 was very self-conscious about how I looked because of all the side effects of the cortisone I was taking, Billy came right up to me and acted as if everything were just perfectly normal and there were no reason to be reluctant about talking to me.
Something like that meant a lot to me at the time, and it stayed with me—that’s the way I am—and after that I always had a very fond place in my heart for him.
After Billy got out of high school, he got married right away and he needed to gel a job.
And we actually helped Billy get a job as a longshoreman, or at least got him into the longshoremen’s union.
But when 1 saw him, we would often get into talking about what was going on in the world.
One time, 1 was running down to him what was happening in South Africa and in particular the role that Coca-Cola played in supporting the apartheid government in South Africa and oppressing the African people there, and how therefore I was boycotting Coke.
Yet, every lime I’d see him after that, he'd ask me, “Are you still not drinking Coke?” — and both of us knew that this was a metaphor for bigger things than just Coke, or even just Coke’s role in South Africa.
So Billy had these conflicting, contradictory sides, but he was always interested in what was going on in the world and supportive of the political things I was into, and he was the one who introduced me to people who in turn introduced me to Huey Newton and Bobby Seale.
He was someone I enjoyed talking with, someone I learned a great deal from, and someone who meant a lot to me.
In 1974, when 1 was living in Chicago, one day I came home and there was a message that Wilma, the woman he’d married right out of high school, was trying to reach me.
So I called her back and she gave me the sad news that Billy had been killed.
I used to go down and look for him there, that’s where he hung out a lot. remember being down there looking for him one day when the news broke that Martin Luther King had been assassinated.
There were these two guys parked in their car in front of Walker’s Pool Hall.
But 1 was somewhat familiar with this scene in the area, in this stretch of Sacramento Street, where Billy was killed.
As I later heard the story, he was in some kind of after hours joint, sitting at a table talking with somebody who’d gotten into some shit with some other people, and both he and the other guy were shot.
But what made it especially excruciating was that it was something like an hour before the police and an ambulance came, and during that time Billy bled to death in this place.
Even though, since moving to Chicago, I hadn’t been able to keep up with him the way 1 did when I was living in the Bay Area, and I hadn’t seen him for more than a year, this was a deep personal blow to me.
Since I had moved to Chicago, my relationship with my parents had also gone through further changes.
As I explained earlier, in order to make the kind of leaps that we had to make in moving to Richmond and going to the proletariat, and given the political and ideological differences that existed with my parents at that time, our relations became pretty estranged, and I largely cut off contact with them for a number of years.
Not that I completely broke off things with them, or that our relationship was fundamentally antagonistic, but for quite a while I didn’t see that much of them.
We saw a lot of things differently and 1 was living a very different life than they were—and a different life than they wanted me to be living, to be honest.
By the mid-’70s, there was still tension between us, but two things had happened.
One, while my parents initially supported the Vietnam War, they had later come around to opposing it, and they were principled enough to admit they had been wrong.
And, more generally, while my father was then a judge, he was the kind of judge who, for example, made rulings against discrimination in the selection of juries.
He was still a judge, and that was an objective fact, which I’ve spoken about earlier, but our political and ideological differences were not as great as they had been before.
So 1 was getting to be a little closer with my parents at this lime, but our lives still didn’t intersect very much and there was still some tension there.
The RU also developed Programme Discussion Committees, where people could struggle over the actual application of Marxism to making revolution in this country and through lhat develop a Programme for the new party.
This journal was addressed to the people who were in these Programme Discussion Committees and in general were part of the process of going to the party.
There were a few people from the BWC who joined the party at the time it was formed, or soon after it was formed, and there were some people from the PRRWO who did the same—this was not a matter of huge numbers, but it was still significant.
And there were some people who were in some other organized formations in various parts of the country who joined in this party-building process, a number of whom became part of the parly when it was formed.
There were also others who weren’t part of any organized group or formation, but were just revolutionary-minded individuals who came forward in this party-building process.
So this journal and these discussion committees provided an organized form through which people could thrash out these issues and also come to a decision about whether they wanted to go forward to be part of forming the party.
Some people who look part in this process ended up deciding they didn’t want to join the party, but many of them remained supportive.
And a number of people who were outside the RU were brought forward through this process and became part of the formation of the party.
It was through this process that we identified and focused on the key questions and the key controversies that needed to be put on the table, and on the floor of the founding congress of the party, to be thrashed out.
You can’t discuss literally every line of a draft programme or constitution—you have to focus on issues that become concentration points of key questions and matters of principle, and/or the issues over which there is the most controversy and struggle.
Within the RU itself, of course, there was very concentrated focus on these questions, and a lot of struggle—it was a period where people were doing their political work in the day and then at night studying Marxism, summing up their practice, debating questions and writing for the journal.
There was a lot of vibrancy to this process, but there were also some negative elements—both in terms of ideological and political line and also in terms of method, or how people were approaching this process— that were finding expression and gaining some momentum.
I mentioned earlier that the struggle with the BWC and PRRWO—and, really, the whole process of building the Parly—occurred in a situation where the revolutionary upsurge in the United States had been ebbing, and this was one important objective factor setting the context for things.
The United States had begun to pull out of Vietnam and was somewhat in the position of regrouping and shoring up its empire, while the Soviet Union was beginning to push out and much more fully challenge the division of the world in which the United States reigned as supreme imperialist.
And, as I touched on earlier, China was facing a threat of Soviet invasion and the direct massing of thousands of Soviet troops on its northern border, and was making adjustments in its international posture.
So it wasn’t just that within the United States struggles had run up against certain limitations and begun to ebb; the situation had begun to change on a world scale as certain dynamics and trends played themselves out, or at least went through important shifts.
One of the very sharp questions posing itself by the early 70s was the essential nature and role of the Soviet Union.
Many people criticized the Soviet Union but said that while it wasn’t very revolutionary, Vietnam and Cuba after all were revolutionary, and they would pull and force the Soviet Union to be more revolutionary.
We would argue, no, the Soviet Union is using, for its own imperialist ends, various struggles against colonial domination in the world.
For example, in places like Angola, we would maintain that the goals and objectives and the content of what the Soviet Union is doing does not constitute supporting revolution but misusing people’s struggles in order to divert them into serving the Soviet strategy of contending with the United States in various parts of the world and exerting its own interests as an imperialist power, a social-imperialist power.
Even some people who had one foot in Maoism often had the other fool in an eclectic, centrist position which ultimately covered over the nature of the Soviet Union and apologized for it.
They would argue that the Soviet Union is supporting the struggle against the United States in the world, so that proves the Soviet Union actually is socialist or at least can be made to support revolution, and anyway it’s better than the United States And we would insist that, no, these are both imperialist powers, the Soviet Union has a socialist guise but it is now in essence and in its deeds an imperialist power, and even when it appears to be supporting struggles against United States imperialism, it is acting out of its own imperialist needs and interests.
You couldn’t just look at the different phenomena that occurred in the world, like the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, on the one hand, or the Soviet military aid for rebel forces in Angola, on the other hand, taken by themselves.
You had to get to the essence of the question—the essential nature of the Soviet Union.
So we did a lot of theoretical work and research to dig into the nature of the economic foundation of the Soviet Union.
Revisionism in Power Equals Capitalist Restoration We made an analysis, based on our research and theoretical study, that the Soviet Union was, in fact, a country where capitalism had been restored, not in the classical form of “free market” capitalism, but in the form of state capitalism.
Now, at that point, our analysis and our understanding of this question was still only in the developing stages, but we did make a leap in putting together both theoretical and concrete analysis of the workings of the Soviet system, beginning with its economics, which is the foundation of the politics and ideology and culture and the military and international policies of any society.
So we analyzed, both from a theoretical standpoint but also in terms of the concrete workings of the Soviet economy, that this was a system where capitalism had been restored, where the pursuit of capitalist profit had become the guiding principle and ruling dynamic within the Soviet economy (and in its relations with the economies of other countries) and that this ultimately governed what the Soviet Union did in the world.
I wasn’t doing most of the direct research or writing of the initial drafts; but I was discussing with the team the conceptual and methodological framework for this project.
And then, as the team was writing drafts, 1 was reading the drafts and making comments and suggestions for rewrites, as well as for further areas of investigation and analysis.
People in groups like the Communist League 28 were insisting not only that capitalism had not been restored in the Soviet Union, but that theoretically it was impossible for capitalism to be restored in a country once it had become socialist.
In opposition to this, drawing from pathbreaking analysis by Mao, we argued that socialism itself, where it does exist, is a society in transition from capitalism to communism, and is full of and driven forward by contradictions between, on the one hand, the old capitalist relations and elements which are being eliminated but are not yet fully abolished and uprooted and, on the other hand, the elements and forces in society leading to the ultimate achievement of communism, where these remaining capitalist relations will be fully overcome and eliminated.
To take one example, socialism still contains a division of labor between mental and manual workers—a division oflabor which is characteristic of capitalism and, actually, all class society.
Communism is a society where such divisions will no longer exist—where everyone will partake fully in both mental and manual labor—but you can’t just declare that this has been accomplished, overnight; there has to be a transition.
Throughout the course of this transition, this division contains the seeds of exploitative and oppressive relations, and if policies are not pursued to step by step eliminate this, then capitalist relations will grow within the socialist society, and forces favoring capitalist restoration will feed on that and gain strength.
To fail to recognize, or to blindly ignore, this danger of capitalist restoration in socialist society will only disorient and ideologically disarm the masses of people and those who are seeking to lead them out of the hell of capitalism and to a radically different and better world.
This was all part of a very lively, vigorous, vibrant process of struggling things out to form a party that would really be a communist vanguard—a revolutionary communist party, as we eventually called it.
And as things would develop in the world—with the death of Mao and then the coup by revisionists in China in 1976, and the further pushing out of the Soviet Union in contention with the United States at the end of the ’70s and into the ’80s—this understanding of the nature of the Soviet Union would prove to be very important.
In the late ’60s the Soviet Union was not contending with the United States in the same way it did in the 1970s—the Soviet revisionists were more concerned with consolidating their home base at that time, and they were, in a real sense, letting the United States slowly bleed in Vietnam.
So many forces that were turning to revolution in the ’60s could see, on a perceptual level, that the Soviet Union was not about revolution or really challenging U.S domination in the world.
But the people who had, in the late ’60s, united on a basic level with the idea that the Soviet Union was no longer socialist, and certainly was not revolutionary, could not deal with the huge changes which were germinating by the early ’70s and which would soon blossom—in rather ugly ways.
But none of these trends could maintain their revolutionary bearings, to a significant degree because they had not made a thorough, materialist analysis of things in the first place.
In the midst of all this, in the fall of 1974,1 went back to China on a trip with Leibel Bergman.
This time I went with a little different view and with different objectives.
I mentioned earlier how, after our first trip to China, we’d come back and pul out a pamphlet defending and seeking to explain the Chinese position on controversial international issues, in particular what was going on in Bangladesh—China’s support for Pakistan in seeking to suppress the breakaway of Bangladesh from Pakistan.
Well, as 1 said, we learned some lessons about uncritically accepting and rationalizing everything a country does just because it is socialist and just because, in an overall sense, it plays the role of a bastion of socialism and of the communist movement in the world and is in a real sense a beacon light and source of inspiration.
That was the role that China was playing then, but that didn’t mean that everything China did should be uncritically supported.
Marxism is, and has to be taken up as, a critical revolutionary approach to reality, and as Marx insisted it has to constantly interrogate reality and interrogate itself.
So this is something we learned, partly through the overall process of developing and engaging the struggle in all the different realms, including the theoretical and ideological realm, and more particularly as a result of the mistake that we’d made earlier in uncritically supporting what China was doing.
So Leibel and 1 went on this trip with a lot of questions that we wanted to raise about what was going on, especially with Chinese foreign policy and international relations at that time.
We also raised the question of Pinochet in Chile, who in 1973 had carried out a vicious coup against the reformist, social-democratic government of Salvador Allende.
Pinochet, with the backing and support of the CIA, had overthrown the Allende government and then murdered and tortured thousands of people.
Later, when I myself went into exile in France, I met a number of Maoists from Chile who’d been forced into exile, along with thousands and thousands of other Chileans.
The Chinese did not denounce this coup, and in fact did not aid people who were victimized in this coup and seeking refuge; China in effect supported the Pinochet government.
This is another thing we were very upset about and raised when we went to China in 1974.
The coup that put an end to the Allende government, and in which Allende himself died, drowned this illusion in the blood of the Chilean people.
But, because of the policies and actions of the Chinese government (along with the work of the revisionist propaganda machinery), it was not the revisionists who were discredited so much as China and even Maoism.
We knew that raising questions about these policies of the Chinese government was going to make things pretty hot, but we felt it was important to put these things on the table.
We went prepared to do that — that was our orientation and that was one of the main purposes of this trip to China.
Now, I in particular was still very excited about going to China, where great things were going on in terms of the transformation of the institutions of society and the relations between people, and of the culture.
China was still carrying forward the Cultural Revolution, and this was very exciting and inspiring.
One thing about this trip that I’ve laughed about afterwards, because it’s sort of ironic, is that Leibel knew other people who had lived in China, and before we left on this trip, he had gone and talked to some of them.
He was actually a leader of the people who continued to uphold and fight for Mao’s line against Deng Xiaoping and the other revisionists who seized power in China and then look it back down the capitalist road after Mao died.
At the time of our visit in 1974, however, although we knew generally that Chang Chun-chiao was a leader who’d come forward in the course of the Cultural Revolution in Shanghai, and had become a major leader in the whole country, we didn’t have a full sense of the internal struggles going on within the Chinese parly.
We understood there was struggle, and we knew some things about the role of different people, such as Chang Chun-chiao, but that was only in broad terms, and we weren’t privy to all the ins and outs of this.
While we were in China, we thought about this advice to ask to speak to Chang Chun-chiao, but we decided not to pursue that, because we knew enough to know that it would be a bad idea to inject ourselves into whatever internal struggles might be going on inside the Chinese party.
But I always wondered what would have happened if we had asked to speak to Chang Chun-chiao.
And Getting No Answers We did raise the tough questions we fell we had to raise, and we pretty much got no answers.
But, in reality, as part of this three worlds theory, the Chinese were distinguishing and identifying the Soviet Union as the main danger and main enemy among the two superpowers.
In fact, the Soviet Union was, in immediate terms, the main danger to China—if an attack were to be made on China at that time, it would most likely come from the Soviet Union, and the Soviets were actually making preparations for such an attack, as I’ve discussed earlier.
But we rejected the idea that, on a world scale, you should just identify the Soviet Union as an enemy and essentially pul the United States and all of its allies and puppets, like the Shah of Iran and Marcos and Haile Selassie, in the camp of friends, or potential allies.
And, in fact, that was the effect of this ‘‘Soviet Union main danger, main enemy” line—in this conception, the Soviet Union was really the only enemy.
As part of this three worlds theory, the position was being put forward openly that even imperialist slates in Europe, and Japan, should be united with against the Soviet Union.
When this presentation was completed, we look a break, and Leibel and I went back to my room.
But at that time Leibel very strongly, and with great sarcasm, rejected this notion of uniting with the capitalist and imperialist countries.
So that gives a sense, and a flavor, of the struggle that went on during that trip to China, even while we continued, as I said, to be very enthusiastic about the overall character of China as a socialist country, the revolutionary transformations that were being carried forward through the continuation of the Cultural Revolution, and the inspiration and lessons that provided for revolutionaries and communists all over the world.
Sometimes things can be acutely contradictory, and 1 was struck with how this was so during that visit to China in 1974.
Wherever you’d go, in work places or residential neighborhoods, you’d see basketball hoops and basketball courts.
And I remember that during the first trip they organized a game that some of us played with the staff of one of the guest houses where we were staying.
On these trips to China, in each city after you had visited different places and held meetings, they would host a banquet and there was a lot of great food—and then some food which some of the members of the delegation had a harder time with.
But it wasn’t something people on the delegation were familiar with, and not only the taste but the texture of it was somewhat difficult for a number of people on the delegation, including myself to be honest.
But just as our hosts were seeking to be polite with us, we were trying to reciprocate.
That was a clash of cultures, so to speak, but it was all handled among comrades.
I tried very hard not to make it like a typical “ugly American” thing or an affront to Chinese culture, and they tried very hard not to be insulted and to take it in the right spirit.
Comrade Chin During one of the trips to China, we were in Shanghai and we met with one of the leading people there whose name, as I recall, was Chin Tsu Min, and he enthusiastically upheld the line of supporting the Cultural Revolution and Mao.
During this visit he gave us a very interesting and thorough presentation about what was happening in Shanghai.
In particular he talked about what they were doing with the economy in Shanghai and the advances they’d made in production.
It was clear, especially in retrospect, that he was doing this because Shanghai was a revolutionary center in China, and the line of attack of the revisionists was that all this revolution was hurting production.
Shanghai was the place where, after the revisionist coup in 1976, the people’s militias actually fought the army, the regular army, for a couple of days, even though their attempt to resist the coup was finally drowned in blood.
So Shanghai was known to be a revolutionary center and the attack on it and on people like Chang Chun-chiao, who came out of Shanghai and was one of the leaders of the so-called Gang of Four, was that they weren’t concerned with production.
In any case, comrade Chin gave us a long presentation about what they were doing with the economy and the advances they were making in production on all different fronts in Shanghai. remember being struck by that at the time and, reflecting on it later, I realized that this was in part to inform us and in part to answer these attacks that were being made.
So anyway, after this long and very interesting discussion we had with this guy and other people there representing the leadership in Shanghai, we had a banquet, at the end of our visit.
Well, l noticed that whenever we’d have a toast, comrade Chin would lake his little wine glass and dump out the wine.
All this was in good fun, and so he started drinking a little bit, and sure enough, he did get red in the face.
And we all roared with laughter. 1 remembered that very affectionately—and then I thought about it very bitterly when 1 learned that he’d been executed as part of the revisionist coup.
On the one hand, the Congress represented an important leap, in that a vanguard party did in fact gel brought into being through this whole process and as a result of this whole upsurge of the 1960s and early ’70s.
So, in the main—in the principal aspect as we say—this was a tremendous achievement and a tremendous step forward.
These people, as things developed more fully, actually became an organized faction.
But then there was this group that we later dubbed Mensheviks, because they were ideologically and politically akin to the Menshevik trend in the Russian revolution, which opposed Lenin and the Bolsheviks from an economist and reformist position.
The struggle with this Menshevik faction within our own Parly came to a head and took a big leap when the coup in China happened.
They wanted to adopt a mixture of Maoism, on the one hand, and revisionism and reformism, on the other hand—that’s what it amounted to objectively—and they were already pushing for this at the lime the RCP was founded.
These people, who became the Menshevik faction within our parly, had a style of work and of relating to people that I didn’t recognize as having anything to do with communism.
They were petty and nasty, and if they didn’t agree with you they would use underhanded and unprincipled methods to try to undermine you, and they’d attack you in an opportunist, unprincipled way, and even on a personal level.
Individuals could form, and should form, different ideas and viewpoints about the different issues that were being discussed and debated.
But different parts of the RU weren’t supposed to be solidifying and forming groups, or factions, in essence, around different positions.
As a leader of the RU—and in fact by this time it had been announced internally within the RU that I had been elected the Chairman of the Central Committee of the RU—because of holding that position I did not intervene in these discussions.
As the leader of the RU, if I had intervened, it obviously would have had an influence one way or the other, and that was not appropriate in this “botlom-up” process, so 1 went to learn and investigate but didn’t take an active part in the discussion.
I asked some questions sometimes about how people saw this or that, but I was very careful and scrupulous not to take sides, if you will, on the different positions that were being discussed and debated and not to act in a way that would undermine the process of discussion and debate.
These were mass organizations we were trying to build among workers who were more politically advanced; the idea was that these organizations would be more politically advanced than the trade unions but intermediate between the trade unions and the parly—in other words, they weren’t communist, but they weren’t just trade unions either—they were more politically radical and had a broader political orientation than the trade unions, even while their basis of unity was not revolution, socialism, and communism.
So, in a beginning way, the tension and struggle was already asserting itself between a more narrow, reformist, economist view and one that, yes, had some of those influences but was also seeking to bring a broader political perspective and ultimately a revolutionary perspective to the working class, including through our work as communists in these intermediate workers organizations.
I was taken aback by this, because in this process different district organizations of the RU were not supposed to take positions.
Plus the whole spirit and style of this was completely contrary to the spirit in which people were supposed to be engaging and discussing these questions.
There was no comradeship in it, it was just a bitter attack and denunciation of other people who were part of the same organization and part of the same party-building process.
We don’t have ‘district lines,’ we’re not supposed to be organizing people around lines going into the Congress.
This was part of a whole organized effort, infused with a factional spirit and a factional purpose.
And then, at the same time and in contradiction to that, there were a number of erroneous ideas and outright wrong positions being fought for by different people, positions which would have ultimately undermined the revolutionary and communist nature of the Parly.
But there remained an essential and fundamental grounding in the principle that the reason we’re going to the working class, the reason we’re working among other strata, the reason we’re trying to build a united front led by the working class, as we understood that then, is because we want to overthrow capitalism and get to socialism and ultimately a communist world.
In the early ’70s, a lot of members of the RU who had gone to the working class had in fact ended up among the more exploited and poorer sections of the proletariat.
There are the more bourgeoisified sections of the working class that are paid more and experience all these conservatizing influences from having a more bourgeoisified existence.
And then there are what Lenin referred to as the lower, deeper sections of the proletariat.
And, along with that, in the Programme adopted at the Founding Congress, it was actually said that the center of gravity of our work should be the economic struggle of the workers.
Now, especially those of us whose orientation had remained one of seeing the need for revolution, and who were inspired by the vision of a whole new, communist world, were not particularly interested in or inspired by the notion of becoming trade-union secretaries, literally or in our political and ideological orientation; we saw this concentration among the workers in the larger factories and workplaces as a necessary part of building a working class movement that would be developed into a class-conscious revolutionary movement.
But in fact we were working in ways and adopting policies that were undermining that, and this was becoming pretty acutely contradictory.
This was very sharply expressed at this first Central Committee meeting, following the Founding Congress.
Mickey Jarvis, who became one of the main leaders of the Menshevik faction, gave a presentation on concentrating our forces in the major industries, like auto and steel—in fact, we ranked these industries in order of importance, largely on the basis of how large-scale the factories in these industries were.
But, in fact, this was a profoundly mistaken orientation and direction.
It’s not that we shouldn’t have worked among those sections of the workers, especially when they did engage in strikes and other struggles, but that shouldn’t have been where our work was rooted and—as we came to see more clearly in a little while—the center of gravity of our political work shouldn’t have been in the economic struggle of the workers in general, and particularly not of the more bourgeoisified workers.
But in mapping out this approach of going systematically into the big industries and in making the center of gravity of our work the economic struggle of the workers, particularly in these large industries, our whole orientation became almost like that of a slightly left-wing trade union organization.
In addition, when you do political work among people, it’s not a one-way street—you influence them, but they influence you as well.
You’re “sharing weal and woe,” as the Chinese used to say —you’re gelling to know people and their problems, you're learning from them, you’re coming to understand better how they see things, and inevitably you’re being influenced, to one degree or another, by their outlook on things.
That was skewing and affecting even many of the belter comrades who had a more revolutionary spirit.
Country Music We had all been affected by this economism, even on the level of culture.
For example, a number of people, including myself, started listening to a lot of country music, because while we knew we had lo bring forward the workers from the oppressed nationalities, we also recognized that it was necessary to bring forward the white workers, to win them to the fight against discrimination—against national oppression, as we say, or against racism, as it is popularly put—and win them in general to a socialist and revolutionary perspective.
So a number of us were listening to a lot of country music, and 1 have lo say that I'm a sucker for a beautiful song.
Some country music songs are very beautiful, in fact, so it wasn’t just that I held my nose and listened to this music—some of the songs 1 actually liked, and some of them had a little bit more rebellious spirit Loo.
There was Kris Kristofferson and Willie Nelson and Johnny Cash, and 1 also liked this Chicano country singer named Johnny Rodriguez. remember he had this song “Riding My Thumb to Mexico,” which 1 liked because, while it was a love song in one sense— or a song about a relationship that didn’t work out—it also had an a kind of “outlaw” feel to it.
He came to Chicago and he had his band called ‘The Coral Reefer Band”; and of course “reefer” was a play on words—on the one hand, it referred to the Caribbean influences in his music, but then it was also...reefer.
In this audience there were some youth from the middle class, but there were also a lot of young white proletarians who were there, who were into all of this.
There are workers, including among the while youth, who are more alienated and rebellious than many of the more stable and more conservative-tending workers among whom we had been focusing much of our work.
It is right to have a strategic orientation of winning as many as possible of the more intermediate workers, and even more backward workers, to socialism, but this should not be our main focus.
In that way, this Jimmy Buffett concert, while in and of itself a small thing, was a part of provoking questions in my mind politically and ideologically.
At the same time, throughout this period I had never stopped being drawn to the culture that I’d developed a love for as a youth, namely Black culture and R&rB music at that time.
While I was listening to country music, 1 was also listening to the main Black radio station in Chicago.
I remember in particular that there was a disk jockey on that station who used to do these little routines, especially late at night, and he had this one character he portrayed, Rudolph “Hat-Tipped-to-lhe-Side” Browner.
There was a lot of nonsense mixed in with it, but it was really funny, and I used to especially look forward to when that routine would come on the radio.
The basic thing, the thing that sustained me, was that I didn’t join the revolutionary movement—and 1 didn’t join the movement before 1 was a revolutionary or a communist—to wallow in narrow petty reforms.
Even before 1 became a communist, l was motivated by the recognition that radical changes were needed in society and the world.
When 1 became convinced that we had to go to the working class in order to make revolution, however we understood that at the early stages, then that is what I joined with others to do.
We still held to the orientation that the purpose of all this is to gel rid of this rotten, foul, oppressive, horrendous society and everything this system does to people all over the world, and bring into being a radically different and better world—a communist world.
It wasn’t that we set out to defeat this developing Menshevik faction—we didn’t even realize at that time how developed this faction was, or how firmly committed they were to this sort of economist, reformist path.
It was just that we were still in this for revolution and communism, so we kept trying to find the ways to get it back to that.
Eldridge Finds Jesus Just around this time, Eldridge Cleaver suddenly popped up in the news again.
This was a revelation to him, and he’d become a Christian, even a Christian fundamentalist.
Because, while 1 had a lot of respect for him when he was playing a revolutionary role and he made many positive contributions—and I’ve said many times, and will say again, that he had an important positive influence in terms of my development, turning me on to Mao and radicalizing me and helping me rupture with some reformism and go in a revolutionary direction—at the same time there was always a bit of the hustler in Eldridge.
Years later someone who used to be in the Black Panther Parly just happened to bump into Eldridge somewhere.
And this former Panther said to Eldridge, “Hey, Eldridge, what’s all this shit, now you're a big conservative and you’re into all this religion and everything.
Chapter Eighteen Revolutionary Work in a Non-Revolutionary Situation A Target of Surveillance Ever since ihe lime lhal I’d become known as a radical and then as a revolulionary activist back in the Bay Area, and even more so once the RU had been formed, I was constantly under surveillance. told the story earlier about how, from the early days in Richmond, we were pretty sure our phone was being lapped.
I also remember, for example, that in Berkeley in the late ’60s, there was a demonstration that ended up marching to the police station. was standing there talking to a couple of other people 1 knew in the movement while the rally was being held in front of the police station, and I was commenting on the fact that the guy who was notorious to all of us as the head of the Red Squad in the Berkeley Police Department had just retired from that post.
But once the RU was formed, it was increasingly targeted by the political police—the FBI on a national level and the different Red Squads that existed in different parts of the country.
So surveillance and attempts at infiltration by the political police were a fact of life—not that we accepted it, but you had to recognize it as part of the conditions you were dealing with.
In Maywood, for example, there would constantly be cars which didn’t belong to any of my neighbors parked near my house; in particular there was one guy who would park down the street a little bit from where I lived, and he would sit there, sometimes for hours, taking note of any cars that came to my house, writing down their license plates, and watching my comings and goings.
Later we did a Freedom of Information Act inquiry and we found out that not only had he done that, but he’d gone through our garbage.
To my understanding, that kind of diagram was used by the police in the murder of Fred Hampton in Chicago.
So while this surveillance was, in one sense, “all part of what was going on,” making diagrams of your house, and indicating where someone could get good vantage points to see into various parts of the house, was very heavy.
We had realized much of this, but not quite the full extent of it until we got this FOIA material.
But I can remember many times leaving my house and, as I was driving, a car would follow me for three or four blocks, and then eventually either I’d lose it or it would lake off going somewhere else.
We recognized, those of us who were still thinking about and oriented toward revolution, that the revolutionary upsurge of the ’60s had passed.
Even the ’60s upsurge had never fully ripened all the way to a revolutionary situation, although in my view it had come pretty close and there were significant elements of that.
But now we were in a very different situation than that ’60s upsurge, and no one could say for how long, but for a certain period we were going to be in a situation that was non-revolutionary and which, in fact, might not be characterized by the same kind of upsurge that took place in the ’60s.
This talk I gave addressed that and spoke to how we had to develop a broad political movement and raise the sights of the working class to broader political questions and be guided by a revolutionary and a communist orientation and not sink down into tailing after the terms of the more intermediate or even backward workers, and not just accommodate ourselves to the ebb in this situation and to the non-revolutionary character of it.
As it turned out, and as is perhaps clear from things I have said already, this was highly contentious and the developing Menshevik faction within our Parly bitterly haled this.
I just thought 1 was trying to help correct and struggle against certain tendencies that were pulling us away from where we needed to go, along with the objective pull of being in this kind of a non-revolutionary situation that wasn’t marked by a massive upsurge in the same way as, say, a decade earlier, or even five years earlier.
And in its aftermath, the Mensheviks within the Parly bitterly attacked and began to factionalize against this position—even though as the Chair of the Central Committee I'd presented the outline of what I was planning to say to other leading people, and none of them had objected or disagreed.
But then, when 1 presented this to the Central Committee meeting, they attacked it in a factional way, behind my back and in a way that avoided and undermined the channels of the Parly through which disagreement and struggle is supposed to be carried out.
Gutter Tactics And they used very underhanded methods against my wife at that time, in order to make her life miserable and to get at me.
We had an unpublished number, but it was known to many in this Menshevik faction.
And we started getting these obscene phone calls, where people would call up and ask for my wife by name and then start all this heavy breathing into the phone and saying all this obscene stuff.
This is how low these people went, this is how thoroughly disgusting they were, and just to call it “unprincipled” doesn’t even really capture how despicable it was.
It is a disgrace to think that people who call themselves communists would descend to that level.
But even before they sunk to that level, they were in many different ways making life completely miserable for her— these are the unprincipled methods that people can sink to when they are in the position of attempting to defend an indefensible, opportunist line.
At that time, in 1976, the bourgeoisie was making a major political and ideological offensive around the 200th anniversary of the American revolution in 1776.
They were calling for big celebrations in the major cities on July 4, and they were putting an awful lot of effort into this.
It may be hard to remember—or if you weren’t alive then, it may be hard to imagine—but through the course of the 1960s millions of people in this country became very alienated not just from specific government policies, but from the foundations and values of American society altogether; they became very skeptical and even bitter about all the talk about how great America was and all that—they had seen and experienced too much of the truth, and there was a lot of anger against what people called “the system” and what many had begun to understand to be imperialism.
And while there were a lot of people who were reacting against this very positive development—with their “love it or leave it” bumper stickers and mindsets—the people who were alienated and radicalized had a lot of initiative and a lot of conviction.
But, as I explained earlier, there was some regrouping by the ruling class in the early 70s and some ebbing of the struggle.
They had an ideological objective—promoting this patriotism —and they had a political agenda too, which was tied in many respects to what they understood to be the growing prospect of war with the Soviet Union.
So the question before us was whether we were going to find the ways to lake this on, or keep ourselves buried in the trade union struggle.
Those of us who were adhering more to a revolutionary and communist line were trying to infuse that slogan with a basic “against the system” thrust.
But we eventually united that it should have this basic anti-system thrust and that we should mobilize proletarians and people from other sections of society to come to Philadelphia and make this statement at the time of the Bicentennial.
We had a march and rally there, and it was very highly contested because Rizzo was the mayor of Philadelphia at that time, and he ran it like a feudal fiefdom.
They were trying to trap us into saying that we were going to have this demonstration anyway, whether or not they gave us a permit, but we refused to get drawn into those terms.
We just said, “We’re gonna fight this through and win, and we’re gonna have our demonstration”; but we refused to get drawn tactically into making statements that we were going to break the law— which was what Rizzo and some of the media were trying to trap the people organizing this demonstration into saying.
We had a march and rally which was very powerful, especially in the face of the attempts to suppress it, and it was very significant because it did raise a banner of radical opposition to this system, and it did have a significant contingent, if you will, of people from the proletariat who came from around the country to make this statement in this way.
I remember I spoke at the rally on behalf of the Parly, and it had a very radical feel to it.
Vietnam Veterans Against the War endorsed this demonstration and played an important and major role in it.
Their contingent was quite powerful; it brought together several hundred vets from around the country in an important political statement at a time when, as we had analyzed, the dangers of world war were beginning to grow.
Rizzo went on to persecute the MOVE organization in Philadelphia and to launch a vendetta against the radical Black journalist—and now death-row inmate —Mumia Abu-Jamal.
As I’ve spoken to several limes, one of the things that everybody was running up against was that the upsurge of the ’60s and early ’70s had ebbed.
Eventually, I think there were more than a hundred radical newspapers that were either put out by GI’s or addressed to Gl’s.
There was rebellion, sometimes very sharp rebellion, within the military in Vietnam, against officers and sometimes against being ordered into battle.
Even in the military jails in Vietnam, where they imprisoned the troops who rebelled, there was further rebellion.
There was this great demonstration, Dewey Canyon III, where thousands of veterans mobilized in D.C. and threw their medals back, and declared that they didn’t want medals for what they’d been made to do as part of the imperialist military, and denounced the Vietnam War.
And out of this came this organization, WAW, Vietnam Veterans Against the War.
So by this time, in the mid-’70s, there wasn’t the same upsurge overall, and it wasn’t the same situation in the military.
There were many vets who had been radicalized, but they Loo were being affected by the fact that this ebb had set in, that you were in a nonrevolutionary situation, and there wasn’t the same upheaval.
This was the objective context for what was going on among all sections of the people, and also the situation that everybody who was seeking to build a movement of opposition and struggle against the system was facing.
And others of us who opposed that orientation said, those issues are important to take up, but it has to be in a broader, more radical context of opposing imperialism.
In my report to the Central Committee in 1976,1 gave increased emphasis, and collectively the party leadership started giving increased emphasis, to the growing danger of world war.
This is something that Mao had pointed to even in the early 1970s, but we recognized this danger was growing and coming more to the fore.
In line with this, we needed to raise the banner of anti-imperialism broadly, and at the same time to struggle out some questions that were sharply posing themselves among radical and progressive people, over how to understand the role of different forces and different struggles in the world.
In particular, how should we understand what role was played in the world not only by United States imperialism but also by the Soviet Union.
Our parly—in large part because by this time we had a fully developed Menshevik faction within it—had not yet come to a unified position around this, but we were beginning to take up this question just as this conference was held.
The conference had workshops and discussions about the struggle against imperialism in many different parts of the world, and then in the evening we had a three-sided debate between myself, representing the RCP; William Hinton, who had written the book Fanshen and done a lot to popularize the Chinese revolution but who was at that point sort of uncritically following the Chinese leadership, particularly with regard to the international arena; and Dave Dellinger, a long-time anti-war activist.
We had tried to get someone openly supportive of the Soviet Union and that whole revisionist camp to be part of this debate, but we couldn’t find anyone who would do that.
Dave Dellinger took part as someone who pul forward the position that the Soviet Union is no good, but that United States imperialism is the real evil in the world and we have to support any struggle against United States imperialism—and we have to look at the role of the Soviet Union more or less entirely in relation to that.
Our position was to oppose both superpowers and to uphold revolution against United States imperialism and Soviet social-imperialism all over the world.
Hinton was putting forward the line coming out of the Chinese leadership—which, as I’ve discussed earlier, identified the Soviet Union as the main enemy, or in reality the only enemy.
The Chinese position, as articulated by Hinton in that debate, was to unite all who could be united against the Soviet Union, including even the United States and other imperialist and reactionary stales in the United States camp.
Unite everybody against the U.S., including forces in the Soviet camp, and in particular support those within the Soviet camp who were seemingly taking a more radical anti--imperialist stance, like Cuba.
A lot of people were confused about Cuba, but the fact was that because Cuba had become totally dependent on the Soviet Union, economically, politically and otherwise, it went right down the line in 30.
In 1974, the fascist regime in Portugal was overthrown by a military coup made up in part of officers who wanted to pull the Portuguese army out of its African colonies of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea-Bissau.
Anti-colonial insurgencies had developed particularly in the latter two colonies.
But MPLA and UNITA each had something of a mass base in different tribal groupings and regions of the country, and neither represented a force that aimed to fundamentally break with imperialism.
But many people still tried to keep inventing ways in which Cuba was somehow an independent force, even though it could not be denied that it consistently allied with the Soviet Union.
We argued strenuously against that and maintained that the international struggle had to be directed against both imperialist camps.
There were about fifteen hundred to two thousand people at this conference and debate on the international situation.
The debate was a significant clash of different positions on crucial things having to do with the international situation and the struggle against imperialism, and as such, was very lively.
This became interwoven and closely bound up with the struggle that was coming to a head in our party with the Menshevik faction, particularly focused now over what stand to lake toward what was in fact a revisionist coup in China, which had taken place just before this conference.
Chapter Nineteen “Bitter Sacrifice Strengthens Bold Resolve”-Mao The Death of Mao Tsetung Mao Tselung died on September 9, 1976.
But right at the lime he died, we didn’t and couldn’t fully understand what that would mean.
So, by the fall of 1976, a year and more later, there was a lot of struggle—and then Mao died.
We had a definite sense that big things were up and the struggle was likely to intensify, but we didn’t quite understand how everything was coming to a head right then.
We put out a statement on Mao’s death, and we had memorial meetings around the country.
I answered that we will—the communists and the revolutionary proletarians throughout the world, including in the U.S., would step forward and lake up Mao’s banner.
They were being denounced as a “Gang of Four” that supposedly had opposed Mao—but 1 had a strong feeling that that was just a shabby device to cover over what was nothing less than a coup against the whole direction in which Mao had been leading the Chinese people, and a blow against Mao’s line of continuing on the socialist road and keeping the goal of communism as the guiding star.
This coup sharpened everything up, and it put the death of Mao into this whole new context.
So the basic terms of what was really going on were clear to me, more or less from the beginning.
And then you had to confront the reality not only that Mao was gone , but that China was lost as a socialist country, as a bastion of revolution and socialism and a guiding light and a source of inspiration for oppressed people all over the world.
A Division in the Leadership At the beginning, when the coup happened, there wasn’t anybody in the leadership of the RCP who would openly come out and support it.
The initial reaction of myself and some other leaders of the Parly was that this was a revisionist coup, a terrible thing.
I think the reality of it was that, for a little while, the dust was still settling, so to speak, and perhaps for some people it had not really sunk in that revisionist forces had definitively seized power and won out.
But these revisionist tendencies didn’t really come to characterize his outlook and approach until this coup happened.
At that crucial turning point, these negative tendencies just ate up everything else, and Leibel went completely over to the side of supporting the coup.
When Mao was alive, it was clearly understood, and we all agreed, that this would lead back to capitalism.
It seemed that, among other things, Leibel just couldn’t confront the fact that socialism had been overturned in yet another country—that, as had happened in the Soviet Union, a revisionist clique had seized power in China.
His pragmatic tendencies, which were always there—and which sometimes strongly asserted themselves—started really coming to the fore and dominating his outlook.
So let’s not get into all this stuff about analyzing what’s really going on.
Deng Xiaoping had been Liu’s second-in-command and had himself been targeted and sharply criticized in the Cultural Revolution, only to be brought back in the wake of the Lin Biao affair.
In addition, people like Leibel and the others who were heading this Menshevik faction looked to Chou En-lai as a model communist.
That is, he was urbane and cosmopolitan, and many intellectuals could feel very comfortable around him.
That can be a good thing, if it’s in the service of a revolutionary line.
Deng and his cronies were greatly aided by the way Chou En-lai was trying to pul stability and the development of the economy above everything else in China—and, in particular, above the struggle to combat revisionism and prevent capitalist restoration.
Writing in the context of the outbreak of World War 1 and the “collapse of the Second International”—with most of the parties that were part of that international socialist organization degenerating into a position of supporting “their own” ruling class in that imperialist war— Lenin talked about how sharp turns in society and in world events will temper and strengthen some but break and shatter others.
The revisionist coup in China led him to abandon the communist outlook and method and communist principles. 1 remember that at one point I was insisting that we couldn’t just go along with what had happened in China, that it was our responsibility to analyze this and if, as I believed, such an analysis led to the conclusion that in fact a revisionist coup had taken place, it was our responsibility to oppose it, openly and vigorously.
You’re supporting these people who’ve come to power and who, as I see it, have pulled off a coup.
You’re taking a position, you just don’t want to take a position against this coup because you don’t want to admit or lace up to what’s really happened—or maybe you like the direction in which these people are taking China, where it’s gonna be a more ‘business-like’ society where they put developing the economy and ‘modernizing’ the country above everything else, regardless of the character of the economy and of the modernization and who is served by all this.
Maybe you don’t care that this is gonna be done along capitalist lines and with capitalist principles and will subject the Chinese people to horrendous oppression and exploitation once again under the rule of these bourgeois forces and the domination of imperialism.
But a parly is a precious thing— a vanguard parly is absolutely essential and indispensable for people to make revolution, for the proletariat to seize power and transform society, for the oppressed people to rise up and put an end to all oppression.
So you don’t just willfully or mindlessly split apart a party like that.
You try to win over and unite as many people as you can, on a revolutionary basis, within the party.
You don’t seek unity at any cost, you don’t do it on the basis of throwing out principles—but you don’t just lightly fracture apart a parly.
Some of us were getting more and more clear that a revisionist coup had in fact taken place in China and that this would have horrendous consequences for the masses of Chinese people, which of course has proven to be true—but which is rarely, if ever, talked about these days in the mainstream bourgeois media.
The imperialist media, when it “covers” China, focuses on the elite minority, on the bourgeois forces in China; the masses of people are rarely mentioned.
All the terrible suffering that they’ve been subjected to since Mao died and the revisionists seized power—that, of course, is not a focus of the imperialist media.
But that was what those of us who opposed this coup were focusing on —what this will mean for the masses of people in China, and throughout the world, what it will mean for the world revolutionary struggle.
A faction is a group inside a party with its own views, its own network and its own discipline.
You can see how that would undercut the unity and discipline that a serious party needs, but it also actually subverts the search for truth.
In a situation like this one, where we were split on the highest level of leadership over what was right, we at least needed to formulate the questions that people should be studying and the principles that people should be using that could help them Bitter Sacrifice Strengthens Bold Resolve” Mao 34. arrive at the truth, or else people would just get bombarded with the one-sided stuff coming out of China and the slant coming from the United States media, the whole thing would be very disorienting and the membership as a whole would not be in a position to contribute to arriving at the truth.
So you couldn’t just go around to anybody in the Parly and try to influence them, in whatever way you could, toward the view that you held.
They had an unprincipled position and they had unprincipled methods that went along with it.
They were opportunists all the way around, so they didn’t hesitate to factionalize.
In fact, I didn’t really realize the full extent of this until the struggle came to a head, and then people started telling stories about how, even before the coup in China, but in a much greater way after that, these people were factionalizing.
They were factionalizing for their line everywhere they could, on every possible occasion.
More than a thousand people, from many different industries, representative of more advanced politically aware workers, came to Chicago for this convention.
So, even in the face of this factionalism, those of us who opposed the coup in China resisted pulls to retaliate in kind.
It was ironic. remember one time we confronted one of these Mensheviks and pointed to concrete evidence of how they had been factionalizing all over the place.
And we pointed out that, as a matter of fact, we had not been doing the same thing.
Sometimes, as a result of adhering to this principle, it would get very lonely, because there was almost nobody for me to talk to. couldn’t even talk to my wife at that time about this, since she wasn’t on the same level of top party leadership that I was.
Everybody on that level of leadership knew what everybody’s position was, and the two of us were open and aboveboard about all this in discussions with others on that level.
It was several months after the coup, and part of our overall approach to resolving this question was to send a delegation to China to investigate.
Some people on the delegation were part of this Menshevik faction, and then other people weren’t part of any faction and had a range of views, but the delegation collectively was assigned the task to go and investigate without formulating definite opinions about what they saw, and then to report back to the Parly leadership.
At the end of the delegation’s visit to China, they had one of these banquets.
And a member of the Chinese Communist Parly Central Committee came and officiated at this banquet.
In the course of this, he tried to put this comrade leading our delegation on the spot.
He cut right down the middle of this and maintained principle without taking a side one way or the other.
Now the people on this delegation who had been organized by, or influenced by, this Menshevik faction were not only arguing for their position but were pressuring this comrade who headed the delegation to lake a position in support of the coup.
They came back and reported to the leadership, and 1 was veiy glad when the delegation returned — not only because the results of their investigation were important but also, on a personal level, because once again there was someone I could talk to about all this.
After he returned from that trip to China, we used to sit up late at night talking and going over articles in the Peking Review.
The Peking Review was now being put out under the direction of the revisionists who had seized power, so it was giving us their side of things; but we also pored over issues of the Peking Review that had come out before the coup, like the ones with the articles by Yao Wen-yuan and Chang Chun-chiao that 1 referred to earlier.
We’d go through these issues and thrash all this out, comparing and analyzing the different lines, over and over again; and we would read and discuss things written by Mao, as well as other Marxist theory—things which shed light on the situation and provided important theoretical grounding.
At the time, the people behind the coup were using their monopoly of the media to just gossip about, slander and really vilify the “Four,” often on the level of personal attacks, and to obfuscate the real differences.
They wanted us to just come out and support the coup, but since we refused to do that they had to go along with this method of identifying and focusing attention on key questions and certain key lines of demarcation.
These were criteria that it would have been extremely difficult for them to openly oppose at the time.
One of the clearest and most important examples of this was what stand to take toward Deng Xiaoping.
Deng had been criticized as a “capitalist-roader”—and had been made the focus of a mass campaign of criticism—during the last year and a half of Mao’s life.
Another factor in this was that, when the coup was pulled off, Hua Guo-feng was nominally the leader of the government of China, and nominally the author of this coup.
And, for a short time, Hua made a pretense of continuing the movement to criticize Deng Xiaoping.
The truth was that Deng Xiaoping was the real force behind the coup, but for a short time this was not so glaringly obvious.
We united people that Deng Xiaoping is a capitalist roader, and what happens with him now that these new forces are in power in China will tell us something very important about what road they are on.
He hadn’t yet been rehabilitated, and moreover everybody knew that this was Mao’s verdict on Deng Xiaoping; and this new leadership, nominally headed by Hua Guo-feng, was still pretending to be upholding what Mao was all about.
Under these circumstances, the Mensheviks had to go along with this criterion, and this was very important.
If they claim to be upholding Mao’s line, they should continue to carry forward the transformations that were brought forward through the Cultural Revolution.
Another key criterion and guideline concerned a crucial political formulation.
This was integral to the line identified with Mao and a qualitative advance in the understanding of the nature of socialist society and of the continuing class struggle within that society.
Once again, the Mensheviks couldn’t oppose these criteria because a basic understanding of these things was generally grasped throughout our party, and because these principles hadn’t yet been openly denounced and overturned in China itself.
Then crucial transformations that had been brought forward through the Cultural Revolution were repudiated and abolished.
The majority of Parly members were able to recognize that those who had seized power in China were in fact reversing the whole course that Mao was leading the people in, and were just putting into practice that line of Deng Xiaoping, which comrades could understand to be a line of restoring capitalism.
Now eventually, the hard core of this Menshevik faction—and others who followed them without thinking that much, frankly, or who gravitated toward this sort of revisionist line anyway—went along with all these changes in China.
What it did do, as had previous negative developments that I'd been forced to confront, was to make me more aware of the complexity of the whole process of moving from capitalism to communism.
Not just everything that is involved in getting to the point where it is possible to overthrow capitalism in the first place, but then the process, and struggle, of continuing on the socialist road, to carry forward the radical transformation of society toward the goal of communism and to do that together with people throughout the world struggling for the same goal.
It brought more fully to life things that Mao had pointed out about the danger of capitalist restoration in socialist society.
T JLhis internal process of focusing comrades’ attention on the big questions that were being posed about the direction of China, and what that said about revolution and counter-revolution, lasted for about a year.
A meeting of the Central Committee of the Parly was called, to resolve the struggle.
And Must Be Supported In preparation for that, I wrote a paper called “Revisionists Are Revisionists And Must Not Be Supported; Revolutionaries Are Revolutionaries And Must Be Supported,” which was later published in the book Revolution and Counter-Revolution.
It set forth my view (which was shared by the other leading comrade 1 have referred to) that what had taken place in China was a revisionist coup, and that those who had been arrested and denounced as the “Gang of Four” were in fact the genuine revolutionaries.
The paper analyzed why this was the case, and it spoke to a number of contentious issues and answered attacks on the revolutionaries that were appearing in the Peking Review, which was now being pul out by this revisionist ruling group in China.
It also answered the main arguments that the Menshevik faction within our Parly was raising—things they had taken up from the revisionists in China and to some degree had pul their own particular “spin” on, as is said today.
This was a clearly polemical paper, and it made very clear to everybody who read it that there was an intense struggle between two fundamentally and antagonistically opposed positions.
The people on the other side did not write up a comparable paper putting forward their position.
They were free to do so, but they didn’t —and this was characteristic of the way they chose to carry out the struggle.
They didn’t want to pul forward a fully developed position that people could then answer and refute.
They chose instead to repeat a lot of gossip and raise a lot of doubts and secondary issues in order to obfuscate the question and try to undermine the process by which people could focus on and come to a determination about the key issues.
Their opportunist line had to be, and was, accompanied by opportunist methods.
But right up to the Central Committee meeting, I continued to meet with, and to have discussion and struggle with, the people who were heading up this faction.
And right before we left to go to the Central Committee meeting, Mickey Jarvis, who was one of the main leaders of this Menshevik faction, called me up on the phone.
I guess the FBI must have gotten quite an earful, because here we were talking on the phone about all these issues that were in contention, about who were the revisionists and who were the revolutionaries on the two sides of this struggle in China.
Jarvis seemed to be having second thoughts and to be more open to considering the position that I had been arguing for.
As it turned out, he really just wanted to hear my arguments one more lime so he could try to sharpen his own opposing arguments in preparation for the Central Committee meeting, and to do that he was pretending that he was being won away from, or at least reconsidering, his position.
At one point I even told him, “You know, I feel like Charlie Brown with the football—one more time it’s gonna get pulled out from underneath when 1 go to kick it.
So 1 tried to explain, as fully and patiently and as exhaustively as I could, the answers to the questions he was raising—knowing that it was very likely that this was all just dissembling and maneuvering on his part.
So that’s why, even though I had very serious doubts and suspicions about what he was up to, I went through this process with him.
Showdown As I said, the time had come to hold the meeting and decide the issue.
But neither did he come in with a paper that actually sought to substantiate this position and to answer with any substance all the things that were in the position paper that I had written.
Thus the Lone was set going into the Central Committee meeting, because he had been opporLunizing right down to the last minute, and now it was all out in the open.
In order to get to the Central Committee meeting, 1 had traveled by airplane with this other comrade I’ve referred to, who had led the delegation to China and who firmly united with me in opposing the coup.
During the airplane ride, we were discussing what he should say about this at the Central Committee meeting.
Our orientation and approach for the meeting was to keep going until everybody on both sides had their say, as thoroughly as they wanted to, and then we were going to bring it to a head and resolve the issue.
So, he and I were talking about what he would lay out as part of his presentation on the issue.
We went through a number of different arguments that we’d heard from the Mensheviks, and we were developing our refutation of that; and, as we were talking, he was taking extensive notes to prepare and organize what he wanted to say at the Central Committee meeting.
Then we got off the airplane and were continuing on our way toward the meeting, and it turned out that his notes somehow got left on the airplane.
We joked afterward that the people working on the airplane and some of the passengers perhaps got an education in these world-historic issues about China and socialism and communism.
Nonetheless, we had to go through the whole thing again, and he once again made notes and prepared his remarks; and when the Central Committee meeting started, he was the first person to speak and went on for a number of hours refuting the arguments of the Mensheviks and laying out a very clear and cogent analysis of what had happened in China and its implications.
The Central Committee meeting proceeded from there, and people did speak as long as they wanted to.
In fact, the last day before we brought things to a vote, we just went all night long—we started early one morning and we just went all the way until the next morning. was the last person to speak.
I started late at night and continued until early the next morning, summing up the key points and answering arguments that had been raised by the Mensheviks.
According to this view, whatever “works” is right, whatever wins out is true.
Well, it was necessary to go straight up against that and say, no, objective reality is not determined by who’s prevailing at a given time in a struggle, or what’s more popular at a given lime among a section of people or generally in society—that does not make something true.
Truth is an objectively correct reflection of reality as it actually is.
It’s not whatever is convenient, it’s not whatever is winning out at the time.
Pragmatism was a big ideological and philosophical component of the outlook of these Mensheviks.
Never mind that it represented the practical application of capitalist principles.
These two pragmatic tendencies reinforced each other in their thinking.
So we had to take on that whole outlook, and the position paper I wrote—and in a concentrated way its title, “Revisionists Are Revisionists And Must Not Be Supported; Revolutionaries Are Revolutionaries And Must Be Supported”—very clearly called that out, and said, “No, if they are revisionists, which they are, we are not going with them just because they won out in the short run.
Pretending Unity, Preparing to Split After the vote was held at the Central Committee meeting, and the line pul forward in the position paper 1 wrote had prevailed, then all the Mensheviks there, except for Leibel Bergman, pretended to make selfcriticism and to unite with the majority position.
But, as became clear before long, no sooner did they leave the site of the meeting than they began factionalizing again.
I remember very clearly one of the decisive organizational steps we had to lake.
As I said to my wife right before this Central Committee meeting, 1 was not sure we would win this struggle.
The Mensheviks knew whom they could count on going into the meeting, but I had not lobbied and politicked, so I didn’t.
I had a sense of where some people stood, but mostly I was waiting to see how people fell out at the meeting.
As it turned out, no one outside the Menshevik faction sided with them, and even some of the Mensheviks began to waver and ended up abstaining when the issue finally came to a vole.
I would not have tried to confuse the issues when clarity was demanded.
The reason is that there actually is a unity between your ends and your means at any given time.
And if you use means that are not in line with your communist principles, that don’t serve getting to the world you’re trying to get to, you will find yourself getting further from that world and actually undercutting your goals—and in the end, turning into the very thing you started out opposing.
Deepening and Broadening We had to defeat this factionalism and unite the Parly as thoroughly as possible, internally—this was, of course, the key step that needed to be taken.
Even beyond that, we needed to put this analysis out more broadly in society and the movement.
At that time, within the U.S., but also internationally, there was a great deal of confusion and disorientation about China.
Even among the Maoist forces, more than a few got taken in by the revisionist coup, or in one way or another went along with it, and as a result lost their bearings further.
Some of them even self-destructed, in effect, immediately or over a period of Lime, as a result of supporting what was objectively counter-revolution, even though some of them perhaps thought that they were supporting revolution.
Regardless of people’s subjective understanding and intent, objective reality has its effect; when you go down a certain road and you keep going on that road, one thing leads to another, and many parties around the world which had considered themselves Maoist were undermined and destroyed by taking the wrong turn and supporting the wrong side at this crucial divide.
Some were unwilling or unable to face up to and analyze deeply what had happened; because what was objectively involved was a profound setback, they did not want to acknowledge what had happened and draw the bitter but necessary lessons.
At the same time, a number of Maoist parlies and organizations refused to go along with the revisionist coup in China, but there remained the task of analyzing what had happened and why.
Revolutionaries Are Revolutionaries,” was an important but beginning step in that direction, and it was necessary to deepen that.
I began writing this series of articles to deepen and systematize this analysis and to provide more of an allaround framework for understanding these questions.
And these articles eventually were pul together and published as a book, Mao Tsetung’s Immortal Contributions.
The Mao Memorials We also needed other means and vehicles for popularizing our understanding and trying to help people gel clarity about these worldhistoric events.
Because, again, there was a lot of confusion out there and a lot of contending analysis.
Some of it came straight from the bourgeoisie, which of course was distorting the whole thing and obscuring the real issues.
And then some of it came from other forces in the progressive and radical movements, who had, at best, a very eclectic understanding.
And, more broadly, a lot of people were just sort of at a loss to understand what had happened in China.
As one of the main vehicles for bringing a more comprehensive and systematic analysis of this to a broader range of people, we decided to hold Mao Memorial meetings.
This was a three-hour presentation, and it was followed by a question-and-answer session where people raised questions off of the talk and more generally questions they had about what had happened in China and why.
These Memorials did fulfill to a significant degree the objectives we had for them.
About twenty-five hundred people came to both events combined, and that, plus all the publicity we did around it and then the booklet that was published afterwards, had a major impact at that time, and did help many revolutionary-minded people to get at least a basic understanding of the significance of the issues and what had actually happened.
Tell the Truth Our objective was to enable people to understand the reality of what had happened.
Some people seem to believe that if you understand reality, including what you might call the negative parts of reality, or the things that go against what you are trying to do, then you’ll just get demoralized.
But my feeling about that, and 1 think a more scientific approach to that, is that if you don’t actually understand reality you will end up in a much worse place, much more demoralized by what are objectively negative developments and setbacks—and not only demoralized but disoriented, in a much more fundamental way.
If there are negative turns in the struggle, or even monumental and world-historic setbacks—which is what had happened in China—the first thing you have to do is confront what has happened, analyze it, and if your analysis tells you that there has been such a setback, then that’s what you have to accept.
By “accept,” 1 mean that you have to recognize that it’s the reality that you’re dealing with—I don’t mean that you simply bow down and capitulate before this reality and give up trying to change the world.
But if the reality is that there have been negative developments and setbacks, you not only have to recognize that yourself, you have to tell people the truth about it.
This doesn’t mean that the goal of socialism and ultimately communism can’t be achieved.
But it drives home more fully that there can be not only great leaps forward, but also great setbacks along the path to that goal.
Getting to where humanity needs to go in order to end this nightmare that most of humanity suffers every day is, to paraphrase Mao, a march of ten thousand miles.
It is a twisting path, not a straight line forward, and it isn’t a continuous ascent.
So you have to con362 From Ike to Mao and Beyond front and continually deepen your understanding of this, and you have to tell people the truth about it in order for them to learn more deeply what the goal has to be and how, through all the twists and turns, advances and setbacks, we can finally arrive at that goal.
It may sound corny, but with that orientation, we set out to tell people the truth.
Chapter Twenty-one “A Fitting Welcome” for Deng Xiaoping T _Lhe booklet from the Mao Memorial was barely published when we faced the question of defending Mao’s legacy in practice as well as theory.
After the coup and then the consolidation of a new revisionist, capitalist regime in China headed by Deng Xiaoping, the United States imperialists saw a big opening to further develop their relations with China, to more firmly bring China into the United States camp and open China up more fully to imperialist domination and exploitation.
So a visit was arranged where Deng Xiaoping would come and hold meetings with the United States president at the lime, Jimmy Carter.
Confronting Deng As Maoists, and in particular as Maoists within the United States itself, this was a political and ideological gauntlet that was being thrown down to us.
We recognized that we had a responsibility to do something that would make a clear statement against this, and we decided to mobilize people from around the country to go to Washington, D.C. when Deng Xiaoping was there, to demonstrate and to create public opinion as much as we could, through the mainstream media but also through our own means—leaflets and publications of various kinds—to expose what had happened in China and what Deng Xiaoping represented, and to uphold the revolutionary banner of Mao.
We had a rally in a church and then we left to go on the march through the streets of D.C. to politically confront Deng Xiaoping, to make as powerful a statement as we could in opposition to what he represented and to raise the banner of Mao.
This was very inspiring and strengthened our resolve to stand up in the face of the revisionist coup in China and the way the United States was moving to further its support for the direction in which Deng was taking China.
As we began the march, it was already very clear that the authorities really didn’t like this demonstration.
And as we got to the area of Lafayette Park, the police unleashed a violent attack, beating as many people as they could, and finally succeeded in breaking up the march.
They especially went after the women, brutally beating them; some were so disfigured from being hit with billy clubs and pummeled in the face that you could hardly recognize them, in some cases even for weeks afterward.
Some people came very close to being permanently disabled or even killed.
The assault the police unleashed was extremely vicious, and over eighty people in that demonstration, including myself, were arrested.
While a number of us were arrested and taken to jail, some others who needed medical attention were driven around in paddy wagons for a long time before they were taken to the hospital.
I and most of the people arrested with me spent the first night in jail handcuffed and chained outside our cells because we were continuing to chant revolutionary slogans and this pissed off the jailers.
The men were held separately from the women but the lawyers who came forward to defend us told us inspiring stories about how the women continued to chant revolutionary slogans and shout from one cell to the other in Spanish, so the jailers couldn’t understand exactly what they were saying, and how, in general, the women kept up their revolutionary spirit in the jail cells.
The Carter government, and the ruling class in general, was infuriated by this demonstration.
Beyond the way the whole thing disrupted “business as usual” in the capital city, it politically disrupted what they were doing, it drew attention to the questions we were raising, and from a number of angles it politically embarrassed them.
The demonstration, and the activities surrounding it, became an international incident.
This was before the Internet and satellite news and all that kind of thing, but news of what we did went out over news services all over the world, and I later talked to people from many parts of the world for whom this demonstration was a very important and inspiring event.
And that was part of what we were doing also—we were fulfilling our internationalist responsibility to let people know that, right in the U.S., there are people who uphold the banner of Mao and oppose what Deng Xiaoping represents and how he has taken China back to the hell of capitalism.
That’s part of the reason why they unleashed this vicious police attack.
Initially, they only charged us with misdemeanors; then they came back with heavier charges for a smaller number of us who were arrested—we were now charged with felonies, like assault on police officers.
In other words, they decided that in response to what we’d done they needed to come down with even more heavy political repression.
So then, lacing these heavy legal charges, there was a need to mount both a legal defense—but more importantly a political defense.
Pranking the Parrots Before getting into the seriousness of that, I want to briefly touch on something a little bit lighter—though with its own sharp edge.
They had gone right along with the coup in China and in their newspaper, The Call , they had pul out all this stuff just parroting whatever was said by the revisionist leadership in China.
The CP leader, Mike Klonsky, had run right over to China and met with Hua Guo-feng, who nominally was the head of the government and nominally led the coup—though it was really Deng Xiaoping behind it—and there was a picture of Klonsky in the Peking Review , all dressed up and shaking hands with Hua Guo-feng.
Some people in the movement at that time, like the Guardian newspaper, tried to turn things inside out and upside down and say that the reason that we didn’t support the coup in China was because Klonsky got there first and got the mantle, so to speak, from Hua Guo-feng, and we were supposedly pissed off about that; and so, according to this distorted version of things, it was our competitiveness with the CP that led us to lake a position against the coup.
Bui his visit is obviously not whal motivated us to lake the opposite position.
Anyway, we thought it would be good—it would make an important point, and also involve some fun—to ridicule the position Klonsky and the CP had taken, and their basic approach to things.
So we pul out a phony issue of The Call which parroted and slightly, but only slightly, exaggerated the ridiculous positions that they were taking on China.
For example, at the lime we pul out this parody of The Call, the Chinese revisionists were beginning to attempt to improve their relations with the Dalai Lama.
And so in this “Call” we pul out, we had an article which talked about a meeting between the Chinese leadership and the Dalai Lama and how there was so much emotion generated over the wonderful things that had been done by the Dalai Lama.
The article said that, for this ceremony, they brought drums that had been made with human skin in Tibet under the rule of the Dalai Lama to celebrate the occasion.
And this was referring to a very real fact of history—things of this kind had been done under the rule of the supposedly “benevolent” Lamas, including this Dalai Lama, and in writing this parody we made a point of referring to this reality and to the torment and the horrendous oppression and literal torture the masses of Tibetan people suffered under the rule of the Lamas.
And, of course, the oppression of women in that society was even more extreme.
So, even as we were doing a parody of The Call, and inventing this scene involving the Chinese revisionists and the Dalai Lama, we pointed to the reality of whal life had actually been like for the masses of Tibetan people under the rule of the Dalai Lama and his predecessors.
The Battle in the Legal Arena Returning to the heavy legal attacks that were coming down on us.
But it was also necessary, of course, to battle in the legal arena. did an interview, for example, with a reporter from the Washington Post —which the Washington Post never ran, but which we published as part of a pamphlet.
When the government came after us, they apparently believed that we either would just capitulate or else would act like crazy maniacs and fanatics whom nobody could understand or in any way identify with.
But 1 think that, at the start, this attitude existed to a certain degree even among the lawyers who came forward to take up our defense—or at least they were a bit concerned about whether we would just be sort of “lunatic revolutionaries” or whatever.
We were able to dispel that and to make clear to them that we Look this very seriously and recognized that there was a need to apply correct tactics and have good sense in battling in the legal arena, even while sticking to and being guided by our larger principles.
A lot of this came down to breaking-the-ice kinds of things, even on a personal level.
So we started talking about basketball, and then he saw that I was a “regular human being,” at the same 33.
Bob Avakian Speaks on the Mao Tsetung Defendants' Railroad and the Historic Battles Ahead, RCP Publications, 1981.
These were good-hearted liberal and progressive lawyers, but they still had these misconceptions, and of course some differences developed between us over legal strategy and tactics, which we had to do our best to struggle out in a good way.
For example, at one point they wrote up a brief to present to the court as part of this case, and 1 read it over and wrote a lengthy critique of it.
But 1 didn’t just slam it—I pointed out what I thought were the good points in it but also the weaknesses and things that should be done differently.
And here, of course, the legal training I’d gotten ever since I was a little kid, at the dinner table and in other ways—such as sitting in the courtroom and watching my dad argue some of his cases, and the whole way in which, directly and indirectly, so to speak, he had schooled me in a lot of the legal arena—came in handy and I was able to contribute through this critique and in other ways to developing and sharpening the legal strategy, as well as the overall political strategy.
My Family Grows Closer By this time, my relations with my parents had become closer again, but on an even better basis than they’d been before.
There had been a gap that had opened between us when I’d become a radical and then a revolutionary and a communist.
My parents never came to fully share my political and ideological outlook.
My mother in particular remained very religious, although to a significant degree that expressed itself in her being a compassionate, generous person; and my father was somewhat religious also.
But by this time they had developed a growing understanding of and respect for what 1 was trying to do.
They saw me as a person of integrity, who stuck to my principles and who had high ideals, as they pul it—someone who was trying to change the world for the benefit of humanity—and they respected the fact that I stood up for that in the face of repression and attack, and that I stuck to it and had not given up in the face of difficulty.
Having gone through the whole period of the ’60s, and as a result of some struggle between us, they had become much more aware of the larger injustices in American society and many of the injustices the United States perpetrated around the world.
So we’d grown clos370 From Ike to Mao and Beyond er again on this basis, through a process of development and some struggle, and even a period of a some estrangement between us.
A little later, around 1980, I actually wrote a letter to my parents setting forth some important aspects of my principles as a communist and how I saw them applying to a number of different things, acknowledging that they didn’t agree with all of this and that we had differences, but that I wanted to spell out for them how I viewed these things.
Right after 1 was arrested in the demonstration against Deng Xiaoping, at the beginning of 1979, my father, who had been a judge for a number of years and was something of a public person, was contacted by the Washington Post , and asked for his comment on this.
I think they expected they would be able to play on contradictions—believing that my father would distance himself, or even attack me.
This meant a great deal to me personally, and it was also an important statement in a broader sense.
To him it represented the whole outrageous character of the indictment to begin with, coming on top of this assault that the police had launched against the demonstration, and he frequently talked to his friends and legal associates about this as an example of political prosecution and persecution.
I remember thinking very soon after I got arrested that he might be contacted.
And 1 didn’t want my parents to be surprised and caught off guard if they were asked for a statement.
So, as soon as I was able to do so after being arrested, I sent a message through a lawyer to someone l trusted, asking them to contact my parents and let them know what had happened.
But sometimes people would make crank calls to my parents, and sometimes people who claimed to be speaking on my behalf, but 34.
This letter was actually published as a pamphlet, Communists Are Rebels.
As a result, my parents were understandably wary about phone calls from people they didn’t know, and 1 was aware of that. tried to figure out a way that 1 could let them know that this person was really calling on my behalf.
Then I remembered one of my father’s favorite stories, about when he was in law school in the Bay Area and had gone with his uncle in San Francisco to an open-air farmer’s market, and there was this guy hawking tomatoes at a fruit and vegetable stand.
Rai l road Before the trial, we had a preliminary hearing, and that was also a real lesson and another thing that outraged my parents and in particular my father, given his legal training and background.
The preliminary hearing is supposed to determine whether the prosecution can establish “probable cause” that the defendant was engaged in an unlawful act and therefore has to stand trial for that offense.
Then, we went through a couple of days of hearings and the prosecution didn’t have any concrete evidence or testimony that pointed to any specific acts committed by anyone—they couldn’t identify particular people with specific acts.
This went along with the whole approach of charging us with “assault on an unidentified police officer”; the frame-up nature of the whole thing was very clearly on display.
I have listened to the testimony and evidence, and 1 am satisfied that it has been established that each and every one of the defendants was present when unlawful acts were committed, and therefore I find probable cause to continue with prosecution.
In other words, after it had been shown that the prosecution couldn’t meet the standard of proof that the judge had established at the beginning of the hearing, he simply threw out that standard and ruled for the prosecution anyway.
It was clearer than ever that, while we could lose this battle through legal mistakes, we could not win this merely by mounting the best possible legal defense.
Chapter Twenty-two Re-Evaluation... and Leaping Forward Interrogating Ourselves Even as this struggle against the legal attacks was unfolding, we were continuing to grapple theoretically with the implications of the loss of China.
When you go through a major turning point, including a major setback like this, it forces you to re-evaluate and look much more deeply into many things.
The logic and dynamic and the momentum of something of this magnitude confronts you with the necessity to do this.
But if you continue to believe that communism is what is needed in the world, then there is a strong compulsion to do this.
So that wasn’t the issue, the issue was what position were you going to take.
But I also pointed out that Mao had emphasized that, if in the future the revisionists came to power in China, the people of the world should oppose them and unite with the great majority of the Chinese people to overthrow this revisionism.
It is not just that Mao said this and that we agreed with Mao —it is a matter of our internationalist responsibility to do this.
And struggle around this deepened our appreciation and understanding of the importance of internationalism.
As 1 said, when you go through a struggle like this, you’re confronted with the need not only to go more deeply into things having to do with that issue but also to look again at some other things, to dig into them more deeply and perhaps to re-evaluate them.
And as we came to understand more fully how this Menshevik position within our party had represented a fully developed opportunist, reformist—and, in particular, a pragmatic and economist, narrow trade-unionist—orientation , we started looking at some of our own practice.
We started questioning how we had been carrying out work in the working class and among the masses of people generally.
For those of us who weren’t in the Menshevik faction, our objective had always been to take revolution, socialism and communism to the masses.
Upholding Mao, Rediscovering Lenin We had fought to uphold, as we put it, the revolutionary legacy of Mao Tsetung; and in going more deeply into that, it took us back to Lenin, in a new way and a deeper way.
We began to appreciate in a fuller sense some of the key things that Lenin had brought forward and contributed to the communist movement, especially—and this was something that Mao had also given great emphasis to—the role of consciousness in the revolutionary struggle.
Mao emphasized that people could take a tremendous amount of initiative on the basis of their consciousness being raised and that—understanding this in a materialist and not a religious sense—they could accomplish miracles on that basis.
With this perspective and impetus from Mao, we went back again to things like Lenin’s key writings, including What Is To Be Done?, where he had emphasized the role and importance of consciousness in the revolutionary movement and, in opposition to the reformists and in particular the “economists” of his time, argued against the notion that the struggle of the working class should center and unfold around its immediate economic needs and interests.
Lenin insisted that the economic struggle of the workers is important but not the heart and pivot of work to build a revolutionary movement among the proletariat.
Lenin emphasized the crucial role of genuine, revolutionary class consciousness and how the workers could only develop this consciousness by having their attention centered on all the events going on in society and in the world, among all different classes, strata and groups, and by learning to evaluate these events from a communist standpoint and no other.
Lenin emphasized that communists have to expose all the ways in which different issues and events in society affect these different classes and strata, and how in turn these classes and strata respond to them, in a fundamental sense, in accordance with their interests.
Only this, he insisted, enables the workers to grasp the larger relations in society and their own role in leading a revolution to transform society; this could not be done by focusing their attention mainly on their immediate conditions and struggles.
In going back to and studying that more deeply, we began to look again at the question of what sections of the working class we should base ourselves on as the main force for revolution.
We recognized that we should work among all sections of the working class, and all strata of the people, but we began to recognize the particular importance of—and we began to grapple more deeply with—this emphasis of Lenin’s on, as he pul it, “going lower and deeper” in the proletariat in terms of the bedrock base for proletarian revolution.
And this internationalism was further deepened as we re-studied Lenin’s emphasis on what he called “revolutionary defeatism” in the imperialist countries.
Lenin had argued that in an imperialist country that was plundering large parts of the world, the proletarians had no interest in siding with “their own” ruling class in the wars it carried out in order to fortify and expand this plunder and exploitation and to contend with other imperialist powers.
Instead, the proletariat had to have its consciousness raised and be mobilized to oppose these wars.
Rather than bemoaning the weakening of its own ruling class, the proletariat had to be educated to welcome this and, in fact, to take advantage of it to build the struggle in a revolutionary direction.
It had to take a stand, not with “its own” ruling class against the oppressed people of the world, but with the oppressed people of the world against “its own” ruling class—this was a crucial principle and dividing line between genuine socialism and communism, on the one hand, and opportunism on the other hand.
By the late 1970s we had become more clear about the contradictions between the United States imperialists and the camp that was under their leadership—the imperialist countries of Western Europe and Japan as well as other countries aligned with, or under the domination of, the U.S.—and, on the other side, Soviet social-imperialism and the countries in its bloc and within its camp.
The contradictions between these two blocs were sharpening up, and the danger of war between them was becoming more acute.
As the decade of the 1980s approached and then as we entered that decade, many people became more acutely aware of and concerned about, and began to mobilize against, the growing danger of world war.
Preparing for “Rare Moments” Another crucial insight that we got from going back to and getting more deeply into Lenin was how rarely revolutionary situations arise in the imperialist countries.
In these countries you don’t have a situation similar to many Third World countries, where revolutionaries can generally take up the armed struggle to oppose the regime right from the beginning of the revolutionary process.
In many of these latter countries, the systems of transportation and communication and in general the infrastructures are much weaker, and the people are much more brutally oppressed and deeply impoverished all the time and thus more prepared to gravitate toward a revolutionary struggle when it is brought to them.
Mao had shown that this path has to be taken in countries like China and other countries that have similar economic and social conditions and forms of reactionary rule.
But again, Mao drew a distinction between that and in the imperialist countries, where most of the time you don’t have a weakened system of rule and instead you have very highly developed systems of communication and transportation and the very highly concentrated power of the ruling class throughout the country, and where the conditions of the people are not always such that they’re gravitating, in their great masses, toward a revolutionary struggle to overthrow the existing system of rule.
In these countries it is only when a number of factors come together— resulting from both the objective development of a revolutionary crisis and the work of conscious revolutionaries—that you get a revolutionary situation.
Lenin talked about this in terms of what he called “revolutionary conjunctures,” when all the contradictions of the system are heightened and come together in a concentrated way, and a revolutionary crisis develops.
At that point, Lenin said, the developments and events of decades gel concentrated in months, weeks and even days, and if the revolutionary party has prepared correctly all during those times when there wasn’t a revolutionary situation, then it can seize on those rare moments when all these things come together in a revolutionary crisis, and it can lead masses of people—whose desire for radical change has been greatly heightened and who will gravitate in much greater numbers to a revolutionary struggle—to actually carry through the revolution.
This distinction is crucial, between the two types of countries and the two roads, as we say—in third world countries, the road of “protracted people’s war,” as I’ve briefly characterized it; and in the imperialist countries, a road, or revolutionary process, marked by long periods of political work which then, when you get a revolutionary conjuncture, goes over to the all-out struggle for power.
With the coming together and heightening of the contradictions to create a revolutionary crisis and a revolutionary situation in an imperi380 From Ike to Mao and Beyond alist country, people who in “peaceful times,” as Lenin put it, “allow themselves to be robbed,” are more inclined to an all-out revolutionary struggle—they then see both the need for and the possibility of that— and the revolutionary vanguard must have the orientation, and must have developed the ability, to seize on such rare moments to lead a revolution.
All that is concentrated in Lenin's characterization of a “conjunctural crisis,” or the conjuncture of events leading to a revolutionary crisis.
On the basis of grasping this, we understood more deeply that the upsurge of the '60s may have passed, and the revolutionary opportunities that could perhaps have arisen out of that upsurge may not have been seized to the fullest, but that didn’t mean that there would not again be another conjuncture of events where a revolutionary crisis would deepen and sharpen, and millions of people would be in a revolutionary mood, or seeking a revolutionary way out.
Whether that came sooner or later, we had to prepare for such a conjuncture, for such a coming together and intensifying and magnifying of the contradictions of the system to a very acute stage where revolution would become possible.
This is grounded in the understanding that, as Lenin said, the goal of a communist is not to be a “trade union secretary” but a tribune of the people, enabling them to come to an understanding of the need, and the basis, for revolution, socialism, and ultimately communism.
We did not and do not see our newspaper as a supplement or “optional accessory"" to our work—rather it must be the hub and pivot of everything we do.
When these volunteers came to D.C., they constantly used the newspaper—in fact, they took this saying that Mao had popularized during the Anti-Japanese war in China, 35 that the supplies of the People’s Army basically amounted to millet and rifles, and adapted it to say that all the D.C. volunteers needed was a Revolutionary Worker and a peanut butter sandwich.
In other words, their use of the newspaper wasn’t off to the side of their political work, it was very central.
R evolutionary May 1st, 1980 One of the main things we undertook during this period, as an expression of our deepening grasp of some of these crucial principles from Mao and from Lenin, was a year-long campaign we waged for May 1st, 1980.
We had a rally on May Day 1979 in the Howard Theater in Washington, D.C., and there was a phone hookup with San Francisco, where there was a simultaneous May Day meeting and rally.
I gave a speech at the rally in D.C., and at the end of the speech I announced the call for a mobilization of the working class on May Day 1980—with the goal of mobilizing ten thousand or more workers on that day, a working day, under the banner of a revolutionary May Day.
This was a bold initiative, something that hadn’t been done in decades, if ever, in this country.
During this time the PLA pioneered a style of relying on the support of the masses (as expressed not only in volunteers for the PLA but also intelligence, material support, etc.) to counteract the superior firepower of the enemy; a hallmark of their style was simple living.
And, as we built for this, we made many important advances—taking crucial issues to important sections of the working class and carrying out a lot of revolutionary propaganda in the course of this campaign over a year.
It also led to very intensifying conflict with the powers-that-be and to the assassination of one of our comrades, Damian Garcia, which 1 will speak to in depth later.
We called on people throughout the country to raise or fly the Red Flag and to sing the communist anthem, “The Internationale,” all at the same time; and to my understanding, about two thousand people actually did that.
And then on May Day we mobilized several thousand people, mainly from the working class, and there were some key concentration points of this struggle—for example, in Los Angeles hundreds of people were mobilized in Revolutionary May Day and it was viciously attacked by the police, who obviously didn’t like this kind of revolutionary expression coming from the proletariat.
On the other hand, although we mobilized thousands, we fell short of our goal of bringing out ten thousand or more, and we had put a lot of work into this.
One of the things we had to confront was that, while we had begun to lake up Lenin’s writings on imperialism and its effects on the proletariat in the imperialist countries themselves, and his emphasis on going lower and deeper, into the bedrock, most exploited sections of the proletariat, we had not yet fully made that transformation and hadn’t really raised our understanding of that to a strategic level.
So, while there were some important accomplishments through this whole campaign around May Day 1980, and then on the day itself; while there were thousands of workers who rallied to the revolutionary, communist banner on that day, and some of them came from the lower and deeper sections of the proletariat; by and large we had not yet made the transformation to where we were focusing and basing ourselves mainly and most essentially among the lower and deeper sections of the proletariat.
This is something we had to sum up out of this whole experience around May Day 1980, even while we sought to build on the positive things that did come forward through all the work around that and on the day itself.
Earlier I spoke about going to a concert by Jimmy Buffett and the Coral Reefer Band in the late 1970s, and the impact this had on me.
Around the same time, 1 started listening to Bruce Springsteen, who was popular among, and gave expression to a kind of alienated and rebellious spirit among, a lot of white youth in general and in particular a lot of white working class youth.
This was another thing that at the time strengthened my sense that just because you’re going to integrate with sections of the working class, and in particular white workers, to spread the politics of socialism and communism among them, doesn’t mean you have to gravitate toward the more conservative cultural expressions that are popular among some of them, and in particular the less politically advanced among them.
We should be looking for the sparks of rebellion and working to fan and develop this into revolutionary sentiment and consciousness.
You had “punk” coming over from England, and people turned me on to The Clash.
We were trying to learn from all this and as Mao said, to “extol” what was positive in it.
At the same lime, Mao also wrote that “there is no construction without destruction”—and as that applies to political and ideological line, it means that if you are going to go forward you have to really settle accounts very thoroughly with your mistakes.
And generally this necessarily entails some painful reassessments of things you thought had been right.
To use Marx's phrase, we interrogated ourselves very thoroughly, because what we’re about is very serious and very difficult and demands a very serious approach.
The neighborhood in Boston into which Black students were being bused was a bastion of segregation, including in the schools, which were essentially all-white.
In these conditions, white supremacist and fascistic sentiment was being mobilized among the white people to oppose this busing plan, but more than that to attack the Black people, the Black families, and even the Black students who were being bused in.
But, at the same time, our position on this actually represented a narrow and ultimately reformist approach which sought in a certain sense to finesse some of these intense contradictions in a kind of economist way.
For example, we raised the demand for “decent and equal education,” which on the one hand could be part of a correct program, but in the actual circumstances objectively amounted to an avoidance of the central question of segregation.
As we saw it, the ruling class was fanning antagonisms among different nationalities—and, of course, there was truth to that.
But, in this situation, rather than grasping that the key to opposing that was to fight against segregation and in that context raise demands like “decent and equal education,” we instead tried to maneuver our way around this by presenting a position that called for building up all the schools, and in particular strengthening the schools in the inner city.
We fell into thinking that if we carried forward work in the working class around what we soon came to call the “center of gravity” of the workers’ economic needs and struggles, we could get them to unite on that basis, and in that context we could get the white workers to oppose discrimination and racism.
What went along with that, when it came to these busing plans, was to oppose them and instead call for decent and equal education all the way around, as if we could somehow finesse the antagonisms that were being fanned with these busing programs.
But if you didn’t make that the cutting edge and the key thing and the pivot of everything you were doing, you were bound to gel it wrong—which we did.
It is not that my hatred, or the haired of my comrades, for white supremacy had diminished in the slightest.
But when you’re trying to determine how to implement a strategy to make revolution and transform all of society and how to bring forward the necessary forces to do that, you’re confronted with the need to approach things differently than when you’re just proceeding from your basic feelings about things.
You have to develop and apply line , as we call it—an analysis of the reality you’re confronting and how to transform it, of where you need to go and how you need to get there, and what forces you need to mobilize to do that.
Of necessity, you have to address things on that level, if you’re trying to lead a revolution and radically change all of society.
And if you gel off track on that , it can even override some of the deepest sentiments you have.
So there you can see—in a negative way in this case—the importance ofline.
In that case our line was incorrect, and this was, in a negative way, so to speak, an illustration of the profound importance of whether your line is correct or incorrect.
At that time the RU was putting out Revolution as a monthly newspaper, and 1 happened to be in a leadership meeting of the RU when the newspaper came out which pul forward our position in opposition to this busing plan.
One of the comrades who was responsible for putting out the newspaper brought the newspaper, hot off the press, to this leadership meeting.
Because, while we did have a wrong position on this, this is not the way we felt that our position should be expressed and put forward, this was not the stand we thought should be taken, let alone blared in the headline of Revolution newspaper.
So even while the leadership of the RU would never have wanted to pul out a headline with that kind of an emphasis in it, it was a sort of grotesque carrying further of a position that was fundamentally wrong.
And this often happens, when you have a wrong position— sometimes people trying to implement that position will carry it to even greater extremes and more grotesque expressions, but even though that grotesque exaggeration is not actually your position, it still reflects the fact that your position is fundamentally and essentially wrong.
It was only later, during the 1978-80 period, and as a result of this whole struggle with the Mensheviks within the RCP—and beyond them, the revisionist legacy we were breaking with—that we began to re-examine things, and to change the way we approached similar busing plans in other cities.
In the late 70s, we published a self-criticism in Revolution examining our errors around this and why we’d made them, trying to both learn more deeply ourselves through systematizing that self-criticism, but also to enable others to learn from our mistakes.
As I said, to recognize that we had made errors of this kind, around a question of this decisive importance, was a very painful experience; but, when you make such errors, recognizing and acknowledging them is a crucial part of what goes into doing what you have to do in order to help bring into being a radically different kind of world.
This whole process of deep rethinking, so to speak, went on for a couple of years.
And everything—the efforts at self-criticism, the theoretical ferment, as well as what we were learning from taking out a more straight-up revolutionary communist line—would be brought to bear as we took on the charges coming off the Deng demonstration.
As a result of the demonstration against Deng, 1 was lacing what could have amounted to over two hundred years in jail, and a dozen or so other comrades faced similar charges.
As I’ve described, we recognized that it was important to battle this in the legal arena.
But much more fundamentally, we had to build a political defense and take not just our legal case, but our case in the broader political and ideological sense, to the masses of people, in the D.C. area especially, but around the country as well.
We saw a very real basis to do that— represented, for example, by how people had responded to the demonstration.
We intended to create tremendous political awareness and political turmoil and to mobilize masses of people in support of us.
We aimed to get two hundred people to come as volunteers, and this is what happened.
It was clear that we were going to be able to have a major impact politically and in terms of mobilizing masses in the city; it was going to become a very hot issue—something that was not only talked about all over the place, but something around which people were going to be actively mobilized.
Already, in our very initial work around this, we found among the masses of people in D.C. a deep reservoir of support for Mao, a basic recognition of what Mao represented and what the Chinese revolution had been all about, along with deep feelings of distrust and hatred for the government in the United States itself.
Many people remembered things like Mao’s statement in support of the AfroAmerican people when they rose up after Martin Luther King was assassinated, and in general they remembered Mao as a revolutionary leader whom they admired and looked to.
It was clear that there was great potential for mobilizing people on this basis.
Defending and Popularizing Revolutionary Leadership During the same period when we were mobilizing people to come to D.C., we were also taking our revolutionary line to people more broadly.
Since I, along with some others, was facing these heavy charges, l undertook a major speaking tour and did a lot of things with media all over the country, everything from campus newspapers to progressive radio stations, to Tom Snyder’s late night TV talk show, which at that Lime was fairly widely watched.
Apparently, Tom Snyder’s plan was to have me on first and then this guy would come in and mock me by acting like a typical commie bureaucrat, as Tom Snyder saw it.
But Snyder’s problem was that the discussion with me wasn’t anything like you’d have with a typical Soviet bureaucrat, so this other thing he did afterward really fell flat.
But it was interesting, and it reflected how big an issue this was among a broad range of people that someone like Tom Snyder—even though he tried to turn it against us—felt that this would be something that there would be an audience for.
People among the most exploited and oppressed sections of society—the basic masses, as we say—recognize that they need leaders.
And they also recognize that there have been negative experiences with leaders, where many of them have been killed or jailed, and some of them have sold out or gone off track and ended up at least objectively betraying the cause.
Even if they don’t understand it in a fully developed, scientific way, they hate this system—they have first-hand experience with or have witnessed many of the crimes it commits, in the United States itself and around the world, and they have a very acute sense of what it is doing, every day, to them and people like them.
And they agonize over whether there can there be leaders who won’t sell out or won’t just be crushed or killed.
And this greatly deepened my understanding of the great responsibility that was on us and, yes, was on me directly.
Cult of the Personality So, in the course of doing this, the question of “the cult of the personality” would come up.
We understand in a deep and scientific way why people need leadership and what kind of leadership they need.
So we also look at the role of individual leaders differently than the bourgeoisie does, certainly, and also differently than others who don’t have a communist viewpoint and understanding.
We understand that there are people who, as a result of a combination of personal experiences and larger social experiences and larger events and influences in society and the world, come to embody the kind of leadership that the masses of people, and the politically advanced forces among them, need in order to make revolution.
Now “cult of the personality” is a phrase that has been used to convey a negative meaning—the word “cult” implies a kind of religious sect—but there is a deeper question here.
And, in a certain way, it has been important to take this on directly, and at limes in a provocative way.
What is really involved here is the role of individual leaders, especially ones who do come to represent in a concentrated way the kind of leadership people need, people who are outstanding leaders, if you want to pul it simply.
Many people don’t have a hard time recognizing that certain people come to play outstanding roles in various other areas of life—science, sports, the arts, and so on—but when it comes to the sphere of political leadership, this seems to be a much more sensitive and controversial issue.
This question came up repeatedly, in a number of different forms, and we went into it deeply and struggled over it with broad numbers of people.
This is a strength in terms of contributing to the international struggle.
So this not something to be embarrassed about or ashamed about or defensive about, it is something to uphold and to popularize to people that we do have this kind of leadership and we do have an individual who can play this kind of a role, who is willing to take that responsibility and is able to do so.
A Broad Defense In the course of this campaign, a number of intellectuals as well as people in the arts and others in various spheres of society were mobilized in support of the Mao Tsetung Defendants.
There were many people who supported me on that level, people with many different viewpoints—revolutionary-minded nationalists, people from among different movements based in the middle class, artists, academics and others.
And, on May Day 1979, we launched the first issue of the Revolutionary Worker , which was a great advance for the communist movement in the United States and made a big contribution in terms of its internationalism.
One of the outrages we had taken up, through the newspaper and in other ways, took place in Chester, South Carolina, where a young Black man had been found lynched.
It was widely understood that this was because he had been dating a while woman in the town, and there was a mass outpouring of protest against this lynching on the part of the Black community in particular in Chester, South Carolina.
While I was in the course of the nationwide speaking lour to build opposition to the attempt to railroad me and other Mao Tsetung Defendants, this lynching came to our attention.
So we went into this small, rural town of Chester, South Carolina, for a meeting in a Black church there.
And then 1 went on to talk about how we have to see this lynching as an outrage in itself but also as part of the overall crimes of the system and how this shows us once again why we need a revolution to sweep away this whole system.
So we left with this long caravan of dozens of cars, which the people from the church had mobilized to accompany us, and they drove with us a long way, until we were far out of that county and away from that area.
That experience has stayed with me, ever since then, in a very powerful way.
It was all about how we should go out with our real, living revolutionary message—not in the stereotypical, dogmatic way that people often expect, but in a lively, living, non-dogmalic way.
We should take this to people and bring them forward to support myself and the other Mao Tsetung Defendants on that basis.
During this same time, there were many highly charged events going on in the world.
This was the period when the Iranian revolution had reached its high point, and driven the Shah of Iran out of the country.
I remember a headline in the Chicago Tfibune when the Shah was teetering on his throne, just before he fell.
That was basically the stand of the Carter administration and the United States ruling class, right until the fall of the Shah.
The United States had pul him in power through a CIA coup in 1953, and they maintained him in power for almost three decades.
Then, after the Shah could no longer maintain his rule in Iran, they brought him into the U.S., after having tried to get a few other countries to take him.
This was happening at the same time as our case was getting ready to go to court and as we were working, through the efforts of the volunteers and in an all-around way, to build support for myself and the other Mao Tsetung Defendants and to promote and project the line and objectives of our Parly broadly throughout society.
At one point they held a rally, and a combination of Klansmen and Nazis came to the CWP rally and opened fire and killed five people in broad daylight.
This was all part of the increasingly volatile situation within the United States at this time.
Shortly before this assassination, I had gone to North Carolina as part of the speaking tour, but when our people got to the meeting site to set things up for later that day, people who were obviously FBI agents and Klan types were running all over the place.
Clearly, there was something brewing there—it really looked like there was going to be some sort of assault on the meeting.
So that particular speech and meeting on that part of the tour was extremely intense, because we expected that at any moment we might be attacked.
But we decided that we had to go ahead with it anyway and, at the last minute, as a tactical maneuver, we changed the site of the meeting; and in that way, as well as by bringing more people to protect the meeting and prevent an attack, we were able to successfully hold the meeting.
So, when the CWP people were attacked and murdered, this was an outrage that fit in with the pattern that we’d seen.
The CWP mobilized people in response to this murder and had a rally and march in the area.
And, despite our very sharp and deep differences with them, we recognized that we had to work together with them in the face of this kind of an attack, so we worked out the basis for doing so and joined with them, and others, in mobilizing people in response to this murderous attack.
At the same time, we had to take a stand in support of the Iranian revolution.
When we would go out to do revolutionary work in general, and particularly to talk with people and do agitation about what was happening in Iran, larger numbers of people would gather.
Things would get extremely healed, and sometimes there would be physical attacks on our people.
But we were very determined that we had to lake this on and turn it around, even as we had this major campaign and battle that we had to wage around the case flowing out of the demonstration against Deng Xiaoping.
One of the things that struck me, in reading a number of reports and talking to comrades who were involved in this work, is that while there was this hysteria, mob mentality and chauvinism whipped up against the Iranian people and the Iranians who lived in the U.S., and it was very widespread—the government and the media had put a lot of effort into this—it was also very superficial.
As is so often the case with people who are whipped up around reactionary shit by the ruling class, there wasn’t any depth to it.
I gave a speech at the rally. talked about the overall political questions involved with the battle around the Mao Tsetung Defendants, beginning with why we’d had the demonstration in the first place, and the stakes of that.
I went into what this attack represented— not just the police attack on the demonstration, but then the legal attack, the piling on of legal charges, the threat of hundreds of years in jail off of this and the outrage of the whole persecution that was embodied in this indictment and these legal proceedings.
But I also talked about world events that were going on, and in particular what was happening in Iran.
We had worked closely with the many radical and revolutionaryminded students from Iran who were living and studying in various parts of the United States Ironically, they had been sent to the United States by the Shah.
The Shah had this program to modernize enclaves of the Iranian economy, while the masses of people would be enmeshed and enslaved in deep poverty and oppression.
So his government, working with the United States government, had financed a lot of these students to go to the United States to get training in things like engineering.
But, especially because of the nature of the times, many of them had become radicalized—and by and large this was a secular anti-imperialist radicalism, rather than fundamentalist religious militancy.
Many of them had become revolutionaries of one kind or another, and the communist and Maoist trend had a lot of initiative among these thousands of Iranian students.
We continued to work closely with them and support them as the Iranian revolution developed, although some of them were beginning to go back to Iran to take part directly in the revolutionary upsurge there.
So when I gave this speech at the Howard Theater 1 talked about this and why it was important that we lake a stand in support of the revolution in Iran and the Iranian students here who were coming under attack —it was, once again, a question of internationalism.
It was our respon400 From Ike to Mao and Beyond sibility to oppose our own ruling class in trying to reinstitute and fasten down more lightly the domination and oppression of the Iranian people.
Some people felt that by taking this stand, in the midst of this whole attack on us, we would be taking on an even bigger burden and bringing down even further repression on ourselves.
On the Basis of Principle During this whole period we focused mainly on the case of the Mao Tsetung Defendants, and in particular on the way in which this involved a concentrated attack on me.
But we also look up other sharp attacks and big questions in the United States and internationally, and we linked them with the struggle against the attacks on us and with my defense in particular.
These connections were strongly in evidence at the rally at the Howard Theater.
While I was the main speaker, there was a very broad array of people represented there from different political viewpoints who stood in solidarity with us in the face of this attack.
For example, the last surviving “Scottsboro Boy” 37 was there and spoke, and there were people from 36.
Parly members and supporters took this pamphlet out very broadly, generating controversy and through sharp struggle helping to repolarize the terms of debate in a more favorable way 37.
The Scottsboro Boys were nine young African-Americans who, in the kind of gross miscarriage of justice commonly directed against Black males in those days, especially in the South, were arrested and charged in 1931 with raping two white girls in Scottsboro, Alabama, were found guilty and were sentenced to death— except for one who was only thirteen years old and was sentenced to life imprisonment.
This was the result of building a relationship of “unity-struggle-unity” with them.
In other words, we built unity around the things we agreed on, and we continued to have struggle about larger strategic questions as we worked to deepen our unity on a principled basis.
This was expressed very powerfully at that rally, and 1 know it had a powerful impact and effect.
When I was in different parts of the country, 1 would see posters of myself staring down at me from overpasses on the highway and from buildings.
And, in the movie Blues Brothers , which came out at that time, in the first few minutes of that film, when Jake Blues (played by John Belushi) gets out of Joliet Prison and is picked up by his brother Elwood , they slop right near a bridge; and there in the background, for a brief moment, if you look carefully, you'll see one of those posters of me.
This was another reflection of how broadly we were building this and how broadly this got expressed in various ways, even finding its way into the popular culture.
All this was coming to a head, a number of us were facing serious charges and possibly long years in prison; but, through all that, I and others in the leadership of the RCP never considered retreating in a political or ideological sense.
We never considered toning down, but in fact more aggressively and boldly took out what we were all about.
That was a key part of how we understood we had to build support in the face of attack, as well as being a crucial part of working toward our overall strategic objectives of revolution, socialism, and communism.
To return again to one crucial aspect of this, we had to take a clear and firm stand around the Iranian revolution and the “hostage crisis,” for two essential reasons.
One, because it was a major event in the world and people needed to know about it and be won to the correct stand on it; and two, if we didn’t maintain this kind of stand, then we were compromising not in a tactical way but in a fundamental way, compromising everything we were all about.
So, for those reasons, we were determined that, from a strategic standpoint, we must not back down, or water down our stand, around Iran or around our basic principles and objectives in general.
Farber was sort of a forerunner of Rush Limbaugh (and, from what 1 understand, is still on the air) and right from the start, he was very aggressive and nasty and it was very clear that he planned to use this as an occasion to launch a political attack on me.
That was representative of a number of battles I had with more reactionary types.
Times assigned a reporter named Bella Stumbo to not only attend the speech itself but to hang out and talk with me for a few days before the speech, and a few days after, and on that basis to write an article supposedly providing insight into what someone like myself, the head of a revolutionary communist party, was like and what life was like for me on a daily basis as well as in my more explicitly political role.
When she finally wrote what turned out to be a rather major and lengthy article, she attributed a statement to me that could have had the effect of making it sound as if I were threatening Jimmy Carter, who was the president at the time.
And, in fact, even though this was a total distortion, the Secret Service picked up on it and tried to make something out of it—to use it as a basis to go after me—even though there was nothing to it.
We actually fought back by, number one, going into court and trying to prevent the government from acting on this basis, by showing that it was, in fact, a total distortion.
And, although the judge wouldn’t grant us this injunction, the fact that we took this initiative did have an impact.
Times , threatening to sue them if they didn’t print a retraction; and they did finally print a partial retraction, admitting that this was a distortion and in effect that there was no way that something 1 said could legitimately be interpreted as a threat against Jimmy Carter.
On the other side of the picture, we were beginning to demonstrate our potential to “turn D.C. upside down,” as we had said in our call to the volunteers.
So, in this context, literally a few days before the mass rally at the Howard Theater, we went to court and the judge ruled in our favor and dismissed the charges.
The government subsequently appealed that and later the charges were reinstated, but in the short run they had to back off as a result of the potential that was shown for us to mobilize support, and the ways in which the growth and breadth of support was beginning to indicate that there was going to be a significant political price to pay for continuing this attack right then.
There were more and more reports of threats coming from the government and from Nazis, Klansmen and similar types.
We got threatening messages from Nazis in North Carolina, and this carried particularly heavy weight given what had happened there, both in terms of our experience with the speaking tour and more acutely with the CWP people.
Times , the government can come in on the basis of that and use that as a pretext for an attack.
It is very important to understand that, while you can’t just ignore the mainstream bourgeois media, at the same time whatever dealings and encounters you have with them are a matter of class struggle, as we say.
They represent the ruling class, and they’re going to serve its interests in whatever way they can, even when they appear to be talking in a friendly way to you, and even if you find a few honest reporters here and there.
I remember way, way back in the days when we were in Richmond, this reporter for the San Francisco Chronicle wrote sympathetic articles about the movement, and he eventually had to quit because he came under such attack from the editors and publishers of the newspaper.
So then these Fortune reporters weren’t really interested in talking to us so much any more, and I noticed that my comments never made it into the article when it was published.
So, through those and many other experiences, I had learned clearly about the role of this mainstream bourgeois media and the fact that dealing with them is a part of the struggle.
Times reporter who totally distorted what 1 was saying in a way that provided an opening for a further attack by the state.
At one point 1 was staying in a motel with some other people just outside of Atlanta, and some of the comrades from the local area came over to meet with us in our motel rooms.
Some of the comrades were Black and some of them were white, and apparently this infuriated the authorities—I’m not sure to this day if it was just local authorities or also agencies like the FBI that were involved.
In any case, it turned out that this scene was a provocation to the pigs, who were preparing to mount an assault on us.
At one point, one of the people who was in our room got thirsty and went out to the coke machine at the motel, and there was this housekeeper there, a young Black woman, who had positioned herself strategically so she couldn’t be seen by all the cops who were gathering in the lobby.
In a real way she saved us from that attack, because we immediately packed up our things and left.
We left in two cars and we were followed for miles before the cops finally decided to give it up.
But this is another incident that indicates how the overall atmosphere was heating up.
And 1 always think back with great affection about that housekeeper and how she saved us from what was clearly being prepared as a major assault; and who knows what we would have been subjected to if they’d come flying into the room with masses of police.
Damian Garcia 1 spoke earlier about our efforts to build a revolutionary outpouring on May 1, 1980.
As May Day 1980 approached, the repression against our Parly and the people who were rallying around this vision intensified week by week, with arrests, jailings, beatings and threats.
Not long before this, Damian Garcia had been one of three people who had raised the red flag over the Alamo and denounced the imperialist conquest and domination that it represented.
The war against Mexico and the theft of its land was a key part of the expansion of the system in the United States as it approached and then reached the imperialist stage at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century.
So Damian Garcia, in a profound expression of opposition to this, had climbed to the top of the Alamo, unfurled a red flag, and read a denunciation of United States imperialism.
But to devote your life, and even be willing to lay it down, to put an end to the system that spews all of this forth, to live and die for the cause of the international proletariat, to make revolution, transform society and advance mankind to the bright dawn of communism—this is truly a living, and a dying, that is full of meaning and inspiration for millions and hundreds of millions fighting for or awakening to the same goal all around the world.
This statement was read at memorial meetings that were held all over the country shortly before May 1, 1980, and then a poster of Damian on top of the Alamo, red flag flying proudly, was put up around the country, with portions of that statement included.
Chapter Twenty-five Exile Just to step back for a minute, this was a very wild and tumultuous period. was leading the Parly to re-examine a lot of what had been our guiding assumptions and to forge a new and much more revolutionary political line.
Times fabrication and distortions and the way that had been picked up by the Secret Service; the growing reports of death threats against me from various quarters, including from the police; the murder of Damian Garcia; and then other things as well.
We determined that it was necessary to make a tactical move in order to disrupt a dynamic that could be headed toward something very serious and perhaps even disastrous.
And, as he was busted for this, time after lime, his whole life and activity was caught up in defending himself around these various busts, and this seriously undermined and took away from what he was trying to do with his life’s work.
So, kind of analogously, besides the outright death threats and other things, we wanted to disrupt the dynamic where they were going to keep coming after me in particular, in one way after another, and where all of our efforts would have to be increasingly focused on dealing with just that, and it would take away from the broader revolutionary work we wanted and needed to do.
A Tactical Maneuver, Not a Strategic Retreat So, in 1981 I look the extreme but necessary step of going into exile and I applied for political refugee status in France.
Applying for Refugee Status The experience of applying for political refugee status in France, in 1981, was very interesting and revealing, and very intense.
The way the process worked was that you went to the UN High Commission on Refugees, which was in Paris, and you applied there for political refugee status.
And if that commission of the UN granted you political refugee status, then the French government was supposed to grant you the rights that went with that, including the right to remain and be able to live and work in France.
When I went with my lawyer to the office of the UN High Commission in Paris, we went from one desk to another in the office with my application for political refugee status, and we were turned away at each one.
I kept exposing these things, and they just kept turning me away, sending me from one desk to another, and refusing to even accept my application to start the process.
So we finally found this guy, and he did agree to sign the application so at least the process could be undertaken.
Well, you know, you'll have to go down to the prefecture of police, and they’ll definitely want to talk to you.
So, even though he was signing my application, he was obviously trying to scare me off at the same time.
But finally, after hours and hours, we did get the application signed and filed and the process began.
Adjusting to Exile Going into exile had been a very difficult decision.
Still, it was personally very difficult and a big dislocation. left behind family and loved ones and many friends.
I even had to leave behind my dog, a half German shepherd, half huskie named Dude that I’d raised from a pup.
I was also going to completely new and unfamiliar circumstances, and a different culture.
On the one hand, 1 was excited, on a certain level —Paris, the city of lights, full of life and vibrancy and vitality, and more than that, a city that drew people from all over the world. would have a chance to meet and be exposed to people from many different countries and cultures and hear about their experiences.
And in fact that did happen—that was one of the very positive things about going there, and it deepened my understanding of what the imperialist system does to people all around the world, from Chile to Turkey to many places in Africa—throughout the Third World in particular, but also in other countries, including countries of Europe.
I met people from countries in Latin America and elsewhere where the United States had pulled off coups and installed brutal dictatorships that tormented and tortured, and brutalized and murdered thousands and thousands of people.
I talked to many Chilean refugees, for example, who gave vivid accounts of this.
A number of people 1 met, including refugees from other countries who had been in France for a while, helped me learn the ropes, as they say, and in various ways were supportive.
And there had also been some political work done, in France and other parts of Europe, around the Mao Tsetung Defendants case, so that had laid a groundwork for some people to understand why 1 had to go into exile.
All in all, I found a great deal of sympathy and support of various kinds when 1 arrived in Paris.
Yet the fact remained that, especially at first, it was a difficult thing to uproot myself and have to go into entirely new surroundings.
Even though it was a very exciting city, 1 felt out of place in many small ways.
For instance, 1 was determined when 1 went there that I was not going to be an ugly 4J4 From Ike to Mao and Beyond American, trying to make everyone speak English. was going to learn French, so 1 could converse with and gel to know people there, and so I could read the newspapers and generally have a sense of what was going on.
By reading the French newspaper Le Monde , for example, you could gel more interesting news than you could from almost the entire mainstream bourgeois press in the United States So 1 was determined to learn the language, but it took a while.
And they would dispel the mystery and awe by explaining that people were just carrying on mundane conversations about everyday humdrum things that weren’t of very great importance in most cases.
But to me this still often seemed mysterious and heavy, until 1 myselflearned French well enough to understand what they were saying, and the mystery then dissolved.
Getting into the Scene At the same time I was trying to take in as much as I could of the culture of Paris and of France.
It’s very easy to get around in the city, because the Metro was not that expensive and you could hardly ever get lost.
There was a Metro station within two blocks of almost anywhere you were in the city, and each station had a very good map showing what lines you would take to get to where you wanted to go—you just had to get on trains, and transferring was very easy.
It was just a great cultural experience—all this diversity from all over the world.
They came up to me and I was trying to figure out what this was all about, and they just said, “billet... ticket, s’il vous plait,” so 1 figured out that they wanted to see my ticket, and 1 did have one, so that turned out to be nothing.
But other than that, and as I became more familiar with it, sometimes I would spend hours just riding around the city on the Metro, getting off and walking around different places and looking at the architecture and other things that were very different from the U.S., and listening to musical performances, taking in the scene there for a little while and then getting back on the Metro and riding to another slop to explore that area.
There was food at all different prices throughout the city—everything from little kiosks or stands to fancier restaurants—and, so far as I could afford it, 1 would seek out all different kinds of food.
You could go to different parts of the city and find restaurants of all kinds— Moroccan, Greek, everything.
But I also sought out things that fell familiar to me, even while I was trying to take in more and more of this new culture.
For example, I right away discovered this weekly magazine called Pariscope that told you what was happening everywhere in the city during that week, including the schedule of the movie theaters.
The movies made in the United States would arrive in Paris within a few months, and then you could go see them in English with French subtitles or you could see them in French, depending on how you wanted to take in the movie and what experience you wanted to have.
But even after 1 learned French more, 1 would still mainly go see movies from the United States in English with French subtitles, because that was the language they were made in.
There would not only be new movies, but there would also be what they called a “cycle”—a series of movies featuring one actor.
When 1 was traveling around on the Metro, 1 would also get out and walk around to discover where different treats could be had.
And then I discovered to my horror a few months later that he’d moved, he wasn’t there anymore.
These were some things that 1 did while 1 was learning the language and increasingly taking in the culture of France, while at the same time I was interacting with and learning from all people and cultures from all over the world.
French Basketball, “The Deerhunter,” and Doo-Wop 1 also discovered French basketball leagues, although 1 was frustrated because they usually only played once a week.
There was a team in Paris and teams in other cities, and each of these teams was allowed to have a certain number of players from other countries, which mainly meant Americans.
Some people who either didn’t quite make it into the NBA but had played in college in the U.S., or who had played a year or two in the NBA but didn’t “stick,” came over to Europe to play.
I would go to as many games as 1 could, and sometimes I'd talk to some of the players after a game, particularly the ones who were from the United States Also, people back in the United States sent me videotapes of basketball and other sports.
So this involved a lot of complications, but still I managed to keep up, and that's how I found out about and first watched the Fiouston team that came to be called Phi Slamma Jamma, which I loved and about which I wrote an article that was included in the book Reflections, Sketches and Provocations.
So that was another way 1 could keep up with things that were dear to my heart.
Culture, especially if it’s done well technically and artistically, can have a very powerful impact in influencing people’s thinking and in creating public opinion.
And that was the case with The Deerhunter , a movie about Vietnam and American soldiers, which came out in the late 70s.
For example, there was a famous image that people all over the world saw of this suspected Viet Cong member who had a pistol pul to his head and was executed in the streets by a member of the political police of the Saigon regime.
Well, The Deerhunter had this whole motif in it where one of the United States soldiers had kind of dropped out of things and was playing Russian roulette; and the scenes of Russian roulette in the movie were aimed at subtly and sort of subconsciously recalling but then reversing the meaning that had been conveyed by that pislol-to-lhehead shooting of a Viet Cong suspect in real life in Saigon.
The images of pistols-to-the-head became, in The Deerhunter , the tragedy of what happened to American soldiers in Vietnam, instead of the outrage of what the political police of the puppet regime installed by the United States was doing to people that they accused of being Viet Cong.
For example, in the actual war in Vietnam, the Vietnamese in the liberation army who were captured by the United States side were put in these tiny “tiger cage” prisons and tortured there.
But The Deerhunter reversed that and had the United States soldiers being put in tiger cages by the Viet Cong.
This, again, was a very conscious attempt to reverse the meaning of things, and “reverse political verdicts”; and it was done in an artistically powerful way, because it was a very well-made and well-acted movie, designed to create reactionary public opinion in a big way around the Vietnam War.
Knowing this, 1 couldn’t just go to this movie like any other movie, so 1 didn’t go for quite a while when it was actually showing in the U.S., and then I had to go into exile.
And 1 discovered that indeed it was a very powerful and very reactionary movie, which played the political and ideological role that I have described here.
I wanted more of the movie, even though 1 understood what it was doing and recognized how it was manipulating people’s thinking and feelings, even somewhat unconsciously, as well as more overtly. wasn’t “taken in” by it—but 1 did feel the powerful pull of it, even while I was resisting it.
So I learned something more about the powerful effect that art and culture can have, in this case in a very negative way.
One pull 1 did not try to resist, nor would 1 ever want to, was my continued love of doo-wop.
They had all kinds of records, including old doo-wop records 1 had lost or had to leave behind when I came to France, and other music from the ’60s and ’70s. bought an album of songs by the Spaniels, a group 1 really liked and that a lot of people modeled themselves after when 1 was in high school.
And French radio sometimes played songs from the United States as well as music from France.
Now, it is important to understand that leading a communist parly doesn’t mean that you have a “hands-on” role in every particular thing that the party might be doing.
That would have been impossible—and not the correct method ofleadership.
In other words, as we say, leadership is essentially a matter of line and not a matter of tactical guidance.
And, although providing direction and forging specific tactics for a particular struggle can be an important aspect of leadership, that is not the most important aspect by far.
The essence of communist leadership is to enable people to continually raise their sights to the larger objectives of the struggle—revolution, socialism, and the final goal of communism worldwide—and, proceeding from that perspective and orientation, to grasp and act on the living link between those long-term strategic objectives and the work and struggles at any point in the process.
In order to provide that kind of leadership, it is necessary to study the historical experience of the communist movement, internationally as well as within particular countries, and to draw lessons from that.
It is necessary to continually study communist theory and apply the essential principles and methods that are concentrated in that theory.
And it also necessary to pay attention to and learn about what is going on in many different spheres, not just in the political sphere, but in the arts, the scientific realm and other fields of intellectual activity, and many other arenas of human endeavor.
It is necessary to learn what people working in these various spheres are learning, what problems they are wrestling with, and so on.
You have to look into social commentaries of various kinds, putting forward different viewpoints on important questions.
It requires learning from the experience and the ideas of the people you are seeking to lead.
However, it means not just “being a mirror” to the masses but instead applying the scientific viewpoint of communism to concentrate what is correct in their thinking, raising that to a higher level, and then returning that to the masses in the form of lines and policies, propagating these among the masses and uniting and persevering together with the masses to carry out these lines and policies... in an endless process.
The mass line can and must be carried out not only in the relations between the vanguard party and the masses but also within the party itself, on all levels.
The mass line is not a recipe for tailing the masses, whether inside or outside the party, but a means for learning from and leading them—from the standpoint of, and toward the strategic objective of, communism.
All this is what is meant in saying that communist leadership is essentially a matter of leadership through line.
The question we faced was finding the ways in which 1 could continue to do that in the new circumstances that arose when I was forced into exile.
As part of that, and coming off the whole monumental struggle around what stand to take in the face of the revisionist coup and restoration of capitalism in China, we recognized the importance of not only going more deeply into Mao and Lenin and their development of communist theory, but also studying more deeply the history of the revolutionary movement and in particular the history of the international communist movement and of the Soviet Union and China as socialist countries.
So one of the first things I did, once I got settled somewhat in Paris, was to begin a fairly major study of the history of the international communist movement, beginning with the October Revolution in Russia, in 1917, and the first few years of the Communist International (the Third International), when it was led by Lenin, through the period of the next several decades when, in essence, the international communist movement was led by Stalin, until his death in 1953.
My approach was, in a real sense, to look at this history anew, applying a critical approach to everything 1 was studying, even those things written by communists, while at the same time applying the fundamental outlook and methodology of communism to draw, from all this, the most essential lessons, positive and negative.
Out of this study, I first wrote up some summations of what 1 thought were the main lessons—an outline summation of the history of the Third International, that is, the Communist International that was founded under the leadership of Lenin and then, after Lenin’s death in 1924, was led by Stalin.
The International Proletariat Must and Will , which was recorded and then transcribed and published in Revolution magazine.
Conquer the World was my attempt to further develop this critical summation, and in this talk I did not limit things to the experience of the international communist movement under the leadership of Lenin and then Stalin, but tried to lake in the whole sweep of the communist movement from the time of Marx and Engels up through Mao.
The weekly Revolutionary Worker had replaced the old monthly Revolution newspaper, and Revolution then became a magazine, which was published periodically.
It is not a dogma and not some kind of religion where you just blindly follow the leaders of the movement, no matter how great those leaders may actually be.
So even with Marx, and Lenin and Mao, as well as Engels and in particular Stalin, l not only took account of and tried to sum up the main contributions they had made, but I also focused to a significant degree on what, with historical perspective, 1 fell could be and had to be recognized as shortcomings in their outlook and approach to things—shortcomings which are hardly surprising because everyone, even the people who make the greatest innovations and the greatest contributions, in any sphere, are conditioned by their lime and circumstances.
In order to grasp—and, in a certain sense, to “unearth” — the most important lessons from this whole historical experience, it was necessary to take this kind of critical approach.
And I am firmly convinced that, not only in this particular case but in general, this is the kind of approach and method that has to be applied.
As a funny side point, for a number of years 1 had been smoking a pipe and I found that, under the intense circumstances of the late ’70s and early ’80s, including this great change of going into exile, my smoking had increased.
I was not only smoking a pipe, but smoking cigars, and then I started smoking cigarettes—and smoking them more and more.
People were really starling to get on me, warning me about the serious dangers to my health.
Plus my mouth hurt all the time and 1 started not being able to taste food.
But I was still stubbornly continuing to smoke, while increasingly recognizing that people were right in telling me I should give up smoking.
But then one thing finally convinced me I really had to quit smoking. was intensely working on writing up some things having to do with the outline of the history of the international communist movement, and 1 got to a certain point where I was stuck and couldn’t figure out how to formulate something I wanted to say.
War Clouds During the early 1980s, and even before 1 left the U.S., there was a broad awareness, not only among communists but more broadly in society, of the growing danger of global nuclear war.
The Reagan administration came in with this very bellicose posture and approach of trying to roll back gains that had been made by the Soviet Union through the 1970s, and Reagan took the explicit position that if it came to nuclear war, he wouldn’t back down.
In the RCP we had already begun to note some of these developments and the severe sharpening of the contradiction between the United States and the Soviet blocs, even in the latter part of the 1970s—such as Jimmy Carter’s declaration that any move by an “outside force” in the Persian Gulf that threatened the interests of the United States would be treated as an act of war—and this further intensified in the 1980s. 1 think that, since we were based in the U.S., in some ways our party was more keenly aware of this growing danger of world war than people from some other parts of the world.
In the U.S., the ways in which the government was aggressively pushing out and confronting the Soviets in various places was constantly in the public eye, and there were things in the United States popular culture at that time—like the TV movie The Day After , about what would happen if there were a nuclear war and the United States were hit with a nuclear attack—which brought this sharply into the popular consciousness.
With the United States being one of the two superpowers, the head of one of the two blocs of contending imperialists, the possibility of world war was pushed to the forefront, shall we say, more prominently and broadly in United States society.
Some people from other parts of the world didn’t see as acutely some of the changes that were being undertaken on the part of the United States in the international arena and some of the ways in which the contradiction between the two imperialist blocs was sharpening up.
In the 1980s, a book, America In Decline , was written by the Maoist political economist Raymond Lotta.
It made a lot of concrete analysis of the development of the contradiction between the United States and Soviet blocs and the growing danger of war between them, as well as putting this in the broader framework of analysis of the contradictions of the imperialist system and its overall dynamics. read drafts of this book and offered comments and suggestions.
In this and other ways 1 was also devoting a lot of attention to the intensifying contradictions between the imperialist blocs, the growing danger of world war, and the truly monumental challenges this posed for the masses of people in the world and the communist movement.
In summing this up, we continue to believe that there was a real danger of world war in the 1980s, and that the contradiction between the two imperialist blocs—headed by the two superpowers— was in fact the main contradiction shaping things in the world and was intensifying greatly.
We were right to call attention to the danger of world war, even though there were ways in which we were somewhat mechanical about that.
So, while upholding what was correct in our analysis and approach to this, we have had to sum up and draw important lessons from the mechanical tendencies we fell into.
Having become a communist in the United States and having been part of the struggle in the United States for many years, I had learned a great deal about the terrible crimes that United States imperialism was carrying out not just in the United States but in many other parts of the world and the horrible suffering that the daily functioning of this system inflicted on billions of people all over the world.
But going to another country, meeting people there from many different parts of the world and learning from them about the horrors that the imperialist system, and in particular the U.S., inflicted on people, deepened my understanding of the importance of internationalism.
I have also continued to devote attention to summing up and drawing lessons from the history of the international communist movement, and I’ve tried to learn as much as l could from the revolutionary struggle throughout the world, especially where that is led by communist, Maoist forces.
I have also written a number of books on major questions confronting the communist movement.
Can't We Do Better than That?, which put democracy in its historical context and analyzed the actual content of different kinds of democracy throughout history.
In other words, this is a democracy that is founded on and serves the capitalist and imperialist system and the ruling class that presides over and benefits from that system. 1 took on a lot of the popular misconceptions and illusions about democracy and showed how, in fact, the vaunted “American democracy” has a definite social and class content—it is bourgeois democracy, and in fact a form of bourgeois dictatorship, an oppressive system of rule in the interests of the bourgeois ruling class and the capitalist system of exploitation.
In their thinking, as well as in the realities of how society functions, they are still trapped within the framework of what is in fact bourgeois democracy, a system of bourgeois rule—a bourgeois dictatorship, in which, yes, the people are allowed to vote in a country like the U.S., but all the politics and in fact all the affairs of society are dominated by a small class of people that rules on the basis of exploiting millions and millions of people inside the United States itself and billions of people around the world.
So “democracy” continues to be a source of considerable illusion and confusion, and addressing and laying bare the realities of democracy in a country like the U.S., in its actual functioning and social content, remains extremely important.
Cant We Do Better Than That?, I wrote a book called For a Harvest of Dragons.
At that time, even before the Soviet Union collapsed, there was a lot of talk about how Marxism was in crisis.
So 1 wrote this book to defend Marxism and communism, both as a theory and as a political movement, and also to sum up what I saw as some of the key aspects of Marxism and how they applied in the contemporary world, toward the end of the twentieth century.
Bush, besides self-consciously taking on the swagger and smirk of a philistine know-nothing bully and promoting that as a model, is also deliberately promoting religious fundamentalism in all kinds of ways.
All this is part of his promotion of religious fundamentalism in the United States and what we, in our party, have very correctly labeled Christian Fascism.
Christian Fascism does not refer to Christianity in some general sense—there are people who take up Christianity from many different viewpoints, including people who are progressive and in many ways stand with the fight against oppression.
That is very different, however, from Christian fundamentalism and in particular its expression as an ideological and political force in society whose connections now reach right up to the highest levels of the ruling political structures, including the White House and House of Representatives Majority Leader Tom DeLay.
In the decade of the 1990s, I gave a number of talks and wrote several articles which spoke to the growing phenomenon, and danger, of religious fundamentalism, within the United States as well as in other parts of the world.
Preaching From a Pulpit of Bones also includes a critique of various kinds of attempts to use the Bible for more progressive causes.
While uniting with some of the sentiments, and many of the actions, of people who proceed from this perspective, I showed how in the final analysis the Bible cannot be a guide to liberation, it cannot be a guide to eliminating the injustices and outrages that many of these progressive religious people seek to struggle against and to abolish.
I have also devoted some attention to analyzing questions of military theory during this period.
In the face of this, certain people who had been part of the Maoist movement started tailing after bourgeois-democratic viewpoints and saying that we had to rethink the whole history of the communist movement and not just criticize certain errors, but essentially throw out altogether the experience of socialist society—and not only in the Soviet Union but in China as well.
This was vastly different than what I had done in Conquer the World , where I had raised a number of sharp criticisms but had upheld the overall experience of socialism; this was an attempt to repudiate that and to argue instead for a more democratic— that is, bourgeois-democratic—approach to socialism.
As I analyzed in polemicizing against this, it would amount to abandoning the cause of revolution and communism completely.
But while strongly rejecting, and sharply polemicizing and struggling against, the notion that we should basically adopt bourgeois democracy in the name of socialism and communism, I have tried to 39.
This is part of developing socialism as a vital and vibrant society where people themselves are wrestling with and thrashing out all the big questions of affairs of state and the direction of society, within the framework of continuing on the socialist road.
Even where people may not agree that we should continue on the socialist road, we should seek to learn from their dissent and criticism and should not seek to suppress it, so long as it doesn’t take the form of an actual concrete organized attempt, once socialism has been achieved, to overthrow socialism and drag people back to capitalism.
I have returned to the theme that Mao brought forward of letting a hundred flowers bloom in the arts and a hundred schools of thought contend in science, and I am trying to pursue further the contradictions involved in actually giving expression to that, both in building the revolutionary struggle and the vanguard party now, as well as in socialist society itself.
So these are some of the main questions I have been wrestling with and writing and talking about, not only to help the RCP itself develop its work, both in the realm of practice and in theory, but also to contribute whatever I can to the struggle internationally.
Learning from Others 1 have always taken that approach of reading very broadly.
In studying the history of the international communist movement, 1 read summations not only by people who were within that tradition, but also people from a number of very different viewpoints.
Marxism, as he put it, embraces but does not replace the arts and sciences and all the different fields of human endeavor.
It is necessary to learn from many different people with many diverse viewpoints in all these different fields.
What Mao meant by saying Marxism embraces these various spheres is that the communist outlook and approach of dialectical materialism can and should be applied to all these different spheres.
It is a comprehensive scientific viewpoint and method that can lead to grasping reality, in all its complexity and particularity, in the most thorough way.
But an important part of applying that viewpoint and method is learning from many different people, including people who don’t agree with or don’t apply the communist outlook and method, in order to have the richest process and arrive at the fullest and best synthesis.
Obviously, in the sciences, in the arts, and in other spheres, many people who are not communists and don’t apply the communist viewpoint and method have made important contributions and discovered important truths.
That speaks to the “does not replace” aspect of what Mao is getting at.
It is not easy to learn very broadly without losing your bearings; and it is not easy to hold on to the correct basic approach and method without gelling dogmatic and mechanical about it and failing to learn everything you can from many different people with many diverse viewpoints and experiences.
With all this in mind, in various talks and writings I have been exploring how this principle—“Marxism embraces but does not replace”—should be applied in our work now and in socialist society, when once again new socialist societies are brought into being.
Madison, Jefferson, and Stalin Stepping back for a minute on all this, and drawing from the title of a talk I gave in 1989, I’ve come to see this whole last period as the end of one stage of the proletarian revolution, and the beginning of another.
The stage that’s ended is the whole period that began with the First International, at the lime of Marx and Engels, and then took three successive leaps with the Paris Commune in 1871, the October Revolution in Russia in 1917, and then the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution in China.
And now this historical period has ended with a situation where once again there are no socialist countries in the world and no Communist International.
To the contrary, we have Marxism-Leninism-Maoism, which is the product of this whole period and which enables us to sum up that experience and move forward—which we have been doing.
And there is also the regroupment of the Maoist parties into the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement which has strengthened the struggles of these parties and has contributed to the future formation of a new Communist International.
With all their tremendous accomplishments, we can’t just try to repeat the experience of past revolutions; we must do even better, and we can.
A number of times in this memoir I’ve recalled our insistence on uphold434 From Ike to Mao and Beyond ing the experience of the Soviet Union under Stalin, focusing on the ways in which the masses truly were making history under his leadership.
Stalin is to the proletarian revolution and socialist society as Jefferson and Madison were to the bourgeois revolution and capitalist society.
Jefferson and Madison, of course, provided critical ideological and political leadership to the bourgeois revolution in the United States and then the writing of the Constitution and the establishment of the republic itself.
At the same lime, they both not only owned and traded in slaves—and the whole history of slavery remains one of the horrendous crimes of history, the extremely oppressive ramifications of which continue today —but they established the legal foundation and political structure that enshrined this ownership of human beings for another 85 years, until the Civil War.
They were important representatives of the bourgeoisie and capitalist society, but at the same time there were significant ways in which, in theory and in practice, they applied and propagated things sharply in conflict with that.
For his part, Stalin represented a class, the proletariat, and a system of socialism whose goal is not simply replacing one set of exploitative and oppressive relations with another—which, after all, is the vision and mission of the capitalist class—but of abolishing all relations of exploitation and all oppressive divisions, throughout the world.
And, especially in the early period of his leadership of the Soviet Union, the main and essential aspect of Stalin’s role was to lead the workers and peasants of the Soviet Union on the road of transforming society to uproot exploitative and oppressive relations and to support the revolutionary struggle throughout the world toward the same goal.
But, even during that time, and especially as the danger of military invasion of the 40.
As Jefferson and Madison had a foot planted in the past, even in relation to the bourgeois revolution of their era; so did Stalin in relation to the era of proletarian revolution.
If the bourgeoisie and its political representatives can uphold people like Madison and Jefferson, then the proletariat and its vanguard forces can and should uphold Stalin, in an overall sense and with historical perspective.
But because, unlike the bourgeoisie, we are aiming for the abolition of all relations of exploitation and oppression, everywhere in the world, we should not simply uphold Stalin—or even greater leaders of the proletariat and socialist society, such as Lenin and Mao—but more than that we should strive to learn from them, their great achievements and their shortcomings and mistakes, and to do even better.
The Outcome of the Charges and the Refugee Status My demand for political refugee status was eventually turned down, as we expected it would be.
So that was an important struggle to wage for those reasons, even though the demand was eventually turned down.
And even though the demand for political refugee status was turned down, in 1982 as a result of all the struggle that was waged to build support for myself and the other Mao Tsetung Defendants, and for my demand for political refugee status, the authorities in the United States were finally forced to back off the charges that resulted from the demonstration against Deng Xiaoping in 1979 and the police attack on that demonstration.
The United States government was finally forced to come to a settlement which resulted in the charges being dismissed against myself, and none of the Mao Tsetung Defendants doing any jail time.
It was a battle right down to the end, even in the final appearance in the courtroom.
The other defendants had to appear for the final disposition of the case, but there had been an agreement that no one would have to do jail time.
Well, as they were going through all the motions, defendant by defendant, at one point, when a Black defendant’s case was being discussed, the federal prosecutor got up and started running out all this racist garbage about how this was a big Black man and he was scary and violent.
So the prosecutor was forced to back down, and we were able to achieve a successful resolution of the whole case.
Chapter Twenty-seven Perseverance, and Inspiration The Hardship of Exile In many ways this period, beginning with exile in France in the early 1980s and up to the present, has been personally very difficult.
I have had to be separated from family and loved ones and many friends.
On the other hand, during this period, I have had the wonderful experience of finding a person who has been not only a close comrade but in the deepest sense a soulmate of mine, and that has made up for many things, even though there have been many painful experiences.
I was able to correspond with my parents, and we became closer in many ways.
My father in particular, but also my mother, would read most everything I wrote—and not just read it because I wrote it, but actually think about it—and we would correspond about this; and in that and other ways we actually became closer over these years.
Just shortly before she died, 1 had a chance to correspond with my mom, and talked about how 1 was trying to make a belter world; and she responded that she was trying to do the same thing in her own way.
Still, 1 was able to have very little contact with them because of the difficulty of these circumstances, and the same has been true with other people who had been close to me throughout much of my life.
Within the last few years, first my older sister, Marjorie, and then my mother and finally my father died.
There is no way to truly express the kind of loss I felt as a result of this, because they had always been dear to me, even when we were somewhat estranged politically and there were a lot of strains in our relationship.
Over the last period of Lime 1 became much closer to them, yet was physically separated from them almost entirely during this period—and then to have them die, and not to be able to be there, was very excruciating.
In some cases these relationships have ended when sharp political differences emerged; in others, they have deepened with battles fought and battles shared.
In light of this, I thought about the great reggae artist Peter Tosh, and one of his last songs.
The album’s title song strikingly presented nuclear war as a concentrated horror, while at the same time driving home the point that life for the masses of people, worldwide, is already a horror.
And there were a number of other very powerful works touching on struggles of the masses—he had an updated version of “Fight Against Apartheid” that connected to the inspiring uprising of the midand late 1980s in South Africa—as well as some rather deep ideological questions.
Certainly I do not think that money, as such, will cause us to turn our backs on what we have set out to do and all the people who are—subjectively in some cases already, but objectively in the case of millions and millions of people—counting on us to do what we have set out to do—to lead in doing this.
I do not think we will turn back from this, or be turned away from it, because of things like money.
Those sugar-coated bullets are even more destructive than literal bullets, because when someone falls to sugar-coated bullets it is demoralizing to the masses of people beyond the loss of a particular person.
But we will have to struggle with each other and help each other—and fundamentally rely on that ‘magic combination’ of our ideology, MLM, and the masses of people.
Like much of the album, it is powerful—and sweeping — in its simplicity.
We, of course, have differences with him, in particular that he is religious and we are against religion, ideologically.
But he was one of those of whom it must definitely be said that his religious convictions led him to stand, firmly, with the oppressed of the world against the oppressors.
Disappointment, Danger, and Going Forward Over the years and now decades, I’ve experienced many disappointments.
Beyond personal hardships and losses, there have been real, and even profound, losses in terms of the struggle for a whole different world and better future for humanity.
There have been not only twists and turns but gigantic setbacks, like the loss of China as a socialist country and base area for the world revolution.
This is something that I myself, our Parly, and communists throughout the world have had to confront.
The people who so viciously rule the world oppress and exploit people in the most ruthless and murderous way.
These are not just words that get thrown around; those are words that hardly capture the reality of the suffering that people are pul through—totally unnecessarily—under the domination of this system and the way it twists and distorts the relations among people and turns people into instruments either to be used for the amassing of wealth on the part of a relative handful, or else just to be thrown onto the scrap heap like so much useless material.
And there is the crushing of human potential and spirit that goes along with that.
The need to do away with all that—and, from a strategic point, the basis that exists to do away with all that—hasn’t been eliminated, or even lessened, despite these setbacks and even real defeats.
When 1 reilect on all this, I think of a conversation I had with a friend when I was a teenager.
One day I asked him what he wanted to do when he got out of medical school, what kind of medicine he was going to practice.
It has been many decades since that time, and while some advances have been made in treating cancer, it’s still a scourge.
But that person has been working in this field all these years, and I would never say that his efforts have been wasted just because cancer is still here.
The need to eliminate cancer, or find a cure for it, if you will, is as great as ever.
And, if you take a scientific approach to disease, you know that it is within the realm of possibility to find the means to eliminate this scourge on humanity and that it is worth persevering in that effort.
The same applies to the question of uprooting, overturning, and abolishing these horrendous relations of exploitation, oppression, and plunder on which this system is based and on which it thrives, along with the wars that are waged, and the destruction and despoliation of the environment that is carried out, as a result of its workings and the actions of those who rule it.
The need to eliminate this system and bring something much belter into being is even more profound than the need to find a cure for cancer.
And if you’ve taken up a scientific approach to investigating, learning about and changing reality, then you know that the means can be found to do that.
There is a basis within the nature of the world as it is, within the nature and contradictions of this system of capitalism and imperialism, to overturn and uproot and finally eliminate this system and all the horrors it causes in the world.
Where you fall short of that, you have to draw the lessons as fully as possible, you have to ground yourself even more deeply in the scientific approach to understanding and changing reality that is Marxism, apply it in a more creative and critical and living way, and work together and struggle together with others in order to both learn more and do more to change the world.
All the experience I’ve been through and learned from has taught me much more deeply and shown me much more fully that it is both necessary and possible to do this, and that the best thing that I could do with my life is to make whatever contribution 1 can to this.
Even where there are terrible reversals and losses like what happened with China, this system will keep throwing up the need for revolution to abolish it and to bring into being a radically different and bet442 From Ike to Mao and Beyond ter world, a communist world.
This need will continually be brought to the fore, over and over again.
The conditions of the people and what they’re put through will continually cry out for this change.
If you have had a chance to see the world as it really is, there are profoundly different roads you can lake with your life.
You can just get into the dog-eal-dog, and most likely get swallowed up by that while trying to get ahead in it.
You can put your snout into the trough and try to scarf up as much as you can, while scrambling desperately to get more than others.
Or you can try to do something that would change the whole direction of society and the whole way the world is.
Your life is going to be about something—or it’s going to be about nothing.
And there is nothing greater your life can be about than contributing whatever you can to the revolutionary transformation of society and the world, to put an end to all systems and relations of oppression and exploitation and all the unnecessary suffering and destruction that goes along with them.
I have learned that more and more deeply through all the twists and turns and even the great setbacks, as well as the great achievements, of the communist revolution so far, in what are really still its early stages historically.
Being Sustained And there have been great achievements, in what is actually the very brief and beginning experience of socialism and the advance toward communism.
Whenever the masses in any part of the world rise up, even spontaneously, and especially when they do so with communist leadership, this is a source of tremendous inspiration and shows once again the potential for this whole revolutionary struggle and transformation of society and the world.
This is a very powerful and sustaining thing when combined with an increasingly deepened grasp and application of the scientific outlook and method of communism.
In the past, while we opposed discrimination against homosexuals, we regarded homosexuality as essentially a negative phenomenon which posed an obstacle to the ending of all oppression, and in particular we saw male homosexuality as something that contributed to the oppression of women.
Overall, 1 have continued to contribute whatever I can, and to lead the RCP in contributing the most it can, to the envisioning of, and the creation of, a whole new world, a communist world—a world of freely associating and cooperating human beings, a world in which the great majority of people, and ultimately all of humanity, would want to live and in which they would thrive, in ways never before possible or even imagined.
Perseverance , and Inspiration In recent years, just at the time when the rulers of the United States and other capitalists and imperialists were seizing on the reversal of the revolution in China and then the collapse of the Soviet Union to proclaim the ultimate triumph of the capitalist system, tremendous rebellions and protests have taken place, throughout the world and within the United States itself.
In Los Angeles on a massive scale but also in Cincinnati and other cities, uprisings have taken place against outrageous acts of brutality and murder by the police.
Through the work of our Parly and others, a national coalition has been built against police brutality, and every year since 1996 there has been a National Day of Protest against police brutality, repression, and the criminalization of the youth, with thousands of people taking part in dozens of cities around the country.
The battle around the right to abortion, as a key concentration of the light against the oppression of women, has continued to rage, and is once again sharpening up.
At the same time, the fight to eliminate discrimination against gays and lesbians in all spheres of society has taken new leaps.
In recent years massive protests and battles have taken place against capitalist globalization and its devastating effects on people throughout the 41.
This is discussed, and gone into in much greater detail and depth, in the new Programme of the Parly and in a position paper, “On the Position on Homosexuality,"" available from RCP Publications.
Seizing on the events of September 11, 2001, the ruling class of the United States and its leading core have unleashed a juggernaut of war and repression, declaring a worldwide war to expand their global domination and exploitation in the name of “fighting terrorism,” and instituting new levels of repression within the United States which are dangerous in themselves and represent precedent and potential for much greater and perhaps even unprecedented repression.
And in important parts of the world, Maoist parties, united in the RIM, are making crucial advances.
When I look at all this, I think again of my friend who decided to dedicate his life to ending cancer—and of the even greater need to put an end to the system of capitalism-imperialism and all the suffering and oppression this system embodies and enforces throughout the world.
You see that there isn’t anything more important that your life could be about, and whatever you end up contributing during the course of your lifetime is the most important and the most uplifting thing that you could possibly do.
And yes, there are moments of great disappointment, but also moments of great joy as part of this.
There is the joy of knowing that you are part of this whole process and contributing what you can to it.
There is the joy of the camaraderie of being together with others in this struggle and knowing that it is something worthwhile, that it is not something petty and narrow that you are involved in but something uplifting.
There is the joy of looking to the future and envisioning the goal that you are struggling for and seeing people come to even a beginning understanding of what that could mean, not just for themselves but for society, for humanity as a whole.
So this is what my life will continue to be devoted to, and this is what the ongoing story of my life will be about.
A veteran of the Free Speech Movement and the revolutionary upsurges of the 1960s and early 1970s, he worked closely with the Black Panther Parly.
By the mid-1970s, he emerged as the foremost Maoist revolutionary in the United Stales.
He has guided the RCP since its formation in 1975 and is a major leader of the international communist movement.
Over the last twenty-five years, Avakian has produced a highly significant body of work, and he approaches Marxism as a living, developing science that must be constantly interrogating itself.
Avakian has penned the most comprehensive account of Mao’s theoretical contributions to Marxism.
He has been undertaking an ongoing examination of the experience of proletarian revolution in the twentieth century—its great achievements, in particular the profound lessons of the Cultural Revolution in China, as well as its setbacks, shortcomings, and mistakes.
He has been addressing issues of revolutionary strategy in the United States and for the international movement.
He has analyzed why revolution is not only necessary but also possible within the United States itself.
Through these and other critical investigations, Avakian has been bringing forward a vision of socialism and communism that breaks vital new ground for Marxism and the communist project.
In recent writings, he has been speaking to the indispensable role of dissent in socialist society—how it contributes to deeper knowledge of socialist society, the critical spirit that must permeate it, and the continuing struggle to transform socialist society towards communism.
He has been drawing attention to the importance of the intellectual and cultural spheres in socialist society and in the revolutionary process overall, and he probes historic problems in the understanding and approach of the international communist movement.
Further Thoughts on Conquering the World , he has been conceptualizing the international dimensions of communist revolution in ways that have far-reaching implications for the world struggle.
Avakian’s writings are marked by great breadth—from discussions about religion and atheism and morality, to the limits of classical democracy, to basketball.
It is often alleged that a vanguard party is incompatible with a searching, critical, and creative intellectual enterprise.
From his life experience and revolutionary perspective comes a profound sense of the struggles and sentiments among the masses of people; and he keeps his finger on the pulse of the movements of opposition in society more broadly.
Correspondence should be addressed c/o Insight Press, 4044 N Lincoln Ave.
Additional information about this memoir and the author can be found at www.insight-press.com.
The Revolutionary Worker/Obrero Revolucionario regularly publishes articles by Bob Avakian, and is published weekly in English and Spanish editions.
Why It’s Necessary, Why It's Possible, What It's All About , a film of a 2003 talk by Bob Avakian.
