This method, called critical oral history, is described as an applied phenomenological psychology; it's goal has been to reconstruct the psychological reality of decision makers in October 1962.
The missile crisis was found to be more dangerous than previously believed, largely due to United States and Russian ignorance of, and disregard for, the crisis as viewed from Cuba.
I think that you and I, with our heavy responsibilities for the maintenance of peace, were aware that developments were reaching a point where events could have become unmanageable.
Kennedy, October 28, 1962 No, Comrade Khrushchev ... we knew, and do not presume that we ignored it, that we would have been annihilated, as you insinuate in your letter, in the event of nuclear war.
Fidel Castro to Nikita Khrushchev, October 31, 1962 Nearly 10 years ago, we were two psychologists seeking to make policy-relevant contributions to issues of war, peace, and international conflict.
That is, we wished ultimately to speak not only or primarily to other psychologists, but rather to policymakers.
We therefore posed the following questions, first to ourselves, then to fellow psychologists.
By showing what it was really like to have nuclear responsibility when, as in October 1962, everything seemed to be at stake.
Cohen wrote during a time when U.S.-backed forces were fighting ""proxy"" wars against Soviet-backed forces in Nicaragua, Angola, Ethiopia, El Salvador, Cambodia, and elsewhere, conflicts whose characteristics, as he saw it, bore no resemblance to the missile crisis.
Those who are guilty of the ""ceaseless pondering of the events of October 1962"" had, in Cohen's view, unwittingly become solipsistic and irrelevant to the world as it is.
Move away from October 1962 and into the study of other events, other analogies, with which to understand the present.
For those who, like Cohen, were primarily interested in the uses of American conventional forces, his advice was sound.
For those who took this risk seriously-and many students of international affairs took it very seriously-it was natural to turn toward the reexamination of the missile crisis, rather than away from it.
Yet by the mid-1980s, the study of the missile crisis offered as little aid to students of nuclear risk as it did to students and practitioners of conventional warfare.
Although the event centrally involved three countries-the United States, Soviet Union, and Cuba-virtually all the literature on it was written about Americans, by Americans.
Khrushchev's inexplicable blundering caused the crisis, Kennedy's courage and skill resolved it, and Castro's Cuba was irrelevant either to its causation or its resolution.
Moreover, none of these works contained a single footnote or reference to real-time documents, with which scholars typically evaluate the validity of interpretive recollection.
Allison's subtitle accurately summarized what most scholars had been attempting to do with the episode.
Escaping the missile crisis is not an option, however, for students of nuclear risk.
Students of nuclear risk must move into the missile crisis, rather than away from it.
These were some of the questions that could not be escaped by those of us who, with Cohen, saw by 1986 little assistance deriving from the study of the missile crisis but who, because of our focus on the problem of escalation to nuclear war, had to try to devise a means with which to understand it more thoroughly than before.
We were looking for clues from actual human experience as to how a crisis looks and feels from the inside, when it appears to be evolving into catastrophic nuclear dimensions.
It is useful to recall now the connection we made then between the raw, evolving experience of the missile crisis and what we took to be policy relevance.
But the psychological reality of bearing the burden of responsibility for trying to manage the crisis must contain useful guidelines, perhaps even some invariants, that would likely apply if such a crisis should ever occur again.
Because human nature, human psychokogy, the perceptual dimensions of ""being there"" under conditions of such moral extremity-call them what you will-are likely to remain relatively constant.
These two sets of descriptions together constitute an attempt to pry open the meaning a given pattern of thought and feeling has for a person.
If you seek to understand an action, ask the actor what he or she was trying to do.
If the reasons actors give for actions still perplex you, try to understand the meaning the situation and action had for the individual actors.
This, in outline, is the psychological foundation on which the reexamination of the missile crisis has been based.
We asked just such questions throughout 1986 and early 1987 of former Kennedy administration officials.
Others were simply lacking in content because the respondents simply did not remember.
Still other answers were so fantastically precise as to be a bit incredible, after the intervention of nearly a quarter century.
Something was lacking, something that would help propel these veterans of nuclear risk back into October 1962 and, in effect, hold their feet to that recollected fire until they found it possible to communicate credibly to others what it was about and what it was like, then and there.
We also came to see that, even among Americans, views were diverse, and that merely mentioning the views of others in the interviews often inspired the veterans to respond in more detail and with greater conviction.
We had discovered, in other words, that to get more fully reacquainted with a given experience in October 1962, the veterans must be provided with information about their own views, and those of others, reflected in documents and in oral testimony.
We called it critical oral history and, as we developed it, it seemed both helpful and legitimate to characterize our effort as an applied, dynamic phenomenological psychology of the missile crisis.
Because in 1986 participation by former Soviet officials was out of the question, we recruited American Sovietologists known for their acumen on Soviet motivation in the crisis.
Finally, scholars and journalists whose knowledge of the ""literature"" of the missile crisis was exhaustive were invited to join the enterprise.
In early March 1987, at Hawk's Cay, FL, we tossed these ingredients into the ""stew"" of a conference on the missile crisis to see what would emerge.
We had no intention, before the conference, of doing anything further on the crisis.
Most of the participants believed that although the experiment in critical oral history was worth a try, there wasn't all that much left to learn about this most extensively studied crisis of the post-War era.
As it happened, however, the conference in Hawk's Cay turned out to be the first of five meetings on the missile crisis, each designed to fulfill the requirements of critical oral history, each evolving out of its predecessor.
There seem to have been two fundamental reasons for the surprising fruitfulness of the critical oral history of the crisis.
First, the method itself produced unexpected discoveries from declassified documents and data-based recollection by veterans that was far more detailed and credible than anything derived previously.
And, the participants often witnessed barely managed confrontations between former colleagues and/or adversaries whose resolutions, if achieved, were often both moving and illuminating.
The highest levels of the governments of the United States, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics , and Cuba got increasingly interested in the outcomes of the various meetings.
In the summer of 1987 we decided to act on a hunch that present and former officials in both the United States and USSR might see in the process an opportunity to push back the leading edge of glasnost, then in its infancy with regard to the Soviet Union's foreign relations.
A third, larger meeting was held in Moscow in January 1989, at the height of enthusiasm for Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost and perestroika, and attended by former Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, former Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin, and other senior Soviet officials.
Cubans also participated in the conference, though in a subsidiary role.
They issued an invitation in Moscow to the Americans and Soviets to come to Havana to a conference focused on the Cuban perspective on the crisis.
In January 1990, the project moved to the Center for Foreign Policy Development at the Thomas J Watson, Jr.
What was initially conceived as a heuristic ""collision"" of veterans, scholars, and documents quickly assumed another dimension-cross-examination by former adversaries.
This has had all sorts of repercussions for those of us who organize and try to manage the meetings.
Often, they were surprised by the extent of their own misperceptions and those of others.
But the most striking feature of this process has been the evolution in views from seeing oneself as an effect and the adversary as the cause, to seeing how the process was driven by decisions and actions of all sides.
The veterans learn things they didn't know at the time , veterans begin to see the interactive nature of decision making, and it becomes possible to begin to construct a rough psychological chronology of the thoughts and feelings underlying the evolution of political and military events.
The inadvertent slide to that confrontation is thus their joint burden of nuclear responsibility.
Together, they put the world at greater risk of nuclear catastrophe than at any time before or since.
For the veterans, therefore, the critical oral history presents both opportunities and risks regarding their personal reputations, the possibility of political reconciliation with former adversaries, and an assessment of one's place in history.
Much of the cross-questioning throughout the critical oral history can be seen as, at various points, attempts to avoid, shift, or finally to assume this burden of nuclear responsibility during the missile crisis.
This is true in the exchanges between American hawks and doves, Americans and Soviets, Americans and Cubans, and even, to an extent, between Soviets and Cubans.
All of these cross-examinations tend first to be characterized by attempts to assign responsibility to the other and, finally, if the process is successful, to accept mutual responsibility for events leading to October 1962.
This is far from the only issue around which one might conduct a ""tour"" of the five conferences.
But the issue of responsibility for the crisis goes directly to many of the most startling and troubling findings deriving from the project, including gross misperception by all three parties far in excess of anything previously believed.
Each side, responding in what was felt at the time to be a completely justified, defensive reaction to actions of one or both of the other two, had its intentions misjudged.
This pattern reiterated until it was almost too late to reverse the perverse momentum of misperception.
These data, detailed and multifaceted, provide a field day for peace psychologists interested in how inadvertent escalation really works, in an almost moment-to-moment fashion.
Each leadership, seeking to discharge its responsibilities honorably, unwittingly collaborated with the others in a process that could have led to the initiation of a nuclear holocaust for which all would have shared responsibility if, indeed, anyone had remained to assign relative blame.
Yet it is also clear that Castro, along with Soviet forces serving in Cuba, preferred to initiate nuclear war if there should be an American invasion of the island.
Moreover, Cuban and Soviet forces in Cuba felt it was their solemn responsibility to do so.
So absolutely discrepant were the views of the leaders of the superpowers from those on the ground in Cuba on the issue of responsibility in October 1962, that it is little wonder we came so close then and that, even now, three decades later, the process of assuming mutual responsibility for those events is still incomplete.
OCTOBER 1962 IN REAL TIME None but the leading participants in the missile crisis will ever know what it was really like to bear the burden of responsibility in real time, as the event was unfolding, caught up in the raw experience of receiving what was known to be very imperfect, perhaps even incorrect information, and on that basis make what were also known to be momentous decisions.
Looking back at October 1962, we are keenly aware of the terrible stakes, but also of the peaceful outcome.
Looking forward into a situation that seemed to be spiraling out of control, the actors knew only the stakes, and many began to doubt, before the crisis reached its peak of tension and remarkable conclusion, that they would be equal to the task of managing it.
Memory is foremost a reconstructive process, and the reconstructions occur in light of experience subsequent to that which one seeks to revisit.
That is why documentary evidence is so central to the task of accurate revisitation of the past especially, in the present case, using declassified documents containing thoughts committed to paper in real time.
Of course, real-time documents do not reveal anything like the whole of realtime psychological reality either.
But they are where practitioners of critical oral history must start their engagement with the past.
Washington and Moscow The burden of responsibility felt by Kennedy and Khrushchev in October 1962 is seared into their crisis correspondence, and its unbearable weight is supremely exemplified by the extent to which they tried to shift it back and forth to one another's shoulders.
The letters reveal that both men were shocked by what they took to be the irresponsible, precipitate action of the government of the other and, unable or unwilling to take responsibility for causing a crisis with such dire potential consequences, the two leaders faulted one another for causing the crisis, even as they ultimately found it within themselves to admire one another for collaborating on its peaceful conclusion.
The President announced the imminent imposition of a naval ""quarantine,"" or blockade, of Cuba and preparations for military action against the missiles in Cuba, should the Soviets refuse to remove them.
These measures were portrayed as having been made necessary by Khrushchev's irresponsibility.
The crisis, according to Kennedy, had been caused by the secret, swift and extraordinary buildup of Communist missiles in an area well-known to have a special and historical relationship to the United States and to the nations of the western hemisphere ... this sudden, clandestine decision to station strategic weapons for the first time outside the Soviet Union ... a deliberately provocative and unjustified change in the status quo.
Rather, it was about the latest and most dangerous evidence to date of what was regarded in the West as the central character flaw in Soviet Communists-secrecy and deceit in pursuit of world domination-now a potentially catastrophic flaw, because the Soviet Union had become a nuclear superpower.
With regard to the concerns and motivation of the Kennedy administration, therefore, the crisis was misnamed.
To the American government, it was caused by the movement of Soviet missiles to a merely convenient piece of Caribbean property, in service of familiar and despised Soviet goals.
The day after Kennedy's speech, Khrushchev served up his own litany of accusations in his message to the President.
Khrushchev thus attempted to send responsibility for the crisis back into Kennedy's court.
The missiles that were sent to Cuba, according to Khrushchev, were done so in response to a whole series of aggressive acts by the United States against the Socialist government of Castro, most important Kennedy's decision to authorize the invasion at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961.
Kennedy sent the burden of responsibility for causing the crisis right back to Khrushchev later the same day.
Like Khrushchev, Kennedy professed to be puzzled and shocked by the actions and statements of his counterpart and, also like Khrushchev, keen to assign all the responsibility for the dangerous crisis to the other.
The Kennedy administration did not expect Soviet missiles in Cuba; indeed they thought they had been perfectly clear as to their unacceptability.
Khrushchev and his colleagues did not expect a blockade-an act of war, as they saw it-in response.
Jolted by the recognition of how wrongly they had judged their adversaries, and with the stakes as high as they appeared to be in October 1962, leaders in Washington and Moscow responded instinctually to their failed predictions with renewed insistence on their righteousness.
In a matter of days, however, the crystal ball effect-assent to the intellectual proposition that war between the superpowers would be catastrophic folly-yielded to a mutual feeling that the crystal ball might be about to shatter-the fear of sliding imminently into a nuclear war.
As this occurred, the shock, anger, and rigidity that characterized the initial responses of each gave way very shortly to circumspection and compromise.
Accusation and denial of responsibility gave way to self-reflection and eagerness to reach a solution that would leave a face-saving way out for leaders in both Washington and Moscow.
By October 28, the day of the Kennedy-Khrushchev ""understanding,"" the Soviet leader had been transformed from the belligerent warrior he had appeared to be just 5 days earlier into a genial diplomat.
Kennedy responded in kind in a statement issued to the press the same day.
Chairman Khrushchev's statesmanlike decision to stop building bases in Cuba and to begin dismantling offensive weapons and returning them to the Soviet Union under United Nations verification.
This seemed to be the psychological point at which the two leaders converged.
Before the crisis each had peered into the nuclear crystal ball and found nuclear war to be unthinkable because events would always be manageable.
Each had subsequently, at the peak of the crisis, discovered that nuclear war had become all too thinkable, because events were becoming unmanageable.
Though they learned quickly that they must share responsibility for ending the missile crisis, the moral common ground on which Kennedy and Khrushchev stood at its flash-point conclusion proved insufficiently spacious to accommodate an end to the Cold War, or anything close to it.
For this to have happened, the United States and Soviet governments would have had to assume their respective shares of the responsibility not only for concluding the crisis, but also for causing it, and this they could not do.
An exchange between the two leaders in December 1962 demonstrated that each still believed the mutual heroics of October were made necessary by the subterfuge and aggressiveness of the other, and that they still-their shared moment of nuclear fear and illumination aside-did not trust one another.
In a speech to the Supreme Soviet on December 12, Khrushchev blamed the crisis on ""American imperialists were sharpening the knives and threatening Cuba with a massed attack.
Yet the profundity of each experience produced eloquence unexcelled in the rhetoric of statesmanship in the nuclear age.
Khrushchev meaningfully chose the divided, disputed, and dangerous city of Berlin in which to demonstrate that he had learned the great lesson of the missile crisis.
As for Marxist-Leninists, they cannot propose to establish a Communist civilization in the ruins of centres of world culture, on land laid waste and contaminated by nuclear fall-out.
We hardly need add that in the case of many people the question of Socialism would be eliminated altogether, because they would have disappeared bodily from our planet.
If we cannot now end our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity.
For, in the final analysis our most basic common link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet.
And we are all mortal ... confident and unafraid, we labor on-not toward a strategy of annihilation, but toward a strategy of peace.
Havana The correspondence between Khrushchev and Cuban leader Castro on the final weekend of the missile crisis reveals that, whereas Castro felt a heavy weight of responsibility, the burden he felt had little in common with that of leaders in Washington and Moscow.
For Castro, the enemy was neither unexpected nor was it fear of inadvertent disaster brought on by the momentum of crisis.
By late in the evening of October 26, Castro became con238 BLIGHT AND LANG vinced, not without reason, that a United States attack o n C u b a w a s only hours away.
According t o C u b a n a n d Soviet documents and testimony, Castro a n d Soviet Ambassador Aleksander Alekseev spent the entire night a t t h e Soviet e m bassy, drafting a n d redrafting a message f o r Khrushchev.
Finally agreeing o n t h e precise wording, they sent a cable t o Khrushchev a t approximately 7m.
I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists' aggressiveness is extremely dangerous and if they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger forever through an act of clear legitimate defense, however harsh and terrible the solution would be, for there would be no other.
But at the same time, we are ready to confront a situation which we view as quite real and quite close.
L e s t there b e a n y doubt i n Khrushchev's mind about what Castro w a s requesting, Alekseev sent a report of his all-night session with C a s t r o t o Moscow, after t h e original c a b l e from Castro had been sent.
But under certain circumstances, we should forestall them without waiting to experience ourselves the perfidy of the imperialists and the first nuclear blow from their side.
Khrushchev was horrified, in part because he seems to have incorrectly interpreted Castro's request as a call for a preemptive nuclear attack, that is, before any invasion of Cuba had taken place.
By the time Khrushchev drafted his response, he and Kennedy had struck their deal, via radio messages, to save time.
Khrushchev was evidently elated at having gotten a pledge from the United States not to invade Cuba, and he obviously thought he was conveying good news to Castro.
But this was not good news to the Cubans, for several reasons, including the provision in the Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding for on-site inspection of missile sites in Cuba.
He had apparently resigned himself to Khrushchev's inability or, perhaps, unwillingness to comprehend Cuba's situation and requirements.
It appears to have become obvious to Castro that Cuba's security interests, as perceived by the Cubans themselves, were not part of the Soviets' calculations in deciding to end the crisis.
In refusing to take Castro's request for a nuclear strike on the United States in the event of an invasion seriously, and in neglecting to consult him about the terms of the conclusion to the crisis, Khrushchev seemed to Castro to have abandoned Cuba in its hour of supreme emergency.
Facing a pivotal and risky choice in the crisis, Khrushchev had not chosen Cuba, leaving Castro, who had chosen the Soviets as protectors, to bear the burden of what h e believed in that moment was responsibility for the potential destruction of the Cuban Revolution and possibly the deaths of hundreds of thousands of Cuban people.
Khrushchev, alarmed that the deal struck with Kennedy might come undone due to Cuban intransigence, dispatched Anastas Mikoyan, his First Deputy Premier, to Havana to persuade the Cubans to agree to the terms of the U.S.-Soviet arrangement.
Notes of the conversations in Cuba between Mikoyan and Castro provide clues as to what the Cuban leader imagined when his crystal ball began to shatter, as well as the responsibility h e felt for what h e feared was about to happen.
As though we were being deprived not of missiles but of the very symbol of solidarity.
Our people thought the news about the withdrawal of the missiles was a lie.
For they did not know about the agreement , that the missiles still belonged to the Soviet side.
I went out onto the streets and to military units and saw that this was so.
We were asked not to open fire on United States planes invading our airspace.
These feelings could have been used by the counterrevolution to incite anti-Soviet moods.
He had cast his lot with Marxism-Leninism, asked the Soviets to assume responsibility for the protection of Cuba, and had accepted the nuclear missiles, thus transforming Cuba into a target for an attack that the missiles were, in theory, deployed to deter.
Castro still felt this way on November 19, the day before the crisis was officially concluded at a press conference called in Washington by Kennedy.
Castro's ""October crisis"" was thus utterly unlike that of Kennedy and Khrushchev.
It was not an omen of inadvertent nuclear catastrophe, narrowly averted, from which one should derive the central responsibilities to succeeding generations.
In the peak of tension and denouement of October 1962, Castro's crisis was a disaster about to occur not by accident, but due to a deliberate attack by his enemy and the unexpected cowardice of his ally.
Desperate, deeply regretful of his own ignorance of nuclear weapons and Soviet intentions with regard to them, and feeling suddenly helpless in their absence, he could only rage at the United States planes overflying Cuba at will, waiting for the final end from which there would be no escape, and for which there would be no redemption.
That morning, Khrushchev had announced over Radio Moscow the imminent withdrawal of all nuclear missiles from Cuba, in exchange for an American pledge not to invade Cuba.
The President sent his brother, Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General, to confirm the details of the understanding with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin.
Returning to the White House, Robert Kennedy and the President spent a few minutes alone, discussing the events of the previous 13 days.
The President, according to his brother, wanted to discuss Abraham Lincoln and the Civil War, a subject with which he had been much occupied for, among other reasons, public remembrances of 100th anniversaries of Civil War events occurred almost daily during his presidency.
Former Kennedy White House aide Walt Rostow has written that Kennedy was not a morbid man.
But those close to him knew he was haunted by the fear that he might be the man whose decisions led to nuclear war.
It was a good deal to ask of a human being-to protect the possibility of civilization by putting it at risk ... the burden was most harsh and explicit in Kennedy's time.
By connecting his own experience to that of Lincoln, Kennedy conveyed in one typically ironic phrase his sense of relief, his feeling that events for which he was supremely responsible might have turned out far worse than they had, and that if he were to go out heroically, this was the day to do so.
The critical oral history of the missile crisis began as an inquiry into the nature of Kennedy's experience of that burden of responsibility, and those close to him who shared it to some degree.
Those involved in the inquiry have from its inception taken the goal of revisiting October 1962 seriously, not merely remembering it or reading about it, or drawing lessons from it.
To revisit is actually to be there as it was in the event, not literally, for this is impossible.
But the participants have understood one of their principal goals to be the creation of contexts conducive to an accurate and multidimensional revisitation of a burden of responsibility at once so difficult to verbalize, but so essential to understand.
For example, in the conference at Hawk's Cay, FL, in March 1987, Thomas Schelling expressed to Kennedy's Secretary of Defense McNamara his own real-time experience of the missile crisis.
Schelling was in the basement of the Harvard Faculty Club, watching Kennedy's October 22 speech on television with his colleagues in the Harvard-MIT Arms Control Seminar.
Schelling remembered feeling no anxiety whatever, only exuberant anticipation of Khrushchev's humiliation.
Schelling noticed, apparently for the first time, that McNamara and many of his former colleagues gathered at the conference had felt tremendous anxiety even while the speech was being delivered, and more later in the week.
It was clear from the start that the main perplexities for all United States participants in the process concerned Soviet motivation.
For example, the Hawk's Cay discussions began with a series of questions concerning Khrushchev's intentions in putting missiles in Cuba, posed by historian Ernest May.
The list of possible motives for the Cuban missile deployment was expanded at Hawk's Cay but, in the absence of knowledgeable Soviets willing to share what they knew, the speculation noted by Sorensen continued unabated, informed, as before, mainly by United States Sovietological theorizing.
Although none of us at Hawk's Cay knew it in March 1987, the Gorbachev-Shevardnadze revolution in the discussion and conduct of Soviet foreign policy would by the following October create an entirely new possibility-a private discussion in Cambridge, MA, in October 1987, for the public record, between Americans close to Kennedy and Soviets who had worked with Khrushchev.
The intellectual and emotional context of that meeting is in certain respects almost as difficult to revisit as the event whose unprecedented, bilateral revisitation was its purpose.
Washington and Moscow In the 25 years between October 1962 and the Cambridge conference of Americans and Soviets in October 1987, Soviet literature on the missile crisis claimed uniformly that the United States had unilaterally caused the missile crisis through its aggressive imperialist actions against Cuba, requiring the Soviets to become involved in order to protect Cuba.
Khrushchev, who had been persona non grata since his forced retirement in October 1964, is never mentioned by name.
In this account, American imperialism is the cause of the missile crisis, Kennedy its tool and the author's father its unsung hero, the man who tried in vain to get a mendacious Kennedy to come clean about his intention to provoke the crisis, and also the man who provided wise counsel to other, unnamed Soviet officials.
He put the missiles in Cuba, a move that seemed then and thereafter to lack common sense.
These were the questions that Americans most often asked, during the crisis and ever since.
Not surprisingly, therefore, the Americans present began the conference in Cambridge by posing to their Soviet counterparts just these questions hoping, but lacking compelling reasons for expecting, that they would at last receive answers with sufficiently thick texture, balance, and credibility to warrant taking them seriously.
But the issue was complicated by Khrushchev's psychology, said Burlatsky, who had travelled with Khrushchev on his visit to Bulgaria, during which Khrushchev reported in his memoirs having the inspiration to put missiles into Cuba.
We have enough rockets and warheads to compare our forces with American forces.
We also had responsibilities to the Cubans, especially after the Bay of Pigs-maybe not so connected.
I also believe Khrushchev's aim was to begin detente with the United States But it is very difficult to imagine how placing rockets in Cuba can support this.
From my point of view, it was more an emotional than rational decision.
Further, he had done so critically, implying that in certain respects the decision to deploy the missiles was irresponsible, poorly conceived, and motivated by deficiencies in Khrushchev's character.
Finally, he had disagreed with the long-held Soviet official line on the reason for the deployment-defense of Cuba-and in so doing he openly contradicted the line he himself had helped Khrushchev to articulate in the Soviet leader's speech in December 1962.
Such strikingly self-critical interventions by Russians are now commonplace.
In October 1987, on this subject, they were unheard of, which is why the veteran Sovietologists and former Kennedy administration officials present took notes like freshmen.
The answer, he said, must lie in the impression Kennedy made on him at the Vienna summit of June 1961.
Burlatsky admitted that there was in this conclusion the unmistakable air of self-delusion and wishful thinking and that Khrushchev's firm, if ""irrational"" convictions, combined with his highly concentrated power in the party and government, led to the irresponsible decisions in the spring of 1962.
Whereas Burlatsky had made Khrushchev's psychology central to the fact of the deployment, Sergo Mikoyan, who had been an assistant to his father Anastas Mikoyan during the missile crisis, addressed head-on the issues that had most troubled United States officials and scholars in 1962 and ever since-Soviet secrecy and deception.
Georgy Shakhnazarov, the senior member of the Soviet delegation (and long-time Central Committee staff member), hinted as well that, as Americans had long suspected, the Soviet leadership systematically deceived all the members of their foreign service corps, excepting Gromyko, so that their representatives in Washington, at the United Nations, and elsewhere could therefore unwittingly ""lie"" all the more convincingly, because they were told there were no missiles in Cuba.
It was here that all three Soviet participants laid the charge of irresponsibility heavily on the Soviet leadership.
For no contingency plans had been made in case the missiles were discovered prematurely, nor could there have been such plans, because many officials who would have been central to their execution did not know of the existence of the missiles.
In this way, Soviets at the Cambridge conference began to redress the massive imbalance between what Soviets knew about United States decision making and what Americans knew about Soviet decision making.
Kennedy and Khrushchev had in the event tried repeatedly, like two tennis players in a long volley, to return responsibility for causing the crisis back to the other side.
Conversely, the Soviet participants at the Cambridge conference offered to join their American counterparts in an exercise more like a game of catch, requiring each side to accept the possibility of its share of the responsibility, before tossing it back to the other side.
The Soviets had begun the process courageously by ""catching"" a considerable and highly specific degree of responsibility, and only then did they attempt gently to toss the ball of responsibility across the table.
B u t t h e issue o n which t h e mutual revisitation o f O c t o b e r 1962 proved m o s t revealing w a s that of American intentions regarding C u b a following the B a y o f Pigs invasion.
Mikoyan: I think all the participants in the discussion agreed that the United States was preparing for the liquidation of the Castro regime ... there were invasion plans.
There was also a covert operation at the time code-named ""Mongoose,"" whose aim was to destabilize or overthrow the Castro regime.
I don't believe the public knew about it, but the Soviets certainly would have.
I remember that in the fall of '62 there was great frustration about Cuba and considerable confusion about what we should do.
We had no intention to invade Cuba, but it seems from what you say that there was a very solid picture in Moscow that we were going to do something more than we were.
Let me say that we had no plan to invade Cuba, and I would have opposed the idea strongly if it ever came up.
We thought those covert operations were terribly ineffective, and you thought they were ominous.
Small actions can be misperceived in important ways, with disproportionate consequences.
I can assure you that there was no intent in the White House or in the Pentagon--or at least in my Pentagon-to overthrow Castro by force.
A second U.S.-Soviet conference regarding October 1962 convened in Moscow in January 1989 at the invitation of Shakhnazarov, who had by then become a personal aide to President Gorbachev.
The conference benefitted from the presence of the highest level living Soviet participants in the crisis, including Andrei Gromyko and Dobrynin.
Many more chapters in the common chronology of U.S.-Soviet intentions were added.
At the Moscow conference it was suggested by the Soviet hosts that the participants be differentiated according to whether they were scholars or veterans.
He cautioned veterans and scholars alike to resist ""a tendency on the part of all of us, in assessing blame, to speak in terms of national interest and self justification, and always to put the blame on some other country.
In fact,"" he said, ""there is plenty of blame to be shared by all three countries represented here today"" , a view with which no United States or Soviet veteran revisiting October 1962 in that Moscow conference room registered any dissent.
Havana Cuban participation in the joint revisitation of October 1962 began at the Moscow conference and immediately caused difficulties for the American veterans and scholars.
The utter unfamiliarity of the Americans with these Cuban officials served to illustrate to the Americans just how exclusively the U.S and Soviets had been in their view of the missile crisis, from 1962 onward.
After the conference began, mere confusion became genuine consternation at the Cuban interventions.
It rapidly dawned on the Americans in Moscow that, with the entry of the Cubans, they had entered a new kind of exercise.
All United States administrations since Kennedy's have, in one way or another, endorsed that statement.
The United States has not had full diplomatic relations with Cuba since they were broken by a directive from President Eisenhower on January 3, 1961.
In the Cuban view, these requirements have never been addressed, much less discussed or resolved.
And so, by common consent, Cuba remains locked in a Cold War with the United States, in an atmosphere as close to perpetual crisis as is sustainable short of war.
The Cuban officials who came to Moscow, therefore, came to revisit the origins of their present grievances.
They came most of all, so it seemed to the Americans, to present themselves as victims of United States aggression, which they held responsible for the October crisis, and the fact of its unfortunate, continuing relevance.
It was clear, therefore, that if there was to be a meaningful U.S.-Cuban revisitation of October 1962, the Americans must take the first step by openly declaring, as the Soviets had done in Cambridge, their share of the responsibility for the crisis.
McNamara: I want to state quite frankly that with hindsight, if I had been a Cuban leader, I think I might have expected a United States invasion.
Because the United States had carried out what I have referred to publicly as a debacle-the Bay of Pigs invasion-we'd carried it out in the sense that we'd supported it.
There were covert operations extending over a long period of time ... from the late 1950s into the period we're discussing, the summer and fall of 1962. ... , there were important voices in the United States-important leaders in the Senate, important leaders of our House-who were calling for the invasion of Cuba.
I can state this categorically, without qualification, and with the certainty that I am speaking not only of my own knowledge, but of my understanding-and I think it was complete-of the mind of President Kennedy ... we had absolutely no intention of invading Cuba ... therefore, the Soviet action to install missiles .. . was, I think, based on a misconception-a clearly understandable one, and one that we, in part, were responsible for.
Via McNamara, leader of the American delegation t o Moscow, U.S. officials f r o m t h e K e n n e d y administration h a d stated publicly, to Cubans, the U n i t e d States' responsibility t o C u b a f o r actions that with benefit of hindsight m a y b e seen to h a v e led straightaway t o t h e crisis of October 1962.
This question was put to the test at a subsequent meeting in Antigua, in January 1991.
The Cubans, who had begun their presentation in Moscow by reading aloud from declassified U.S. sources regarding covert operations in Cuba, led off with a highly detailed report on United States covert operations drawn from Cuban sources.
It was a selfconscious attempt to refute the claim McNamara had made in Moscow-that the Cubans, however understandably, had been victims of misperception in drawing the conclusion that the United States intended to use military force to destroy the Cuban regime, leading to the chain of events that resulted in the Soviet missile deployment.
War is not only combat with tanks, aircraft, machine guns, cannon and missiles; war is the placing of bombs, war is generalized terrorism, war is indiscriminate murder-war is all of this.
Thus, the causes of the crisis can be traced back to United States aggression.
The Americans were responsible for the crisis we had come to the meeting to discuss.
It was a pointed attempt to encourage the Cubans to understand that, just as they believed they had to respond to a war already declared on Cuba by the United States, American officials believed they had to respond to a war the Cubans had declared on the proUnited States governments in Latin America.
That was how they saw it at the time although, as McNamara admitted, he cannot in retrospect defend an operation like Mongoose.
But it was a mistake committed not, as perhaps Escalante's presentation would lead one to conclude, simply by perverse men in Washington.
Rather, it emerged from a context in which Cuban actions played an important causal role in United States decision making and for which, therefore, Cuba bore some responsibility.
I'd like to remind you that after Cuba's expulsion from the OAS, and after the rupture of diplomatic relations by many countries in Latin America with Cuba .. . many of these other countries started to support the Cuban counterrevolution.
In other words, I think that any act of Cuba to help the revolution in a country that was helping the counterrevolution was an act of legitimate defense ... if such a thing took place.
I perfectly understand, to put myself in the Americans' shoes, as my friend McNamara said, that the United States would be worried by this activity, by the Cuban response.
Risquet failed to address the central request made by McNamara, which was for specific details on Cuban support for terrorism in Venezuela in the period in question, and in general for an overview of (what the Americans took at the time to be) Cuban subversion in the hemisphere generally.
Later in the conference, Schlesinger, former White House Aide who followed Latin American affairs for Kennedy, crystallized what the Americans were asking for as a Cuban Church Committee Report, alluding to the hearings in the mid-1970s during which the Mongoose operation became widely known.
This the Cubans were not prepared to do in Antigua, for several stated reasons, including the paucity of documentation on these issues at so early a point in the revolutionary period, and not excluding the possible impact such revelations might have on present Cuban relations with countries such as Venezuela.
To their credit, however, the Cubans showed no lack of eagerness to discuss the issue, although they preferred to defend such actions as they may have taken, rather than to describe any that they actually did take.
Subsequently, for example, Risquet evinced perplexity at the drift of the discussion.
That is, although it is undoubtedly true, as McNamara and others argued, that both the United States and Cuba engaged from an early point in attempts to subvert the interests of one another, we should also recognize, as Risquet suggested, that the conditions that seemed in the early 1960s to warrant policies of mutual destabilization have evaporated with the end of the U.S.Soviet Cold War.
But it is also important, all agreed, to have a clearer understanding of what the ""this"" is that should not be repeated, especially on the Cuban side.
It is important because historical accuracy is always to be preferred to innuendo or fading memories.
But it is also important because, in mutually coming clean on subversion by the United States and Cuba, it would be possible to understand in detail how the responses of one side led to responses from the other side until, as an unintended consequence of any single act in the chain, the world was brought closer than it has ever come to catastrophic nuclear war.
WESTERN HEMISPHERE The meeting in Antigua had been intense, even bitter at times, as members of the United States delegation continued to press the Cubans relentlessly for details of their decisions to support leftist movements in the western hemisphere.
The Cubans, however, continued to refuse to reveal such information, repeatedly claiming that, whatever they may have done, they were only responding to United States aggression.
This infuriated McNamara, Schlesinger, and others on the United States delegation, who claimed to want from the Cubans only information, not excuses, apologies, or accusations.
Indeed, it seemed odd that the Cubans, particularly Risquet, leader of the delegation, were concerned enough to establish the absolute sovereignty and autonomy of Cuba in the period of the missile crisis while, in addition, claiming victim status for Cuba at every opportunity.
This led many Americans in Antigua, and some Soviets, to conclude that the critical oral history of the missile crisis had reached a dead end.
Western hemispheric issues such as covert activities on the part of Cuba and the United States and mutually hostile rhetoric, having been admitted to a discussion of the course of events leading to October 1962, might just be too sensitive, even in January 1991, for Cubans and Americans to discuss fruitfully.
The Cubans, however, moved ahead with plans for a conference in Havana.
To attract the skeptical former members of the Kennedy administration, the organizers promised the full participation of President Castro who, it was said, would come prepared to make a full disclosure of whatever information the United States side requested regarding Cuban support for revolutionary movements in Latin America between January 1959, when the revolution triumphed, and October 1962.
Castro would, the Americans were told, proudly take responsibility for Cuba's revolutionary activities.
Washington and Moscow In the statement with which he opened the conference, McNamara went straight to the heart of the matter.
Our second concern was Cuba's support for armed groups whose goal was to overthrow many, if not all, of the governments in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Our fourth concern was that the Cuban government betrayed its promise of a free election and began to establish a dictatorship.
That was the challenge McNamara put before Castro and his Cuban colleagues.
Failing to get an adequate response, the United States delegation had agreed ahead of time to walk out and end the conference at an appropriate moment.
The conference was by design focussed on US.-Cuban episodes that, in the view of Americans or Cubans , were connected with the missile crisis.
Decision making in Moscow, therefore, played a subsidiary role in the conference, just as it played a subsidiary role in the deterioration of US.Cuban relations 30 years before.
In other words, the central purpose of the presence of a Russian political delegation, led by Troyanovsky, was to facilitate the U.S.-Cuban discussion, rather than to reveal new facts about political decision making in Moscow.
The conference agenda did not, however, call for Castro to respond immediately to McNamara's blunt challenge.
Instead, the conference was addressed next by General Anatoly I Gribkov, former head of the Warsaw Pact and, in 1962, head of ""Operation Anadyr,"" the code name for the secret deployment of Soviet troops and missiles to Cuba.
As we have seen, Castro believed such a step would redeem Cuba's martyrdom for the socialist cause.
Gribkov would now argue convincingly that Soviet military leaders serving in Cuba during the crisis agreed totally with Castro, not with Khrushchev.
He then asserted that Soviet forces in Cuba were ready and authorized to initiate nuclear war, in Cuba, by the use of tactical nuclear weapons, whose authority for use had been delegated to the field commander on the island, General Issa Plieyev.
The existence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba during the crisis was completely unknown to the Americans before Gribkov spoke.
Indeed, none of the former Kennedy administration officials recalled even speculating about such a possibility in October 1962.
For the former members of the Kennedy administration who were present, and who would have had to recommend an invasion to Kennedy, this was the most sobering moment in the entire critical oral history process.
For in October 1962, there was much concern in the Kennedy EXCOMM about the possible implications of killing significant numbers of Russians in Cuba.
Most thought Khrushchev would have to escalate the crisis, perhaps by seizing Berlin or attacking the NATO missile sites in Turkey, should the United States move massively on Cuba.
But what they never considered, until they heard Gribkov speak in Havana, were the implications of having horrendous numbers of dead American marines on Cuban beaches.
For although Gribkov's portrayal of the Soviet military in Cuba as a group of nuclear age Robin Hoods was obviously idealized and one-sided, his revelations tended to add weight to the claims made by the Cubans at the Moscow and Antigua conferences.
Because Gribkov's revelations showed the Americans that their actions led to even greater nuclear danger than they had previously imagined, but because the Americans also believed that Cuban actions were inextricably linked to the chain of events leading to the crisis, the forthcoming Cuban response to McNamara's initial challenge-particularly Castro's response-became even more pivotal.
Several members of the Cuban delegation reacted immediately and angrily to Martin's presentation.
Carlos Lechuga, Cuba's OAS ambassador at the time, expressed the view that Martin was lying.
Risquet said bitterly that ""for many years the OAS was the Ministry of Colonies for the United States.
To many members of the American delegation, these remarks of Lechuga, Risquet, and Escalante were indistinguishable from what was taken by some to be their unvarnished mud-slinging at the Antigua conference.
Martin had tried to get across the point of view of the American government in the early 1960s, and he had done so effectively.
But instead of providing facts regarding the kinds of activities mentioned by Martin, the Cubans responded only with accusations.
The absence of interest in supplying facts to the discussion seemed to imply that the Cubans were, most implausibly, continuing to deny that they ever taken part in covert operations in the hemisphere.
McNamara therefore responded to the outbursts by the Cubans by reiterating his original request for information about Cuban actions that the United States government felt, at the time, deserved a hostile response.
At lunch, the United States delegation agreed unanimously that if Castro did not respond to McNamara's and Martin's challenge in the afternoon session, they would terminate our participation.
He first explained (unconvincingly) that he was previously unaware that he would be asked to speak about subjects not directly-in his opinion-connected with the subject of missiles in Cuba.
Castro then followed with a 1-hour critique of the four concerns as expressed by McNamara and Martin.
Working from notes he had taken during their presentations, he dissected the Americans' remarks point by point, and with considerable animation.
This was much more than any of the other Cuban participants had admitted.
Whereas in Moscow and Antigua and in Havana, the Cubans held uniformly that they did nothing to provoke the United States, Castro now asserted that what the Cubans did (and they did quite a lot, he asserted), was done as a response to United States actions.
We didn't export revolution, because the concept of exporting revolution is impossible and since, of course, in dealing with us there was no respect for any law or standards, as far as we were concerned, we felt that we had the right to support the revolutionary movement in the rest of the countries of Latin America where they were supporting the counterrevolutionary movement against Cuba.
From Costa Rica and other countries in the Caribbean, to attack Cuba, from the Dominican Republic.
And I believe a country attacked and harassed as Cuba was then had every right to act the way it did, very simply.
Castro then added, parenthetically, that ""there's a new situation in Latin America.
This was one of several such interventions by Castro, each more detailed than the last, each drawing a distinction between Cuba's past support for subversion, and its new policy of friendship with all the countries of Latin America.
Castro's response to McNamara's fourth concern, the betrayal of a democratic revolution and the establishment of a dictatorship, was utterly defiant.
He argued, in part, that Cuba has a democracy, a point no one on the U.S. delegation was willing to grant.
He also argued that human rights, such as education and health care, should count heavily when one evaluates the human responsiveness of a political system.
On this score, he asserted, credibly, Cuba is a leader in the hemisphere and indeed in the Third World.
Indeed, the issue remains the central intractable issue dividing Cuba from the United States.
Following Castro's ""trial"" intervention, there was no longer any talk in the American delegation of walking out of the conference.
In fact, there was agreement that Castro had gotten their point, as embodied in McNamara's opening salvo.
If, as the Cubans had demanded at the 1989 Moscow conference, the definition of the ""missile crisis"" was to be enlarged to include the period of the Bay of Pigs and the launching of Operation Mongoose , both sides-Cubans and Americans-must come clean on their hemispheric activities designed to undermine the security of one another.
Castro's main presentation on Cuban decision making regarding the Soviet missiles, the crisis itself and the aftermath, took place the following day.
A putatively bilateral turning point in history has thus been shown to be thoroughly trilateral.
An event whose danger has been held by many to have been mostly imaginary has been shown to be, due to the situation on the island of Cuba, much more dangerous than anyone previously imagined.
Most important for those of us who seek durable understandings from critical oral history, the causal linkage from relatively innocent, trilateral defensive actions to the verge of nuclear holocaust has been established in fine-grained, multifaceted detail.
That missile crisis may perhaps be thought of as something of a superpower confirmation or bar mitzvah, a nuclear coming of age in the nuclear age.
Cohen would no doubt agree that, as with all such milestones, it is good and necessary that they happen but, in the nature of things, they only happen once.
But for participants in the critical oral history of the missile crisis, some funny things have happened on their way into October 1962.
First, its duration must now be measured in years, even in decades, to capture its U.S.-Cuban dimension accurately.
Second, far from being the bloodless scare it seemed formerly to be, we must admit into the picture tens of thousands of casualties from the covert action campaigns backed by the United States and Cuba before, during, and after October 1962.
Moreover, the missile crisis has become the only episode of the nuclear age in which preparation for conventional warfare was significant and the use of nuclear weapons, tactical and strategic, was at various times seriously considered.
Finally, we have discovered that the events of October 1962 can no longer be understood apart from the implacable hostility between the United States and Cuba since 1959, when the revolution came to power, and which still continues.
Certainly, there is an eerie contemporary resonance in the tale of a small, beleaguered Third World nation, suddenly gaining access to weapons of mass destruction, having no history of their management or the theory of their alleged ""utility,"" and becoming desperate enough in a crisis to want to use them.
But methodologically, particularly for political psychologists, the ""nuclear phenomenology"" with which the missile crisis has been reexamined may be just as instructive.
When this happens, according to James, what we need is a good dose of what he called radical empiricism, or what we who are involved in the critical oral history have called nuclear phenomenology.
Allyn, Philip Brenner, Jorge I Dominguez, Mark Garrison, Mark Kramer, David Lewis, Edward Tabor Linenthal, Robert S McNamara, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Stephen D Shenfield, Thomas G Weiss, and especially David A Welch.
Notes of conversations in Cuba between Anastas Mikoyan and Fidel Castro Presented to the ""Cuba Between the Superpowers"" conference, January 3-, 1991, Antigua, by the Russian Foreign Ministry, Department of Archival Administration.
The 1968 ""secret speech"" of Fidel Castro and the rupture in Cuban-Soviet relations.
Radio and television report to the American people on the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba, October 22, 1962.
Statement by the president following the Soviet decision to withdraw missiles from Cuba, October 28, 1962.
Notes of conversations in Cuba with Fidel Castro, November 19, 1962 Presented to the ""Cuba Between the Superpowers"" conference, January 3-8, 1991, Antigua, by the Russian Foreign Ministry, Department of Archival Administration.
Men, events and decisions that shaped America's role in the world-from Sputnik to Peking.
