The correlational studies demonstrate that experts with strong theoretical commitments to a covering law and cognitive-stylistic preferences for explanatory closure are more likely to reject close-call counterfactuals that imply that “already explained” historical outcomes could easily have taken radically different forms.
Many experts are capable of surprising themselves when encouraged to imagine the implications of particular what-if scenarios.
The more effort experts allocate to exploring counterfactual worlds, the greater is the risk that they will assign too much subjective probability to too many scenarios.
We close by defining good judgment as a reflective-equilibrium process of balancing the conflicting causal intuitions primed by complementary factual and counterfactual posings of historical questions.
T he philosopher of science Carl Hempel ultimately rests on counterfactual claims about what advanced the controversial thesis that history, would or might or could have happened in hypothetical properly understood, is a prime candidate for worlds to which scholars have no direct empirical reduction to the laws of social science.
But mises, carefully abstracted antecedent conditions disputes over the relative soundness of competing that prevail at given times and places serve as minor counterfactuals are often notoriously resistant to conpremises, and the conclusions follow as the inexosensual resolution.
Examples include the seemingly rable or at least likely result of the hypothesized laws interminable debates over the avertability or inevitabiloperating on the specified antecedents.
Close-call counterfactuals are often focal points of We work from the uncontroversial premise that disagreement for two reasons. there is an ineradicable element of subjectivity in these First, Fogel and Fearon , among othdebates over historical causality.
Accordingly, a strong ers, demonstrate that all causal inference from history case can be made for rigorously scrutinizing potential cognitive biases in how historical observers go about Philip E Tetlock is Burt Professor of Psychology and Political evaluating the relative plausibility of competing what-if Science, and Richard Ned Lebow is Professor of Political Science, History, and Psychology, the Mershon Center, The Ohio State scenarios.
We sional observers of world politics rely on abstract express our deep gratitude to the many colleagues who took the time to respond to our questions.
We also appreciate the helpful advice of covering laws in assessing what was possible at specific Geoffrey Parker, Daniel Kahneman, the anonymous reviewers, and times and places.
Cognitive Styles and Historical Reasoning December 2001 ers place in relevant covering laws, and the stronger liberation has a price.
The more effort we devote to their cognitive-stylistic preferences for explanatory clounpacking counterfactual scenarios, the more contrasure, the more likely they are to be guided by those dictory are our resulting judgments of history.
APPLYING down character of counterfactual reasoning and the ABSTRACT COVERING LAWS TO SPECIFIC power of covering-law preconceptions to shape the HISTORICAL CASES conclusions that experts draw about what was historically possible, the experimental studies encourage exGuiding Theory perts to perform, in effect, an unnatural cognitive act: to give more thought than they normally would to From a neopositivist perspective on historical explanaalternative paths that history could have followed.
The tion , theorists are under absolutely goal is to test the notion that counterfactual reasoning no logical obligation to apply covering laws to any also can take an inductive, bottom-up form.
Covering laws in social science are best words, the mental processes of imagining specific counviewed both as probabilistic and as applicable to sets of terfactual scenarios can induce us to change our mind events, not individual occurrences.
Logical necessity to and become more circumspect about the power of our the side, however, there may well be considerable favorite causal generalizations to delimit the range of psychological pressure on observers to achieve closure historical possibilities.
Experiment 1 asks foreign policy in their historical explanations. experts to consider various scenarios, supported by As Herbert Simon and colleagues have varying amounts of detail, that “undo” the peaceful shown, even highly trained experts function like boundresolution of the Cuban missile crisis.
The net effect edly rational satisficers who try to keep the number of was to increase their perceptions of the potential for variables and amount of information that must be alternative, more violent, endings.
Experimental and possibilities into progressively more differentiated subfield research finds, for example, that people who score sets; the net effect was inflation of the subjective high on self-report measures of the need for closure probabilities of those alternative outcomes.
Moreover, tend to rely on prior beliefs in solving unfamiliar consistent with Tversky and Fox’s support theproblems and in evaluating dissonant arguments, preory, the more extensive the unpacking, the greater was fer parsimonious interpretations of evidence that inthe resulting inflation of subjective probabilities.
Exvoke as few causal constructs as possible, and prefer periment 3 demonstrates that these effects are not deterministic accounts that downplay probabilistic peculiar to the relatively recent and brief Cuban missile qualifiers.
From a strictly logical perspective, cesses by which observers apply causal generalizations there are three possible lines of defense . to history and judge the acceptability of close-call From a psychological perspective, especially one counterfactuals that circumscribe those generalizagrounded in cognitive consistency theory, there are tions.
Historical observers may indeed often be prisongood reasons for expecting experts to mobilize all three ers of their preconceptions , but they whenever experts feel core theoretical commitments hold the keys to their own release.
They are not are under siege (see Jervis 1976 on belief-system constrained to explain only what happened.
The lines of defense are as follows. endowed with the imaginative capacity to envision First, challenge the mutability of the antecedent.
The example, insist that it is hard to imagine Kennedy more energy we direct to elaborating dissonant alterheeding his more hawkish advisers during the Cuban natives, the weaker is the hold of our preconceptions missile crisis.
This defense often seems contrived, on however, even to those who value closure.
That is, when one state threatens to betake the form it did. come too powerful and to dominate the entire interSecond, challenge the connecting principles that national system, other states—rational, self-preserving bridge antecedent and consequent.
Counterfactual aractors as they are posited to be— coalesce against it, guments are inherently elliptical; it is impractical to thereby preserving the balance of power (cf.
From this standpoint, the failure of aspiring satisfied to sustain even the simplest antecedent-conhegemons, such as Philip II, Napoleon, or Hitler, is sequent linkages.
Consider the claim that if Kennedy predetermined by a fundamental law of world politics, had heeded his hawkish advisers during the missile and close-call claims that these bids to dominate crisis, and attacked Soviet bases in Cuba, World War Europe might have succeeded are misinformed.
Deterrence theorists can Study 3 targets a pair of covering laws that loom counter that war was not inevitable because the Soviets large in debates on the rise and fall of civilizations.
The recognized their strategic inferiority vis-à-vis the first is that history, in the long term, is an efficient United States.
They would have grudgingly acquiesced process of winnowing out maladaptive forms of social to the fait accompli and forbidden their ground forces organization.
It is no accident insist that history would have been thrown off track that, between 1500 and 1800, Europeans came to wield only temporarily, and the proposed changes would global influence so disproportionate to their numbers. have had little long-term significance.
This defense is The rise of the West, at the expense of the “Rest,” designated a second-order counterfactual because it reveals the fundamental superiority of Western values undoes the undoing of history implied by the original and institutions.
For example, even if Genghis Khan had lived port to undo the rise of the West by minor mental and the Mongols had mauled Western Europe, the mutations of antecedent conditions—more aggressive resilient Europeans would have bounced back quickly.
Islamic incursions into France in the eighth century or less isolationist Chinese emperors in the fifteenth century—are merely whimsical excursions into what-if Hypothesis history.
The preceding argument lays the conceptual groundwork for the two hypotheses tested in each of the three Methods and Measures correlational studies.
Experts with a strong need for Security and Arms Control) of the American Political explanatory closure are likely to invoke all three deScience Association and from the Society of Diplofenses against dissonant scenarios. matic and Military Historians.
The 63 participants for study 3, which focuses on the rise of the West, were randomly drawn from the membership roster of the Research Design and Logic of Analysis World History Association.
All respondents were conThe correlational studies probe reactions to close-call tacted by either postal mail or e-mail, and they were scenarios that undercut three categories of covering promised both anonymity and detailed feedback on the law.
Scenarios that imply we were able on participating and nonparticipating individuals on the brink of nuclear war at numerous junctures in in our sample.
Available results suggest, however, only the Cold War should seem far-fetched to theorists who slight overpresentation of academics employed in large posit the robustness of nuclear deterrence.
Looking research universities. back on the Cold War, these theorists should find it hard to imagine that either superpower ever would Covering-Law Beliefs.
These measures assessed enhave allowed a crisis to escalate into a nuclear war (just dorsement of the covering laws on nine-point agreeas, looking forward, they find it hard to worry about the disagree scales.
For neorealist balancing there were dangers of nuclear proliferation). four items.
A hedgehog knows his Khan, later European development would have one big thing and tries to integrate the diversity of the been impossible”; “If Islamic armies had made a world into a comprehensive and parsimonious vision serious attempt to conquer France and Italy in the 8th whereas a fox knows many small things and tries to century, later European development could have been improvise explanations on a case-by-case basis.
I would radically side-tracked”; “If the Black Death had place myself toward the hedgehog or fox style of been even more lethal, killing, say, 70% of the poputhinking about politics.” lation, Europe could not have arisen as the dominant Beliefs about Close-Call Counterfactuals.
Predicting Resistance to Closesions consistently show that the more committed the Call Counterfactuals scholars were to a school of thought, the more dismisCovering Law b SE t sive they were of counterfactuals that undercut historNeorealist balancing 0.96*** 0.30 3.18 ical applications of favorite explanatory generalizaCognitive style 0.35 0.29 1.20 tions.
The more experts believed in the reliability of the balancing hypothesis, the more they rejected the sceBalancing ⫻ style 0.74** 0.36 2.07 narios that implied Germany, with slightly sounder n ⫽ 87 decision making, could have emerged victorious in R2 ⫽ 0.47 either of the two world wars and achieved continental Nuclear deterrence 0.89** 0.34 2.65 hegemony.
The more experts believed in the robustness of nuclear deterrence, the more dismissive they Cognitive style 0.33 0.31 1.07 were of close-calls that implied the United States and Deterrence ⫻ style 0.69** 0.33 2.06 the Soviet Union easily could have slipped into nuclear n ⫽ 86 conflict during the Cold War.
The more experts beR2 ⫽ 0.43 lieved in the superiority of Western institutions, the less use they had for counterfactuals that implied other Adaptive advantage of West 0.82** 0.36 2.27 civilizations, with minor twists of fate, could have been Cognitive style 0.23 0.28 0.83 contenders for geopolitical dominance.
Experts who most R2 ⫽ 0.41 valued explanatory closure and parsimony mounted the Note: The table presents the full ordinary-least-squares results for each stiffest resistance to dissonant scenarios.
Each treats resistance to closecall counterfactuals as the dependent variable; independent variables tion cannot, moreover, be attributed to a differential are commitment to a particular school of thought (neorealist balancing, restriction of range.
Hartley’s Fmax test for heterogenuclear deterrence, and adaptive advantages of West), cognitive style , and a cross-product term designed to capture neity of variance revealed only minimal differences in degree to which resistance is greatest when both theoretical committhe variance of each theoretical belief scale among low ment and need for closure are high.
Differential reliability of measures also quence, what would the long-term ramifications have was not a factor.
Correlational analyses revealed that experts invoked all three belief-system defenses against dissonant closeDiscussion calls but preferred certain defenses.
Two of them— challenge the logic of the connecting principles and Respondents with a high need for closure were not generate second-order counterfactuals that put history content just to claim that they had the right explanaback on track—were widely employed and were tightly tions of the past.
The third defense— challenge the mutability of or were not undoable for long.
It is easy to extract lessons from history that cerebral hemorrhage of March 1953 or whether Cuba reinforce our ideological or theoretical stance (Jervis could have been cloudier on an October day in 1962.
The data also put in new psychological perspecpredicts so much variance— 8% to 10%—in judgments tive some old epistemological and methodological conof the mutability of antecedents. troversies.
Cognitive Styles and Historical Reasoning December 2001 accounts that dwell on inconsequential contingencies extensionality principle of probability theory.
Stretching can be specific possibilities than they can for the abstract sets facilitated either by dismissing dissonant scenarios that subsume these possibilities.
How can we avoid becomIn effect, people judge the whole to be less than the ing prisoners of our preconceptions, trapped in a sum of its parts and give quite different answers to self-serving cycle of filling in the missing counterfactual logically equivalent versions of the same question. control conditions of history with theory-scripted scenarios, and then deploying that same theory-driven Hypotheses.
Although experts tend to dismiss tion to research on cognitive style, we also expect that dissonant close-call counterfactuals, hefty regression the effect should be more pronounced among responcoefficients do not preclude the possibility that these dents with low need for closure. scenarios have some measurable effect on their judgSecond, Tetlock shows that there are two ment of historical contingency.
Indeed, the psychologlogically but not psychologically equivalent methods ical literature suggests that causality operates in for scaling experts’ perceptions of historical continprecisely this direction.
One imposes a factual framing on the historical peatedly find support for the prediction— derived from question and solicits inevitability-curve judgments.
For Tversky and Kahneman’s classic work on the example, in Experiment 1, experts on the Cuban misavailability and simulation heuristics—that merely imagsile crisis were asked at what point some form of ining multievent scenarios increases the perceived likelipeaceful resolution became inevitable.
Once they have been run class of outcomes waxed or waned in the preceding through our “mental software,” they leave psychologidays.
The other method imposes a “counterfactual” cal traces in the form of images, thoughts, and emoframing on the historical question and solicits impostions that can shape a host of subsequent causalsibility-curve judgments.
In Experiment 1, for example, propensity and subjective-probability judgments. experts also were asked at what point they believe all The literature on heuristics and biases also warns us alternative, more violent endings of the crisis became to expect systematic logical inconsistencies when peoimpossible and then were asked to trace how the ple judge complex event sequences that require intesubjective likelihood of that class of outcomes waxed or grating two or more probabilistic linkages.
The likeliciple or binary complementarity is transparently at hood judgments of the former group typically will exceed stake, and experts can plainly see that they are assignthose of the latter group by a substantial margin, even ing so much probability to both x and its complement though the former group is judging a subset of the class that the sum will exceed 1.0.
But logic and psycho-logic of outcomes being judged by the latter group. do not always coincide.
Second, in the moderate-salience condition, before By contrast, counterfactual framing of historical making retrospective likelihood judgments, responquestions effectively invites analysts to look long and dents judged the plausibility of three closehard for causal candidates that have the potential to call scenarios.
When down of a United States reconnaissance plane over Cuba on we add the subjective probabilities assigned to peace by October 20, Kennedy had agreed to implement his experts first asked to respond to inevitability curves and standing order to carry out retaliatory air strikes the subjective probabilities assigned to war by experts against Soviet SAM sites in first asked to respond to impossibility curves, the sums Cuba that shot down United States aircraft, then the United States Air will consistently exceed 1.0.
The rationale for the ease of imagining that antecedent could have occurred; between-group nature of the comparisons is worth the likelihood of the hypothesized consequence if the stating explicitly because it underscores the critical antecedent had occurred; and the long-term effect on advantages of experimentation in this context.
Given history if the hypothesized antecedent and consethat the experimental groups were constitituted by quence did occur. random assignment and hence should not differ sysThird, in the high-salience condition, respondents tematically in preexisting attitudes, there is no methnot only considered the three aforemenodological reason to expect systematically different tioned situations but also judged a series of nine responses to the logically equivalent inevitabilityand additional what-if scenarios that reinforced the anteimpossibility-curve questions.
For example, error variance in responses should be normally distribcounterfactual arguments 1, 2, and 3 reinforced the uted around the same “true” population mean of responplausibility of the antecedents in the fourth counterdents’ beliefs about the likelihood of peace or war. factual.
Pilot groups for experiments 1 fense McNamara to make a credible case for caution, and 2 were informally drawn from faculty at two large then Kennedy would have followed the advice of his American universities.
Soviet missiles in a single strike (with no need for a Experiment 1 randomly assigned the 76 participants follow-up land invasion), he would have followed the to one of three conditions.
They were also asked the antecedent-bolstering arguments is available from when all alternative endings became the authors on request.
Cognitive Styles and Historical Reasoning December 2001 Retrospective Perceptions of Inevitability and Impossibillated, r ⫽ 0.76.
The order of administration of these questions distinctive functional forms of the inevitability and was always counterbalanced.
The inevitability-curve impossibility curves of low-need-closure respondents in exercise instructions were as follows. the salient condition drive both interactions.
Let’s define the crisis as having ended when, on October As expected, within-subjects comparisons reveal that 29, Kennedy communicated to the Soviet leadership his when experts completed an inevitability curve and agreement with Khrushchev’s radio message of October immediately thereafter an impossibility curve—that is, 28.
At that juncture, we could say that some form of when binary complementarity was transparently at peaceful resolution was a certainty—a subjective probabilstake—subjective probabilities of peace and war ity of 1.0.
Systematic October 29 to October 16, trace on the graph your violations of binary complementarity emerged, howperceptions of how the likelihood of a peaceful resolution ever, when we made more subtle between-group comrose or fell during the 14 critical days of the crisis.
If you think the superpowers were very close impossibility curves, the average sum across dates is to a military conflict throughout the crisis, then assign 1.19.
This value is significantly different from what we consistently low probabilities to a peaceful resolution obtain by adding the probability of war and peace across all dates.
The initial analyses involved a 3 ⫻ 2 ⫻ 13 Skeptics can argue that in Experiment 1 respondents fixed-effects, unweighted-means analysis of variance were confronted with an elaborate battery of mutually that crossed three levels of the between-subjects experreinforcing counterfactuals that made alternative hisimental manipulation (control, moderate, and high tories unfairly vivid and left little room for determinsalience), two levels of the individual-difference classiistic rejoinders.
Respondents reported being rather overwhelmed by the number of judgments Guiding Theory.
Consider again forecasts of which required in the high-salience condition, and fatigue league, division, or team will win a sports championmay have attenuated any further effect that exposure to ship.
Tversky and Fox demonstrate that the additional counterfactual scenarios might have had. subjective probabilities people assign to binary compleTo simplify analysis, therefore, we collapsed the ments at the league level generally sum moderate and high groups into a single salient condito 1.0, but the subjective probabilities assigned to tion.
Inevitability curves rose within divisions—typically exceed 1. and occasionally more slowly over time among those with lower need for even 2.0.
Forecasters find it easier to generate evidenclosure assigned to the salient condition, F (12, tial support for a particular team winning than for 908) ⫽ 6.74, p ⬍ .01.
The figure displays inevitability curves from experts with low and high need for closure in the control and salient conditions of Experiment 1.
The rate of rise toward 1. indicates the degree to which experts perceived the likelihood of some form of peaceful resolution of the Cuban missile crisis as increasingly likely with the passage of time, with the value of 1. signifying inevitability. tive probability of, outcomes.
The cumulative probabilities assigned bias by bringing back to psychological life counterfacto the exhaustive and exclusive components of the tual possibilities that people long ago buried with whole set exceed 1.0, which violates the extensionality deterministic “I-knew-it-had-to-be” thinking. axiom of probability theory.
Drawing on support theory, we hypothetheir unpacked bets with actual money, they would be size that experts who are encouraged to unpack the set quickly transformed into money pumps.
It is, after all, of more violent endings of the Cuban missile crisis into logically impossible for each of four teams within an progressively more differentiated subsets will find supeight-team division to have a 0. chance of winning the port for those alternative outcomes.
As a result, their championship the same year. inevitability curves will rise more slowly and their Unpacking manipulations are understandably impossibility curves will fall less rapidly than those of viewed as sources of cognitive bias in subjective probexperts who judge the entire set of possibilities as a ability judgments of possible futures.
It is also expected that experts in the unpacking people to find too much support for too many possicondition, especially those with low need for closure, bilities.
Yet, such manipulations may help reduce bias will display stronger subadditivity effects (cumulative in subjective probability judgments of possible pasts via subjective probabilities exceeding 1.0) than the holistic exactly the same mechanism.
The key difference is that group. judgments of possible pasts, unlike those of possible futures, are already contaminated by the powerful Research Design, Method, and Logic of Analysis.
Experimental work shows that as respondents in Experiment 2 were drawn from the soon as people learn which of a number of oncesame subject population as Experiment 1 and recruited deemed possible outcomes happened, they quickly in the same mail survey.
Respondents were randomly assimilate that knowledge into their cognitive structure assigned to one of two groups.
Mental exerity and perceptions-of-impossibility items, as in Expercises that involve unpacking sets of possible pasts iment 1.
The figure displays impossibility curves from experts with low and high need for closure in the control and salient conditions of Experiment 1.
Unas a single inevitability curve for the overall set of packing effects diminished toward the end of the crisis peaceful outcomes.
The results again reveal that how we pose between lowand high-closure respondents (F (12, historical questions shapes how we answer them.
Experts, even low-needure 3 illustrates the power of unpacking questions.
The figure presents inevitability and impossibility curves for the Cuban missile crisis.
The inevitability curve displays gradually rising likelihood judgments of some form of peaceful resolution.
The lower impossibility curve displays gradually declining likelihood judgments of all possible more violent endings.
The higher impossibility curve was derived by adding the experts’ likelihood judgments of six specific subsets of more violent possible endings.
Adding values of the lower impossibility curve to the corresponding values of the inevitability curve yields sums only slightly above 1.0.
Inserting values from the higher impossibility curve yields sums well above 1.0.
Again, condition comparisons of correlations between theothere was little support for the twilight-zone-period retical beliefs, such as the robustness of nuclear deterhypothesis.
The longest time during which experts rence, and reactions to close-call counterfactuals that judged peace inevitable (⫻ ៮ inevitability date ⫽ Oct. move the missile crisis toward war.
This unpacking condition, and even this difference fell short drop is consistent with the notion that, under unpackstatistically ⫽ 3.03, p ⬍ .10). ing, observers shift from a theory-driven, covering-law The curve-fitting results also underscore the power mode of thinking to a more idiographic, case-by-case of counterfactual thought experiments to transform mode. our understanding of the past.
Unmaking the West tive-likelihood judgments of the undifferentiated sets of peaceful outcomes and more violent alternaGuiding Theory.
The past appears to be a smooth linear small number of Europeans, working from the superprogression toward the observed outcome.
By contrast, ficially unpromising starting point of 1000 A.D. or 1200 the past looks more like a random walk, albeit around A.D. or even 1400 A.D., managed in relatively a few a discernible trend, from the perspective of low-closure centuries to surpass all other peoples on the planet in experts who unpacked the set of more violent outwealth and power.
Experts then completed inevitability and recently as 1400 A.D., European dominance would be impossibility curves that began with 1000 A.D. and one of the least likely outcomes.
These scholars decry moved by 50-year increments to 1850 A.D. (for which “Eurocentric triumphalism” and depict the European the subjective probability of Western dominance was achievement as a precarious one that easily could have fixed at 1. and that of possible alternatives at 0.0). unraveled at countless junctures.
Other civilizations could have checked the West and perhaps even been Findings.
As our third sessed, an increase that was produced by asking experts correlational study suggests, the list of “could-haveto generate impossibility curves not for the abstract set been-a-contender” counterfactuals is long.
The analysis of variance took the form only there had been more support in the imperial court of a fixed-effects, unweighted means 2 (no unpacking for technological innovation and territorial expansion. versus unpacking conditions) ⫻ 2 (low versus high Europe might have been Islamicized in the eighth closure) ⫻ 17 (50-year increments between 1000 and century if the Moors had cared to launch a serious 1850) mixed-factorial design.
The same two unexpected but history has eclipsed by elevating possible worlds to the readily interpretable tendencies emerged as in Expersame moral and metaphysical status as the actual world iment 2.
But now the gloaters, claiming observers saw less likelihood for counterfactually alterhistorical vindication for their ideological principles, ing outcomes toward the end of the specified historical are on the Right, and the brooders, absorbed in wistful process. regret, are on the Left.
Also as in Experiment 2, low-closure experts in the unpacking condition were most likely to assign subjecHypotheses.
The hypotheses parallel those for Expertive probabilities that were subadditive, violated exteniment 2, except now the focal issue is not the Cuban sionality, and summed to well above 1.0.
A dents with low need for closure. twilight-zone period also emerged; in contrast to the Research Design, Methods, and Measures.
Experiment temporally compacted missile crisis, there is now a 3 draws on the same respondents and uses the same sufficient range in responses to permit significant efmail survey as the third correlational study.
Focusing just on the control condition, we comiment has only two conditions.
The no-unpacking pared the average date for the inevitability of Western control group generated inevitability curves dominance to the average date for the impossibility of for some form of Western geopolitical domination and alternatives to Western dominance.
The figure presents inevitability and impossibility curves for the rise of the West.
The inevitability curve displays gradually rising likelihood judgments of sme form of Western geopolitical dominance.
The lower impossibility curve displays gradually declining likelihood judgments of all possible alternatives to Western dominance.
The upper impossibility curve was derived by adding experts’ likelihood judgments of six subsets of alternatives to Western domination.
Adding values of the lower impossibility curve to corresponding inevitability-curve values yields sums only slightly above 1.0.
Inserting values from the upper impossibility curve yields sums well above 1.0.
This period for the unpacking condiperts who fail to make tight conceptual connections tion was bounded, respectively, by 1751 and 1787, between the two levels are just confused and sloppy which not only is a significant difference in itself (F (1, thinkers.
As for the results of our experiments, these 32) ⫽ 8.43, p ⬍ .01) but also is significantly longer proponents can argue that unpacking manipulations ⫽ 4.36, p ⬍ .05). simply lead historical observers into the inferential In terms of curve fitting, a fifth-order polynomial equivalent of wild goose chases that encourage them to equation was necessary to capture 80% of the variance assign far too much subjective probability to far too in the numerous ups and downs in average-perceptions many scenarios.
Unpacking “messes up” our understanding of the about incoherence. past, transforming what had once been a smooth Critics of the covering-law approach can respond progression toward a preordained outcome into a far that the high correlations between abstract theoretical more erratic and unpredictable journey.
Unpacking beliefs and specific historical ones are a warning sign of also undermines the power of abstract covering laws to an excessively theory-driven style of thinking about constrain our perceptions of specific historical possibilhistory.
Insofar as unpacking manipulations prove an ities; correlations fell from 0.63 in the control condition effective method of opening closed minds by reminding to 0.25 in the unpacking conditions. theory-driven thinkers of how riddled with indeterminacy history is, then so much the better, and do not fret that unpacking induces internal inconsistencies in beGENERAL DISCUSSION lief systems.
Unpacking reveals previously hidden cogOur results do not tell us who is right about this or that nitive contradictions and sets a constructive agenda for historical controversy.
Cognitive Styles and Historical Reasoning December 2001 historical case, we have struck the right balance bestruct latent knowledge of historical junctures at which tween theory-driven and imagination-driven modes of they once thought events could have taken a different information processing.
Respondents with a timate how rapidly subjective probabilities should dipreference for closure (who resemble the hedgehogs in minish as a function of adding contingencies to Berlin’s famous taxonomy) tried to assimilate the past scenarios (Koehler 1991; Tversky and Kahneman into their favored deductive system.
The most effective manipulations for attenuatneed for closure aping certainty of hindsight make use of these effects by proached the past in a frame of mind open to the asking people to imagine, in florid detail, alternative possibility that a potpourri of processes may have been paths that history could have taken. involved, and an equally miscellaneous set of outcomes Fourth, a cognitive approach warns us not to go too could have resulted.
Moreover, these individual differfar in the quest to open closed minds.
To check runaway unpacking tists) and Experiment 3 (which drew mostly on histoeffects, people need plausibility pruners to cut off rians). speculation that otherwise would grow like topsy beSecond, a cognitive approach deepens our underyond the bounds of probability.
These elimination standing of how the framing of historical questions can criteria inevitably reflect covering-law beliefs about shape where and how we look for answers.
Indeed, equivalent factual and counterfactual framings of the the cognitive approach also warns us not to mystify or same historical issue elicit contradictory probabilistic romanticize imagination and treat it as somehow supeintuitions about what had to be and what might have rior to theory-driven thinking.
The more theory-driven schemes for understanding cause and detailed the unpacking of counterfactual alternatives, effect in hypothetical worlds.
Theory-driven strategies confer the benefits of explanThird, a cognitive approach suggests methods of atory closure and parsimony but desensitize us to pitting cognitive biases against each other, the mental nuance, complexity, contingency, and the possibility equivalent of fighting fire with fire, by checking the our theory is wrong.
Imagination-driven strategies senexcesses of convergent, theory-driven thinking with sitize us to possible worlds that could have been, but divergent imagination-driven thinking, and vice versa. the price is increased confusion and even incoherence.
The most influential other mode of information processing, the prudent cognitive explanation of the hindsight effect attributes stance is to define good judgment as an iterative it to the “automaticity” of theory-driven thought, to the process of checking convergent theory-driven thinking, rapidity with which people assimilate known outcomes which focuses on explaining why what was had to be, into their favorite covering laws.
In the process, they with divergent imagination-driven thinking, which fodemote once possible, even probable, futures to the cuses on what could have been, and then putting the status of implausible historical counterfactuals. whole procedure into reverse so that theory-driven Knowledge of past possibilities need not, however, thinking can be deployed to prevent us from spinning be lost forever.
There will, of course, be no experimental interventions that can help people reconsingle, well-defined equilibrium solution.
Philip E Tetlock, Richard Ned Lebow, just in the mind of one observer but in ostensibly and Geoffrey Parker.
Forthcoming. self-correcting scholarly communities—will yield plauGould, Stephen Jay.95.
Free Press. equilibrium solutions should be preferred to lopsided Jervis, Robert.76.
Perception and Misperception in International solutions that give priority to either theory-driven or Politics.
Objectivity was the epistemological rock on which Kruglanski, Arie W., and Donna M Webster.96.
Norton. approximations, toward the truth, a truth unadorned by Lebow, Richard Ned.01.
Philip our findings that theoretical preconceptions are potent E Tetlock, Richard Ned Lebow, and Geoffrey Parker.
The Objectivity Question and questions, even logically equivalent factual and counthe American Historical Profession.
Cambridge Univerterfactual framings of the same question, shapes the sity Press. conclusions we draw about what had to be or could Sagan, Scott, and Kenneth Waltz.95.
Norton. discipline that provided the concepts and methods Simon, Herbert A 1996.
MIT Press. underlying the studies reported here— cognitive psySuedfeld, Peter, and Philip E Tetlock.01.
Intra-Indimany precedents in the history of science in which the vidual Processes, vol 1, ed.
