But with good showmanship and clever image management he could maybe emphasize his walkover victory with some celebratory air punches and maybe a display of manly force.
Well, that seems to be what a large portion of the United States Navy is engaged in in the Caribbean, on October 25th, 1962.
I’m Indy Neidell Today, the United States enforcement of its blockade of Cuba continues despite the fact that the Soviets seem to have turned back all their ships, but we know that four Soviet submarines are still on their way to Cuba.
Yesterday, the United States administration noted that the Russians were respecting the blockade, although the military had noticed already two days ago.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev wrote to US President John F Kennedy with a forceful rebuke of the United States blockade, and the United States preparations to confront the Soviets at the United Nations continued.
This confrontation is incredibly important for the Americans, as they need the rest of the world to have no doubt whatsoever that the Soviets have installed both mid and intermediate range ballistic missiles on Cuba.
Up until now the USSR have neither denied, nor confirmed this, and while most United States allies believe it, the world public might not, and the Eastern Bloc countries stand with the Soviets.
In Eastern Europe, Europe, and Latin America, the Soviets have mobilized their Communist connections to besiege United States embassies and demand an end to the blockade.
Now, remember that the United States ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, has so far been the only person in the American administration to vocally oppose all forceful actions to resolve the crisis, including the blockade.
His preferred course of action would be negotiating the closure of United States foreign military bases and removing the American missiles in Turkey and Italy in exchange for the Soviets leaving Cuba.
Today, he must confront the Soviets in open session at the UN in front of the TV cameras of the entire world.
Unlike the Navy, Stevenson will most certainly meet his opponent, USSR Ambassador to the UN Valerian Zorin, in the ring.
Zorin is a formidable opponent he is sharp and he is gifted in rhetoric.
He’s also something of a sad figure, which we won’t find out until after his death two decades from now.
His real passion is music and he deeply regrets only being an amateur, and also never being a published poet.
Anyhow, there is grave doubt by many on EXCOMM, the United States committee dealing with the crisis, that Stevenson is really up to the task.
Loads of pressure has been brought to bear on President Kennedy to bring in someone else.
Instead, Kennedy has stood by Stevenson and called in their mutual friend and presidential advisor John J McCloy as moral support for good old Adlai.
Stevenson has promised to stand his ground, but it doesn’t look great when he starts off in his traditional diplomatic and conciliatory tone.
My government is most anxious to effect a peaceful resolution of this affair.
We continue to hope that the Soviet Union will work with us to diminish the -not only the new danger which has suddenly shadowed the peace, but all of the conflicts that divide the world.
The argument in its essence of the Soviet Union is that it was not the Soviet Union which created this threat to peace by secretly installing these weapons in Cuba, but that it was the United States which created this crisis by discovering and reporting these installations.
This is the first time, I confess, that I have ever heard it said that the crime is not the burglar but the discovery of the burglar -and that the threat is not the clandestine missiles in Cuba but their discovery and the limited measures taken to quarantine further infection.
His arguments get stronger and stronger, and then he goes off script and delivers what he has promised the President.
But today -again, if I heard you correctly -you now say they don't exist, or that we haven’t proved they exist, with another fine flood of rhetorical scorn.
I am not in an American courtroom, sir, and therefore I do not wish to answer a question that is put to me in the fashion in which a prosecutor does.
You are in the court of world opinion right now and you can answer yes or no.
ZORIN [statement in Russian followed by English translation through a United Nations Interpreter] Sir, will you please continue your statement.
Stevenson then shows the photographs of the missile sites, most importantly the low altitude shots taken two days ago.
He explains to the council in detail what they are looking at, and asks again if Zorin denies the existence of Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba in view of this irrefutable proof.
The representative of the Soviet Union says that the official answer of the U.S.S.R. was the Tass statement that they don’t need to locate missiles in Cuba.
But the question is, have they missiles in Cuba -and that question remains unanswered.
Stevenson has stood his ground and made the USSR look like the bad guys in the roughly one hour that his presentation lasts he has done more than influence world politics on a historical level, he has also made television history.
Ever since, this moment has been replayed again and again as an iconic moment of the Cold War.
Hours before the confrontation in the UN, the Soviet Presidium has met to discuss the crisis again.
During the night they have received another direct letter from President Kennedy imploring them to not do anything rash and to initiate negotiations.
The Americans say that the missile installations in Cuba must be dismantled.
His jest is the beginning of a long row of attempts to pitch the now failed Operation Anadyr as a success because it scared the Americans.
In fact, he had used some of his last political clout to sell the idea in the first place.
It will take another two years for the rest of the men in the room to oust him and seize power, but in 1964 they will.
However, although the presidium agrees unanimously and starts drafting a letter to Kennedy offering to withdraw the missiles if the United States promises to not invade Cuba, the crisis is not over by a long shot.
Like I’ve said many times in this series, when you let out the leash on the dogs of war it risks slipping out of your hand, and that is what is happens right now.
Around Cuba, the United States navy is circling looking for something to do, or at least someone to intercept.
They want to stop and board two tankers, but since the Soviets look like they’re respecting the blockade on arms deliveries, the White House is uncertain.
Within the military and the EXCOMM, people now begin to worry that it will look like they’re not enforcing the blockade if they don’t board some vessel, even one that they know that they’ll let through, but on the other hand they don’t want to provoke the Soviets.
But in order to allow Admiral Dennison to lay on a plan for doing that, we should give the instructions, and do so very promptly.
Finally, in order to not provoke the USSR while the prospect of negotiations at the UN are on the table, they decide to let the tankers through and go after a Lebanese freighter, the Marcula instead.
Only one problemthe Navy has lost track of it, pursuing a number of other ships they think might be it.
Tomorrow morning, it becomes the first ship to be boarded and searched by the United States navy during the blockade.
Today, though, the administration is not really certain what to tell the public about the blockade and if and how it’s working.
Robert Kennedy seems to be back to the idea of air strikes, this time as a way to move the confrontation from the Soviets to the Cubans.
And ultimately, we might decide that it would be better, rather than have the confrontation with the Russians at sea, that it might be better to have knocked out their missile base, as the first step.
I don’t know, it might—you know that’s more with the Cubans than with them.
And we go look through and we tell them [the Soviets] to get out of that vicinity in ten minutes, and then we go through and knock the base.
While they continue discussing this, USSR Ambassador to the United States Dobrynin messages the Kremlin in Moscow that he overheard a conversation between journalists that an invasion of Cuba is imminent.
Four nuclear-armed submarines are playing cat and mouse with the United States Navy somewhere in the western Atlantic.
On Cuba itself, Fidel Castro is preparing his armed forces to ‘shove the Yankees back into the ocean’ if they invade, or at least shoot down some of those planes that keep on invading Cuban air space.
Don’t forget to subscribe and please support us at patreon.com or tg.tv so that we can make more awesome history like this.
