At some point while assigned as a civilian United States Army contractor, Olson began working as a CIA employee In May 1952, Frank Olson was appointed to the committee for Project Artichoke, an experimental CIA interrogation program.
The dispute regarded I think Glorian Donegan with people like Frank Olsen objecting to unauthorized use of her genome for ongoing Masonry study.
The issue of control, WHO would make this decision, and the assertion of control is likely the higher level issue that led to JFKs assassination and I assert these assassinations continue today with Roll and Scalia of the Judiciary, Thomas C Wales and various CIA as Executive Branch, Ronald Reagan assassination attempt, and attempts on my own life, my own life a data point where these USA / Masons schism 1s visible.
This appears to be directed towards white side theories of Barrack Obama, the Dunham side, leading to PsyOps against Tom Dunhma, possibly tied to that family line as well as tied to me, and also other descendents of Glorian Donegan, another white female whose genome was used by MKULTRA including it seems the white side of Barrack Obama Jr., whose possible February 20 November 18 December 13 1961 maternal side is tied to me and the JFK assassination, other assassinations under MKULTRA since.
In researching Obama connected activities regarding my family history I joined the small group believing his biological father is Malcom X As for Barrack Obama Jr and Sr he appears to have been selected as a role model for conversion to Anglican in African Regions controlled by the Crown thus extending the Crown.
White Side Being Subverted | Black Side Being Built up 7 Said to be Dunham, is Glorian Donegan | Said to be Barrack Obama Sr. is Malcom X Much of this story if not all of it is circumstantial evidence created surrounding me and obvious misdiagnosis of me subverting my reputation and accomplishments, even altering the context I am living under to very frustrating conditions under being stalked by hostile parties rather than me observed in normal conditions.
This work is especially base in the history of Prescott Bush, George Bush, and the Rockefellers who conspired with CIA (and the OSS its predecessor, the British, Germans, and others) who continue illegal acts from generation to generation.
A battle for Alepo fought by Irregulars is easy to spot, the rights to use a Genome and Irregular Warfare surrounding the rights to is is harder to catch on camera though in this book I jhave both photos and emails from the Irregulars as to their acts.
Irregular Warfare which John F Kennedy signed int law as part of the United States Military and Espionage capabilities I believe now have taken on a life of their own and are defending their mistakes increasingly biologically detectable and George Bush, Gregg Abbot, Donald and William Barr, the OBamas, the Trumps, and others, Masons, are abusing state powers of harassment against me in the same illegal covert irregular operation which have been illegal in the USA so far, but the PsyOps can protect 1s wrongdoing with further hits and espionage.
It is also the story of oil money, big money, and big finance as the Standard Oil the Bush family from Texas, Howard Hughes, and others planned the Middle East and the Rotchschilds Rockefeller and George and Neil Bush pharmaceutical planned to make money on the world economies forming the Masonary New World Order and PsyOps behavioral research into world populations and economies by the British Empire in the Middle East North Africa Populating the 21st Century.
It is the story of Fertilization Feb 20 the delivery about November new radiological attacks on my midsection, twice.
It is the ¢ OECD MKULTRA Building World Genetics story of CIA Church Committee DIA radiation experiments, e George Ball Deep State advancing capitalism worldwide ae Studies, and illegal science, illegal Eugenics, and the Missile Gap scare.
It is the story of assaultive stalking as psychological harassment and study of me along with psychological warfare against me via staged photos and FrankOlsen-Class espionage harassment of me. e JFK Warren Commission upon assassination In a United States Federal Prison with the Department of Defense United States Public Health Commissioned Corps medical staff I sat in a small prison cell and began to feel a pinging and burning. as my meal plate was delivered.
It is not about Barrack Obama or the theory that Malcom X and Glorian Donegan, a Windsor/Von Trap FOXP2 gene carrier are the real parents of Barrack Obama though it does include that theory.
DARPA and NASA and MKULTRA Von Wehner and Sidney Gottlieb and genetics were all one kludge. luminati families studying nuclear war, rockets, tested DNA and were curios of DNA role in world wars, communism, capitalism, decided to mend.
FEBRUARY 20, 1949 , Zlin, Czechia Ivanka with high cheek bones, recessed jaw, and 5 foot 11 like myself and like Jack of Twitter born NOVEMBER 18 AND 5 FOOT I1like my father and I both. it is about the Kelly Brothers too, FEB 20 NOVEMBER 18 DEC 13 AUG 4 tied ""360 World"" DNA and Twins studies by NASA DARPA Just a few of what I believe are long term studies of ""family jewels"" CIA study of Lendel Genes, but actual family lines from both my mother and father side who rise to power and are moles of [luminati illegal genetics usage, clones source and clone making.
The need this book fulfills is a need for an Epiphany view of world genomic history, now only held by the Illuminati and controlled by the Illuminati and denied to the public, a public with no credible larger view of it all, a public with not working theories of race and racial strife that truly make sense.
This book is authored as an Epub book wuch uses HTML which is also used on thw Internet and those HTML pages in this book reference an internal Cascading Style Sheet, a page or pages of information about how to display things like paragraph or other elements of a page.
How style information competes or cascades or which rule your reader is set to or can follow will determine the display of this book and thus you may see these presentation styles contained within the book used by your reader software.
Patriot or Traiter pages styled like this section with blue background and white text and reproduced in this book have the story of Jen Moore, Nathan Cain, and other patriots who show under the Bush Administration at key dates of conferences, I will Michael Mukasey, Rod Rosenstien Mueller, and others who had access tot he missing 75 grams of nuclear material and those same figures remain involved ina DARPA biology and radiation study which ALSO includes following twins and radiation survivors in long complex studies from large twins registries.
This is a Term or Word followed by a list of definitions This is what the Term or Word means probably snipped from authoritative sources NX ... for instance The NDAA and its compenents NDAA The National Defense Authorization Act is the name for each of a series of United States federal laws specifying the annual budget and expenditures of the United States Department of Defense.
That is the premise of this book FEBRUARY 20 1961 Fertilization of Barack Obama and Edward Paul Donegan from Glorian Donegan Ovum (she born DEC 13 from King Edward VII/ Maria Von Trapp parents) birth NONMEMBER 18 1961 JFK assassinated at 2 year mark.
This is how Addresses are displayed For those with information on MKKUTRA, MIDNIGHT CLIMAX or other CIA operations please contact John Pilfer.
How images are sometimes displayed with associated text or captioning in this book In this book sometimes a background ""collage mat"" visual affect 1s created with a Turquoise like background with white text This is picture of my mother Glorian Donegan who was a lovely lady, loving, and patriotic to the USA except blacks, jews, gays.
Much of this book goes into her lineage and her marriage to my father in the Manhattan Project, my Manhattan Beach project birth in that project, and atomic bomb development at Manhattan Beach and whether at that time her DNA was used involuntarily in twins studies including half twins of different races or for sleeper agents for around the world like half black Barrack Obama Jr. groomed for Indoneia with genetic traits of Malcom X an also the Kutchscheras and Windsors who share a German/Austria area speech and langauge defect called FOXP2.
Edward Prince of Wales later King Edward VUI appears to have had out of wedlock children and Glorian was among the “King’s Daughters” the English Royal Family, Catholic Church, and Sidney Gottlieb relocated into the United States of America farm of Festus Gainey.
My father James Paul Donegan Irish resident of Cape Cod joined the Army Air Corps as a P-51 plane pilot, B-29 escort, some fighters to protect the atomic bomb dropping B-29s, my father flying the North American P-51 Inglewood Los Angeles (Manhattan Beach California near Santa Monica) Manhattan Project WW II atomic SIMI Valley proving ground of the bomb, the “gadet” and the plane compliments which would deliver the bombs.
Mu delivery was November 18 and birth certificate issued and signed November 19.
My theory is rather than use those dates for Obama, JFK being at my Manhattan Beach Manhattan Project atomic bomb testing and development birth, the CIA moved the location to Hawai, also in atomic testing, and Gottlieb August 8 birthday delivery dates of August 3 and August 4.
Wikipedia retrieved from Ze Switch and Rumor Has It and copied or modified to here The Switch is a2010 American romantic comedy film formerly titled The Baster, was inspired by the short story ""Baster"" by Jeffrey Eugenides . 30-something Kassie Larson is single, hasn't found love yet, and decides she wants to have a baby.
I am going to cite the Ruins here in that my life in the USA, and most other peoples life in the USA is amidst hostile vines, I am using as a metaphor, for Illuminati tentacles with sufficient hostile be secretive reach as to accomplish illegal goals which protect Free Masons from those the Free Masons victimized, and I realized far too late the vines were surrounding me and my mother, even my father, so they already had the inroads to have exposed me to potentially lethal financial abuse conditions constraining good outcomes in my otherwise normal would be life.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia The Ruins is a 2008 supernatural horror film The group of tourists in a remote Forrest now realizes that the vines around a pyramid are predatory Two young American couples Jeff and Amy , and Eric and Stacy enjoy their vacation in Mexico.
Secretive meddling in election power-brokering King Making and media operators with big money and espionage capability to keep program proponents in power and continuing treasonous espionage operation mostly out of Executive controlled rouge agencies and illegal black budget techniques such as racketeering monetised trust fund of Glorian Donegna and thus procuring HUMINT Human Intelligence operators.
SESS Wi Sa ies NASA ADMINISTRATOR NASA SCIENTIST iM CIA/TSS/ MK From 1945 rt peer agi es granted nearly 1, rm TCS CALLS American citizenSTALL) mL been CU SRL ORC eC R CMa OR OD RCC el moe periments on humans at concentration comps and commited other war crimes.
February 20 November 19 Dec 13 Aug 4 Family Jewels and replacing other countries sovereign leaders with Secret Windsor Princedom.
Donald Barr Leo Ryan investigated these activities as well such as MKULTRA at Folsom Prison and Jonestown Guyanna, CIA research locations Researching my family history and genomic history It does seem my father had a brother Edward Donegan Jr, thus my maternal grandfather, was Edward.
Zrreppard Air Force Base is named in honor of Senator John Morris Sheppard of ~~ Texas , chairman of the Senate Military Affairs Committee from 1933 until his death on 9 April 1941.
As the Army Air Corps became the Army Air Forces, facilities were completed sufficiently to allow the first class of 22 aviation mechanics to enter training that October; the class graduated 23 February 1942.
TWA Pilot Barry Seal was probably tied to my father's age of pilots class action lawsuit in biology and psychometrics regarding piloting and retiring age for new pilots to come on line.
Sete ig ae owe ~~ \Glorian Donegn Born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb20 Nov18 1961 eC ae te Gaye S I believe this an international for profit racket of multiple benefits to the racketeers and that some of the goals are shared by Fellow Travelers in United States and other world governments.
Rumor has it that some of these criminals were issued “Sovereign Knight of Malta” Passports that allowed them to escape to the Americas out of Germany.
My mother who carries the FOXP2 genes as I do and appears to have been rescued from King Edward VUI earlier days, as , having illegitimate children out of wedlock.
A disdain for adjectives effusing religious emptiness meant always going into the library in the den, letting a book fall open, and just moving into the present passage as 1f a meditation in learning.
The creation of the Advanced Research Projects Agency was authorized by President Dwight D Eisenhower in 1958 for the purpose of forming and executing research and development projects to expand the frontiers of technology and science, and able to reach far beyond immediate military requirements, the two relevant acts being the Supplemental Military Construction Authorization and Department of Defense Directive 5105.15, in February 1958.
The Euclidian Birther Chart Barack Obama DNA Africa, -———— | Glorian Donegan Most Free Masons 1960s MENA Airport | Ethiopia, Edward Likely Austrian DNA via || | Australia, Paul Windsors elsewhere Donegan |Kutschera of OO is panted under WWII Europe, her life and. | —— | with espionage | Mitochrondria in flames.
Free Masons 1960s MENA Airport | Glorian Agent DNA Provacatuer assaults Edward Paul Donegan greyed out because a Conspiracy Against His RIghts (Under Color of Law and including Religious, Reproductive, and other fundamental rights) are included more in the next chapter ""Government backed Assailants of Edward Donegan An agent provocateur is a person who commits or who acts to entice another person to commit an illegal or rash act or falsely implicate them in partaking in an illegal act, so as to ruin the reputation or entice legal action against the target or a group they belong to.
Joseph of Carondelet The Impregnation of Obama Shifted in Time 3 Months Earlier than in reality It takes a Chicago Village 22 November 1961 birth Barack ie August 1961 Kenya birth of Obama ie Loy ae Links in QR Code a Isreali Insider says abou Mossad doubts Nov this 1960 impregnation, and doubts that Surrogate Hawaii was Dunahm, Mother official and Father tied to dead Boeing and CIA, says in Obama Sr killed by plane CIA in Kenya crash KN-19548.
Links to the above public data sources and references to them in the QR Code SCAN ME At 0 Months FEb 1961 Barack Obama Sr Weds 3 mos pregant CIA Agent Madelyn Dunham, or he 1s fertilized on FEb 20 and 9 months later born.
I call L the Lie timeline Feb 20 1962 External Fertilization re-implant successful for 1 year, plant for April 1961 Futurism MKULTRA Rocketry November 22 1961 Birthday of experimental monkey at JFK Whitehorse Arpil 1962 21st Century Expo JFK, Windsors, Futurism, Thomas C Wales, Boeing, Missle and MKULTRA November 1962 JFK Dec 12 1962 OECC and need for blacks of aid, the need PHDs November 19 November 18 1963 Obama two years old, talking normally.
Poster They do a lot of testing DEC 12, 2019 Twins Study | Latest News, Videos and Images.
National Aeronautics Today Tic Toc Tic Toc Hostile Conservatorship of Ed Donegan Trust Snow Edward Skid Row Gang Austin and the Gang Banger Mountain | Paul Banger peeps as Ed Doengan to | at Ballpark West Downtown | Downtown Austin Austin Ed and Gang banger both hit Skid row Corpus Christi, Gang banger leaves.
No opportunity zone for Ed who remains in Saw Snow Mountain useless Corpus Christi opportunity Mountain Gang Bangers Bird Dogging assert victim of Ed Donegan Edward Paul Donegan can not break away from MKULTRA CIA Gangstalk, brain study, DNA animal husbandry, PsyOps, retardation firms he wants nothing to do with.
When the COpl or DOpl say to a domina ""guess what ED DID"" the domina will punish the cop, not me, for the rights to my DNA and use it for police backed causes, such as retarded children, themselves, their ministers or religions, etc., The cops tell me NOTHING 1s going on and no perps are in any area and no allegation exists against me or anyone else.
Not only has grocery buying been a part of the fraud, grocery theft has, as both those appearing to shop with me and those stealing groceries vital to my health make it seem we are doign things together when we are not. ""46-46"" appear to be Tx who pays up or is arrested, or the location of ""the provider"" of the sigjht of a females, the black on my property photographs, and thus in doing so has ""given sperm to her or the provider of her, the ""statement to me"" is on the pubic exterior of a door an egg 1s posted...hmm Easter.
Bush's left hand, and his right hand, no politics implied, saying to legitimate government Stand Down to CIA backed activities and do not interrupt tt.
C >) Lad Emergency medical technicians from the 96th Medical Group move a ""wounded"" Airman toward safety during an active shooter exercise at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida in 2014.
Katie Porter in the nearby Longworth House Office Building, during which she was sure an “‘insurrectionist’” would storm the halls with a firearm and she would die.
World Stage Connectedness to Moscow Subway Bombing, Several Downed Planes Including During Olympics, Judge Roll assasination and Foreign Economies, more A complex kluge of genetic commerce and the effects of genes and relociations of genes under MKULTRA-360 is what this book is about.
He accused senior officers of the Directorate of Analysis and Suppression of Criminal Groups Major-General Yevgeny Khokholkov, N Stepanov, A Kamyshnikov, and N Yenin of ordering his assassination.
JlyOsHckas MpecrymHasd rpymmuposKa; also translated as The Gang from Lubyanka) is a book by Alexander Litvinenko about the alleged transformation of the Russian Security Services into a criminal and terrorist organization.
Anexcanap Bansreposuy JIutBunenko, IPA: [elit ‘ksandr ‘valttrovitte litvit'nienko]; 30 August 1962 or 4 DECEMBER 1962 by father's account 23 November 2006) was a British-naturalised Russian defector and former officer of the Russian FSB secret service who specialised in tackling organized crime.
The events leading up to this are a matter of controversy, spawning numerous theories relating to his poisoning and death.
Compelled Propelled Act Compelled Propelled Steal the book because it is of worth Real Ed Donegan's book Unless the above theft occurs the a plot to undermine Ed will fail False Heroes needed an anti-hero for their struggle, their heroic acts to look real thus the vilification of me by their planting evidence and creating incriminating circumstances.
Elsewhere in the book I use this list of legitimate and phony investigations. aaah a a atin ad sl ell ‘ e Methods Employed for sex abuse of a person by predators Most sexual predators are skilled sales people who know how to get you to trust them and hand over control of a situation to them.
Wife of husband covertly moved to safety Espionage Paid Informant Wall-off of Suspect 1.
It appears to be what Jen Moore and others called Pizza-gate where it seems ""I had a scum bag ""provider"" put a minor in my present to photograph, but the impersonator of me who did ""take tbe bait, also an adult, will be caught with the pictures when an adult entertainer, called in my name, will catch that person with the child porn, and claim my DNA can then be re-assigned to victims and victims funds, a 'money shot"" paid to the exploited.
My best guess is he flew reconnaissance before, during, or after the nuclear bombings of Japan because he was in the Manhattan Project above ground testing in Nevada and Simi Valley California and Johnson Atol of Hawaii and i was born under that Manhattan Bomb development Los Alamos atomic center, Manhattan Beach California in an Inglewood neighborhood Jesuit hospital under extensive testing.
PHOTOGRAPHED BY Ae COMBATSCAMERA UNITS By is oR OF ait AAF MOTION PICTURE UNIT Mase pa UY Quote retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Los Angeles's NUCLEAR SECRET Years of mishandling dangerous radioactive materials and chemicals has also left a toxic legacy for generations of people living near the Santa Susana Field Laboratory.
The rest of the site, more than 2,000 acres was used for the testing and development of rocket engines for the United States space program and for advanced weapons research.
North American P-51 Mustang; Supermarine Spitfire; Avro Lancaster Wikipedia U Google knowledge panel on the North American P-51 Mustang retrieved from link and copied . or modified to here and fighter-bomber used during World War II and the Korean War, among other conflicts.
It was a tactical reconnaissance Mustang that became just the second USAAF Mustang variant to be used in a combat situation.
OF LIVE SIRTH ae Edward Paul Donegan born in Inglewood, Manhattan Beach 1961, likely [V February 20 1961, Manhattan Project to P-51 Pilot and Atomic Blast Exposure testing pilot James Paul and Glorian Donegan.
From 1945 to 1961 Cape Cod where are families are from, including Irish Catholic Liquor dealing, it is more likely JFK knew my father than he knew JFK, the Kennedy compound 25 miles from Marshfiel, our family home, though similarities in both familes.
Effectively I need to be bad husband material and discredited, others sucking up any oxygen which might reach me, a criminal harassment system of sabotaging me to others, literally being battle for the keyboard 1 am using, the bed I am in and how should be in it, etc., as 1 loose out to the competing espionage backed competitors gangstalking my activities.
Ploy Espionage Agencies Targeting of me Public Hatred of White Supremacy Seizing Genes on the basis of White Supremacism for use with vulnerable populations who are threatend by the White Blacks have been punching me all my life, physically, air punch, attitude, or discriminatory treatment of me starting a fight I never understood I might die in this fight or end up ina homeless shelter a victim of unprovoked attacks because others are incited against me on manufactured ""Legend"" (false back-stories about me) predicates for assaults.
Agent Provocateur incurring a liability against me who is the assets of value) subject of retaliation for the act of the Agent Provocatuer dressed as Dis-possessor.
Oddly, this gene tied to Austria, is CLAIMED to be the Nazi gene of ""psychos"" and flash tempers, but in fact makes up passionate people with strong emotions such as LONDON KE FAMILY of King Edward VII, likely on my mother's side as well as Maria Kutschera later Maria VonTrapp, niece of an Austrian Nazi official showing the same gene, also in King George V of Germany Austria area.
Ethics and James Comey ea See eee &amp;EN talks chemistry with James B Comey retrieved from link and copied or modified to . here 1 Chemical &amp; Engineering News covers the world of chemistry, from research and education to business and policy.
C&kamp; EN senior correspondent, Cheryl Hogue recently had a chance to sit down with Former United States FBI director James B Comey on majoring in chemistry and how it affected his career.
HIGH PRICE MODEL SHOWS UP FOR have FAKE AT TREEHOUSE AS MEDICINE SEX WORK FOR FAKE ED Eds DNA under blackmail in the Treehouse pays the high price model bills and the Victoria's Secret sex worker.
This word evolved from a pronunciation of “I'd rather, which should help you remember the meaning.
I'd be living in a town like Capitola or in Monterrey California Stay and Play among 18+ white consenting female adult partners in R/L activities But I have been roadblocked trapped in a town of narcissistic poor minorities with an interest in false claims against me, and no right to keep me from normal life, and death threats done under color of laws if leave the area or if I was to use the county normally.
Now a given I am not in a county with a white prosecutor claims can proceed against fake ed and I will recount one such chain of events in which I discovered what the operation was that Jim Volcecka challenged me to prove even existed, and I found out via thin walls and an adjoining apartment unit.
Founded in 1961, involved in my Nuclear Triad Manhattan Atomic Bomb Project 1961 birth and the study of me, this book is the story of DARPA and the II/uminati in DARPA, companies, agencies, and people.
Sapience and Sapient Intent “There's a plot in this rele aia av mee mat hi A eV leet LD and child.
Before | rR aa marca and noble office, | intend to expose this plot.” President John F Kennedy ANA ae eee Teel —™,. sEveeveincempenialee If you would like to be a member of Targeted Justice, please submit the information below.
U Google knowledge panel quoted here on Eugenics which was sourced from link Eugenics is the study of how to arrange reproduction within a human population to increase the occurrence of heritable characteristics regarded as desirable.
And it means, finally, that government at all levels, must meet its obligation to provide you with the fullest possible information outside the narrowest limits of national security -and we intend to do it.
Left Hook Today Law Enforcement Backed Bird Dogging carries out these three Bird Dogging Claims steps making a ""mark"" out of me and my trust assets for wrongful litigation claims Roadblocking I am Doppled.
The CIA placed my family DNA into the Family Jewels program of Iluminati use in 1961 ina program dating back to 1926 Vienna under the CIA, Carl Jung, Freud, and others, and secret tracking, use, and abuse of my DNA is the subject of my book and between her and I our expose on the matter.
Trinity United Church of Christ and It Takes South Side Village After CIA JFK February 20 1961 Manhattan Project Thorkil Kristensen CIA OSS fertilization experimental procedure, November 18 1961 baby delivery to a mother whose own birthday was Dec 13 which is on my birth certificate.
RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY ABOUTUS DARPA and the Brain Initiative a Trinity marks its beginning on DECEMBER 3, 1961 when TWELVE MIDDLECLASS BLACK FAMILIES, most of whom were descendants of migrants to Chicago during The Great Migration of African Americans, met for worship in a Chicago elementary school gymnasium.
It is difficult to report the existence, and more so the evil acts of, Nazis while in downtown WWII Berlin.
That she held about Donald Barr and William Barr tied to Jeffery Epstein, the DARPA Brain Program, the Free Masons and I[Iluminati, and corrupt trafficking in genome conducted CIA connected elites.
CIA/DOD Contractors from around the world including Andy Ellington, perhaps the Lloyds of Orinda, California, now have a supply of Donegan DNA for research, medical treatments, or other usages such as surrogacy. ies TOOLS VIEW RuizRocket.docx Word a @ PROTECTED VIEW Be careful—files from the Internet can contain viruses.
The >, Tee complexifying elements are that eee ee _— —_— ee eee © Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder the funds due me but held by others. | have no verbal, financial, or any another account of the financial accounts but others use identity theft to create the cover story | am aware of the money and | am spending out of it.
Beta) ore eee oO Type here to search © Identity Thieves are using impersonations of me to engage in despicable and politically defaming conduct.
Golds Gym Corpus Christi.Rarely and non-exploitivly | do use a forward facing dash camera to tape scenic motorcycle rides on MY motorcycle, not the one For those who ever doubt police officers can be loyal and dedicated she will remain a shining beacon of faith in the profession, however much all humans are subject to failings.
His voice was later used as mine to confess to shower peeping in MY stolen motorcycle jacket. | documented this Aug 7 a day before she was driven of YouTube and killed.
Caretakers, legal Authorization for Bitlove / FetLife to cooperate with law enforcement and disclose any or all relevat data Thi.
Joseph Biggs told KTLA that he received an email from Hastings on Monday. om Biggs had known Hastings since 2008, when the journalist was embedded in his unit in Afghanistan.
And also the psychology of King Edward VII and Borderline Personality Disorder, impulsivity Vienna and 1920s Central Europe Eugenics Officer Moore, previously beaten, forced out, clutching her badge still Job history of investigation sex abuse and sex assaults Before I link to my video tribute to her I link to her body of work on YouTube and elsewhere, whistle-blowing on these ongoing coverup murders of MKULTRA in the USA and around the world.
Preface and upcoming book allegations against the Illuminati Deep State » Kevin Ives ad Don Henry August 23, 1987, in a rural community just south of Little Rock, police officers murdered two teenage boys because they witnessed a police-protected drug drop.
The MKULTRA Illuminati are a form of, born of New Agism, a New Age of John Brown's War fought all around the world in the New Age.
In this New Age perhaps the successor age to Modernity, an international effort of assassinations and secret plans will intimidate Natural Law concepts of evolution and race and replace both the biological history and theory of race into a world of equality in which gaps are closed in clandestine activity which when complete undermine the theories and the realities of race and racial conflicts around the world.
Included in the ASSIGNATIONS WAS LEO RYAN, NOVEMBER 18, investing the CIA's MKULTRA work in Jonestwon Guyana at an annual review.
Bush including the October Suprise Also included in this is a Rough Music scheme of Iluminati using a scheme to limit the following I have and at the same time discredit the reach of my voice I do have, thus as a Y-axis X-axis area multiplier harming my getting a following in my accusations against CIA programs.
It is not necessary to transmit both sidebands plus the carrier, as a suitable receiver can extract the entire original signal from either the upper or lower sideband [but AND would be superfluous. | suet Bandwidth Area | This This Upper Side Band and this| and this | This Lower Side Band With Enough MAASONS Upper Band can use Lower Band In-Band and Out-Of-Band Masnoic | State OF fice Authority Masonic Governess, POTUS Abuse Power, | NWO Interes Ed blamed for State Exorcizes near him, bullying attitude, short of explicit statement, nothing therefore for me to refute, clear MY name of.
Mosonic Available State Use of Power, Excercizes mere excercizes on REAL public land Interest in Crisis Crisis Actors of Peeper in vicinity of Edward Becomes Identity Theft and RICO COnspiracy Against RIghts under Color of Law when Dopple acts used as acts of Edward Donegan, conspiring against proprty and interests fo Ed Donegan since others acts alleged to him.
Alternative claims were in Nairobi Kenya and Hawaii. y or nearly 70 years, the atoll was under the control of the United States military.
Naval Bases and Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles e Eastern Europe and Cuban satellite ¢ The Pacific Ocean Pacific Rim Philippines Battle of Midway, etc., e Latin America, Walt Disney peace outreach, etc., ""View From Space"" [EN a Pacific Atlantic im WWII Memorial The Plaza of the WWII Memorial is the space in between the columns representing the United States States.
Glorian Donegan has no middle name, Victoria Windsor murdered, slew of odd names. Seattle and the Space Needle where Obama will live for a few years Sal A planted public records trail which leads to the family like traditions of this made up family using name legacies reinforcing the Legend of the Anna Dunham family line as CIA agent Madeylin Payne Dunahm also arranges dubious marriage and marrieage date of Barrack Obama Sr to Stanly Anna Dunham.
However, one former top CIA official, who knew Crane slightly during the Agnew years, said he could not recall a CIA affiliation.
Pe 2 2 SS 2S SS SS SSS SS SS SSS Se ee ee SS SS See eS See eee eee eee eee ee Zc Asian Missile Crisis Cold War included conventional warfare in Korea and ~~ Vietnam as well as unconventional special forces and regime changes leverage troops warfare.
As head of the Central Intelligence Agency during the early Cold War, he oversaw the 1953 Iranian coup d'état, the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, the Lockheed U-2 aircraft program, the Project MkKUltra mind control program and the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Sapience is closely related to the term ""sophia"" often defined as ""transcendent wisdom"", ""ultimate reality"", or the ultimate truth of things.
A person is culpable if they cause a negative event and ° the act was intentional; e the act and its consequences could have been controlled (i.e., the agent knew the likely consequences, the agent was not coerced, and the agent overcame hurdles to make the event happen); and ° the person provided no excuse or justification for the actions.
Sidney Gottlieb was an American chemist and spymaster best known for his involvement with the Central Intelligence Agency's 1950s and 1960s assassination attempts and mind-control program, known as Project MK Ultra.
Where Legitimacy of Dec 13 DNA Equals 1 Oe Thus an Espionage hit on me roadblocking normal life More Twins Authorized DNA Assignment Authority Fake cman Real Ed verbablly assaulted and blamed for being a provided to Fake Ed Sas Ed Fake Ed Confesses to harmer of victims If REAL Ed is in the vicinity he will be assaulted for the crisis fake Ed created and Real ed may be asked to leave on flimsy excuse Most of this can and does happen with Ed not there.
Z Foreign Intelligence Service report circulating in the Kremlin today states that the top United States Federal Judge for the State of Arizona was assassinated barely 72hours after he made a critical ruling against the Obama administrations plan to begin the confiscation of their citizen’s private retirement and banking accounts in order to stave off their nations imminent economic collapse, and after having the United States Marshals protecting him removed.
Cz BHmHRHRHHEHRHHEHRHEFHEHEEFHEEFFRHEFFHEHEEHRHEFFRHEEFHEHEFEFEHEEFHHEFEFHEEeFHEEFFHEE » u Google knowledge panel quoted here which was sourced from Wikipedia link eee ee The Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation or SVR RF is Russia's external intelligence agency, focusing mainly on civilian affairs.
The statement was made by Lord Acton, a British historian of the late nineteenth and : early twentieth centuries. ‘ i i i I i I i i i i i i i Black Opps are the shadows shadowy people work in that can cover mistakes using bad policies under excuses to cover thier own mistakes.
This shadow capability includes ability to recruit assets, paid assets, dupes, and allies in the espionage cause. Donegan I dike Tom Dunham) have obeyed the law all of my life minus a few recreational drug deals but by appearances we are in a ring together manufacturing Child Porn victimizing church going and other females.
Affinity to Operation, Liquidity and Commodity As Quantitative escalators of motivation rather than Qualitative adherence to Epistemia or Ethics Financial, racial glory or political glory, social success, or stmple cash can be motivators which can continue to motivate by increasing, variably, how much motiviations is required to achieve motivational results.
Espionage Recon of potential assets and how they could be motivated and direct or either non existent affinity to operation goals or loyalty to Kingpins of operation 7 pionaes Shieumne Incorrect Act paid for by what Asset Incorrect wanted to be paid Result Interest aka Corrputabilty of motive Asset No ulterior actor | Correct Motive Correct Action Correct Result Julian Assange and Wikileaks posited that offensievely illegal operations would lose the Imperial Conditioning of people like Edward Snowden as their affintity the programs existance faltered on a loyalty level to the illegality.
Through the Operation Goodwill program, forfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other community-based public health and safety programs. e The Asset Forfeiture Program was created in 1984 when Congress passed the Comprehensive Crime Control Act, which provided federal prosecutors and agents the legal and regulatory tools necessary to keep up with, and ahead of, those who commit crime for economic benefit.
Undercover agents around the world are exposed, and MI6 is attacked, forcing M to relocate the agency.
Aided only by a field agent , Bond takes to the shadows and follows a trail to Silva , a man from M's past who wants to settle an old score.
In the Russia Investigation example Anti Trump Interests are the Espionage Deep State James Comey is the Targeted Individual believing his FISA warrants are based on sound evidence and help DEFEAT espionage A British and or other Gangstalk plants evidence surrounding the Trump campaign subjecting it to investigation Student, Senator, President, and Former President Obama, and Obama the husband and father.
This will lead me into the theory the Trump administration and William Barr (Attorney General who as CIA officer destroyed CIA MKULTRA records) are trying to cover the era of Sidney Gottlieb and the CIA and Illuminati which included the assassination of Kennedy as Kennedy resisted the program going any further.
Both the Information Doppelganger and the Targeted Individual may be Mercenaries who will benefit from actions against the Gangstalk Victim.
Long Con Set Not Zone ""B"" Zone ""C""' Stolen property from my home, E planted evidence in my home, surveillance of my home Wanted, intended, associations, links with, of myself or my mother In-explicit though obvious non verbal assaults, photobombs, planted people, etc., who deny they are tresspassing against my use of public locations My PRIVAT HOME The Mercenaries are paid or ideologically suitable people used to attack me on behalf of illegal organization, CIA, espionage.
Sow what are the mulitple various races [lluminati international families really hiding and how does it relate One of the many accusations this book makes is this picture of my half brother,depicted as a monkey in 1961 and I claim it is my half biological twin, mitochondrial detected, and one of many illegal twins I have black and white.
JFK wanted his winnings Now so Dave and Torbert had to go upstairs to get their EVI olte 1 ohn Sidney ""Slew"" McCain was a United States Navy ~~ admiral and the patriarch of the McCain military family.
Wwww.seacoastonline.com » article » NEWS NOV 17, 2013 Torbert Macdonald of York, Maine, talks about his father, Torbert Hart ... in 1955, serving as congressman until his death in 1976 at age 58.
MELBOURNE, Fla. -Kennedy Space Center as we know it was just getting ~—off the ground when President John F Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral for the last time, 50 years ago Saturday.
Like the nation, NASA's space center, which within a week of the assassination would be renamed in Kennedy's honor, was consumed with shock and sorrow, remembers Jack King, then NASA's local director of public information.
These were around the world, NGOs, CIA Front Companies, and other private companies, media companies in particular like those of Maxwell Epstein ties, Hollywood and its actors and producers, and academic institutions NGOs and others around the world including the Mossad and French intelligence, the CIA efforts include Jim Morrison, Wwlt Disney, and other public figures :-EPD The CIA’s Office of Scientific Intelligence organized the project, code-named Project MK Ultra, in coordination with the United States Army Biological Warfare Laboratories.
In fact this happens in mostly public and was set up by Abuse of Process Psychiatry in which Doppelganger of me, Edward Paul Donegan, in density theft, were given a ""Legend"" of being gullible, naive, and retarded, and under that diagnosis given by the State z(utilizing Doppelgangers) including by Department of Defense, the factual theory my DNA was authorized will be consistent.
I have likened the entire plan to have landlords others drive me out because I am a peeper and leaving me in skid row homeless shelters under black and white assault and loss of all belongings over and over again to the Law and Order Special Victims Unit episode Zaken.
U Fandom quoted here from link Invisibility cloaks may be woven from the hair of a Demiguise, a magical creature whose coat allows it to become invisible.
Harry's was owned by his dad, so it's not exactly new, is it, but it's just... perfect!"" Ron Weasley on the Cloak of Invisibility Such Cloaks of Bedazzlement have been attempted blinders upon on Tom Dunham, myself, and others to get them into psych wards or simple to undermine the police reports we have given on Doppelgangers of us in our vicinity engaging in wrongdoing.
In either case when the con job clears a person of a clear head should not be conviced a ""pay off"" could be taken if they go along with something they should not and in either case the person should upon becoming free of the trick to revert to non entrapped behavior.
In Forward MKULTRA operations then Backward liability of MKULTRA 1s erased as earlier MKULTRA victims are further targeted military grad PsyOps Abuse as well as , law abiding United States Attorneys, Judges, Journalists, and others around the world also undergo military operations his as Abbot ordered for inside Texas running military grade COINTELPRO vigilantism against em and my genome and Glorian and James Donegan legacy.
Whoever kidnaps any individual designated in subsection of this section shall be punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life, or by death or imprisonment for any term of years or for life, 1f death results to such individual.
This latter meaning still applies today , when we say that certain subjects are ""taboo,"" meaning off-limits for discussion Power of Defamation The effect Media can have in bulllying Silence of the Grave Murder of journalists, whistle blowers, federal officials, military units, as need to keep operation secret or knowledge of it silenced.
From here, the other party can choose whether to end the contract or continue (where the other party will likely breach the terms of the contract) In Espionage Repudiation occurs when an Ageny denies the Actus Rea which is the action designed to bring about the results of the Act as if it were a contracted serve or tit for tat or quid pro quo, or resultant condition as effect of the affact.
Those who use subterfuge to protect illegal acts from effective detection are obstructing being held accountable for the acts they are concealing or passing off as coincidences. ~_— g Robert Plumlee interview He discussed how scandals from Iran-Contra to the failed presidential bid of Senator Gary Hart all tie-worked as a pilot for clandestine CIA flights, transporting arms to Cuba before Castro took power.
As aconcerned citizen, author Richard James DeSocio raised public awareness about the decline of our once mighty manufacturing sector and the ramifications on our lives and communities.
The institute had initially been endowed with 11 million marks, contributed by Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach and James Loeb [Paul Warburg's brother-in-law], an expatriate American of the KuhnLoeb banking family.
SON OF QUEEN VICTORIA AND BROTHER OF KING EDWARD VII, HAD BEEN GRAND MASTER OF THE UNITED GRAND LODGE OF ENGLAND SINCE 1901.
AJITBIHHOTO BOpa BEIaroT, a MOJITHHHOTO YCCTBYIOT The thief who stole an altyn is hung, and the one who stole a poltinnik (50 kopecks) is praised.
Brennan Center * In the imagined scenario described earlier, the president set up military tribunals to try violators of federal immigration law.
At 31 United States military personnel killed, the shoot down of Extortion 17 represents the greatest single-incident loss of United States lives in Operation Enduring Freedom Afghanistan, surpassing the sixteen lost in the downing of Turbine 33, a 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment MH-47, during Operation Red Wings on 28 June 2005.
On 6 AUGUST 2011, a United States CH-47D Chinook military helicopter operating with the call sign Extortion 17 was shot down while transporting an Immediate Reaction Force attempting to reinforce a Joint Special Operations Command unit of the 75th Ranger Regiment in the Tangi Valley in Maidan Wardak province After United States intelligence services discovered in 2011 that senior Taliban leader Qari Tahir was possibly in Tangi Valley, Wardak province, Afghanistan, local United States forces launched a mission to apprehend or kill him.
At 10:37 on the night of 5S AUGUST, a platoon of 47 United States Army Rangers left at forward operating base in Logar Province via two CH-47D transport helicopters, one of which would later be involved in the accident.
It was reported that the Taliban fighters had no information of the helicopter's flight path and that they had been in the right place at the right time.
Their cover up plans using espionage capabilities nearly complete, at the 99 and on half yard line of their finishing their desperate plans this book calls them out, but they will (nor will operatives their power extends through) ever give up on their own.
He was hoss PsyOps and Psyists Z rosa field Memory Alpha Fandommemory-alpha.fandom.com » wiki » Tantalus field The Tantalus field was a 23rd century device found aboard the ISS Enterprise in the with the touch of a button.
The Disposition Matrix, informally known as a kill list, is a database of information Developed by the Obama administration beginning in 2010, it goes beyond process determining criteria for killing is not public and was heavily shaped by National Counterterrorism Director and former Central Intelligence Agency Director John O Brennan.
Bush, son of Prescott Bush and MKULTRA NWO and concealing CIA and MKULTREA Mistakes with unites like Enrique Prado. mirror universe, which could be used to monitor and eliminate enemies from existence for tracking, capturing, ""rendering"", or killing suspected enemies of the United States. existing kill lists and is intended to become a permanent fixture of United States policy.
The Note the assassination attempt or Ronald Reagan during Bush VP term.
By William Grimes Dec., 2008 George S Morrison, who commanded the fleet during the Gulf of Tonkin incident that led to an escalation of the Vietnam War and whose son Jim was the lead singer of the Doors, died NOV. 17 in Coronado, Calif.
Ongoing MKULTRA all around the world Entrusted with the location for developing the Atomic Bomb far from the field of battle of WWI and without long traditions in Government or Science the USA fell under the influence of those like Sidney Gottlieb, MIS, the OSS, Religion, and Allies Itinerant proposed solutions and operatives offering ends to racial strife and racial genocide.
Amidst unprecedented world and racial strife Aerospace unites Housof Camelot, House of Windsor, House of MKULTRA Anne Dunham.
Seattle Post-Intelligencer Seattle Post Intelligencer By Charlette Report on September 16, 2016 at 9:57 PM * ""Stanley"" Anne Dunham mother of Barack Obama Jr.
We know she lived for a short time in an apartment on Capitol Hill by 1962 but not much has been published about where. tT nter the Polk Directory.
E < © , ne eee eee ee ee g 1% \ Among the strategies was denying the racial differences, incitements to war and conflict, a premise of Nazis alleged and pressuring genocidal wars against with conditioners of peace and global control.
In the language of the Courts, mostly what I read and get my lingo from, | attribute to their thoughts ""Dropping an atomic bomb on a nation to stop race wars is ""strong medicine"" for the Body Politic.
F O George W Morrison aft SAAPURICKEY crate, 1S) ae I ite ; Foree4 Mee lLerre fe See Reports ry TY None Gives, rier f""26820 BLS 726408 BLC 0 ree TPE-C i It rn'sh below bs VPC, ricl York nee) (& 1 A315} FRIG ""tn we ma 4 FRIG 5.
I found it very difficult to stay with him and tried to remin near him by weaving above hia, ‘hen we were at about 22,000 ft., a group of bombers, on their way out of the target area, passed directly in front of us at the sane level, During thie tine, Morrison had been attempting to get his engine to kick over, and then asked for any sugvestions as to what further could be done to get the engine to mrk.
At that time, while getting out of the prop wash, 1 lost sight of Morrisor.
Since I had been ahead of him, I turned into him but failed to see him.
I continued to look for him, asking for his position, in relation to the bombers, giving wine.
At that time Morrison once £5 aio"" took tn aris aeeelna bine eye tie sonics ge FH oes ite of sed northeast of Saarbrucken, and sere in fairly ‘to Eoave the rye ore Ste celled gf ain, saying shat, } ne would have to pare e plane. {iter r sour tf ti ue But anle ase Br baer fron “Na tes « at the Tt.
Later Admiral George Morrison teaches Atomic Safety was a United States Navy rear admiral and naval aviator.
This book is the culmination of my research into WHY my mother, me, and later my father, have been attacked under some kind of genome pretext, and our lives as atomic testing veterans.
With James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan ¢ Thomas Neil Donegan e Edward Paul Donegan Edward named after his grandfather, a hidden royal on one side of the family or other I was told in youth.
It is my belief Mercenaries for a Deep State are engaging in #wetworks to cover the illegal ""animal husbandry"" practiced by the CIA now the genetic detectability of that, and also the murders protecting the animal husbandry. v Google knowledge panel quoted here 1 A sleeper agent is a spy who is placed in a target country or organization not to undertake an immediate mission but to act as a potential asset if activated.
These Mercenaries are drug, car, and Glam Dommes paid Gangstalkers working outside the rule of law and in criminal acts to achieve illegal harassment of me, a law abiding citizen, which can not , should not, and would not be acheivable by legitimate law enforcement ends.
I These are fraud allegations, and they are essential to this portion of the fiduciary duty i claim.
Free Masons and Peace Corps and others believe the racial causes of wars are a soruce of world genocide crime and must be undercut by Illuminati programs though those programs are imposed on the world including through assassinations which the Illuminati world peace masons are now ""on the hook for"" and need a way out of by creating a consistent fog of genetics which is world wide and no specific families or racial histories clearly identifiable as out of place with natural migrations, which the Illuminati use of genetics is out of line with, done in response to world threats.
I will also use Information Technolgy for the flow of Infomation Wires Near each other but not connected Air gap Battery PIN battery | No battery pai [ ot condueion Cnt Forced Teaming especially in public creates entanglement which is not correct connectedness of things, unwanted but near.
Many who seem ""Republican GOP"" and some would expect as anti immigrant are part of Social Justice for Civil Rights and Masonic service to non white and under privileged, the underprivileged projects of Masonry work in hospitals, communities, medical services, and other Lodge projects. v Daniel Ray Coats 1 served as the Director of National “Intelligence in the Trump administration.
A 2017 article in The Economist described it as one of America's foremost Christian institutions. rr ll FBI Director Ray along with United States Marshalls continue to Target White Supremacism and give their assets to Masonic Works E St.
Louis Missouri Masonic Children’s Foundation 2019 Director’s Community Leadership Award Recipient Quote retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Director Christopher Wray recognized the recipients of the 2019 Director’s Community Leadership Award.
Louis and its Rolla NASA campus of Science and Technology and where Jack Dorsey is from, who has a November 18 birthday.
It is my belief the Masons have already tampered with history in rescues from the Nazis of Kutscheras, my mother being one of them, who were loving people and great leaders and the Masons used those genes for themselves, and in fact my father likely a Windsor out of wedlock son of King Edward VHI married a Von Trapp daughter.
Espionage, likely the DARPA Brain Program as their assets have long wrongly diagnosed and hidden not only FOXP2 but the entirety of my cognitive brain function and origins and at the same time as claiming it has not worth secretly clatzming and moving into genomic underground international networks as slaves were rescued during the era of slavery.
But I also stated the less obvious, that part of that history was Illuminati run underground railroads and Iluminati MKULTRA history including animal husbandry under Sidney Gottlieb with ""stolen"" DNA from Glorian Donegan, likely descended from the Windsors and Kutscheras, and others like her and myself, her son Edward Paul Donegan, are now subject to Espionage wrongdoing by those who like Donald Barr, William Barr and others who were part of earlier MKULTRA wrongdoing and are now in recoup.
R James Woolsey Jr, Colin Powell/ Alma Powell Catholic Charities, Bankruptcy Court, and others in that building seem to continue claims to my DNA, and claim the right to ""protect"" me from women or women from me, and I believe this Espionage capability wishes my genomic family line not perpetuate at all or does under claims others DO have a right to my DNA when in fact those permissions are after the fact and on planted evidence basis, but it is socially supported Deep State fraud, including by the media and government officials tied to the long espionage history of this.
The scene of flagrantly deceitful people masturbating and photographing (in my identity while near me) was common in United States Institutions where the ""Legend"" of me was created i a ee | Deceive Receive Conceive.
Windsors and JFK in Furturism of nuclear standoffs against Communism _ G with Windsors and Kennedys — MKULTRA Boeing Crorp Areospace experimentation continues with mixed race test IVF for ending comuniism in Pafic.
Mother Stanley Anne Dunham, Seatle WA Anthropology student, her own mother MADYLYN DUNHAM CIA BANK OF HAWAII, and her father STANLEY ARMOUR DUNHAM BOEING and owed CIA a favor after arrest for theft of aircraft blueprints The Kenyan father and Duhnam mother are fakes, as is the birth certificate to them.
This was an experiment wanted by Futurists and the Illuminati on ""the so called Negroes"" and the 21st Century.
The theory they operate under is improved economy around the world will decress interest in Socialism.
JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 John F Kennedy had been meeting with Futurist Thorkil Kristensen of The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD including on FEBRUARY 20 1961 in the White House the likely day of my and Barack Obama's Invitro Fertilization of Glorian Donegan with her egg and my father's DNA and Stanley Ann Dunham with an egg from my mother, and Malcom X Prewdent Jot Fitzpensd Kannecy Lie Dy Folew AShre EK ret with the Secre of the Orgartzation for European Froncenic CO operation (OEEC Thorkl Kristensen arn in he Oval Ores.
While applying for credit to by a stereo system in San Francisco in the 1990s I was corrected on my credit app that I had it wrong.
It states that Obama received the SSN from his grandmother, who worked part-time at a Honolulu courthouse, where she would have access to deceased individuals’ Social Security numbers.
The suspicion is that Obama’s grandmother, knowing he was not a United States citizen, simply scoured the probate records until she found someone who died who was not receiving Social Security benefits, and selected Mr Ludwig’s Connecticut SSN for Obama.
CIA Operative Madylen Dunham, said to be the mother of Stanley Anne Dunham, the white said to me mother of Barack Obama.
Madeylen Dunham also worked in the Probate Office of HA and may have stolen the SSN for Obama.
Mr Ludwig lived most of his adult life in Connecticut Because of that, his SSN begins with the digits 042, which are among only a select few reserved for Connecticut residents.
Therefore, there is no reason on earth for his SSN to start with the digits 042.
Conveniently, Obama's grandmother, Madelyn Payne Dunham, worked part-time in the Probate Office in the Honolulu Hawaii Courthouse, and therefore had access to the SSNs of deceased individuals.
The Social Security Administration was never informed of Ludwig's death, and because he never received Social Security benefits there were no benefits to stop and therefore, no questions were ever raised.
You will see leftist heads exploding, because they will have no way of defending Obama.
Although many Americans do not understand the meaning of the term ""natural born"" there are few who do not understand that if you are using someone else's SSN it is a clear indication of fraud.
If the voters of this great nation can succeed in bringing this lying, deceitful, cheating, corrupt, impostor to justice it will be the biggest and best news in decades for our country and the world.
If you can just say ""oh well; ho hum"" after reading this, you get what you deserve.
Aissa Wayne LAW OFFICES OF AISSA WAYNE The chart below shows the first 3 digits of the social security numbers assigned throughout the United States and its possessions.
The same area, when shown more than once, means that certain numbers have been transferred from one State to another, or that an area has been divided for use among certain geographic locations.
At birth I had an asymetric maxofacial structure possible unusual carrying position in the womb.
SSA says Generally, SSA assigns an individual one Social Security number to track his/her earnings and any benefits he/she may receive.
In 1963 as Barack Obama of Los Angles turns 2 years old, a few days later JFK is dead in TExas, JFK warning of an internatioal groupl ikely the Illumniati and also the CIA, vowing to destroy both.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston Physical Description | negative Person Subject Pets and other animal g The Mystery of Robert Knudsen by Jacob G Hornberger July 6, 2018 1 His family said that Knudsen was gone for three days.
How may of Camelot like Thomas C Wales knew of Barack around the white house, or was that Barry, etc., U,, his cluttered office, McKinney, now 67 and still the pastor of Mount Zion, recently reminisced ~~ about the invitation, the resulting controversy, King's brief stay in NOVEMBER 1961 and its longterm impact on the city and its African-American community.
Segregation phone conference APRIL 1962 Seattle Futurists, Windsors, Kennedys, Seattle | Muhammad Speaks Malcom X Nation of Islam Although there is a conflicting account from the Nation of Islam, it is widely accepted that Malcolm X founded the weekly periodical Muhammad Speaks, whose first issue was published in 1961 Malcolm X FEBRUARY 21, 1965 ,Cause of death Gunshot wound Photocredit, Ebony Magazine retrieved from Wikipedia Malcom X entry MalcomX Just like a chicken can't lay a duck egg.
Keep in mind Presbytarian workers in Africa allegedly tied to Obama dead pool a _ Occidental College was founded on April 20, 1887, by a group of Presbyterian clergy, missionaries, and laymen, including James George Bell, Lyman Stewart, and Thomas Bard.
Occidental President Remsen Bird worked behind the scenes to help Oxy students of Japanese descent continue their education despite mandatory evacuation orders; his letters are included in the Japanese American Relocation Collection in Clapp Library.
B issurch Post-Gazette JAN 30, 2007 11:00 PM A retired Presbyterian missionary from WESTERN PENNSYLVANIA, known to thousands of Africans as ""Mama Lois"" Anderson, was killed with her daughter, Zelda White, in a Saturday carjacking in Kenya.
Z How Britain covered up the friendship between Hitler and Edward VIII with the Nazis about looking after their luxury villas in Paris and the South of France.
Bush Mass graves found in Canada linked to MKULTRA program Donald Ewen Cameron was born in Bridge of Allan, Scotland, the oldest son of a Presbyterian minister.
Cameron's “terminal” use of electric shock as a brainburning torture, psychosurgery, and brainwashing with drugs and hypnosis would make the Canadian program the most famous apsect of the CIA's MKUltra * McGill Tribune and copied or modified to here Although the norms of experimentation and research were different during the time that Cameron was undertaking these treatments, there is evidence that he was aware of the immoral nature of his actions.
He actively denounced the atrocities committed by the German doctors during the war, and supported the Nuremberg Code, which laid out specific rules about what was legal when conducting human experiments. v Quote retrieved from Haunted Montreal Blog #38 Ravenscrag and copied or — modified to here Our October edition examines Ravenscrag, one of the world’s most frightening house of horrors.
Experiments also forced patients to listen to broadcasted messages (either from loud speakers or from under their pillows), as well as giving them experimental hallucinogenic drugs.
The classical twin design compares the similarity of monozygotic and dizygotic twins.
Osborn was the secretary of the American Eugenics Society, which was part of an accepted and active field at the time; the chairman of the Advisory Committee on Selective Service during World War I; and later the deputy United States representative to the UN Atomic Energy Commission.
Malcolm Donald was the Draper family lawyer and trustee of the Draper estate.
John Marshall Harlan II, whose firm had done legal work for the Pioneer Fund.
Donahue and DiFelice Endowed Professor Graduate School of Social Work Boston College McGuinn Hall Chestnut Hill, MA 02467 ment of policies that address the ""best interests of the child"" in cases of adoption.
But that party is filled with VIPs, tense with their competing agendas.
Her concerns grow after she catches her fiancé and Maria making eyes at each other while dancing Maria teaches the Von Trapp children their Do, together to the “Laendler,” an Austrian folk dance.
Secretive Bilderberg Meeting Draws Pompeo and Kushner * What Mr Pompeo, Mr Kushner and the other Bilderberg attendees actually say to each other will be a mystery to most of the public, thanks to the meeting’s use of the Chatham House Rule, which states that although attendees can tell the public what was discussed, generally, participants must not reveal who said what.
Alex Jones Is Starting to Think Kushner Is Illuminati * Z, he FBI, a United States intelligence agency with jurisdiction abroad probably the CIA, and ~~ British Intelligence officers, all believed that Robert Maxwell, the father of Jeff Epstein’s partner in crime, Ghislaine Maxwell, was a Soviet-Russian spy.
Sidney Gottlieb and the CIA under Donald Barr, William Pelham Barr, and the CIA PHS DOD DOJ Connections of Rod Rosenstein This chart is well supported by the chronology and reporting of actual participants such as Kennedy documents and Malcom X Muhammed Speaks references which are consistent with an explainable outgrowth of contemporary events which are outgrowths of covering up 1960s events, and the probability of those CIA activities being discovered today.
This will also be included later in the book but for now keep an eye out while reading the book for dates like Feb 20, Nov 18, the dates of my and Obamas IVF date in 1961, my birtday Nov 18, or dates like April 1 Steganosemantics CryptoGenocide This will also be included later in the book but for now keep an eye out while reading the book for dates like Feb 20, Nov 18, the dates of my and Obamas IVF date in 1961, my birtday Nov 18, or dates like April 1 CIA OSS Vatican Divinci Codes of MKULTRA Translation, keep an eye out for stories around these anual markers.
IVF date Thorkill Kristensen, George Ball, Sidney Gottlieb plant test pregancy via IVF using Glorian Donegan James Donegan surrogate birth system for also MalcomX Glorian Donegan test fertilization ""There are said to be photos of Ann Dunham on Waikiki Beach taken in or about July 1961, when she is supposed to have been in her third trimester, in a bikini, taken by a fellow female student.
Birth date 9 mos later from JFK Feb 20 1961 and Donald Barr with experimental monkey at White House November 22 1961 1 year after IVF It appears in both JFK and Malcom X archive data FEb 20 phone conference and planning for April 1962 Futurism Aerospace Boeing Seatle Glorian Birthday.
The DNA from the Donegan family during my surrogacy birth for the Barack Obama experiment was from my mother's side of my parentage 2 year developmental psych report and JFK dead, likely not agreeing to the Free Masons MENA Airport plan for Middle East North Africa, and Glorian for Free Masons Nation of Islam or other usage.
President John F Kennedy Secret Service Agent Gerald ""Jerry"" Behnand President John y g y k Presidential Assistant Dave Powers Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.35TH.POTUS Home Photos Videos About Events Endorsements Posts Community According to the book Mortal Error the shot that killed Kennedy was from the car with George Hickey and David Powers.
An operable abdomen and a new test procedure JFK EVA BAN Aug 19 SUPER SECRET GO TO THE GRAVE NUCLEAR WAR LEVEL January 27 1962 death of 7 members Nation of Islam and Ronald Stokes.
Bees SSS ee eee ee eee eee eee ee ee eee eee Notes on the State of Virginia 1 To justify a general conclusion, requires many observations, even where the subject may be submitted to the Anatomical knife, to Optical glasses, to analysis by fire, or by solvents.
James Watson * 1 James Dewey Watson was born in Chicago, IIl., on April 6th, 1928, as the only son of James D Watson, a businessman, and Jean Mitchell.
MK ULTRA Epstein Barr OGM scossranes RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY ABOUT United States DARPA and the Brain Initiative g Wikipedia Epstein started working in September 1974 as a physics and mathematics teacher for teens at the Dalton School on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
DONALD BARR, who served as the headmaster until June 1974, was known to have made several unconventional recruitments at the time, although it is unclear whether he had a direct role in hiring Epstein. g Wikipedia ipa Donald Barr Donald Barr was an Office of Strategic Services agent, an American educator, and a writer.
Consolidating power is not a quick process, but it is one that can happen behind the scenes, and can make it possible for one or two politicians to effectively control an entire government gradually, frequently without anyone else being the wiser until it’s too late.
The Russians have been a better warning to the USA activities than than the United States Press corps has been.
ARC of Northern | OANN operational, and political control of the population I Virginia Mark Weirness — | USATODAY | was in or seeking to be in, particularly women I would Tom Donegan KIZ10 otherwise might be around.
Funding conduits for comrol operations cun by the CIA sere erent een eee and other agencies were and have been numerous, octopuspear like, The Rockefellers and Allen Dulles established the Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology at Stanford which channelled funds for this type of research.
Kennedys Ei President John Fitzgerald Kennedy Q a ee | Follow Share «+ President John Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.ISTH.POTUS Home Photos Videos About Events Endorsements Posts Community Santa Monica, Venice, LA, Muscle Beach LA FEBRUARY 20 1961 NOVEMBER 18/19 1961 DECEMBER 13 GLORIAN DONEGAN birth of Edward Donegan, James and Glorian Nuclear Radiation Effects testing, St Jospeph's Hospital more or less Santa Monica CA. 10 miles or so.
Schwarzeneggers Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger is an Austrian-American actor, filmmaker, businessman, author, and former professional bodybuilder and politician.
In the self reported case of strong emotions Katherin Eunice reported concerning her body image that could be related to Borderlline Personality Disorder, clinical level strong emotions particularly surrounding polarization detection remediation tendencies. — Yaw 16, 2010 -In her new book, Katherine Schwarzenegger, Arnold Schwarzenegger's daughter, delves into her own life to help other girls and women develop a healthy body image.
George V, Edward VIII, George VI, and Elizabeth I U V2K THE TRUE STORY OF THE KING’S SPEECH — In 1895, Prince Albert Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born to Victoria von Teck, Princess of Wiirttemberg, and her husband George V The German boy who would become George VI was a sickly and fearful child prone to tears.
That’s why he was crying a lot, that’s why he stuttered and stammered, that’s why he used vulgarity, and that’s why he had a bad temper.
So, as I have stated, yesterday this same man was again watching the DNA as it was working and also commenting on the new DNA when someone beside him questioned him as to where he had come from, commenting that he had not seen him at all in this kind of work.
Another child, Mary Beth Butt, who lived for only 10 days (November 17, 1943 November 27, 1943), is buried beside Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt at the Glen Rest Cemetery in Kerrville, Texas, was the fourth child of Howard Butt Sr. and Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt.
Glorian Donegan FOXP2 Ovumn and the involuntary ovumn use Sidney Gottlieb, the son of Hungarian Jewish immigrant parents, was born in the Bronx in 1918.
The first version of the council was created by Congress in 1958 and chaired by President Dwight Eisenhower.
Emerson E White, the university’s president, from 1876 to 1883, followed a strict interpretation of the Morrill Act.
Coverups Many including Thomas C Wales of Seattle, one time roomat of a Kennedy, contemporary with the JFK assassination | think tied to Barack Obama turning 2 years old, speaking, and JFK rejecting Vatican orders.
I assert the assets siezed for the genome usage rights is a source of black budget for CIA operations the adult entertainer environment, creating forged property rights to biological or other assets, the rights permissions are actual forgeries and under blackmail the real Edward Donegan would have no reason to or no expectation to accede to.
A crisis actor working for church charities does something wrong, while identified as Edward Donegan by similar clothing, then concedes to harming his fellow church goers, I have nothing to do with any of these people, but because I am impersonated that impersonator moves my genome into charities and also for profit oerations.
LAW ENFORCEMENT INTELLIGENCE UNITS under the NDAA also called FUSION CENTERS piece together information on making and estimate as to who is a menace to society and then Target them with assets seizures, etc., I call them LAW ENFORCEMENT SAPIENCE CENTERS which utilize information from White House Plumbers and Iluminati Family Bosses to sapiently identify whistleblowers and then SUBVERT the credibility and reach of the whistle-bower voice.
Preceded By Grey Anbat Marder cf Me lanes Senate p, 7) Mou t Teeuas te on the MLedeid to Cape Tawa Ceacmie Cine of Christian Charity and I Think Orphanage Genemics Ken Paxton J Stst Anoney Goneret of Teaes I can not get a restraining order against these people or out of the state.
The idea being, if one can indirectly control the PUBLIC's decision-making process, then the aggregate effect 1s control over the PUBLIC and the POLITICAL environment.
Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here apparent Google Definitions from Oxford Languages clearly visible or understood; obvious. ""it became apparent that he was talented"" seeming real or true, but not necessarily so. ""his apparent lack of concern"" apparent from Vocabulary.com Apparent means obvious, but and this is confusing it can also mean something that seems to be true but isn't definite.
T was given a fake rock for hiding keys while on the job at SelectQuote around this time.
From SelectQuote to my Neighborhood — SelectQuote Review As Tom Dunham notes Tom Dunham WW Follow @sftomdunham nd Varied retellings of the break-in to my home were told at SelectQuote.
The woman probably had a master key, but conceivably could have picked the lock while pretending to use the keys as well I was given a fake rock for hiding keys while on the job at SelectQuote around this time.
From SelectQuote to my Neighborhood — SelectQuote Review As Tom Dunham notes Tom Dunham | Weotiow | @sftomdunham nl Varied retellings of the break-in to my home were told at SelectQuote.
OS — we A receipt fom Lori Cox Oakland California Behavioral Health is among the rubble out side my open hotel door some if it with crack or meth pipe soot stains.
The Disputed Domain Name contains the Complainant's entire mark plus a generic term ""review"" meaning that the casual observer is bound to mistake the Disputed Domain Name for a name connected with the Complainant.
U Thomas Dhuams Dunham on Google Blog — Hello, my name is Tomas Dumas Dunham This is my blog, my story of pain and torment.
EZ coost knowledge panel retrieved from Terence Hallinan and copied or modified to “here as Kamala Harris defeats Terrancy Hallinan, Hallinan the police unjon favorite.
When he returned to America, he joined the Student NonViolent Coordinating Committee and spent the summer of 1963 in Mississipp1.
If you see something crazy, say something crazy, and be locked up in a psych-ward"" thus the dopple of the real person has closed the door to police reports, the police friendly to the dopple anyway.
The dopple who stole my phone 1s safe from being called a RICO operative because that is his name, not his crime.
Interestingly, results also suggest that each specific aspect of each form of mental dissociation 1s associated with brain areas that are specific to that domain.
Similarly, some comment, I think a survivor, had a comment about being submissive to commanding voices, perhaps a marshall, air marshall, police, or some other Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit connected actor or actors.
He thought he had figured out the safety issues and created another layer of safety; he was wrong and it cost him his life.
Montreal, Canada Reviewing Select Quote Events and Describing them with a Different and true Narrative In short when people are planted at Select Quote a Doppler Radar rebound is read.
Rosenstein and MKULTRA Secrets of Massachusetts Marshalls and Secrets of Massachusetts if it seems the white supremacist is a sex offender sexualizing non white children and thus also owing them DNA, the hypocrite, he should come to orgasm thinking of hot hollywood adult white women, and seek them out if what he says is true.
That Dopple is similar looking but it is ""paraonid"" to point it out. e Exploit.
This as the splice of culpability of their peeping to my normal gym use is completed behind my back in a faked chain of events and evidence real and faked, spliced together.
I am told no reason the trucks and cars parked like that when I am present, it is not said to me any peeping has occurred.
Though heuristically the pool area is protected from peoping motorcycles God nor the Devil are named as suspects.
Académie Internationale de Philosophie des Sciences, BELGIQUE, Consejo Superior de I i | I t | I I t js : 1 predicting anything.
It's been over ten years since Ed sent me an email, and I wanted to make sure I remembered everything correctly.
Tom Dunham has tracked down credit report errors tying him to the identity of a Catholic Priest in a pedophilia scandal.
Disinformation campaigns on social media platforms that confuse, trick, or upset the public For example, a foreign group may purposefully spread false or inconsistent information about an existing social issue to provoke all sides and encourage conflict.
Kiva Lender Veronica Hoffman Apr 1, 2007 Studio City, CA, United States Shaking down an unamed fool, Fools Day, for his peeping at a pool teon:) Kiva and foreign immigres benefit troiner toperate a small correctional facility where | teach men the virtues of treating women with the respect and adoration they deserve.
The one of the recent mass shooters reported some some of Behavioral Health based operations surrounded him, perhaps inviting him to rage via their acts.
The department of Defense and research forward my data out to china and Russia, then there are local patents such as ... | i t t I LJ I I i i LJ t | t i i t LJ t LJ J Creating Phoney Planted Indications an Investigation is Legal Espionage utilizes public cooperation, creates pretexts for Law Enforcement acts, with weak evidence trail for Espionage victim to cite to Human Rights watchers.
Ed in Normal Gym, normal health, positive acts Knowledge K |I seem to be there at the gym to exploit R Reproductivity I seem to be there at the gym to exploit R R Poisonous Reproductivity Acts | The Impersonator is conducting the exploiting of Abusive to females, minors (R females R piggy backed to Ed being present at suspicious scene The act of the Piggyback and my being present create KOMPROMAT, Compromising photos, a Dopple will be chased from the scene, as a fugitive of harming the minor or other, and that dopple will forge Ed's confession away from Ed.
Fifty Shades of Grey the HTML colour chart * ~~ U believe that we should #1C1C1C"" #6E6E6Eis far more obvious.
Protection Racket Normal Condition Storefront Window Me Normal guy normal life normal cities Good reputation Neuces Count Texas and Espionage Protection Racket City Area Under Protect Racket in Nueces County Texas where I have been repeatedly given death threats if I try to move out to elsewhere or I have been forced out from elsewhere.
The Prosecution of a White Male Rx for the acts of Tx, and impersonator who will incur a liability then owing the disabled Trinitas Nsabimana es Yet re tote Bren About Me Dasa, Senegal £ More atrout Tienes \A 1 Desteretere hd) 2 Tyee & Gucntonrs a> 0 Motos Sh 1 frence eT Cares sserras tu tee tedtng thes Dasara af Sates he ed The Marshals Service supports communities by transferring certain types of forfeited assets to state, local and nonprofit organizations.
Thraugh the Operation Goodwill program, Jorfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other community-based public health and safety programs.
Black FBL Pranthinad ahiate tenes Alack all arannd ma Rinel and nae wthita rarictar clarirve nratand T Organized Crime Shakedown Scheme of Impersonator of Me who DID peep at female helpless victims with a camera but later was caught by an adult model he was seeing In front of me victims are placed.
STATE SANCTIONED This is protected by murder as Jen Moore died after receiving death threats, her reporting that highly classified programs are used to fake this KOMPROMAT as Government officials fake child porn to create the pretext that I did, thus the pretext for legal retribution against me 1s created.
Landlords Jim Volcelka, Mac Lamar Properties William Ruiz Capitola Califronia Under cover operations mounted in MY HOME from position 3 (unknown party, probably Obama connected) planted evidence I was retarded and planted evidence I was a peeper, these operations conducted in and assaulting me in my own home.
As is common for me, at FBI , gym, or elsewhere, the camera system at the Clerks office was out and being adjusted as | FILED MY CASE over this.
A function of these things 1s that when the Doppelganger is exiting the Doppelganger is followed and shaken down and confesses to wrong doing, and this is traced back to the establishment which with police backing will ban me from the establishment the Doppelganger left with the pizza from.
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States In office September 26, 1986 February 13, 2016 Pizza Gate and IQ Research The ARC of Northern Virginia and an Epstein is tied to Pizza Gate and my mother's trust fund.
Introducing CIA Slush Fund Midnight Climax MKULTRA and money laundering genes rights Plausibly Deniable Acts of personnel inside Executive Branch that might be of a slush fund or Plumbers operation cover up which if caught are accountable and may include foreign ties or illegal motives Slush fund A slush fund is a fund or account that is not properly accounted, such as money used for corrupt or illegal purposes, especially in the political sphere.
Astlush fund is a fund or account that is not properly accounted, such as money used for corrupt or \ illegal purposes, especially in the political sphere.
Use of slush funds to influence ' government activities may be viewed as subversive of the democratic process. ; i i i i i i i i i | i i i i i i i i In accounting, the term slush fund describes a general ledger account of commingled funds to which all manner of transactions can be posted, with debits and credits cancelling each other.
Hearsay It seems a very strange thing to say but it was a very strange thing to hear and while it sounds paranoid of me this entire book is about witnesses to this and other evidence presented in the book.
Muscle Cars on the Street death threats telling her to stop reporting, and beatings of her leaving her hospitalized F A ee He's a biker attorney who specialized in Prati errh cattit @efendants off.
When the identity of a defendant is not known, some jurisdictions provide mechanisms to initiate charges and thus stop the statute of limitations from running.
In a strange con-incidence this book is about corrupt moles like the FBI Director and Attoeregy Genearl William Barr and others like Colin Powell even Trump Adnan Khashoggi Task Force Detective Jenn Moore died or was found dead on August 11 2018.
He slept well after releasing so much of this. | think ICE HSPI unit is the place to go.
OECD tribute to John F Kennedy JFK-OECD-History * United States President Kennedy with OECD SG Kristensen, 1963 © JFK Library, Boston 50 years ago, on 22 November 1963, United States President John F Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas.
I v Event-driven architecture Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Event-driven architecture is a software architecture paradigm promoting the production, detection, consumption of, and reaction to events.
I don't believe that it's necessary in the United States of America. | think that we can work together I don't think that we have to shoot at each other, to beat each other, to curse each other and criticize each other, I think that we can do better in this country.
U Kerner Commission From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Kerner Commission National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders Established by Lyndon B Johnson on 28 July 1967 The National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Jurisdiction Purpose Investigate the causes of a recent outbreak of race riots, with a particular focus on the 1967 Detroit riots.
Prelude The First Black President Denouncing Social Darwinism Obama, himself a product of mixed race testing by the CIA, Vatican, and Mossad earlier forms, trying to stop Nazis decide to take the Micro and turn it into the Macro using Spanish Opeus Dei Griffith genes transport technology ee Be ew’ Nov 19 Diagraphs Feb 20 Dec 13 Ed Donegan Birthday Noy 181961 IVF Date Feb 20 1961 ESS Glorian Donegan FOXP2 Dysgraphic Dec 13 Birthday Also pictured here.
What if Micheal Hastings and Andrew Breitbart were really on to the Windsor FOXP2 family branch and the use of that DNA in Obama who tested clean of Dysgraphia at birth, and that on the maternal side, Michelle Obama is actually Micheal Lavon Robisnom, a placeholder in an alleged family tree while Glorian Donegan mitochondria is still used in the Obama family and at 2 minutes 46 seconds into the Andrew Breitbart video that Michelle Obama is seen as a man.
The Windsors of German FOXP2 Dysgraphia origin through King George V decedents like King a Baraék Hussein Obama with his lover at that#fime called Michael LaVon Robinson.
Edward VIII work with Hitler on MKLUTRA through speech therapist Sidney Gottlieb.
About My family history Rough Music abuse of my ordered by high authorities with something to hide The abuse of Glorian Donegan genome, racketeering it, and the treatment of me by high ranking politicians tied to that history and the subversion of me by evidence plants and defamatory impersonations of me and money laundering of my mother's trust fund as an asset.
U Google knowledge panel quoted here Ned is an English given name and variant of Ed, sometimes short for Benedict, Edward, Edmund, Edgar, or Edwin.
It was also told to me by my mother and relatives in the south Edward was some sort of once king.
EDWARD Price of Wales james PAUL donegan glorian DONEGAN Edward Paul Donegan James Paul Donegan Cape Cod, Manhattan Project Atomic Exposure to Radiation Testing oO Ps Donegans pre _ 1961 and other» __ Donegdns PZ a SAO s * im ""Brockton oa 1 4 si a a od th 8 Fp ae as ( Eeyore’ tee 'Glorian Donegn Born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb20 Nov18 1961 I grew up in Marshfield MA with my father and mother, Uncle Harold and other brothers of my father.
This is often called creating a borderline between potential positions, or Borderline Personality Disorder.
Borderline personality disorder , also known as emotionally unstable personality disorder , is a mental illness characterized by a long-term pattern of unstable relationships, a distorted sense of self, and strong emotional reactions.
About Edward Paul Donegan directly Throughout my life I have been put through what is called a Gang Stalk, a form of stalking which is illegal but has the cover story of being randomly occurring, not a stalk.
This creates the ""legitimacy"" that my DNA was signed away to non-whites under blackmail circumstances. while compromising photos are staged in my vicinity an impersonator, not me, concedes to them and authorizes non white use of my DNA under blackmail Targeting FOXP2 Dysgraphic Racially and Genomically Hostile Conservators Create and Accept KOMPROMAT as State Actors and Corruptable Private State Agents See I stayed one extra night In NYC this kid was very sick and | did not feel right about sending him home.
Line agents horrified, To brass renewed his SC and his contract ,,., Hostile Charitable Conservator Generates, Then Accepts As True KOMOPROMAT, Accepts Restitution of alleged harm to co-patients of their behavioral health Ultimately, my DNA has to be moved into NONWHITES under some pretext and also prevented in WHITES under some pretext.
Stygmatizing me with KOMPROMAT acheives this, coverup my family genome already in the Obamas.
Their principal defect seems to lie in a lack of fine control over the muscles of the throat and mouth, needed for rapid speech.
King Edward VIII, Queen Elizibeth II, and King Georege VI would be her father and brothers and sisters.
Zone House of Windsor is the reigning royal house of the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth fealms.
As for an age guestimate, my father told me he had to lie a little about his age, to appeart to be older, to enlist in WWII. so he was about 18.
I believe on February 20 1961 Barack Obama Sr and Glorian Donegan DNA are used in an IVF experiment which also fertilized me on Feb 20 1961.
EI] Facebook «G+ Google twtr ¢ Tuer Qa <M Rested Shooting lube Senone, Hot Pex & « Deal Sarah Blake “Spanking end Borage Domfon LA Announces 2016 lley Rei 8 comments Harvey Dent Sad, Sed, Sed BPD is no shit.
President Franklin D Roosevelt appointed Kennedy to be the first chairman of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission , which he led from 1934 to 1935.
August 4, 1961 , Kapi‘olani Medical Center for Women &amp;amp; Children, Honolulu, HI True AUGUST 4 1963 SUNDAY The African Development Bank was created by agreement of the leaders of 33 African nations meeting in Khartoum, the capital of Sudan. [the day before James Hetfield, born in Downey California Lars Ulrich (/' ulrik/; Danish: ; Lars Ulrichborn 26 December 1963) California, Downey the NASA Apollo Space Program 1961 follow up to the Mercury space program.
The long list of people associated with Bill Clinton 1 I i Google knowledge panel quoted here I A lab report suggesting ""Clueless"" actress Brittany Murphy died from poisoning is ""ridiculous"" and ""baseless,"" an expert said Tuesday.
The Los Angles County coroner Monyack, 39, died from the same illness five months later.
December 20, 2009 Spouse: Simon Monyjack i i i i i i i i i i i ruled pneumonia killed Murphy, 32, in December 2009, and that her husband, Simon ; i i i i i i i i Centering On Family Members My theory is that the alleged mother of Barack Obama, Stanley Anne Dunam was neither impregnated with a fertilized ovum nor had any other connection to Obama other being a cover story in the Seattle area.
Malcolm visited Qubilah in December 1996 in San Antonio, where she was undergoing treatment.
Further, these genes are authorized by impersonators of me for this usage of them and that is Defense Intelligence Agency identified Pizzagate also known as Extortion17 flights And all this evidence, he says, points to a “pan-Africa” hypothesis of human development.
Role Fighter and fighter-bomber / ground-attack aircraft National origin Soviet Union Manufacturer Sukhoi First flight 7 September 1955 Introduction 1959 The Sukhoi Su-7 is a swept wing, supersonic fighter aircraft developed by the Soviet Union in 1955.
The first prototype, designated S-1, was designed to use the new Lyulka AL-7 turbojet engine.
Su-7B fighter-bomber On 31 July 1958, Soviet tactical aviation (Frontovaya Aviatsiya, dpoHTopasa aBnaina) tasked Sukhoi with developing a ground-attack variant of the Su-7, which could replace the scrapped Ilyushin I-10 pictured below.
On 31 July 1958, Soviet tactical aviation (Frontovaya Aviatsiya, @poxutoBasa aBnana) tasked Sukhoi with developing a ground-attack variant of the Su-7, which could replace the scrapped Ilyushin I-10.
Decades later, Boeing remains integral to keeping the Minuteman III going strong, with an average alert rate of 99. percent. 1 jessie seas atina ec History of fational missile defense systems When the United States Air Force was split from the United States Army in 1947, the Army retained the role of ground based air defenses that would evolve into National missile defense.
Project Defender The Nike-Zeus use of nuclear warheads was necessary given the available missile technology.
Or the anti missle Child Mashups The Missile crisis with both Russia and China, the spread of communism generally, led to the need for Barack Obama as a test birth of futurism and IQ gains in black Winsor DNA with the speech defect FOXP2 was tried through GLorian Donegan with a Malcom X fertilization.
A future leader needed in Indonesia, Polynesia, Malaysia to help fight communism and the growing Intercontinental Missile Threat Using Boeing Corporation and the Seatle Missle Defense area the Pacific Northwest Futurist of MKULTRA and Sidney Gottlieb and Warner Von Braun, MKULTRA and JFK decided a test baby for Indonesia.
United States relatives of King Edward VIII, with FOXP2 gene, tried out on Barack Obama, btw a great orator, who could be planted in Indensia for peace between the East and West.
U Boeing Corporation, the Minuteman and other TRIAD connections In 1955, the Soviet Union successfully tested a hydrogen bomb, and in 1957 it launched the Sputnik satellite, surpassing the United States in rocket technology.
Fearing that the Soviet Union had the ability to attack the United States with intercontinental ballistic missiles , the United States made development of a reliable, rapid-response ballistic missile the highest priority.
At its peak, it would employ 39,700 people located at Boeing sites in Seattle and at the missile final assembly site at Plant 77 in Ogden, Utah. assistant minister of the Nation's Temple Number One in Detroit.
Later that year he established Boston's Temple Number 11; in March 1954, he expanded Temple Number 12 in Philadelphia; and two months later he was selected to lead Temple Number 7 in Harlem, where he rapidly expanded its membership.
In June 1953 he was named t i i t i i i i t i] | i | i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i] i t i] i] | i] | | i | i CIA asset, Don Bohning argues in his book, The Castro Obsession , that Operation 40 was not actually established until March 1961.
To hide the covert operation and facilitate Barack Obama's implant into Indonesia a Hawain birth was a cover story by the CIA, the parents of Barack Obama on the white side tied to the CIA from Witchita Kansas and Settle.
The earliest form of ballistic missiles dates from the 13th century with its use derived from the history of rockets.
As of 2018, in modified versions (Soyuz-U, Soyuz-FG, and the Soyuz-2 , the vehicle is still in service, having launched over 1840 times.
Wales was a graduate of Milton Academy, where he roomed with Joseph Patrick Kennedy I, the son of Robert F Kennedy MKULTRA, Weherner Von BRaun, etc., Obama live in Seattle, then head to Indonesia JFK is dead Nov 22, had warned of secret org, maybe Freemasons Thomas Crane Wales (June 23, 1952 October 11, 2001) was an American FEDERAL PROSECUTOR Seattle Washington.
They need materials. e Glory as victims and heroes in the fight against White Supremacism e Themselves as Holy, and the victims of a Heathen.
Certere fey SCE Pleo Gla amen noer lire Bietot | les sone me eC eet loc Bates meraberby Texas police.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development is an intergovernmental economic organisation with 37 member countries, founded in 1961 to stimulate economic progress and world trade.
Wikipedia Ethiopia and IQ. and GDP Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Mole In espionage jargon, a mole is a long-term spy who 1s recruited before having access to secret intelligence, subsequently managing to get into the target organization.
Continuing Criminal Enetrprse State (Definition From Edward Donegan long-term and elaborate drug conspiracies run by Illuminati Profiteers and Abusing Powers of State facilitating racketeering activities eo 8 8 oe ee UU Ue UG Ue UU UU Ue Ue UU UU UU UG Ue UD Ue UO UU UU OU UU UU UG Ue UU ~ Overview Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here 1 A mole may be recruited early in life, and take decades to get a job in government service and reach a position of access to secret information before becoming active as a spy.
By contrast, most espionage agents, such as CIA Director of Counterintelligence Aldrich Ames and FBI agent Robert Hanssen, who spied on the United States government for the KGB, were either recruited or offer their services as spies after they were in place as members of the target organization.
Bush families, the Schartzeneggers, most connected politicians since tied to the IIluminati and MKULTRA around the world.
A Genome-claims Felony Racket and Why It Exists I have been, my Genome, has been Targeted Economic or industrial espionage commonly occurs in one of two ways.
WA vemderdBed rune Pebrwary 20. thet One modified February 20 1961 as an IVF date and with a birth of Nov 18, 19 1961 in Santa Monica area, recorded in Los Angles St Josephs for me, and Hawaii for my half brother, my mothers other ovum use, Barack Obama who would get a cover story for him to be planted in Indonesia later.
Mao decreed increased effort to multiply grain yields and industry should be brought to the countryside. quotas based on Mao's exaggerated claims.
Many had a longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo and had conducted experiments on humans at concentration comps and commited other war crimes.
Ae pa rata a in aie United States — cieen a aon “ ut a7 sea Se rite Col Werner Von Braun MKULTRA Missle n\) Command JFK Styling i Ue Va mh JFK at Cape Canaveral November 16, 1963 During the five years of being entrapped in Texas and researching criminology, cons, and protection rackets I have discovered the word Etiology, Se RR EE EE EE EEE EE EEE EEE RE EE EE EE EE EE EE EE EE EEE EEE eee Google knowledge panel quoted here 1 Etiology is the study of causation, or origination.
Anne Hathaway as Fantine, the mother of Cosette and a struggling factory worker, who resorts to prostitution and selling of her teeth \ 3 For the Fantine strategy to work the Social Justice workers representing the victim female must also represent Squalid Filth Ed and arbitrate it all.
These high power espionage agencies have radiologically attacked me while in mental health custody, incited other prisoners to assault me, etc., and I fear even being in a Department of Motor Vehicles in the United States because of their complicity in identity theft and actual assaults on those, like other, State properties where the State backed acts occur.
The use of Heuristics avoids the correct Due Process BSR RR RR RR RP PE RP EE EE EE EE EE EEE EE EE EEE EE EE EE EE EEE EE EE EE EE EE EEE EE eee V psy en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heuristic 1 The study of heuristics in human decision-making was developed in the 1970s and 80s by psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, although the concept was originally introduced by Nobel laureate Herbert A Simon.
Element B where the Doppelganger, the zoom photographer is confronted, happens one apartment over from me, in a similar apartment, different floor, etc., Denna Wide angle My Eyesight Field of View Subject of photo or my normal activities normal life view Female Photo Victim Me with natural eyesight T Zoom/Scam Photographer — Me using my camera Does Misrepresentation of me Scam Artists ae Does represent alleged victim I could not figure out why teens or tots where in my field of view near me.
Me normal day e Assaults on my property when starting self relief to adult porn, tots after that outside by window disgusting me e Tots and teens in public attempting to create the appearance of me having an interest in them or them as my paid models.
I can not stop them or those who placed them near me from being near me e¢ Normal acts like normal photography or watching news stigmatized by shouting into apartment from outside, engine roars, etc., ¢ In affect sound and fury to my normal acts with external engine roars as thought his ties me to the Marshalls acts.
Manufacturing the allegation by treating what are non symptoms publicly. e Marshalls or others will roar engines and create sound and fury a perp is in the area and protect others, behind my back from me, and roar engines stigmatizing my normal conduct as if it ties me to abnormal conduct.
Roaring Engines, anonymous over-taching engines, surround, subsume, My Normal Acts into a per in the area, btw NOT ME Cypher-text anonymous undisclosed to me Clear Text in the open A critical point in this is that the Doppelganger deny the acts to me.
Roles 1 Me in clear text with only clear text meaning and only clear text simple poverty limited transactions books.
The the 2A Doppelganger of Me who will confess as though me to anti social peeping conduct and pay with my DNA as requested by a Domina or other 2A A clerk or cashier who will attempt to fuse 1 economic authorized transactions with activity not in explicit text or meaning withe me, and if were, or even intoned, I disavow.
Could also be someone who jumps in front of me or places themselves or herself in my path and verbally assaults me as ""bear,"" etc., e 2A United States Marshall Most likely United States Marhsalls roaring engines, parking vehicles, etc., creating the intonation that a predator is in the area and I is/are the predator Probably justifying their acts on the gains which they wish from wrongful asset seizures, lurid activities, and excuses about the need to take the image of a White Nationalist down a rung.
Shills are premeditating false claims to my genome and but for their prediction in my path and placing themselves there with Criminal Intent they would not be there laying in wait and photographed by their friends. animus nocendi intention to harm The subjective state of mind of the author of a crime, with reference to the exact knowledge of illegal content of his behavior, and of its possible consequences.
The Marshals Service supports communities bv transferring certain types of forfeited assets to state, local and nonprofit organizations.
Through the Operation Goodwill program, Jorfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skilis and other community-based public health and safety programs.
Black FBL Pranthinag aha ties hlack all arannd ma Rianel and nan wthita ranietar clarirs nratand T Three Pack of Ploys Three Pack of Ploys ¢ RxTx Ploy ¢ Chemia Fury Alchemia Ploy e Hyperspacing Ploy RxTx Ploy I receive a comment.
In-congruent with who I am and what I eroticize but what fits with ""Legend"" Teens and tots and ""ass fetishism"" made no sense to me and it took over a decade for me to even figure out the reason people stepped in front of me was that they were asserting with their acts my interest in their asses.
Criminals, United States Marshall in the most egregious race based crime stage empathetic exploitable victims in my vicinity, while they, dresses as me or others dressed as me, will ""victimize"" the victim by masturbating or photographing the female, in anti social conduct.
The incident, them being near or in front of me, is their own conduct not mine, and any victimization of those females is by others, not me.
These people will also ""get the word out about the White Supremacist, and skid their cars while in my vicinity to show how they feel about me.
In cons a Gull falls for a trap and then will give into the blackmail resulting from the trap. e The Marshall/Protector of the Shill teen, tot, or female who the mother will report the found photo to.
Shills are Con Artists who in Long Congs can do things like fall down in front of you allegedly tangled feet or a push, and perhaps another shill at the scene will bear false witness to what occurred.
CA, United Stotes Shaking down an unamed fool, Fools —— —— Day, for his peeping at a pool Kiva and foreign immigres benefit lloan because About me ‘acility where | teach men the virtues of treating women Check out Member Since: Apr 1, 2007 This is NOT the inchoate deal I and her initiated nor any confession I ever made to her.
Dislocations Placement Displacement Replacement Extended Stay Springfield VA My Card Key paper folder list room 400, My card key does not work at though exactly as I checkin scuzsy black and | 400.
I go to lobby and my card I check, card white female leave for elevators a minute key is fixed to 400.
I have to pay for and book an I can not board, no passport,and modification | entirely new flight on an to NYC is denied impersonators name, not my own I book a flight to Canada The same happened in Casa Linda Apartments and everywhere I go and everything I do.
The Von Trapps in London, Paternal EDWARD marrying 1926 Maternal MARIA PRINCE OF WALES KUTSCHERA niece of 1926 (German PRINCE EDWARD an affair with Austrian Nazi Franz biologically) MARIA KUTSCHERA VON Kutschera TRAPP Ultra Secret FOXP2 Borderline Personality Disorder/ language defect LONDON KE FAMILY Gene With JAMES With MALCOM PAUL DONEGAN Xand GLORIAN and GLORIAN DONEGAN DONEGAN e Barack OBama Jr. (via IVF of Surrogate Eva e Thomas Neil Ban) Donegan e Edward Paul Donegan Edward named after his grandfather, a hidden royal on one side of the family or other I was told in youth.
Edward Donegan IVF FEB 20 Diagraphs ... and continuing into the Obama and other children, Donegan DNA given up by impersonators of Edward Donegan, thus bailing the CIA and Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized The CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized.
Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized Edward Donegan IVF FEB 20 1961, Edward birth NOV 18, her The CIA birthday DEC 13.
That is why they were killed, Tom Clancy was working on Dec 13 2013 C Q & bBlintecapleyaces.net/ x pis inPlare Gresh Loretta Fuddy, director of the Hawaii Department of Health, reportedly died due to injuries she received in the crash of a small commuter plane shortly before 4:00m. local time Wednesday, December 11, 2013.
Napisa Waitoolkiat, Southeast Asia Visiting Fellow from Thailand, discusses her findings with Dr.
DEC 13 2007 Where: East-West Center in Washington What: Democratic Institutions and Political Corruption in Emerging Democracies: The Case of Thailand Ex-CIA Agent Jim Garrow Claims Obama Had Breitbart and Clancy Killed; Brandon Walker interviews Doctor Jim Garrow, philanthropist and worker for one of the largest non-profit organizations on the planet to save female children from slaughter in China.. states he knows that President Obama ordered the murders of Tom Clancy and Andrew Breitbart EWC groundbreaking ceremony, May 1961.
Model of Cover Ops in public and in state offices and using surveillance of me for which no basis and no basis has been shown to me or presented to me.
How Obamacare Will Be Used To Destroy The United States Constitution On tonight’s The Wise Shall Understand Radio Broadcast, our guest was Dr.
I believe DARPA found black masons and others tied to the original MKULTRA affecting my family and now these same world masons tied interests will kill people like Judge Roll, Justice Scalia, Thomas C Wales, and others in the dual goal to ¢ Conceal the genomic evidence of the original MKULTRA ¢ Continue MKULTRA around the world and forever erode racism by elimination of racial gaps.
It was not until 1951 that a United States Senate committee led by Democrat Estes Kefauver of Tennessee determined that a “sinister criminal organization,” later known as La Cosa Nostra, operated in this nation.
PropagandaDue < Propaganda Due was a Masonic lodge under the Grand Orient of Italy, founded in 1877.
Its Masonic charter was withdrawn and it transformed into a clandestine, pseudo-Masonic, ult organization operating in contravention of Article 18 of the in 1976, raright Constitution of Italy that banned secret associations.
In America He's a biker attorney who specialized in getting Srialtime defendants off.
A ASTON Rea rc ’ ga rum mm rae en Nc lee el lo ele ee » @ The unity of government which constitutes you one people is also now dear to you.
THe CIA, Mossad, and Russians all seem to have some theories about Obama family ties to this, and earlier CIA OSS Vatican and Windsor ties to all this, including close ties between King Edward VHI, Nazi Germany, Spanish Illuminati Opus Dei, and others, and now possible ties to MI5 and MI6.
B vice.com Yesterday afternoon, an anonymous source known only as “Peter R.” reached out to VICE with claims that he had in his possession a video of President Barack Obama’s birth.
Jen Moore saw it before the side bars blocked the planter at Stay and Play ee i ee THe Mysterious death of Dr.
The document is just another in an increasingly long line of fakes intended to prove Obama wasn't born in the United States Lt.
Died in the Camp Bastion attack 3 days after the Benghazi attack Marco McMillian: Mississippi's first gay mayoral candidate, 34, 'was beaten and burned' before his body was found dumped on a riverbank.
Two other black members of Trinity Church Murdered at Further, Sinclair claims that Obama was friendly with at least two of these deceased parishioners, and that choir director Donald had contacted him shortly before being murdered from multiple gunshot wounds on December 23, 2007 * Andrew Breitbart Died of a massive heart attack, walking outside late at night, alone, in the dark approximately one week before he was to_produce tapes of Obama’s extremist activities in college.
Student also arrested for attack on embassy Bill Gwatney, a close friend of Bill and Hillary Clinton and a Clinton super delegate at an upcoming convention in Denver and was fatally shot in 2008.
Caucus death threats ... also reported by Jerome manipulation, sudden death Christopher Kelly Committed suicide, under pressure to testify against former Gov.
Former Navy SEAL ‘Died Because Somebody Wanted to Kill Him’ Robert McKeon: founder of private-equity firm Veritas Capital, dies Sept.,2012 of suicide; General Dynamics bought company in August 2011 to expand influence into Obamacare IT Marco McMillian: Mississippi’s first gay mayoral candidate, 34, ‘was beaten and burned‘ before his body was found dumped on a riverbank.
United States Navy SEAL commander dies in Afghanistan: suicide --SEAL Team Four commander in Afghanistan ‘commits suicide’ as body_of married father is found shot dead: Rumor?Clinton Injured, United States Navy Seal Killed In Secret United States Mission To Iran ; State Department_Denies Hillary Clinton Injured in Plane Crash... butABC News Report on Emergency Landing of a United States Plane in Iran 16 days Suicide’ In Afghanistan SEAL Team 6: Helicoptor shot down by terrorists.
Obama_skipped intel meetings for days leading up to the attacks despite christopher stevens was a muslim (Statement that Ambassador Chris Stevens was a Muslim is made between 1:00 &amp;amp; 1:20); Col.
Hillary Clinton SS) eee SS eS SS eS SSS Oe assassinations, run by CIA nominee John Brennan, resulted in the death of the United States ambassador, a new book claims...Claim that secret war ran behind the back of Gen.
Jihad Friday gets bloodier: Attack on Camp Bastion in Afghanistan, 2 Marines 1 2p) orted I lle 1 : Dez fe nN a ey, 1] ence about th z Car Op 3a: (110N attac I 3 A a I] np Bastion Families Want Answers About A feh anistan ; Uncovering the ( amp Bastion coverPrince Harry, 27, has been deployed at Camp Bastion as a military helicopter ice According to Smith, the Taliban also claimed that the prince was a target in Friday’s attack.
Taliban fighters have threatened to kill him, saying earlier this week they had a “high-value plan” to attack the third in line to the British throne.
Jim Garrow Obama Hoax Debunk’d Refutations, by Gordon Duff, Senior Editor Veterans Today. a a a gE Gf pen, Ay a ef Ree Dr.
Judge found dead at courthouse: suicide; Nueces County sheriff: ‘Strong leads’ on Judge Greenwell’s suicide motive Phillip Marshall; Murders Children &amp;amp; Self in CA, 9/11 Conspiracy Author, Each had been shot once in the head with a handgun, as was the family’s dog.
But it minimized the role of a third partner, Hillary Rodham Clinton, on questions about her relationship with drug convict Dan Lasater and Rose's role in suing him on behalf of the government and First American Savings & Loan of Oak Brook, a Chicago suburb.
One of the latest deaths was that of Alexander “Sasha” Kagansky, a Russian scientist who had been working on developing a COVID-19 vaccine when he was brutally stabbed and thrown from the window of his 14th floor apartment in St.
One of the units on base is the 743rd Military Intelligence Battalion. g Colorado’s strong space, defense industries continue to act as magnet for companies retrieved from link and copied or modified to here By JUDITH KOHLER | jkohler@denverpost.com | The Denver Post FEBRUARY 21, 2020 at 12:00m.
An added element, other than the property rights tranfers, is the defamation to my political, religious, and intellectual worth as the Dopple and the dapples acts are taken for my own. fraud In law, fraud is intentional deception to secure unfair or unlawful gain, or to deprive a victim of a legal right.
Bismuth titanate or bismuth titanium oxide is a solid inorganic compound of bismuth, titanium and oxygen with the chemical formula of B112Ti020, Bi 4T13012 or Bi2Ti207 Bismuth titanates exhibit electrooptical effect and photorefractive effect, that is, a reversible change in the refractive index under applied electric field or illumination, respectively.
LOUIS, MO Twitter.com/eddonegan A lab report suggesting ""Clueless"" actress Brittany Murphy died from poisoning is ""ridiculous"" and ""baseless,"" an expert said Tuesday.
The long list of people associated with Bill Clinton Google knowledge panel quoted here ~ illness five months later.
December 20, 2009 Spouse: Simon Monjack Brittany Murphy poison report 'ridiculous,' expert says CNN Bovine Death of Don Henry and Kevin Ives retrieved from link and copied or modified to here On August 23, 1987, the bodies of 16-year old Don Henry and 17-year old Kevin Ives were hit by a cargo train in Alexander, Arkansas as they lay on the tracks.
Mary Caitrin “Caity” Mahoney Killed on July 7, 1997 a Caity, the youngest of three children, flunked the second grade but worked hard to catch up and by the sixth grade was accepted into the McDonogh School.
Paula Jones lawsuit journalist Michael Isikoff dropped hints that a “former White House A staffer” with the initial “M” was about to go public with her story of sexual harassment at the fr White House.
Ethicists are also concerned about the potential misuse of mitochondrial transfer.
Lee Harvey Oswald and his wife Marina and their child return from the Soviet Union November 6, 1962: John Connally elected Governor of Texas.
Oswald is given notice in the latter part of March that he will be terminated from his job.
Ruth Paine's house is where alleged JFK assassin Lee Harvey Oswald spent the night before shots rang out at Dallas' Dealey Plazaclaiming the life of President Kennedy \ oe Kennedy's upcoming trip to Dallas was first announced to the public in September 1963.
According to a declassified CIA document, Ruth's sister, Sylvia Hyde Hoke, was listed as an employee of the agency in the Falls Church, VA local directory in 1961.
Ruth's father, William Avery Hyde, was an insurance executive who went to work for USAID , which was and is a well known cover for CIA personnel.
United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom March 8, 1938 October 22, 1940 lst Chair of the United States Maritime In office April 14, 1937 FEBRUARY 19, 1938 Died NOVEMBER 18, 1969 Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, United States ll Z — a a Kathleen Cavendish < Marchioness of Hartington Kathleen Agnes Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington, also known as ""Kick"" Kennedy, was an American socialite.
Feb 23 2019 she is found dead MEET NATACHA sAUTT SL be aL She came forward saying she had proof of a high level pedophile ring involving VIPs, Politicians, Movie Stars and other celebrities.
PRET RUE TU ear eGo Can cr ee BCU MRE eC a bath tub, nor will | shoot myself in the head.
Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewicz From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia ebruary 16, 1958 barack Obama's dog and late senator Edward Kennedy's three Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewic Banuary 12, 2011) was an American dog trainer.
Bradstreet, MD. an altemative autism specialist, and Dr Nich and were willing to sfep outside of (he standard allopathic medical mode) for treating cancer and autism.
Who-have-real-cures-not-approved-by-the-fda/5465809 1 I i I i i : When agents from the USFDA and local state of Georgia law enforcement raided Dr.
Shock ~~elaim in latest WikiLeaks cables HMS Vanguard is Britain's lead Trident-armed submarine.
Jim Volcelcka and William Ruiz Slap work with and slap me back to Corpus Christi non white skid row I am not a high value target for any Fusion Center, Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit but my assets are AS IT AM FRAMED by high profile politicians.
Roadblocking me in Housing and NORMAL cities and counties Roadblocking, Disruption of Continuous Event Paths as applied to Housing Road Blocking False Flag of peeping, Identity Thief exploiting who will late minors event occupy my disrupts lease identity and location of housing Edward Paul Donegan rents in a normal city Pperhas takes over date with female I was going to meet in that location Identity Thief Normal Cities and Skid row Gangstalk normal life Nueces continues I can not leave alive.
At 1001 N Water Street the North 4th Floor I was zerod out from 1001 N Water Street 1/17/2021 Catwalk Balcony Peeping activity betweenst Nearby units, line of sight on balcony catwalk ee an faslar as only apartment Ed Donegan has any connection Indoor hallway The building has all sorts of slight of hands confusions like the letter B and 8 right next to each other and consider how this scam operates.
Mops are pushed all around 48 while the apartment 4B is right next door, and the fake hero peeping from the adjoing unit ""owes"" and provides DNA to the family making milk references, people push mops or cleaning rags all around where the fake hero was or might have been, and this surround me walking around.
It is possible the female in 4B thinks she was peeped at by Edward Donegan in 48 or someone substituting for Edward Donegan in 48, if she knows it 1s a substitute she may feel better about being peeped at by the substitute for Edward Paul Donegan.
My apartment is not wired for AT&T, they confuse apartment numbers, which wiring goes where, etc., and this is the usual of the long con eet of the vicitm unit and the adjourning fake hero unit who is caught (by him or herself peeping at the next door unit.
Getting me ostracized from a potential family life by faked allegations will work, and it works by showing how framing me can pay off for social good, if good people will frame and attack me It is called the Precious Gemms Scam, people are told a Gullible loser fool is coming along and you can help shake him down and then you will be in possession of the Precious Gems when the scam is over and he has left without them.
The Enigma machine is a cipher device developed and used in the earlyto mid-20th century to protect commercial, diplomatic, and military communication.
HUMINT Attacks Google Knowledge Panel retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Human intelligence Human intelligence is intelligence gathered by means of interpersonal contact, as opposed to the more technical intelligence gathering disciplines such as signals intelligence, imagery intelligence and measurement and signature intelligence.
HUMINT by illegal COINTELPRO and Sham investigations which are created under false premises and use illegal harassment Racial fights are picked and staged and I and my trust are the Mark in fraud upon me.
I believe the real Espionage interest in my has been converting my positives into the positives of others such as people will turn from me to others If we can study his racism my theories of Hegel could propell me and I thus find it difficult to enter communities such as Austin and this stalk goes back those identify stalk victims during Church Committee hearings about the CIA, FBI, NSA AND DARPA Brain Program.
When at a similar apartment to mine thinking it is mine, and knowing it overlooks a school area a Dominatrix protective of children's buttocks may block the view Disgusted that Ed seems to take pictures of teens and tot asses, across from the High School, she will show her ass to the Neighborhood Watch instead, and they will spend Edward Donegan's money on her ass.
Just Cause she works with Law Enforcement and Neighborhood Watch This is spliced with my real contact to her and the evidence manufacture about me is spliced to her by Espionage along with my contact to her for her to be incited against me.
Film splicer Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here i RY [ Film splicer From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A film splicer is a device which can be used to physically join together lengths of photographic film.
Thermal paper splicers 5, Cement splicers Cement splicers join films together by using a chemical called film cement which is made of film base dissolved in a solvent.
Compositing * Four images of the same subject, removed from their original backgrounds and composited onto a new background Photobombing has been known to get global exposure, mainly due to the bandwidth and ease of dissemination afforded by the Internet, and the abundance of snapshots by smartphone cameras and other hand-held devices.
Especially if they're debating the United States’ habit of intervening in international conflicts. interfere Vocabularly.com To interfere is to try to stop something from happening.
Disgruntled employee; Living Above Means of Income; Vulnerabilities; Greed Subversion, Shakedown and Conspiracy Against Rights of a white supremacist who regretted from day one Corpus Christi Texas, Nueces County Subversion and recruiting Subversives Terms Advocating, causing, or attempting to cause insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny, or refusal of duty by any member of the armed forces of the United States or by Department of Defense civilian personnel with the intent to interfere with, impair, or influence the loyalty, morale, or discipline of such armed forces.
Interest 1s also the word used to describe money charged or given as part of a debt.
HYDE IS IS NON WHITE MARSHALL WATCH SETTINGS 00:00 4) IS a USA Military DOD member, or at least using ID of a ite USAF officer Air Force National Guard Airman first class EDUCATION United States Air Force ROTC F-22 Fighter Pilot Vanden High School, Travis AFB, CA High School Not only are these English as Second Language speakers as is CENTCOM area Mistress Vesta, the one on the right flipped horizontally his photo I flipped back.
Air Foros ROTC Ware to Vanden High School, Travis AFE, CA Lives in Travis Alr Force Base.
Fake claims from Neighborhood patrols of gang infested neighborhoods The Marshals Service supports communities by transferring certain types of forfeited assets ‘0 state, local and nonprofit organizations.
The dependency of the plot, surreptitious plot, manufactured by context is that | am a severly retarded loser how needs a trust fund manager, and that trust fund manager can break any contract for housing in normal life and keep me in homeless shelters of violent felons and threatening to kill me if a retarded person like goes to the library of study intellectual content.
Format of cryptonyms Each CIA cryptonym contains a two character prefix called a digraph, which designates a geographical or functional area.
Jim Vocelka and William Ruiz, Stay and Play and Capitola Crisis Acting as foundation work in the Long Con, Stages of the Long Con on my Sperm Bank Rights In the Lambda Green White chapter of this book this and more information is found on Cons or Long Cons, shakedown schemes.
Quackery The ARC of Northern Virginia has used quackery from the outset to undermine the fact 1 never needed them or signed up for them.
But the word lucrative doesn't carry a similar sense of shame If the purpose of the Rockefeller Foundation shaking down a Nazi for genome ""for the kids"" it doesn't seem shamefull.
If the operations, as it was, to incite homelessness in a person already a victim of the Rockefellers the scam was shameful.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia In my case I think wars are fought against me such as race and pedophilia wars allowing Espionage based font organizations to conspire against my rights and during that hold public support.
They now have been caught ""with their pants down"" (except those arguing for transparency) as DNA Forensics are revealing family connections and genome history around the world which some of these Illuminati have been secretly tampering with, using the ""goods"" of unknown hidden identities like famous leaders illegitimate children for their own Illuminati use and around the world for [luminant groomed as sleeper agents including the Obama family line.
Evidence Clustering Around Judge Roll g Wikipedia quoted here from link While eugenic principles have been practiced as early as ancient Greece, the contemporary history of eugenics began in the early 20th century, when a popular eugenics movement emerged in the United Kingdom, and then spread to many countries, including the United States, Canada, and most European countries.
The eugenics movement became associated with Nazi Germany and the Holocaust when the defense of many of the defendants at the Nuremberg trials of 1945 to 1946 attempted to justify their human-rights abuses by claiming there was little difference between the Nazi eugenics programs and the United States eugenics programs.
Since the 1980s and 1990s, with new assisted reproductive technology procedures available, such as gestational surrogacy , pre-implantation genetic diagnosis , and cytoplasmic transfer , concern has grown about the possible revival of a more potent form of eugenics after decades of promoting human rights.
A criticism of eugenics policies is that, regardless of whether negative or positive policies are used, they are susceptible to abuse because the genetic selection criteria are determined by whichever group has political power at the time.
Yet another criticism of contemporary eugenics policies is that they propose to permanently and artificially disrupt millions of years of evolution, and that attempting to create genetic lines ""clean"" of ""disorders"" can have far-reaching ancillary downstream effects in the genetic ecology, including negative effects on immunity and on species resilience.
Context, If Obama and even Glorian DNA and Mitochondria get seized, as if a Nest Egg trust fund, Obama relatives would be from everywhere, not somewhere Mark Edward Kelly is an American politician, former astronaut, engineer, and United States Navy captain.
Bizzare and even Earth Shaking larges scale rigged proceedings surrounding my using both Targeted Individuals or Placed Individuals to rigg proceedings as if sweeping ice in front of a stone to guide it Vocabulary.com retrieved from rig and copied or modified to here rig 1. equip with sails or masts 2. the act of swindling by some fraudulent scheme 3. truck consisting of a tractor and trailer together When you rig something, you connect parts in a way that's so crazy it just might work.
You could rig your jeans by using a paper clip to replace a button that pops.
Interest how ""fixed"" means ""stuck on"" like a Fixed Delusion or a Compulsive Act, a belief or action fixed in destiny by a sapient or controlling, engineering, even socially or legally enginerring force.
Kelly is the husband of former United States Represeftlaiive Gabby Giffords.
February 21, 1964 (age 55 year -121, STS-124, STS-108 , City of Orange, NJ Space missI0 Scott Kelly < American engineer Scott Joseph Kelly is an American engineer, retired astronaut, and United States Navy captain.
Ge See cesses taba could-the-black-death-protect-against-hivwithout the mutation, called CCR5-A32, were killed by the Black Death, so that those with the mutation survived to reproduce and increase its prevalence today.
In the 1990s, PCR, developed in 1983, became the than RFLP, it has an exclusion rate of 99.99% or higher.
The proteins encoded by certain genes “54468 CCR-5 is disabled in people with the full mutation, and so HIV is unable to gain access to the macrophages.
Highly accurate DNA parental testing became available in standard method for DNA parental testing.
A simpler, faster, and more accurate method of testing are also known as antigens, as a result of their historic discovery as factors in organ transplants.
My father was an 1950s above ground nuclear testing participant in Nevada to test affects of radiation by the DOE an NIH/PHS Feb ~ 18 1961 Glorian and James Paul Donegan Have IVF of me into my mother Glorian.
Obama also an IVF on Feb 20 1961 Note online impersonators speak of Glorian and Genenetch, an online Bernie friend saying so in Wishlist +9 months +3 Months 9 months pass andl am_ | Feb 23 1962 A year after IVF of born on 11/18/1961 and |Obama IVF to build future Obama is likely also African leaders, all looks good In my twenties or so I am being harassed by some kind of odd police.
In Concord CA I even call the Concord police on some form of special ops which seem to be monitoring my home illegally. | am also told there is an operation underway according to neighbors which is protecting a mob witness next in a house adjoining my house.
Another wrinkle 1s that not everyone at 23andMe participates in DNA Relatives, the matching tool there.
My eggs will need to be broken in the U.S., If I have children five generations later they will tie to Obama's children five generations later.
In fact Ed Donegan was quite famous for this. (like now, impersonators of me signed away my DNA at AOL Netscape) Judge Roll seems to have been a possible ""real target"" of a shooting, shooting connected to The Saulk religious institute, in an asset seizure case in my mother's trust fund amount, over a ruling detrimental to Obama's likely DNA agenda for foreign nations relief, on a date tied to a Pizza Gate conspiracy motivated by witness to it independently finding it and even reporting it to police.
Edward Paul Donegan @eddonegan » 13m & In 2000, Family Tree DNA, founded bys Veeeemcteld, was Oo ta Edward Paul Donegan @ecdonegan « 14m & Judge Roll Time of Death Feb 8 2011, Obama was famous by then.
L+ 0 ill Tied to Birther IVF issues | Tied to Ongoing Secret Looks forward to Genes In Africa PAST AND DNA Database | undisclosed ARC of NOVA Trust | for Medicine (and Obama's DNA vicinity Fund Strangeness in Africa Seems independently reported as Obama policy related assassination through Kremlin report ec Lee ee ee a a a U in NOV _ 30 2010 the case is filed, within a 72 hour period of a preliminary ruling he is ~~ dead on FEB 8 2011.
Nov 18 Feb 20 +/12 days Edward P Donegan, me, my take on this, a ruling disallowed a legal theory or some other matter affecting the genetic privacy rights of the President, possibly asked for by the Secret Service or others.
December 21, 2009 Obama and CIA | applaud your posting of Obama's Trilateral connections, and you 21 FEBRUARY 2009 Daniel Brandt sends: December 21, 2009 Obama and CIA I applaud your posting of Obama's Trilateral connections, and you may also post this email if you wis Here are some links concerning Obama's background that may be of interest.
GDP and governmental, scientific, societal, and sconomic success seems to be correlated with ethnic IQs.
Unlike the WikipeidA links, these have permanent content, which means that every time | post such a link, a bunch of revisionists editors cant go edit it and vater it down or change it, or add false contradictory information to it, as happens with the WikipediA links | use within a day of my using such a link.
In our previous reports United States Descends Into Total Police State As 2012 ‘Solar Chaos’ Fears Grow, Pole Shift Blamed For Russian Air Disaster, Closure Of United States Airport and Poisonous Space Clouds Slamming Into Earth Cause Mass Bird And Fish Deaths we had detailed some of fears the United States government are most worried about, but which they still will not be truthful to their citizens about.
Pegasus U pecases Mythical creature Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied . or modified to here Pegasus is a mythical winged divine horse, and one of the most recognized creatures in Greek mythology.
Wikipedia i i Z ericen D Basiago, DARPA Future Battle retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Introduction Tonight, in a major disclosure event, the United States time travel cover-up ends, as one of America’s early time-space explorers steps forward to reveal what he experienced and what he learned during the early years of time travel research and development by the United States government.
Big, big, big day for those of you who believe the world is run by a cabal of elites, be it the Free Masons, Illuminati, or New World Order.
It suffices for me to affirm, having studied the opinions below and the expert briefs presented here, that the portion of DNA isolated from its natural state sought to be patented 1s identical to that portion of the DNA in its natural state; and that complementary DNA is a synthetic creation not normally present in nature.
U Oral arguments, the text below copied from Wikipedia On October 10, 2012, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case.
Black Markets Black Money and Money Laundering Money Laundering is complex.
Layered Architecture of Racketeering influence Criminal Organization introduces ""railway"" crossing point in which the cross out of accounts can occur cicrumventing in that extra step direct accounting of the asset owner Recall from the Department of Treasuary description and how this layering of an extra layer can provide the money laundering cross point.
A Protection Racket, unneeded mental retardation advocacy of me creating by my mother's will creators enables this loot of my DNA rights by sabotaging my normal life circumstances such as metropolitan apartments and keeps me either homeless, institutionalized, or in deep slum non-white conditions of hostile environments devoid of my intellectual, sexual, religious, or their interests.
Instead defamatory repulsive and repugnant sexuality is staged against my interest including both flashing and evidence plants.
Shill Gulls who impersonate me as Information Doppelgangers and will forge a confession of me that will be used as a pretext for legal claims against me, It is the Gull who actual photographed or committed the peeping whilst standing next to me in public at the same time the shill victim was planted in front of us.
Shill social services or law firms who will benefit from laws which allow my assets to be transferred to them under RICO like asset seizures, though the asset seizures are on fake claims and many of the Shll Gulls who faked the identity of me and confessed to peeping at women are the homeless people and drugs addicts who the asset seizures will benefit.
Often and even mostly they are lower class uneducated, on drugs from treatment program drop outs and sex offenders, but as United States Marshalls will plant evidence as me then seize the evidence already on them then as me ""admit"" that my assets are due them as victims or forced donation to charities.
Shill lawyers and judges such as B Janice Ellington or Paula Xinis or others who are connected to deep state genetics programs.
Errors of Reproductivity, The State Controls Fertilization Rights and Activities State Teloogical ""emergency"" control private reproductive rights and moves them into State owned assets for the elite and government backed causes.
And politicians choose whose DNA will be seized on fake claims organzied by evidence plants. dola Polis En Parentis Loci For the NIH and Obama Admin to racketeer the value of my geneome (and who does know it and will not disclose it to me) and pass it to White women it is necessary to make a publicly visible spectacle I am mentally incompetent, a spy or terrorist, thus medically and legally gaining control of my genome rights, and I must be sabotaged as somebody who can not be near white woman, or whom white women, potential partners of mine, should avoid like the plauge.
Even the | Pizza (female minor to Tea paseo I am bankrupt and sauce was photograph ala Bettie Page ocna e will pay the bill with white photo sessions) my DNA Goes to actual | Tx leaves and is chased to location he is at, fake Ed Donegan home, with home Adult Entertainer, a fugitive.
False pretenses is very similar to the theft crime of “larceny by trick,” which involves convincing someone to transfer you possession of their property through deception.
The building is operated by the interest of the duplicity, not the simplicity.
Definitions from Oxford Languages The gambit, an exploited child, is the allegation ""I took the bait"" and exploited the minor, though, after that, my trust fund will compensate the victim, the gambit, and those who protect the child.
These religious charities are using their children as exploitation victims to gain advantage over an Atheist by an impersonator of the Atheist taking the bait. mmm mm meee Hee HEHEHE eH HEHEHE HEHEHE HEHEHE HeHeeHeeHeeHReHeeHeeReeeeeeee eee -~ Catholic Charities of Corpus Christi, inc., * _— atholic Charities 55 Tanuchua #750 epresentive Payee for Disabled People Representative Payee Program as provided by the United States Social Security Administration.
Program Description We follow the Guide for Organizational Representative Payees i I I I i I I i I I I i I i I i I : management responsibilities for people who because of severe mental or physical limitations or may be subject to family exploitation, are unable to manage their own finances.
That fake data going into a rigged ""intelligence unit"" evidence ""fusion"" center for guesswork on what might be happening, I am wrongly targeted and subject to wrongful assets seizures and even predatory misrepresentation of me who wants my assets for their victims while denying to me those are my assets being used for victims, no true accounting only ambiguity in statements, nothing that upon being pinned down they won't repudiate that they had meant that.
Its MKULTRA groups and operations and its ultra powerful vested interests are requesting media silence and getting media silence or even media cover fire as complicit media intimidates and bans others reporting on the operations of MKULTRA, at times called ""Truther"" theory.
BBC.com Trump ‘drifted away’ from constitution, says ex-military eel Colin and Alma Powell then and now | Celebrity couples, L Alma Vivian Powell is an American audiologist and the wife of military and political figure Colin Powell , whom she married on August 25, 1962.
I didn't see one on this trip but usually when this happens, which 1s whenever I am in public, a person dressed like me will have an interest in the female and the parties will then bifurcate from me and I believe the person dressed like me will take over my identity.
CIA contractor illegal irregulars were used to kill Jen Moore and to assault me, drawn from Social Services Agencies (who are in a RICO scheme embezzling genes rights and the value of genes they do not own) because she and I were uncovering and reporting on the RICO scheme, its black budget coming from violent crimes connected racketeering.
A central lie in Pizzagate is that in ordinary acts I am actually ""sendng the signal"" or making the deal for my DNA, signed over during a tryst an impersonator of me 1s really setting up in which my DNA sperm bank rights will be money laundered.
The Mousetrap The Mousetrap is a murder mystery play by Agatha Christie.
Wild Things 2 Ploy ¢ Britney Havers every day teen with a $70 million dollar trust fund from her rich dead biological mother, allowing her only a 25K a year stipend.
Her rich mother secretly murdered in an Florida alligator swamp. e Maya King secret teen lover and brash accomplice to Brittney Havers who will use the clause of the will if a biological relative is found the trust then goes to her, and the 25K a year basic scheme is no longer in place.
Brittney's brash, relatively poor classmate Maya King suddenly claims to be Dunlap's illegitimate daughter as the result of her mother's extramarital affair.
The trio are in cahoots, running a scam to secure and share Dunlap's fortune.
Mulholland Falls Analogy and MKULTRA COINTELRPO, MLKULTRA, tied to Ongoing Government Blunders wit} my DNA and DNA rights Eisenhower's farewell address Now this conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Treat Williams as Colonel Fitzgerald Cleanup of Espionage by Espionage hits as needed to save the bosses In Mulholland Falls and the The Bourne Identity series these are characters who are trying to brind down those who could compromise the Espionage Gone Wrong of their agencies, really in both cases the CIA with the CIA working with DAPRA and Atomic Energy The Bourne Identity Logistics coordinator, Niky Parsons handled many technical tasks during Treadstone missions.
This book poses that the Boston Marathon Bombing was a cover-up during mulit-suspect mass crowd event and that a black United States Dpet of Defense employee at the JFK library fire may have been in an operation to destroy evidence that the JFK library. (ee See Se a FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, who arrested “~ Dzhokhar, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013.
Read More Racketeering in the Continuing Criminal Enterprise Masonry State with money laundering and sub version based in genetics and long running II]luminati CIA DARPA operations Twitter @IchooseLove22 @FightingMonarch @Robby 12692 At least in my case me being a far right winger New Age Claims call me a Nazi and lay the claims of alleged harmed victims at my feet, actually New Agers self victimize then subvert me on appearances cause I was in vicinity.
It seems a Mr Hyde side of me came out, but in fact My Hyde 1s a real sex offender following me around dressed as me.
Black Marshalls | Mr Hyde | Related to neither, Ed Donega, Dr Jekyll The paradox of who is Mr Hyde and how does he fit into some other identity Dr JEKYLL Wustrated BUSI ere BS eT e eT ; MY | aI World's Greatest Authors N YDE Robert Louis Stevenson Nic What ""set off"" Mr Hyde to masterbate to peeping tom acts and photos, that the Law Enforcement who invented and deployed Mr Hyde as FBI contractor was the need for the Government and Religious Missions to claim rights to my DNA and make a sock puppet Ed Donegan who has harmed others.
As 1 sought the answer for racial hate crimes against me that only further polarized and issue still do not as my calling out black or other aggression and research the reason.
Racket Trust os approach white women with my Building Super contractors assualt eee Fund, actual aesthetic, intellectual, and as Mr Hyde or planted or other Dr Marshalls, ; eee other assets supporting Mr Hyde | victims Jekyll puier Asser Mr Hyde is ghetto se1zers y e Death threats to me or white black or other as me) | Incitation to vigilantism for Mr Hyde's acts > women by ghetto blacks if I am near white women Locations and Psuedo Locations Locations I was at and locations I might have gone to but did not.
Defeating White Supremacism by Assets Smuggling and Humanism to the Needy Gee See ee U Humanism Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied or modified to here 1 Humanism is a philosophical stance that emphasizes the value and agency of human beings, individually and collectively.
For the NLF, however, the political struggle was by no means secondary to the armed campaign; rather, these two elements were conceptualized as equal d complementary components of the overall campaign against the Saigon regime (CIA, 1966, 14 U Wikipedia retrieved from Psychological warfare and copied or modified to here Psychological warfare , or the basic aspects of modern psychological operations , have been known by many other names or terms, including MISO, Psy Ops, political warfare, ""Hearts and Minds"", and propaganda.
Sometimes there may be one or more simultaneous insurgencies occurring in a country.
Types of Subversion Subversion can generally be broken down into internal and external subversion, but this distinction is not meant to imply that each follows a specific set of unique and separate tools and practices.
Each subversive campaign is different because of the social, political, economic, cultural, and historical differences that each country has.
I | i i I | | | I I I | I I i i I I I i I I i i | I I I i I | | | I I I i I | | Tactics Insurgencies differ in their use of tactics and methods.
But when his adulterous affair with Guinevere is discovered, it causes a civil war that is exploited by Mordred to end Arthur's kingdom.
Brier would succumb to his wounds shortly thereafter, leading to rampant speculation as to the thotive for his murder, and despite his family suing various individuals and corporations along the way, many were still left thinking that Rich was murdered by the the DNC and the Clinton Machine for, they speculated, leaking incriminating DNC files to Julian Assange and Wikileaks, eventually causing Hillary to lose the 2016 election, and to fuel the then-nascent Pizzagate investigations, as millions of concerned patriots became aware of just what exactly these leaked e-mails implied.
PsyOps, the CIA Mole State, and the Media and other a wing planes A Lie about race and the history of coping with racial strife has consolidated power to the point of intimidating open discussion.
Truth is treason in an empire of lies The title of this blog is a quote from former Congressman and presidential candidate, Ron Paul.
The Cin conception of a daimon notably appears in the works of Plato, A eLoKom LD describes the eavanate inspiration of Socrates.
Conversely, they don’t believe of these links what they don’t want to believe.
DISINFORMATION have found the source of political news that they prefer, and they agree with the views they hear or read, and there would be no harm in that if the news media was always reliable, but it isn’t.
There is ° BIASED INFORMATION reckless journalism from the far left all the way through to the far right.
We’re not asking anyone to change their ° WITHHELD INFORMATION political views.
After having cleared the legal department for all possible questions of inaccurate statements, the article was scheduled for publication Just when the presses were set to roll, Washington Post Managing Editor Bob Kaiser , killed the article without explanation.
According to the sidebar which appeared with the Penthouse Magazine version of this story, Bob Kaiser refused to even meet with Sally Denton and Roger Morris, hiding in his office while his secretary made excuses.
Bush and the bush family mostly invovled, even the alst George Bush president threating he would be killed if he did not comply, and Isreali Mossad had operation under way to kill program dissidents. y | Chapter Ten And because of your suffering, alone, My Little One, and because of your heartfelt prayers on behalf of all of humanity, these evil ones will not use hyperspace as they have and will not use this medium again to further enslave humanity.
Swingate Chain Home Radar Station In the case of the Bomber aircraft especially before RADAR the fighter/pursuit plane could fly within a circumference of bombers and intercept inbound hostile fighters before they reached the home team bomber.
Corruption is a form of dishonesty or criminal offense undertaken by a person or organization entrusted with a position of authority, to acquire illicit benefit or abuse power for one's private gain.
Mafia state In politics, a mafia state is a state system where the government ts tied with organized crime to the degree when government officials, the police, and/or military became a part of the criminal enterprise.
Plausible deniability is the ability of people, typically senior officials in a formal or informal chain of command, to deny knowledge of or responsibility for any damnable actions committed by others in an organizational hierarchy because of a lack or absence of evidence that can confirm their participation, even if they were personally involved in or at least willfully ignorant of the actions.
Revenge for a real or imagined offense (People in these organizations are quite petty, mirroring their preternatural handlers); false accusations of a ""horrible crime"" of which the victim has gotten away with ; silencing a corporate ""whistle-blower""; defecting from a cult; a perceived enemy of a i group or organization; ""knowing too much"" are all examples of possible motivations. i i Or to by repudiably irritating and frustrating a person (Happy Slapping normal hapy states) create frustration which appears to the examiner to by psychosis.
Crony Deep State Shot | Henchmen Law Violent Callers can and do get | Enforcement Gang support for this Layer 2 Espionage Agent | Member (Has support of others Confidential operation and covering |including Media who in | Informants it up Deniability of operation) | Layer 2 Espionage Asset Me and my trust fund blamed for the acts of others Passing the Buck [from WH Plumbers and Street Gangs to Edward Paul Donegan Buck passing, or passing the buck or sometimes the blame game, is the act of attributing to another person or group one's own responsibility.
Few men have been desperate enough to attack openly, and barefaced, the liberties of a free people.
I call it the Radical Right because it is right wing in that it sees limited role for government, I call 1t conservatism in social, religious, and economic matters, conserving the use of the power of State to their most limited applications.
Once you know what motivates your target, you are ready to begin psychological operations. (from psyhist ) ""Psychological Warfare is simply learning everything about your target enemy, their beliefs, likes, dislikes, strengths, weaknesses, and vulnerabilities.
Once you know what motivates your target, you are ready to begin psychological operations [of becoming the alternate choice for the Compromised and Absent original.
Gangstalk of Evidence Plants and Agencies Believing fake evidence create new unjust recomposition, sketch, of the gang stalk victim's life Gangstalk System Targeting a Cape Cod Atomic Testing Veteran PDE Ote Copiague Prados Core The innocent murdered victim in custody Nostra, assets) Their Espionage Recruits Targeted by Deep State for Recruitment Gangstalk Victim, murdered, conspired against by CIA — Mercenary at State Agency, Landlord, etc., acts on pretext created by Doppelganger — Ed Donegan abused by State lives in Context of retaliation.
Don’t think that homeless shelters assaults are where the betrayal 1s most tangible.
An avalanche is an event that occurs when a cohesive slab of snow lying upon a weaker layer of snow fractures and slides down a steep slope.
If the avalanche moves fast enough, some of the snow may mix with the air forming a powder snow avalanche, which 1s a type of gravity current.
Medicaid: 0 Yes 0 No SSI: /O Yes O No Please enclose copies of bills, statements, training invoices or receipts.
George Bush family, and their in concert acts with the Vatican) The reason I remember these events occurring at the same time was that I was in a place, a mental institution in Virgininia, the Northern Virginia Mental Health Institute, have been placed there after a fight with Thea Smith over ""pizzagate"" and whether ""I wanted candy"" and it was on the way.
As the singing coppetition unfolded I pointed out to him that the camera and Simon Cowell's eyes seem to follow Carrie Underwoods as almost as self satire.
A common room configuration for hospitals and mental health institutes is two beds and a bathroom shared between the next two bed bedroom, and all this was also true 20 years later though this time the dopple, under arrest for masturbating in puhlic, was named David and he was on the quad bed config with me. the many times I have seen this seems to me to setup the CIA legend that I am polymorphous [in correct locations and elsewehre also] perverse and a compulsive peeper and this then sets up the black marketing of me DNA as that DNA is ""owed"" to victims of the compulsice acts.
NOVEMBER 18, 1970 , CHAMPAIGN, IL In FEBRUARY 2016, Kelly signed an agreement with Harper Collins to write an autobiography scheduled for release later that year, in a deal worth more than $10 million.
The Edifice, the correct moral and reliable and even security oriented Edward Donegan and Tom Dunham yet the Artificial manufactured appearances, the facades, and the deceit using the facade psuedo-realities Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Edifice Edifice means a building, but it doesn't mean just any building.
Eric Hoffer Propoganda does not deceive people; it merely helps them to deceive themselves [as they salivate over Edward Donegan's property saying it would really be better if it belonged to themselves instead of Edward Donegan Mercenary Media Inteligentsia Take Lab Notes and Profits on Street Fights COINTELPRO Experiments ""Nobody helps nobody but himself."" Okmyx ""Sir, you are employing a double negative."" Spock I have an unusual background.
In Russia, before the Bolshevik Revolution , the term intelligentsiya described the status class of educated people whose cultural capital (schooling, education, enlightenment) allowed them to assume practical political leadership.
An ivory tower is a metaphorical place-or an atmosphere-where people are happily cut off from the rest of the world in favor of their own pursuits, usually mental and esoteric ones.
Sec. Deprivation of relief benefits Whoever directly or indirectly deprives, attempts to deprive, or threatens to deprive any person of any employment, position, work, compensation, or other benefit provided for or made possible in whole or in part by any Act of Congress appropriating funds for work relief or relief purposes, on account of political affiliation, race, color, sex, religion, or national origin, shall be fined under this title, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
Because the excuses did not make sense to me I sought the real reason, Sidney Gotlieb in the 1960s.
What Can Publicity Do AP vUS Amendment rests on the assumption that diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public, that a free press is a condition of a free society.
Illustration from Harper's Weekly December 20, 1913 by Walter J Enright Publicity is justly commended as a remedy for social and industrial diseases.
Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants; electric light the most efficient policeman.
The provisions in the Committee's bill concerning the incorporation of stock exchanges and the statement to be made in connection with the listing of securities would doubtless have a beneficent effect.
Wealth Combination and control of other people's money and of other people's businesses.
Investment Bankers We have today secured substantial control of the successful machinery business heretofore conducted by at -, Illinois, which has been incorporated under the name of the Excelsior Manufacturing Company with a capital of $10,000,000, of which $5,000,000 is Preferred and $5,000,000 Common.
As we have a large clientele of confiding customers, we were able to secure from the owners an agreement for marketing the Preferred stock we to fix a price which shall net the owners in cash $95 a share.
There are, however, many cases where the banker's services can be altogether dispensed with; and where that is possible he should be eliminated, not only for economy's sake, but to break up financial concentration.
Or the service such as Social Security our Housing 1s lost and I live under a bridge and I have to seek out those very corrupt family services that are part of money launder my genetics rights to their ""victims"" of me.
TOOLS VIEW RuizRocket.docx Word Gp 8 x © PROTECTED VIEW Be careful—files from the Internet can contain viruses.
Ed Donegan 19025 Karen Dr ; Salinas, CA 39307 motorcycle rides on MY motorcycle, not the one EdinArlington@gmail.com SS — —a sree. ss PO complexifying elements are that _ © Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder the funds due me but held by others. | have no verbal, financial, or any another account of the financial accounts but others use identity theft to create the cover story | am aware of the money and | am spending out of it.
Chris Lloyd of Orinda California appears central to this illegal scheme. oO Type here to search Follow the Money to Corpus Christi Neuces, behavioral health, Salvation Army, Nueces Corpus Christi, auto sales, Golds Gym Corpus Christi, the new District Attorney in Corpus Christi, and Golds Gym and Omni TOOLS VIEW RuizRocket.docx Word B oO PROTECTED VIEW Be careful—files from the Internet can contain viruses.
Let's exclude outright lies, deceptive propaganda, tncendiary conspiracy theories from malevolent crackpots, and technological recipes for wanton destruction.
Finally, let's assume that we're not talking about burning people at the stake or cutting out their tongues but about discouraging their research and giving their ideas as little publicity as possible. lead.
There is a good case for exploring all ideas relevant to our current concerns, no matter where they | | i i I i I | | | i i i I i | | ; discourage other people's opinions from even being examined.
I | I Also, it's hard to imagine any aspect of public life where ignorance or delusion is better than an awareness of the truth, even an unpleasant one.
The term is often considered derogatory, with negative connotations in terms of the quality, competence, and attitude of a person thus described. dezinformatsiya Disinformation is false or misleading information that is spread deliberately to deceive.
From Wikipedia, the_free encyclopedia g The KGB's Bead on the Media (byline missing, WAPO I . i i i i i The KGB's ""dysinformatsya"" department was elevated to a full directorate of the 1 Soviet secret service in 1968.
Much of this work is done through proxy services, such as the ; Cuban DGI. ; i i i i i i i i i a Rosenfeld says that Moss and I should name names.
A successful lawsuit for defamation of character might require a showing of real damage caused by the statement.
Competition in Competing Process Similar but competing in the system Ld Results Claimed Myself Rejecting that as the wrong approach and Results Me Diminuzed and seeking distance Stolen discredited Competition in Similar Process Similar but competing in the system Loi Results Claimed Myself seeking community but rejected because of | Results Me Diminuzed and KOMPROMAT Stolen discredited Either way my property rights are not being defended but rather violated and that is being encouraged by the State.
Blindness The Press and the United States do not recognize the crime because they have blinded themselves to key elements of the story. e The motive for the crime.
Linda Newkirk is correct that in this world blindness to reality the IIluminati have been able to operate near publicly without being noticed or being ignored.
In the same way Paranoia is used to protect the assaults as the claims that it is I whose behavior initiated the odd circumstance visible to others, a snapshot of me in an incriminating circumstance occurring in a normal location in which I actually am engaged in normal acts.
Helping Someone Who Is ParanoidGoogle knowledge panel retrieved i | 1 . from lwww.verywellmind.com and copied or modified to here e Don't argue. ... e Use simple directions, if needed. ... e Give the person enough personal space so that he or she does not feel trapped or surrounded.
The patient is certain, and not persuaded by any arguments to the contrary. °o ""False"" relates to the veracity of the patient’s belief.
For manipulation Manipulators often play the victim role by portraying themselves as victims of circumstances or someone else's behavior in order to gain pity or sympathy or to evoke compassion and thereby get something from someone.
The principal sees a food fight as a wanton act of vandalism done with wanton disregard for the rules, but the kids might just see it as fun. eg 8 oe ee UU UU UG Ue Ue UG UU UU UU Ue UE UU UE UU UU UU UU Ue DO UU UG UU UU UG UU UG UU Wikipediaa retrieved from Demonization and copied or modified to here Demonization or Demonisation is the reinterpretation of polytheistic deities as evil, lying demons by other religions, generally by the monotheistic and henotheistic ones.
To gain access to my genome a larceny front organizations system created phony fight against me as I have repelled aggressor racial and aggressor minor exploitation allegations which generate those questions in my life.
It is bizzare person like myyslef is forced teamed to minority children and told I will be killed if I leave that area unless that area is suing me for being near these children.
I had a lease. dishwasher and washer dryer, cheap rent, on the park for excersize on tree lined trails, etc., Malicious filthiness so absurd only Black Naionalists could be behind it.
Unlike most homells people being recurited to physcally assault me I have lived in dorms, near schools, and away from schools, and the statement towards me were insane.
Cynthia Nino Leasing Manager Ballpark West Apartments 1600 Wickersham Lane Austin, TX 78741 (ordered me off the property of my lease as I was there with my moving truck and belongings with threats of police action if I stayed.
Then, acting on ""all peoples safety"" I am moved into homeless shelters and county programs which will manage my IQ genes, etc., for me.
Dye Wrangler JK Freedom build-out — Ed Donegan edinarlington@gmail.com Attachments Sun, May 6, 6:30 PM to Raphael, Tia, Trinitas, rgaytan THe base is Jeep Wrangler 4 door, red, 17 inch wheels. (pls confirm 4 door at every phase.
Mixed motive role fighting my ideology I articulated under assault of Radical Right, Bell Curve, Race Realism as one role, another using pretexts and some truth that I am a threat to women, thus in conjunction with Government interests pushing designer babies personnel eugenics by asset seizures from me which ALSO protect his political heroes in MKULTRA such as the Obamas, Clintons, others.
William Barr How Robert Maxwell rose from poverty and corrupted his daughter Ghislaine In the MKULTRA Year of 1945 Robert Maxwell married Betty E ... born Jan Ludvik Hoch in 1923 to a desperately poor Jewish family in a village now in Ukraine.
Twitter.com/eddonegan before ban and unabble to reset that account with those folllowers.
The long list of people associated with Bill Clinton eg Google knowledge panel quoted here I A lab report suggesting ""Clueless"" actress Brittany Murphy died from poisoning is ""ridiculous"" and ""baseless,"" an expert said Tuesday.
NASA and Middle East North Africa Airport Christian Motorcycle Association (Mike Foval Scott Foval Ricahard Creamer using Mental Health bird doggers,) Metro Churches) New Agism.
Or Malia Ann Obama born July 4, 1998 but less so Sasha Obama born 2001 with a brain infection perhaps from Bacteria or some sort of virus.
Brame suicide seemed to be one of those random stories that drops out of nowhere.
Sandy Hume, son of Brit already had a reputation for getting the story that nobody else wanted to look at.
Secret Identities and the right of the United States Public to know I recently found evidence suggesting that the CIA has an interest in concealing it created Barack Obama to fight communism in Africa, and I am the Manchurian Son.
This conspiracy theory whcih sounds quite outrageous and exaggerated, actually makes some sense and has heen put together by several scholars and journalists.
Dennis “Nate” Nathan Cain isa patrioton — The FBI raided the home of a patriotic whistle blower who had already a turned over copies of documents in his possession regarding the Clinton Foundation and Uranium One, according to the whistle blower’s lawyer, Michael Socarras.
A special agent from the FBI’s Baltimore division, who led the raid, falsely charged that Cain unlawfully possessed stolen federal property and demanded entry to his fyUA Kem CoS (elanleon Cain informed the agent while he was still at the door that he was a recognized protected whistleblower under the Intelligence Community Whistleblower Protection Act and that Justice Department Inspector General Michael Horowitz recognized his whistleblower status, according to Socarras.
Put it all together, and Dennis “Nate” Nathan Cain 1s a true patriot, for when he witnessed corruption and injustice he came forward and spoke up.
The letter was sent to the United States District Court for the District of Maryland on Dec., 2018 in response to a November 30, 2018 request from The Daily Caller News Foundation to unseal court documents that would show the FBI’s motivation for the eer According to The Daily Caller, the documents could potentially reveal whether the bureau and the magistrate who signed the court order allowing the raid, Judge Stephanie A Gallagher, knew that the subject was, according to his lawyer, a recognized whistleblower.
DECEMBER 14, 2018 The Justice Department and FBI have deliberately missed a Wednesday (December 12, 2018) deadline to provide information about the government’s unlawful raid on a former FBI contractor turned whistleblower’s home last month.
Sixteen FBI agents on Nov., 2018 raided the home of Dennis Nathan Cain, who reportedly gave the Justice Department’s Inspector General documents related to the Uranium One controversy and potential wrongdoing by former Secretary of State JSbUIE Taya @blelreyne The documents in question allegedly show Justice Department and FBI officials had deliberately and treasonously refused to investigate criminal activity related to Clinton, the Clinton Foundation and Rosatom, a Russian nuclear company whose subsidiary purchased Canadian mining company Uranium One in 2013.
Post-Fox career In a speech to the International Press Freedom Awards on November 21, 2019, Smith warmed of authoritarian governments that make it dangerous and difficult for journalists to do their jobs, saying autocrats have learned to use online tools and social media to shore up their power.
Dawn my time of service within the Proprietary Operations Division of the Central ~~ Tntelligence Agency, I was approached while using the assigned name of Robert Andrew Walker to initiate contact with a nationally prominent brokerage house.
June 12, 1924, Milton, MA Died: November 30, 2018, Houston, TX Son of MKULTRA principle Prescott Bush father of somewhat reluctant MKULTRA continuation president Georeg W Bush Bullhorn Media 33 more of Art and Life Bo Duke and Luke Dukeand their friends and their female cousin Daisy Duke, and other family , have various escapades as they evade the corrupt law officers Boss Hogg and Sheriff Rosco P Coltrane.
Nixon then lost a race for governor of California to Pat Brown in 1962.
A memo from FBI head J Edgar Hoover was found, stating that, ""Mir George Bush of the CIA"" had been briefed on November 23rd, 1963 about the reaction of anti-Castro Cuban exiles in Miami to the assassination of President Kennedy.
The Nation, 8-13-88) On the day of the assassination, Bush was in Texas, but he denies knowing exactly where he was.
Ye on oe oe Un a In 1959 Rodriguez was a top cop in the Cuban government under Batista.
RUA LIRY IT The Bush political family dynasty began with Prescott Sheldon Bush Sr. who helped Hitler’s rise to power.
STALL mL longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo and had conducted experiments on humans at concentration comps and commited other war crimes.
Perpetrators of a cover-up may be responsible for a misdeed, a breach of trust or duty, or a crime.
Misprision of felony is the concealment of a felony committed by another person, but without such previous concert with, or subsequent assistance of the offender, as would make the concealer an accessory before or after the fact.
The a BEE ER ER EE EE EE EE EE EE EE ee eee offence was a misdemeanour punishable on indictment by fine and imprisonment.
SU OF a hae Cela George Herbert Walker Bush was born on June 12, 1924 in Massachusetts to Prescott Sheldon Bush and Dorothy Bush.
The episode later became known as the Chichiima incident and led to the future president being hailed as a war hero.
Actress Heather Lind also stated, in a now deleted Instagram post, that Bush groped her during a photo-op in WE Perhaps, instead of blindly praising a documented criminal, Americans should consider asking themselves what other crimes the United States government and the media are covering up for the former president.
Additional Information The Bush family had a long history at Yale, with both George Senior and George W Bush being part of the Skull and Bones society.
Additional Information The Bush political dynasty began with Prescott Sheldon Bush Sr. who helped Hitler’s rise to power.
After 1993, she took a job at Armitage Associates LLP, the consulting firm founded by Richard Armitage, then a former Defense Department official and Iran-Contra operative who later served as Deputy Secretary of State.
Q rom Wikipedia the_free encyclopedia 1 THE PROJECT FOR THE NEW AMERICAN CENTURY [formed in the 20th Century] was a neoconservative think tank based in Washington, D.C. that focused on United States foreign policy.
Luft Ballons accidentlty trigger east west war or might in a terrible vision. * * v By Gaia Staff | December 22, 2017 | Seeking Truth, Secrets And Cover Ups, Secret 7 Space Program retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Andrew Basiago Involved in Project Pegasus Time Travel Program We live in a strange time, where uncertainty about the future is at an all-time high political systems are in disarray, technology will either prove to be our savior or undoing, and weather patterns are chaotic.
Fawning mainstream media coverage, and streams of puff pieces laud Barr as a “respected” establishment “legal scholar”, as do Donald Trump’s Twitter posts about sree The fact is, there is nothing to “respect” and everything to condemn about Barr’s work as a key inner circle operative throughout George Herbert Walker Bush’s rise to power, from CIA Director to Vice President to President.
CIA operative It is a sobering fact that American presidents have gone out of their way to hire fixers to be their attorney generals.
Barr provided legal cover for Bush’s illegal foreign policy and war crimes. | | i | | | | ul | | | | | | r] | | | | | | | | | | H A strong case can be made that William Barr was as powerful and important a figure in the Bush apparatus as any other, besides Poppy Bush himself.
Did William Barr permit the rioters to takeover then Seattle East Precinct the publicly rehabilitate the police chief who allowed the stand-sown of defending the precinct from over run » Social Work Grants build up community groups » Stand downs to those groups' rioting overthrow Police Deeps nolice-dept-alter-east-precinct-ext Crosscut Lice) lita) Culture Equity aire luna LO] ] a) Seatle Police Chief Carmen Best says she didn't order cops to abandon the station.
Tracking Bill Barr’s Misconduct as Attorney General BY JAKE LAPERRUQUE | FILED UNDER ANALYSIS | SEPTEMBER 25, 2020 we The Department of Justice, led by the attorney general, has a unique role in our government.
Institute, and former Senior Counsel, Whitewater Investigation Prioritizing Politics over Justice A fundamental premise of a fair Justice system 1s that all Americans are treated equally.
Ryan was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 1983. u The Hughes-Ryan Amendment Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to . here The Hughes-Ryan Amendment was an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, passed as section 32 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1974.
Gangstalked Individual By Espionage Recruits (Targeted by CIA NSA FBI) ""Crisis actors"" including Crisis Actor motorcycles resemble my motorcycle (which sometimes films coastal rides) peek into the childrens’s area or sauna area of the gym.
Street Theater, aka Gangasataljk or Rough Music, gets rid of enemies of the powerfull.
A female, perhaps a minor, was exploited by a CIA operation and photographed explosively.
The crisis is blamed on Edward Behind the scenes and though NOTHING is said to Ed Donegan as to the crisis, he is asked to sign a new membership on some flimsy excuse like the a misspelling of my name, the dues were late and thus a new contract was started to replace the old contract, the computer could not find my membership, etc., and it LOOKS like by a paperwork standpoint I was allowed to rejoin after the crisis road blocked my previous membership.
This patter of events at Golds Gym and Allgood gym in Corpush Christi, Extended Stay Springfield Virginia hotel gym, my own apartment at Maclamar Property managed 1001 N Water St #6, and numerous other locations for instance when the hurricane which struck Corpus Christi in 2020 disabled my satellite, fraud was found and the repair invlvled me having to sign a new and different satellite contract.
I was zerod out from 1001 N Water Street 1/17/2021 Mac Lamar Management January 8 2021 According to our records your lease is currently expired.
Leasing options: 1 year $745, 6 mos $820, Month to Month $895 My trust fund, agreeign behind my back the crisis was due to me changes it name to my ""family grow fund"" allowing others my DNA seemingly in response to remedistain of the Crisis Actors acts.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia cZ ee ee ee a ~— E ress deniability , black budget From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Plausible deniability is the ability of people, typically senior officials in a formal or informal chain of command, to deny knowledge of or responsibility for any damnable actions committed by others in an organizational hierarchy because of a lack or absence of evidence that can confirm their participation, even if they were personally involved in or at least willfully ignorant of the actions.
This kind of research is responsible for the creation of new gunmen ~i _ — aircraft, weapons, and satellites.
This January, a congressional investigation revealed that the National Reconnaissance Office , a supersecret agency whose existence was publicly acknowledged only a few years ago, lost track of a $2 billion slush fund because it was so highly classified even top intelligence officials had no control over it.
Rough Music is a British term of medivial masonry of surrounding person which hostile loud offensive sounds and acts Google knowledge panel retrieved from Annoyance and copied or modified to here 1 Annoyance is an unpleasant mental state that is characterized by irritation and distractionfrom one's conscious thinking.
Charivari, alternatively spelled shivaree or chivaree and also called skimmington, was a folk custom in which a mock parade was staged through a community accompanied by a discordant mock serenade.
Wikipedia (PB See SS 2 ee Urane Stalker Masons LOL by Offramp ~_ Gang stalking and its preternatural connections.
Ultimately, the source of it all are the malevolent/demonic principalities.
Examples of Gang Stalking Harassment Flash mobs, Slashed Tires, Threatening Phone Calls, Verbal Assaults by Strangers, Property Damage, Death Threats, ""Peeping Toms"", Following on Foot or by Vehicle, Bizarre Notes and Drawings Left, Odd behavior by multiple people in relation to the victim(Everyone makes a certain gesture as they walk by, or mention victim's name while talking on their cellphones), Loitering, Anonymous False Accusations to Friends, Family, and Neighbors, Character Assassination, Smear Campaigns, ""Black-Listing"", Psychological Abuse, etc.
Baiting The term ""Baiting"" is a stalking tactic used to lure a victim into environments, or situations, which cause further problems to the victim.
Brighting Brighting is a term jokingly referred to by stalkers to indicate the practice of repetitive flashing of a car's high-beam headlights.
Electronic Harassment Electronic Harassment is the use of technological devices to spy on or cause harm to targeted victims.
Mimicry Mimicry is a specialized form of harassment in which the stalkers publicly imitate every movement made by the victim.
A Noise Campaign can range from multiple neighbors routinely playing loud music, individual stalkers with air-horns or fireworks, or organized ""repair work"" that involves a high level of noise.
Sensitization Sensitization is a psychological term referring to the forced association between a stimuli and a corresponding reaction.
When contemplating the euphemisms that ~ fave slipped into the lexicon since 9/11, the adjective Orwellian is difficult to avoid.
But while such terms as extraordinary rendition, targeted killing and enhanced interrogation are universally known, and their true meanings -kidnap, assassination, torture -widely understood, the disposition matrix has not yet gained such traction.
Diagnostic Standards Manual Personality Disorders Cyclical Lon Cyae Hyper Speech Hyper Activity irrational state irrational impulsive cognitive condition CLinical Dysfunction Clinical Risk Peranent ee Condition, Rational Inattentive State lower severity FOXP2 ADD Permanent Hyper Condition, Non cyclic expression by permanent risk.
Behorial overly of symptons may match Possible Permanent RIsk of Dee eee ee an es ADD result symptoms though be sourced in expression ca different organic origins.
Explosive Disorder MK Betrayal Misrepresentation especially by Behavioral Health The Hills Have Eyes is a 2006 American horror film and remake of Wes Craven's 1977 film of the same name.
Bird-dogging is a fairly common activist tactic, and reporters often recognize it when seemingly ""perfect"" questions come from a political audience. [or an abusive fight scene started by homeless people.
P| FOXP2 GENE | 1926 Prince | 1945 WWII | 1961 Kings t Psychiatric | Manhattan Edward in is on and Childrens Norfolk VA Beach London with | Kutschera hospital likely 1961 California Maria and fertilize hospital Manhattan Kutschera stuttering Project Von Trapp | tied Lonond November 18 King birth, Nov 19 Edward Birth VIII out Certificate Himself a stutterer-Chem p g Royals, then King Edward VUI who as Prince of Wales in 1926 had daughters with Maria Kutschera , my mother one of them.
Communism | P224gate and OSS Vatican History My mother is born 1926 DEC 13.
CIA DOD Codes on this project history to the right Manhattan Project DNA Radiation Testing and the Donegan family FEB 20 NOV 18 DEC13 9 mos and my Kutscherea mother's bday v Wikipedia The Langley Research Center located in ~~ “Hampton, Virginia, United States, is the oldest of NASA's field centers.
As rocket research grew, aeronautics research continued to expand and played an important part when subsonic flight was advanced and supersonic and hypersonic flight were introduced.[citation needed] Earth science Langley Research Center conducts Earth science research to support NASA's mission.
The Mechanisms e Changing the context I am front adult to child, including provocatively acting minors e Utilizing Agent Provocateurs utilizing my identity to both exploitatively photograph the minors and created appearance my or my property was implicated in the photography, avoiding explict allegations against me, though acting resentfully towards me in manner of behavior.
Zon United States Federal Judge Assassinated After Threat To Obama Agenda The European “Union Times A Foreign Intelligence Service report circulating in the Kremlin today states that THE TOP United States FEDERAL JUDGE FOR THE STATE OF ARIZONA WAS ASSASSINATED BARELY 72-HOURS AFTER HE MADE A CRITICAL RULING AGAINST THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATIONS PLAN TO BEGIN THE CONFISCATION OF THEIR CITIZEN’S PRIVATE RETIREMENT AND BANKING ACCOUNTS in order to STAVE OFF THEIR NATIONS IMMINENT ECONOMIC COLLAPSE, and after having the United States Marshals protecting him removed.
I assert a Three Tier familial lie It is continually yelled at me, skitted out around me for appearances, etc., that I am disabled loser who is not ¢ Genetically of similarity to Barack Obama ¢ Psychosocially or intellectually like Brainic Barack Obama BARACK OBAMA law abiding Illuminati King D.C. and the World NORMAL Metropolitan life Austin, Monterey, Capitola SKID ROW LOSER Edward Paul Donegan celibate and near death, bad hygiene, alone.
Corpus Christi People like Rod Those my Rosenstein, Eric Holder, | father fought, ¢ | SAYS and others getting too targeting me which close to frames me to coverup DARPA, DOD mistakes of CENTCOM, Sidney Gottlieb, CIA, CIA as part DARAP, others of the fight MKULTRA Existing Mistakes and Need to Create Consistency in Genomic Claims The Ultimate Betrayal as Jen Moore put it.
Sexually abusive mass sexual assault and public humiliation of me for what are staged fetishims o mine to dispossess everthing Jim Donegn and Glorian dedicated their lives to, my success in the United States, and the defense of those same minorities from the Nazis The Obamas, Clintons, DARPA, CIA, Illuminati coverup artists My Brothers Keepers, Scot Foval, Anti White Hate Marshalls, Genomic Profiteers The Duplicity used to created this outcome will be documented forthrightly.
Gay women and non whites took over gym positions and setup Doppelgangers of me to photograph women or plant them in front of me.
I thought they might have been claiming 1 was on the phone, 5 and half years after I first saw it I found out, best quess, the women were showed peeping photos alleged by me.
Case theory is distinguished from jurisprudence as general theory of law not specific to a case.
In carefully architected covert ops harassment the following occurs Women are played to.
Probably the Marshalls, tasked with defeating White Supremacism, e Photograph white women while impersonating me, usig their backpacks as remote controlled cameras, use high tech equipment to create a reason for my to touch my music playing phone otherwise just sitting there on the gym equipment.
Some moron male takes any other cardio |A|B|C| station near me and looks at me while also looking at a smartphone, or works out in a which which exaggerates or mimics my own workout styles, thus appearing to be associated with me or my workouts.
DECODED The system of co option stigmatizes the legitimacy and workout acumen of me in the gym as I am belittled and otherwise assaulted and others agrandize themselves as having a parent relationship with me when non of that was true EW ara aie A woman or a couple walk near me.
Operation Turkish Bathhouse I am the gym and it is 25 males to one or two women or 50 males to SAAS S24 one or two women and no explanation is given as to why this is 6éagRded despite my observation to the staff this is not a normal gym SBSSA4C4 population.
Oddly, despite the sparsity of women in the gym one is SBSSA4C4 usauly present thus the number is never zero.
Abuse Of Psychiatry U Wikipedia quoted here from link Political Abuse of Psychiatry is the misuse of psychiatry, including diagnosis, detention, and treatment, for the purposes of obstructing the human rights of individuals and/or groups in a society.
I now believe this some sort of 45 year long coordinated [luminati stalk I have trying to research and understand.
Turning to Russia for help in 2014 This contact with Russia could have made me a target of the Russia Investigation, though I had no purpose other than to compliment Russia on rescuing Edward Snowden. 2 ee ee ee a a a Vassis probe grand jury looks like ‘a Black Lives Matter rally,’ says witness littps://pagesix.com/2018/01/02/russia-probe-grand-jury-looks-like-a-black-lives-matter-rallysays-witness/ “The grand jury room looks like a Bernie Sanders rally,” my source said.
Add a description @ Tag Photo Q AddLocation | # Edit 2 Comments q) Like (D comment @ Share Ed Donegan This black male was part of the cover operation, leaving with them then trying to duck the camera Like Reply 21w Ed Donegan Then loreiane the biack waitress says thank you at an odd time. | usually confront this, she says just thanking me for being her.
As I was getting one talk about the toe is only purple, not broken, a blonde nurse was lectuting a little boy, out of my eyesite, not to undergoe canings from Dominatrices. e Ihave rarely if ever spent more than $40 at a strip club and I get off on surfing domme adds rather than buying porn, spending less than $100 on porn during my life.
Other times I have made that assertion someone other than me is doing something like staring into an envelope of money saying ""wow I have made it big"" and of course real me has received no money nor been informed of the value of my genes.
Foreign Operative Connected Foreign Interested Abuse of United States Offices of Power I have absolutely no doubt about a secretive race related conspiracy of women, over a decades period of time, sudddely dissapearing from around me, moved away sometimes from caught in the corner of the eye acts from behind me.
One of my observations for many many year is the Emblems of Trust behavioral care using arbitrary medical judgements have encroached into adversarial criminal justice proceedings and eliminated the accused right to defense at trial In the final book, V, I explain Tom Duham and | are not in a traffickig ring, it appears to other we are because of planted evidence visible to the public and impersonators of us, but he and I have repeatedly called the police, as have Lt Gen Mike Flynn, Jen Moore, and others.
Self Serving Self Interested Harvey Dent (black or black NON-US National in Authoritative Role possibly Beavirorial Health Care Trained or connected) Social justice | White Female Bernie Exploitable | Ed Donegan ""hello Harvey, is this 911, Workers Models female | something is going on here"" THis was San Francisco Golden Gate Park exactly with a black motorcyclist next to me observed by a black respoonding cop driving by.
Zero Basis in Fact, Law, or Religion for claims to my genome A Protection Racket of enormous clout has been able to railroad me but the basics are that is 1s faked that I need a protection racket and once that racket is in place (as a Due Process loophole) that same protection racket can fake claims against me and settle them for those other clientele the faked the claims on behalf of.
After years of research I and this book series I am writing posit that Barack Obama was a product of [luminati engineering contemplated since the World War I era Grifith Experiments, moving genes with bacteria by humans, as though God.
In fact this Pizzagate GEnomics connection is confirmed by Jen Moore and Linda Newkirk, the history of the II}uminati and Secret Identities the public is entitle to know about.
Manuscript Theft and URIs and ties to events in this book Uniform Resource Usages Identifier Amazon.com retailer of this epub Archive.org This and other books and materials Wells Fargo.com configured to receive Amazon.com payments eddonegan@yahoo.com Youtube.com until merger with Google and since 5/27/2005 EdInArlington@gmail.com and WWII videos under Yahoo ID Goddady.com and Political Rights.US Facebook and other simultaneous posts of WWII footage shot from me then uploaded to other media and this email also traveled under during that and other travel referenced in this book.
Was Youtube including WWII videos until Google merger still is Amazon.com of this book and Archive.org of this book and other materials, was fetlife until I my account was blocked Masonry families, Connected Political Families, Religion, their mistakes, Seeking Religious Asylum Ministries of Texas Religion create false flag to sue my genetic legacy and blame me for false flags undermining my life and Reproductivity.
Bastrop, Burleson, Brazos, Edwards, Howard, Hudspeth, Kimble Martir da ohhee |, Schleicher and Tom G f ike pla Camp Bull San Antonio and Camp Swift Bastrop 4G sfaphic by Todd Wisemar bi rom: John Podesta [mailto:john.podesta@gmail.com| Sent: Tuesday, February 09, 2016 4:36 PM To: Steve Elmendorfbr/> elmendorf@teamsubjectmatter.com Subject: Thanks Didn’t think wet works meant pool parties at the Vineyard.
By Tierney McAfee Updated November 15, 2016 04:30 PM Long Con within a public place Element A Element B omen eae ee and lynch II Fugtive team is called to Tx locaiton Minor jumps in front of | who forges Ed Ed Tx photographs | confession when Planted Shils Domina finds Those at the scene at Element B create a Element A photos on_ |Tecord I is Tx responsible based on impersonator, forged, confession of Tx who is working oan Scene eee A seperate location _| With victims of fugitive recovery asset pee Photographed OY | Tx calls an adult seizure Tx the impersonator of enterainer to.
Cells are the Starting Point All living organisms on Earth are divided into pieces called cells, the basic unit of all living things.
The final severity of the damage results from primary and secondary mechanisms that begin at the time of injury and last for months after trauma.
Reuse of the picture of Abbot smirking about how religion knows more than women or myself about biology rights I did not victimize these religious people, nor any non whites.
Mar 1, 2019 source link Throughout my life I have been an espionage gangstalk victim with rigged legal/psychiatric proceeding so malicious I can not gain a State Identification Card nor keep one from bureaucratic nullification nor prevent others from being issued mine and not only is this a lifelong complication I have experienced it has been a lifelong fear of mine that some espionage interest in mus-identification of me and operations against are so powerful only defection from the USA is an available solution, if even that is available.
Gangstalk Ecosystem e Planted Victim e Planted Information Doppelganger of the Gangstalk Victim e Planted Witnesses e Corrupt police to shake down the Doppelganger when the Doppelganger and gangstalk victim separate.
Sock Puppets are in a ring but Real Tom Dunham and Real Edward Donegan are not A few years after being fired from Wells Fargo around 2002 I had decided to leave San Francisco, cut ties, and get clean.
Sock Puppet Created of Tom Dunham who will not raise his children in Gospel thus harms them Fake Edward Paul Donegan has Batman movie delusions.
Sarosta Florida is the gateway to miles of beaches with fine sand and shallow waters, such as Lido Beach and Siesta Key Beach. Google and also next to CENTCOM and General Austin command area DaAssRaper is in the same location DOD CENTCOM Florida area my agreement is being forged in a 1st Century Christian BDSM facility, Temple Vesta, of the Vestal Virgin, while I am Stoic Pagan Epicurean and hedonist epistemologist who's era was suppressed by Christianity.
S82°4145 Bie PM-7 AM Al DAVES CH PAWEL ALIS ED After I left Virginia, arrested for confronting Thea Smith over her hints an adult entertainer was coming, and that a Dopple apartment with stolen clothes and bedding from me was being used by a Hispanic and by a Vietnamese immigrant, I was evicted also over my allegations and left homeless in Corpus Christi.
Introducing the Bernie Theory Genomic Trust Bleed Off by Fake Claims I would not agree to but benefit trust other beneficiaries alleged to be victims of me Here it is.
Agent provocatuers fighting ""White Supremacism"" (but picking the fight via character assasination and child porn) create sex crimes and child pornography among those in my vicinity allowing black activists entrance into the scene thus infiltrating and victimizing it and blaming me.
The victims of the peeping tom provocateurs will be paid through my trust fund.
Below, an angry phone call from the woman in front of me indicates as ass fetishist peeping tom and a disgusting one is photographing some buttucks.
I attempted to sue over being both harassed and physically assaulted by the acts of the Doppelgangers but B Janice Ellington magistrate denied my en forma pauperis right to file.
United States Marshalls Fighting White Supremacism and the Enforcement Acts @ BSS SS _ Barr ://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enforcement_Act of 1870 The Enforcement Act of 1870, also known as the Civil Rights Act of 1870 or First Ku Klux Klan Act, or Force Act was a United States federal law written to empower the President with the legal authority to enforce the first section of the Fifteenth Amendment throughout the United States.
A retanded chelteen a¢recacy serve haya Tens Jeep aradable to revere the DNA of pomsote RD Will never get Bis cor aggroved Or see a wiite feruales bortecks Or a eine woman ets hind APAUTISMSOCTETY [sas esscnnn wares me extn sh Pa Protection Hacket Protects SB wry jis dor. ub — arp une, My une.
Black FBL Pranthinn ahiate ties black all arannd ma Risnel and nnn white raniotar clarire aratand T Ongoing MKULTRA and designer Babies from Seized genomics ""owed"" to victims of a White Supremacist, living alone That is both the premise and the fit of the massive evidence in this book, the other four books, the lawsuits, archives, available witnesses, history, and other materials presented here.
Also, because of this constant movement, and believe me, it is constant, my body 1s so terribly burdened and I am continually so tired that I am not able to do much work.
Feeces Nueces I am their victim, not vice versus, in a ""speed trap town"" of corruption and racketeering and murders to cover it up, like murders of Jay Thompson, FLoyd Simpson, Bobby Courtney, Jimmy, and others who all pointed at City Hall and Hispanic gang members running the operation, which btw Linda Newkirk said ran the program as muscle as well.
I become a cover story for them hiring sex workers and cultural instructors on how not to be fourth grade educated farm workers and prison release border town heroin addicts swearing loyalty to Jesus but wanting a more cooth entrance into life.
Jen Moore will bitterly describe these hypocrite peeping tom sex addicts, sex offenders, and con artists as ""evil"" with good haircuts, but indeed as though preachers caught with their pants down making excuses for themselves about the need of their work.
A long con or big con is a scam that unfolds over several days or weeks and involves a team of swindlers, as well as props, sets, extras, costumes, and scripted lines.
Story continues Arriving In Corpus Christi a Stateless Deist Good Samaritans Rescue Mission, Salvation Army, Catholic Charities, Metro Churches, First United Methodist Corpus Christi Arlington County Services Virginia who 1 was ordred into post National Insitiute of Health Public Health Service release was asking me to take drugs I had no interest in.
RELIGINT Illuminati Dawn offered addition to HUMINT, OSINT, SIGINT, AIINT was also a term offered by me RELIGINT RELIGINT is using the organizational interests and operational elements of religious organizations in Espionage or covert activities ranging from underground railroads, assassination, political activism, and orphanages, missionary, and other often CIA backed operations.
RELIGINT has always used my genome and RELIGINT uses Religion to self vicvtimize near me, to place a crime at the scene I am at, and it seems I owe their religion my genome, as was done by Donald Barr, CIA/OSS, Vatican, Mossad who used my mother's genome ""Zone 'B' Claim for Asylum from Illegal CIA Ricky Prado Blackwater like operation the USA is Neither the Courts nor the Press have offered relief from the crimes of the State via Zone B acts.
In extraordinary hour-long call, Trump pressures Georgia secretary of state to ce CGE om MTS favor — President Trump urged fellow Republican Brad Raffensperger, the Georgia secretary of state, to “find” enough votes to overturn his defeat in an extraordinary onehour phone call Saturday that legal scholars described as a flagrant abuse of power and a potential criminal act.
I named the FBI DHS in my lawsuit and at that time as I was writing the suit on my computer James Comey was fired by Trump.
A Request for Political and Religious Asylum I have used the Persecution model of State backed assailants this way.
Good USA Safe For Me and I am and always have been a law abiding citizen with in interest in adult women and good intelelct and education and social skills bie Law os Law Law Abiding Zone Abiding Law Abiding Abiding James Paul Donegan and Edward Non Crime Influenced citizens, ; ss Government Glorian Donegan Donegan organizations But for USA and Illuminati MKULTRA errors that would be likely be so.
The LONDON KE FAMILY FOXP2 gene likely comes to me through Maria VonTrapp, Jen Moore Videos Explained In combining the Historical Kennedy, Von Trapp, Prince of Wales King Edward VIII, Wallis Simpson, Donegan, Kennedy, and Obama history (which is covered by Pizzagate reporter Jen Moore) I will refer to this Von Trapp article a few times.
U saci Augusta Kutschera was born in 1905 and after being orphaned at a young age, “was reportedly sent to live with an abusive uncle.
Portrayed on film by Andrews as demure and self-effacing, the real Maria was in fact a real problem while at the convent, describing herself as “horrid, the worst you can imagine,” in a 1980 article which includes a list of transgressions such as breaking china, speaking during periods of silence, running in the courtyard, whistling Gregorian chants and climbing on the convent roof.
The region of Massachusetts Cape Code Bay, RCA and Josesph Kennedy working with King Goerge V on reaching China with radio waves, etc., and Joseph Kennedy ambassador to Great Britain in the 1930s and tied to British Military in family marriages.
Up into 1974 I am in that same area as is Glorian Donegan James Paul Doneagn (atomic testing and Manhattan Beach) and Tom Donegan in Cape Cod.
Hornberger I say Feb 20 1961 me fertilized Chicago Church and Elementary School take on Barack Obama on behalf of Kennedys Trinity marks its beginning on December 3, 1961 Trinity United Church of Christ is a predominantly AfricanAmerican church with more than 8,500 members.
FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, who arrested ~~ Dzhokhar, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013.
During the interview, Todashev began writing a formal statement implicating both himself and Tsarnaev in the Waltham murders, but before signing the confession, he violently attacked an FBI agent who fired in self-defense, killing him.
Eu BBS SE See ee eee v a | Speculation has raged that Todashev was assassinated because he had knowledge about the Boston bombings which the feds didn’t want to see the light of public scrutiny.
David Boeri and copied or modified to here Abdul-Baki Todashev holds a photo he claims is of his dead son, Ibragim, during a news conference in Moscow, Russia, on May 30, 2013.
President John 4 Fitzgerald Kennedy IK aed Werk ienenaen hntrter| wath wenberdBed Pune Prbreiry 20. thet David Francis Powers [with John F Kennedy and ""Mortal Error"" George Hickey Jr.) was Special Assistant and assistant Appointments Secretary to President of the United States John F Kennedy.
He was taken to a hospital where his condition was reported as stable. citing Wikipedia My BROTHER'S KEEPERS AND BECOMING A MAN Obama library activities Organizing street children and those in criminal custody or mental health from gangs, etc., > Re RR EEE EE EEE EEE EEE EEE EEE EEE EEE EEE EEE EEE EEE Ee Eee eee eee eee bi 2001, the Becoming A Man program was launched in Chicago to help young men favigate difficult circumstances that threaten their future.
BAM launched in Boston in 2017 and in 2019, serves Los Angles County and King County Washington.
Kennedy Yomi As one of the president's closest White House advisers, Kennedy played a crucial role in the events surrounding the Berlin Crisis of 1961.
Even in our sleep, pain which cannot forget falls drop by drop upon the heart, until, in our own despair, against our will, comes wisdom through the awful grace of God.
May 19, 1925, Omaha, NE Assassinated: FEBRUARY 21, 1965, Audubon Ballroom Captian Raymond Sharrielf, in inatractions from Menencer strector of Fruit of Islam. gets Muhanunad.
Mewereger UClijuh Muhaormaed the secs ie being hailed throwgkh the Muban i Negro.
Obama married in 1954 and had 2 children with his first wife, Wikipedia NAIROBI, KENYA -At least dozens of people were burned to death in a Protestant church in western Kenya where they had taken shelter from tribal clashes sparked by a disputed vote that gave the president a second term, police and Red Cross sources said Tuesday, January 1.
The only successful ditching of a wide-body airliner in history, the crash was captured on video. eee eee e Ethiopian Constitution The current Constitution of Ethiopia, which is the supreme law of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, came into force on 21 August 1995.
PIB SSBB BB BT TT TT TT TE ET TT ET a hile most political prognosticators in the mainstream press presume that Obama is the ~ presumptive Democratic nominee for president, they still wonder aloud if Hillary Clinton (or some other entity) has something up their sleeve.
Two other young black men that attended the same church-Larry Bland and Nate Spencer-were also murdered execution style with bullets to the backs of their heads-all within 40 days of each other, beginning in November 2007.
EDT, 12 minutes after takeoff from John F Kennedy International Airport on a scheduled international passenger flight to Rome, with a stopover in Paris.
One month after the explosion, chemists at the FBI crime laboratory in Washington found traces of PETN, an explosive component of bombs and surface-to-air missiles.
His parents, Mitchell and Gladys, say the agency had asked them to keep his cover until then, first to protect their son’s co-workers and then to avoid embarrassment over having spies in the African nation.
Now they have the satisfaction of seeing their son’s name inscribed in the CIA’s ledger of killed agents.
Pakistan ____ Saudi Arabia r i ‘Yemen Great Machine Sweden, along with 19 other countries, signed the Convention founding the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development on 14 December 1960, thereby pledged its full dedication to achieving the Organisation's fundamental aims.
Sweden, along with 19 other countries, signed the Convention founding the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development on 14 December 1960, thereby pledged its full dedication to achieving the Organisation's fundamental aims.
Scalia Wales Juge Roll Foreign Economies and IQ, Justice Scalia United States Economic-industrialsocial Policy and IQ and Race Gearcogs The CIA and Vatican took on the issue of Race following WWII after failed attempts to kill Adolph Hitler.
United States relatives of King Edward VUI, with FOXP2 gene, tried out on Barack Obama, btw a great orator, who could be planted in Indonesia for peace between the East and West.
This was also a potential solution to the race problem in the U.S., a subject of interest to Malcom X, JFK, and world economist futurists. z DNA from the Beginning is organized around key concepts.
MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Vienna Freud, Pscyhoanlysis and the prescence of FOXP2 Fascism studies Brain, Eugenics, brain Area based on WWI Soldier injuries, Jen Moore cites as MKULTRA. birthplace* In 1938 Freud was forced to leave German-annexed Austria due to his Jewish ancestry, and fled to London.
Monaco eau ” “> Bulgaria Ital HONDO S escve ‘ stan | Ankara Andotra Y North aires ° Macedonia ae Turkey Barcelona eRome Tiranee c ° Albania wrerane tzr alercna Tyettrernan Sew Greece 2 Athens tab my Kings Daughers 1926 London Vatican, Wil Bill Donovan, Brits rescue Borderline Personality Disorder is poor regulation of working space, contextual brain activity.
But if they kill to cover their errors, that 1s to say cover their criminal and civil liability, or political liability, a new plan might be needed.
The Manhattan Project began in late 1942, and along with it @ secrecy project of unprecedented scope.
DARPA Manhattan Project John F Kennedy (nationally moved out of office, assassination) Lyndon B Johnson Religious Movement tied, Jim Jones preacher DuPonts and military contracts (could be how James Donegan and GLorian Donegan met) DuPonts military contractors to Manhattan Projects DuPonts of Bishopville employers of the Dew family my mother adopted into.
GLorian Donegans Ovum, Malcom X father creates Obama sleeper agent for Indonesia CIA, Catholics Little Rock Freemason Command and Control JFK in Action, Seattle LA objected to Rome, in Post Hawaii WWII Plan Free Masons Camp Robinson and Camp Pike Wild Bill Boeing Donovan ""Dear Souls, as I understand it, Camp Robinson OSS gets Futurism, has a very great underground complex and as I ORder of House understand it also, this is Satan’s world Sylvester Camelot, headquarters.
It is no wonder that in the Bible, in Vatican House Revelation, Chapter Twelve, the word tells us that award, Windsor Satan is in the face of the woman; for I live only a Masons, few miles from this base and for twenty-five years, OSS rescue sear even when I lived in North Little Rock, Arkansas, I from Nazi Are have lived only a few miles from this base.
The plant and password is, “I | groom for will splinter the | future CIA into a espionage thousand pieces | against the and scatter it into |Communism, the wind,” a but decided quote credited to | against wider President John F | Free Masons Kennedy. plot.
Public Health Service likely tied to Manhattan Project and Above Ground Nuclear Testing, PHS is non combatant military and also used in federal prisons.
Public Health Service and NIH in Bone Marrow Stromal Cell, AIDS, Nueral Cell, Cancer Fighting, AIDS, Autism, Retardation, and other Black United States Marshall heads service, flunked bar research with an interest in exam, probably did not like Justice Scalia genes including FOXP2 referenced Mismatch Theory, blacks given oppurtunity above their expected completion a disservice to both opportunity and affirmatice action candidate.
MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Pizzagate Cogwheel (extortion over 17 year olds, tots photography discovered by audit models allowed under the law) Me in clear text attempting to decode, scrutinize vagueness and treated as though I am Gulliver Explicit illegal acts in my vicinity by Non explicit out of place Cople of Doppelganger which will be indications, intonations, but fused to real me by in-explicate overlays with clear text, odd reference.
MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Cape Cod Cogwheel Irish Mafia and Liquor dealing in both Donegan and JFK families Martha's Vineyard and Clintons Donegans | Kennedys Military Triad in both Donegans and Kennedy Families Great Machine Foreign Economy MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Civilian Legal System Assassinations.
Wales was a graduate of Milton Academy, where he roomed with Joseph Patrick Kennedy II, the son of Robert F Kennedy.
From elsewhere in the book repeated here e DNA from the Beginning is organized around key concepts.
Li The Law of Segregation: Each inherited trait is defined by a gene pair.
The Law of Independent Assortment: Genes for different traits are sorted separately from one another so that the inheritance of one trait is not dependent on the inheritance of another.
MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Ethiopia and Australia Cogwheel Australia Ethiopia JFK has a Little Rock, Australia, and The Middle East and North Africa is Ethiopia daily a region encompassing approximately 22 ... schedule, I think Free Ethiopia and Sudan are sometimes included.
Masons Leslie Anne Shedd Boeing Famine Mitochondria moved into Ethiopia, seems to get to Australia too after that in New Timeline of ""Human"" IQ which now starts in Ethiopia, mot North Africa Great Machine Domestic Economy In local politics county prosecutors seizing assets for police and community when community is violated on a Civil Rights basis Regular Office Holders displaced by Illuminati Fifth Column I believe Kamala Harris, Mark Gonsalzes Gregg Abbott Trump $ business associates, moved into place, people like JFK, Judge Roll, Justice Scalia, James Comey illuminated or moved out.
Barack Obama Jr., secretly Glorian Donegan ovum used along with Malcom X fertilization, thus the Shabazz family and Obama children Kennedy's, Shrivers, Lawfords, Schwarzeneggers, , Katherine Schwarzenegger Borderline Personality Disorder born DEC 13, Pelletiers, possibly both Albert Einstein and Adolph Hitler, most of all of whom are tied to Manhattan Beach and Cape Code Massachusetts, Mary Caitrin Mahoney, > Rose Marie ""Rosemary"" Kennedy > Robert Kennedy Jr.
Herman Edward Butts, HEB, Ambassador to Australia 1961, Christian Hill Country Lodge, Joseph Kennedy, Ambassador England 1920s The United States Mothers of World Disaster CIA, DARPA, MKULTRA, Defense Intelligence Agency, Secret Service, FBI, The Bible, Free Masons, Z osiy the youngest of three children, flunked the second grade but worked hard to ~~ Gatch up and by the sixth grade was accepted into the McDonogh School.
In fact these railroads have made up my life and I think Justina Pelletier's life and track to the very secret history of the FOXP2 gene particularly in Boston Cape Cod and Harvard history. journalist Jen Moore Dept of Defense, FBI, manufactured Child Porn, blame Edward Paul Donegan in blackmail ring The person stealing my phone, clothes, identity, or in a break in will make me ""look bad"" as someone who became indebted to a victimized female.
To brass renewed his SC and his contract ,,., I am Edward Donegan dangerous drug addicted violent felons manufacture Child Porn in my vicinity, DARPA Backed The appear to have created the appearance of a fake ring that appears to include Tom Dunham and Edward Donegan who are giving into the blackmail or being detected by Dominatrices.
These criminals recruited from Sex Offender registries get caught by United States Marshalls and when caught these criminals hired by DARPA pay for their crimes with the DNA of Edward Paul Donegan, then they are bought cars for solving the crime.
Austin and the fight against seeming White Supremacist Perpetrator Networks Planted out side my door Ordered away from my lease on the flimsy excuse I was a day late She ""feels for children"" it seems because her name is Cynthia Nino.
Washington D.C. in a skid row homeless thermal shelter after zerod out from Austin.
Rosenstein and MKULTRA Secrets of Massachusetts Marshalls, the Secrets of Massachusetts, and Subversion Gangstalk of witnesses to history In a program widely viewed as suspicious and unconstitutional the Obama Administration through Eric Holder appointed Machen Jr. and Rosensteind to keep the nations most secret sexrets secret I believe this is where subverting Targeted Individuals come from.
Morphological icons are images, patterns or symbols that relate to a specific morpheme.
My father, Linda Newkirk, Veronica Hoffman, myself, all recetve Junk PHone calls showing we are being stalked, watched in our homes, etc., as we move about, in my case if I get off, read a scientific book, etc., and this is anonymous Stalk psychological harassment by strangers.
Commonalities with Others and My Story. e [had first contacted [Veronica Hoffman after meeting her in person, all was well.
This is all very illegal black budge black racial Chicago alcohol prohibition gang activity and Trump rose to power on it including illegally using intellectual as well biological property of mine. fC KidneyGate | Trump/USA | RU Black Market Criminals | Saudie Crowm Prince Family and career* Dr.
There’s no way anyone could get into my house, no robbers, no angry exes (which I don’t have btw), no fanatical people my house is like Fort Knox...unless it was someone super professional.
PSYOP Soldiers are regionally aligned and develop cross-cultural competence in the areas they study and deploy to. e Foreign Language Proficiency Pay ° Specialized and advanced training in social media, marketing and other communication techniques ° Unique missions in varied interagency environments ° 30 Days of vacation per year e Complete medical and dental care ° Enhanced leadership skills Crisis Actors motorcycles peek into the adult pools and childrens room of Golds Gym.
AT the golds gras there have been several dopple trikes used of my motorcycle Dopple Mosorcycle owned by black gyi eirploses.
Thes ae equiped very eanedarky uit dust arreatere wtanda, etc This motorcycle and its motorcyclist is pursued to some location like this which LOOKS like my apartment, a long con set, and people like these will claim its rider really was Edward Donegan and their children or women were harmed by Edward Donegan.
Rx Cheryl Lloyd Friendly sounds like a Highlander Motel operator friendly to the Christ Lloyd family tied to Genenetch.
Amidst this desperate plot was the intimidation of Judge Roll who was asked for a favor and the silencing of Scalia, who would not co-operate with the Spanish [luminati.
Opus Dei Founding Dates e in WWI Spain is unaligned and reports on the world pandemic later called the Spanish Flu for its Spanish news sourced reporting.18 is a deadly year.
The Opus Dei Lay Miracle capability meets a need, repairing certain defects targeted by Nazist genocide.
He jumps to his death shortl after from a psch ward window where he had been committed.
In the 1950s and 1960s The CIA, Catholics, and other Christians and United States DOD MKULTRA are trying to defeat Russian expansion in Africa through cultivating future leaders such as Barack Obama 1961 Malcom X founds Elija Speaks, a Nation Of Islam publication which will reference Obama's birth using CIA Dlagraphs and speek of ""the future of so-called Negroes.
The publication notes Stanlyy Ann enrolling in Washington Universit of Seattle at the same time.
Century 21 and the BOEING Spacearium, Seattle, WA and the Space Needle and Monorail, April 21, 1962, to October 21, 1962.
I; Change Stanley Anne Dunham WEDS Barack Obama Sr marriage/concieve from February 20 to February 2_ 2.
It was during this time of prayer, even before He gave me this message on this very day that He told me that it is time for the above message to go out and that what He has told me 1s indeed as it is.
Some countries banned or otherwise regulate the availability of IVF treatment, giving rise to fertility tourism In 1961 the [VFinig of Barack Obama and Ed Donegan.
Glorian Seem ie Donegan, her | Edward Paul Donegan Nov 18 1961 e e bday Dec 13 Alleged Barack Obama CIA Claim Aug 4 1961 I say BORN NOV 18 Stanlly Ann 1961 BIRTH CERTIFICATE NOV 19 1961 TO ILLUMINATI Dunham HUSBANDRY Glorian Malcom Donegan Monday, February 20, 1961 February 20, 1961 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 am in the Oval Office.
THE YOUNG LisreveD THE oly Grace e Many Obama Birther dates and figures relate to Feb 20 or Nov 18 and these appear to form the Divinci Code of Opus Dei, interested in Catholic Genetics Works, defeating Orthodox Russians and treating world genetic diseases.
APRIL 21,1962, to October 21, 1962, in Seattle, The 21st Century FUTURIST EXPO in Seattle with the Windsors, the Kennedy's, and Stanly Ann Dunham, mother of Barack Obama, future Anthropologist.
Malia Ann , born July 4, 1998, and Natasha , born on June 10, 2001 In October 2001, at about the time of news of an Obama child Birth, Seattle United States Attorney Thomas C Wales who roomed with Joseph Kennedy is assassinated.
In an odd note I am led later to ""motherless"" links from someone from Maryland but the are broken links.
NOVEMBER 24, 1982, Nairobi, Kenya, Barack Obama Sr dies after a prolonged fight to survive previous accidents.
My Birthday is 9 mos later on November 18 1961 e In 2007-2009 Rod Rosenstein and Mueller have me under arrest for seeking National Iinstitute fo Health info and during this time Obama is elected, sworn in, and deaths with Divinci Code Diagraphs seem numerous Key Dates Related to my and World genetics, and how and why they are encoded Cryptonyms and Digraphs Stegonography or Secret Writing uses ""cyhper"" references to ""clear text"" information.
BZ pos en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CIA_cryptonym ro Format of cryptonyms Each CIA cryptonym contains a two character prefix called a digraph, which designates a geographical or functional area.
Thus this is also an embezzlement story, or, as Jen Moore AKA Task Force called it, a Black Budgets (or sluch fund) story.
CIA cryptonyms are code names or code words used by the United States Central Intelligence Agency to refer to projects, operations, persons, agencies, etc.
Here ere some links concerning Cbena's beckground thet nay ke of interest.
A Catholic The question may be Begotten to certain Better Dead than Red Christians of the United States DOD that Kennedy was soft on Latin American Atheist Commies.
The most renown one was Project MKUItra, a code name for a government funded CIA human research program that conducted experiments in mind control.
This conspiracy theory whcih sounds quite outrageous and exaggerated, actually makes some sense and has been put together by several scholars and journalists.
My mother's birthdate is the death date of the person who was the producer of the Obama birth certificate. by Dr.
Eowyn December 13, 2015 EcllowshmOfTheMinds Cryptic Names Casper (the friendly ghost, Casper was a street person with long felon record hired as a CIA backed alleged pimp to me as were also the following,) Don Johnson, Harvey Dent, and others, or these blacks were Marshalls who caught alleged activity which is staged in my vicinity but vouched for by those CIA backed people asking impersonators to confess to.
Feb 20 and Nov 18 Business Prophecies I had encountered Mr Sirgy, a counter-terrorist expert connected with this which I wondered if was coded for discussion of increasing IQ base of failed state, consistent with the Saulk Institute core belief which is also associated with Francis Collins, Barack Obama, and The Brain project which replaces the Human Genomoe Program sequencing of the Genome.
More information channels, more competing media outlets, and the Intamet are overcoming the stranglehold on information Intelligence and Race exchange and availability, Hollywood and the MSM can not decide anymore what we perceive about our world, and the Information Age makes available unfiltered raw data and Information to everyone.
The Bell Curve frulticuturaiam, some of the moat important and holly contested issues of today.
Among the three major evolutionary genetic groups there ara Negrows (Negrokds, } who first evalved in Africa, Caucasians who migrated from Africa North West Into Europe, and Asians who Criminal Justice migrated from Africa North East into Asia.
Genetic drift occurred among the separated populations resulting in differences in body and mind.
Francis Collins, Barack Obama, and others at t he Saulk Institute brain program.
The Computational Neurobiology Laboratory Jim In hofe < 3) inhofe.senate. gov James Mountain Inhofe is an American politician serving as the senior United States Senator from Oklahoma, a seat he was first elected to in 1994.
Perry Inhofe all Ne > vw Perry Inhofe Obituary | Perry Inhofe Funeral | Legacy.com wwe legacy. com/ns/perry-inhofe-obituary/167960709 © Or Perry Sebote, » 52 id orthopedic # Tulse suburd Col.
Inhofe w WW NeWS0N6. crashed in NTSB Releases Final Report On Plane Crash That Killed Dr.
Seewtor Jim Inhofe di Novernber tery Miteubishi MU2E engine turboprop sintane . 8 imernat , telated Story.
This Dispossession of both Standing and Worth of a Targeted Individual applies to both Money Laundering Rackets and Espionage so appears both places in this book An agent provocateur quoting Wikipedia is a person who commits or who acts to entice another person to commit an illegal or rash act or falsely implicate them in partaking in an illegal act, so as to ruin the reputation or entice legal action against the target or a group they belong to.
The combination of corrupt police bullying of me for what their Agent Provocateurs have done has been especially offensive to me because I am an upstanding law abiding intelligent person, and thus it is unjust, and also it is unjust because this covers State abuses against my parents who also gave and risked so much on behalf of the USA including Atomic Blast Exposure, multary USO and DOD service.
The plain clothes operatives will act like I am the peeper in the area but upon my challenge of them they say there 1s nothing amiss and I am not suspected of any misconduct at all.
Or a white male one. e Fake Cell Tower e Paid off Family Members e Paid off witnesses ¢ Amplification of DNA samples by techniques like PCR e Gain co-operation of private society of dupe of private society e Bluetooth Connectivity Hacking and SIMM Chip disrupt functions.
Opus Dei, P2, Catholics, Iluminati, and Order of St Herbutrus PBS Se SS SS Z rropagands Due was a Masonic lodge under the Grand Orient of Italy, founded in 1877.
Among its Argentine members were Raul Alberto Lastiri, interim president in 1973 during the height of the ""Dirty War""; Emilio Massera, who was part of the military junta led by Jorge Rafael Videla from 1976 to 1978; José Lopez Rega, minister 1973-1975 and FOUNDER OF THE ARGENTINE ANTICOMMUNIST ALLIANCE; and General Guillermo Suarez Mason.
Emergence of Molecular Genetics ~ fittps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_genetics#Emergence_of_molecular_genetics In 1928, Frederick Griffith showed that genes could be transferred.
In what is now known as Griffith's experiment, injections into a mouse of a deadly strain of bacteria that had been heatkilled transferred genetic information to a safe strain of the same bacteria, killing the mouse.
Ge Sess BB BT TT TT TT EE ET EE ET ET EE TE » oc ieasatiinsah cose canes ~~ Gaps added Griffith's experiment discovering the ""transforming principle"" in pneumococcus bacteria.
The III-S strain synthesized a polysaccharide capsule that protected itself from the host's immune system, resulting in the death of the host, while the II-R strain did not have that protective capsule and was defeated by the host's immune system.
Foundational period ~ fittps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opus_Dei#Foundational_period Opus Dei was founded by a Catholic priest, Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer, on 2 October 1928 in Madrid, Spain.
Ina i second experiment we assessed the putative roles of the ATLs in the processing of narratives and 1 theory of mind content and found evidence for a role of the ATLs in the processing of theory of ; mind but not narrative per se.
The "" canonization this week will draw at least 250,000 spectators to Rome "" Saint Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer The Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, affiliated with Opus Dei, was founded on Sunday, 14 FEBRUARY 1943.
Foundation X On 19 FEBRUARY 2012, Lord James of Blackheath's produced revelations concerning reports of 15 trillion dollars , originating with a Mr Riyadi, transferred to various banks.
If you’re vested in your company's pension plan after working there 5 years, then even if you quit at 5 years, that pension money is yours to take with you.
All News ape images Videos More Settings Tools About $46,000 resulta Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers vires vatican va/roman_curia/pontifical_ councils /nithwork/index ntm © Pontifica ounce for the Pastoral Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers.
Pope Francis issued a letter Monday condemning sexual abuse and its concealment within the Catholic church.
The United States Ambassador Hackett and the Presidential Delegation United States Ambassador Hackett and the residential Delegation John Podesta, Congressman Xavier Becerra, and Katie eirne Fallon on the Canonization of Pope ohn XXIII and Pope John Paul II The Pope we affectionately call il Papa buono was a man of peace and a man of reform.
By convening the Second Vatican Council, the former Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli revolutionized the role the Church plays in the world, and made the Catholic Mass a more inclusive and open experience for the faithful.
As a boy in Nazi-occupied Poland, Karol Jozef Wojtyla studied for the priesthood in secret.
WACO was on contract to pump propaganda out for the CIA in the Middle East Excerpt from A PANORAMIC HISTORY OF THE FIRST AMENDMENT REMARKS TO THE WESTERN NEW YORK LIBRARY RESOURCES COUNCIL By James Ostrowski March 22, 1995 2 ee ee ee a a a a a z he Bill of Rights is best understood as the enactment of a philosophy of individual natural ~ fights that dominated American political thought in the Eighteenth Century.
During that time King Charles I lost his head and later kings lost much of their authority to an elected parliament.
Images for sam hopkins lawyer death eee a Mm Ee a Google Sharon Malone § a Dr.
Possibly over [luminati assistance with speech defect, other genomic traits.
Isaak Izrailevich Prezent brought Lysenko to public attention, using Soviet propaganda to portray him as a genius who had developed a new, revolutionary agricultural technique.
The perps in the ring attempt to hide the evidence plants, fake allegations againt me, code words, etc. challenging me I cant prove the people near me are trying to be condused with me but I know that they are.
Taking over my Gym Workout, road blocking my gym access In a sudden change the Clarendon club next to my brother and Mark Wierness house will merge with the Wilson Mall location I worked out and a Gangstalk moves in to my gym from that gym, and suspicious trainers move in and suspicions activities.
In a sudden change the Clarendon club next to my brother and Mark Wierness house will merge with the Wilson Mall location I worked out and a Gangstalk moves in to my gym from that gym, and suspicious trainers move in and susplicions activities.
U Arlgton Now retrieved from link and copied or modified to here Sport & Health Near Clarendon to Close Next Month by Ethan Rothstein February 5, 2014 Located at at 1122 N Kirkwood Road, the gym is one of four Sport & Health clubs in Arlington; there is one in Ballston and two in Crystal City.
In English it may be used in an informal disapproving manner to ""describe people who are not clever or well educated, and who are not interested in changing or improving their situation."" 1 g Serial Murder 1 Behavioral Analysis Unit-2M National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime Critical Incident Response Group Federal Bureau of Investigation Excepted from FBI online material at his link * The interpersonal traits include glibness, superficial charm, a grandiose sense of self-worth, pathological lying, and the manipulation of others.
Victoria Secrets models, white, will show thier asses to retarded fake ed and retarded fake Ed will be punished for the photos taken in the gym by retarded fake ed.
Camera Click Restart Music — Phone Touches Rx Scapegoat a person who is blamed for the wrongdoings, mistakes, or faults of others, especially for reasons of expediency.
Tx the guilty Goat Rx the blamed Goat U Google knowledge panel Scapegoat retrieved from link and copied or modified to here 1 In the Bible, a scapegoat is one of two kid goats.
Forging my Brae eeonle I email Mistress VivianNYC | Someone who looks like her is | She will follow IMPERSONATOR OF about scene resources, in my vicnity in the Gym in ME from the gym who will forge my housing in NYC California agreement Substantial evidence Circumstantial SUBSTANTIAL Non Inculpaltory non inculpatory INCULLPATORY, cut in by cops x INCULPATORY x INCULPATORY xX INCULPATORY Some technology in use by Espionge could get my smartphone music to stop (if my CDMA Chip was in) and that as a women stepped in front of me.
President John F Kennedy Secret Service Agent Gerald ""Jerry"" Behnand President John anncaeigae ay Sex ee y Presidential Assistant Dave Powers Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.S5TH.POTUS Home Photos Videos About Events Endorsements Posts Community Pee] Restaurant In 1992, Schwarzenegger and his wife opened a restaurant in Santa Monica called Schatzi On Main.
Planning Parenthood Brittany Anne Murphy-Monjack was an American actress and singer.
As the planet rapidly accelerates toward Earth, a nuclear device 1s created at the last minute and destroys the approaching world.
Bowman opens the ship's emergency airlock manually, enters the ship, and proceeds to HAL's processor core, where he begins disconnecting HAL's circuits.
When the disconnection is complete, a prerecorded video message plays, revealing that the mission's objective is to investigate the radio signal sent from the monolith to Jupiter.
U Sidney Gottlieb, MK Ultra And Brainwashing's Mystery Man retrieved from Sidney Gottlieb.
Courtesy the CIA, via npr.org and copied or modified to here The CIA Unwittingly Fuels The Counterculture We do know, however, who some of the people who became involved in the LSD culture were -they were introduced to the drug because of Gottlieb, although they never knew his name.
We do know, however, who some of the people who became involved in the LSD culture were -they were introduced to the drug because of Gottlieb, although they never knew his name.
Sarah Obama, the president's step grandmother, tells Peter Firstbrook. i We found him sitting by the steering wheel. did not roll.
So after it was said that ihe had hit the tree, we just had to believe it, because he could not talk back.
Mr Shabazz, 21, was charged with reckless endangerment, assault and criminal mischief. glass shards and were taken to a hospital, the police said.
Mr Shabazz was released from prison this year after serving time for a 2002 attempted-robbery conviction in X’s widow, Betty Shabazz, various juvenile centers, escaping at least twice but being recaptured.
Malcolm X was assassinated on FEBRUARY 21, 1965 at the Audubon Ballroom It so complicated these days Neither Michelle Obama nor Stanly Anne Dunham were photographed in pregnancy.
He also was blamed for the death of his grandmother and Malcolm in 1997 after he set fire to her Yonkers apartment.
He pleaded guilty to the juvenile equivalents of second-degree manslaughter and second-degree arson and spent time in When alledgely pregnatn, Stanley Anne Dunham was photographed not pregnant in a bikini at the beach.
From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Racial Eugenics, Murder, Assassination, and the Secret Service The Brain and Brain Genes and Race and Origins and Continents is not the neat clean likable story we have all been told.
It is complex and being fudged with in a popularly accepted simplification and even some Eugenics programs kept secret are back-filling various of thousand of genes tied to lifespan, disease resistnace, cognitive attributes and IQ, and perhaps even personality traits remain under study and alteration in world lab The programs are kept covert to deny pretext for hostility towards certain groups.
Experts hailed the discovery in 2015 as ""stunning"" -47 teeth found in a cave in southern China dated back to 80,0000 to 120,000 years ago, challenging widely accepted ideas about human evolution.
Maria Martinon-Torres, director of the National Research Center on Human Evolution in Spain and an author of the 2015 study, said she welcomed the new data on the early presence of modern humans in China.
Major-General Count Arthur Cherep-Spiridovich (or A de TcherepSpiridovitch) was a Major-General in the Imperial Russian Navy (not a Major-General in the Imperial Russian Army, as is frequently alleged), and an anti-Semitic conspiracy theorist, who moved to the United States following the Bolshevik Revolution.
Despite his views, Fischer remained on good terms with Jewish chess players. f » g@ CRISPR-Cas9 was adapted from a naturally occurringgenome editing system in "" ecteria.
CRISPR-Cas9 was adapted i i ""from a naturally occurring genome editing system in bacteria.
He later became involved in a misadventure involving a Chinese sequencing company, BGI, to which he supplied the DNA of more than a thousand American geniuses.
Obama being successful the question was world eugenics which JFK turned down but the Spanish [luminati wanted, thus as Liberation Theology in Catholicism, JFK was killed and the program went ahead, now detectable by family databases leading to assassinations, burning of towns and DNA, and fake claims to DNA which are false claims and railroads in justice and railroads in the courts.
Three government agencies are leading the project e The National Institutes of Health ° the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency e and the National Science Foundation.
The White House said the agencies will work with the ""private sector partners"" of ° The Allen Institute for Brain Science e the Howard Hughes Medical Institute e the Kavli Foundation, and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies.
The secret identities are Sidney Gottlieb test tub babies experimentation coming out of MKULTRA including through Midnight Climax adult entertainer surrogate mothers for on going blackmail for DNA rights, etc., and thus the pedo networks alleged created rights to DNA designer babies from unilikely DNA sources World Eugenics program might have been a ""no"" if the public were asked but the programs were needed to coverup for SIdnely Gottlieb and the fallout from the Barack Obama experiment and later coverup.
Madelyn Dunham (/'danom/ DUN-om; October 26, 1922/1] November 2, 2008) was the American maternal grandmother of Barack Obama, the 44th President of the United States.
Their daughter, Stanly Ann Dunham Alleged white Seattle mother of Barack Obama (CIA, USAID, Peace Corps, East West foundation activities) ""Stanley"" Ann Dunham was an American anthropologist who specialized in the economic anthropology and rural development of Indonesia.
MKULITRA continued to produce Barack Obama in 1961, the Obama children in 1997, and tested in 2006 and test program ending in 2007, was a go ahead system around the world underway in 2011.
Go this day in peace, my Child; and know that My love for you is great.am your Father in Heaven, yea Jehovah, Most High God.
For us, the vital hardcore news is the covert end game between the old guard of I/luminati rulers and those intending to reshape your world's present collapsing reality.
These strategies allowed our Earth allies to develop a broad game plan, which 1s at last bringing this hapless cabal to its knees.
Fake counseling services or other service claiming to speak for me or fake FISA Warrants are another way rapes can be carried out by the DOD I am really in Quadrant | but defamed as a nutjob low IQ looser child in Quadrant 2; which, btw, enslaves me to the Behavorial Health Care System.
Non-white, children, gays. e This creates the illusion I like non-whites and gays undermining my white supremacist whites only sexual interests. e Further, since I APPEAR to have an interest in non-whites my DNA then, by OTHERS, be assigned to those outside of my racial group. e Meanwhile I am socially sabotaged to white women who would partner withe me, genetically, and in my own life and reproductivity and marriage.
One theory is that Donegan genome already placed in the Obama family line, successfully, can now be moved into all of Africa, and this can be undetected if celibacy of me is assured in the U.S., and according to Carlton Pyant of the Public Health Service, I can never have sex with a beautiful or intelligent white woman.
Genotocracy Although it’s still taboo to talk about, some medical scientists are trying to figure out how to use the polygenic intelligence scores to pick the smartest embryo from an IVF dish, choose the best sperm donor, or discover fetuses at high risk for an expanded menu of cognitive disorders, including autism.
I Although it’s still taboo to talk about, some medical scientists are trying to figure out how to use the polygenic intelligence scores to pick the smartest embryo from an IVF dish, choose the best sperm donor, or discover fetuses at high risk for an expanded menu of cognitive disorders, including autism.
Likely AT ANY AGE with a combination of brain genes gene therapy and bone marrow source of brain available neuron stem cells, and brain can be treated where cellular neural deficit exists.
Ss i \ Zou Changes in Gene Expression Affect Brain Function I Altered regulation of gene expression in both DEVELOPING BRAINS AND ADULT BRAINS have been linked with multiple neurological diseases such as depression, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer’s disease.
He gave the organization the name ""Opus Dei"", which in Latin means ""Work of God"", Ed Donegan % @eddonegan Rouco Varela openet 8 November and later closed it on 18 March C.C.S. later received all the documents gathered during that process in 2005 .. and validated the process later on 17 February 2006.
The President next hosted a State Dinner for ETHIOPIAN AMBASSADOR. _ yy ews Corp Australia Network November 7, 2013 10pm President John F Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy with their children, John Jr. and Caroline, on a portico overlooking the White House south lawn in Washington on NOVEMBER 13,1963, just weeks before his death.
Also see this chapter on how the This would be a self-enrichment scheme of a retardation advocacy firm who needs access to my own real property, biological property, by falsely claiming the right or need for them to manage my property rights for me and then do so illegally and without accounting to me.
Again, Judge Roll and the need to seize my genomic assets in a scheme which will also get my blackballed by adult women Repugnant Market DNA rights, Fertilization Rights, in police asset seizure lockers.
As the ARC of Northern Virginia was signed up by my brother Tom Donegan to handle my mother's sale of the Moraga house estate, the ARC left me out of meetings and refused any documents to me on how the trust was being setup, while VERBALLY claiming it was only a house value normal trust fund.
Bizarre birther and MKULTRA issues surround me family DNA, my mother's hair and hats, my meeting white women, and Omaa and the NIH and his 2008 election and Rod Rosenstein.
And my points around IQ destabilizing low IQ nations as a world security threat.
Map snip added to text by Ed Donegan Chicago D Naperville 3 p ° ce Gar Then, in the same dream another man appeared, this one rather young with fine, short brown hair.
Then, the I[luminati man put forth his hand and projected a picture on a blank wall.
Meeting Between the Secretary General of the CECD, Thorkil Kristensen, and the President on October 1 at 9:30 Attached is a briefing memorandum prepared for the President's use at his meeting with Mr Kristensen Ben n if.
John F Kennedy The very word ""secrecy"" is repugnant in a free and open society; and we are as a people inherently and historically opposed to secret societies, to secret oaths and to secret proceedings.
That I do not intend to permit to the extent that it is in my control. know.
For, in this average, and the increases in personal income and employment have been slower here than PARTICULARLY THOSE IN THE MINORITY GROUPS, ROAMING THE STREETS OF NEW YORK AND OUR OTHER GREAT CITIES -AND OTHERS ON RELIEF AT AN EARLY AGE, WITH THE PROSPECT THAT IN THIS DECADE WE WILL HAVE And I know you share my conviction that, proud as we are of its progress, this nation's economy can and must do even better than it has done in the last five years.
Remember my father in the 1950s 1960ss having his DNA testing during radiation testing. and I TVF from eggs drawn from my mother.
Fluid and crystallized intelligence In psychology, fluid and crystallized intelligence are factors of general intelligence, originally identified by Raymond Cattell.
But, there have been other very significant conversations; and | will further entail some of what I have heard since I last wrote to you.
I awoke to this dream on the 16th oh FEBRUARY, BUT IT WAS ON THE MORNING OF THE 15TH OF FEBRUARY that I awoke to find two needle marks on my left thumb, which were about a millimeter apart.
Obama Childrer on 1996-1999 Malcom Shabazz Edward Donegan Genomic Research and Databases The United Kingdom National DNA Database (NDNAD; officially the UK National Criminal Intelligence DNA Database) is a national DNA Database that was set up in 1995.
Arn RENEE OOTY JET iestya sll over ow neto plane creehihst bh ilad perp © 0 U1 4.
Perry 'efeet Jim Inhofe < United States Senator © inhofe senate.gov James Mountain Inhofe is an American politician serving as the senior United States Senator from Oklahoma, a seat he was first elected to in 1994.
The Disposition Matrix, informally known as a kill list, is a database of information for tracking, capturing, ""rendering"", or killing suspected enemies of the United States.
The idea being, if one can indirectly control the enemy military commander’s decision-making process, then the aggregate effect 1s control over their troops and the combat environment.
In fact a 'fapper' who stole my phone called himself Sovereign RICO, and one other black male called himself Rico, thus 1n their actions alleging I anthropomorphise schizophrenically and my report of police backed RICO are evidence I am Thus the State dismissive my complaints and I and Veronica Hoffman have been institutionalized over out unproven allegations against others. saveion RICO Tweets Tweets & replies Media saveion RICO + The Russian military’s conception of psychological operations is eerily similar to Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoyevsky’s 1866 novella, The Double.
COINTELPRO, MK Ultra, Red Squads, &amp;amp; the Stasi Li The National &amp;amp; International Scope of Gang Stalking 8.
My belief is the MKULTRA Birtherism Deep State of Obama black nationalist birtherism has been successful in ""targeting me"" with brainwashing and interrogation techniques the Defense Intelligence Agency in behavioral psychology uses for interrogations, psychological harassment, psychological warfare, and cyber warfare.
Tom Dunham and I have had key plants outside, as though we are sharing keys or codes with others, breakins and evidence plants with landlords cooperating with law enforcement in law enforcement's doing so, etc., THe result of all this is it seems Tom Dunham and I are trafficking and peepers, not the cops.
Tom Dunham | Follow | @sftomdunham Varied retellings of the break-in to my home were told at SelectQuote.
Intruder wanted to be seen for rumor's sake. selectquotereview.com/2016/01/from-s 1:11 PM 22 Jan 2016 4 t6 G25 a My hotel room door as I found it after I went out excersizing in Austin with my bike.
Meth or crack paraphenalie outside my open door, a trash can inside the door, and Lori Cox of Oakland California, black, social services worker, hotel receipt used to clean an amphetamine pipe with.
The police report and case notes are under SF City vs Tom Dunhan case # 223265-2 Tim Kelly UCSF Adolsecent Psychiatrists diagnose Sock Puppet Tom Dunham Tim Kelly Edward Paul Donegan To Tom Dunham, quite recently Edward Paul Donegan 12/02/2017 I mentioned you as a fellow victim in a Facebook post.
Eee eee eR RP REE ERE PEEP EERE EEE RPE EEE RE RPE EEE EEE EPP EPP EPP eee eee eee Micheal Hastings and Victoria Windsor Investigating Obama origins reporting 1 How ironic that they accuse Trump of Russia involvement when it was they who conspired with Russia to produce a polished liar and charlatan to unleash on an unsuspecting and naive nation.
And then he called MSNBC contributor Perry Bacon, Jr. a “stenographer” for the White House.
By Pe Monday, Ar By winning more than 52% of the vote in a seven-candidate Senate primary in Illinois Last year, Barack Obama instantly made his name in political circles, And after delivering a lyrical speech last July at the Democratic National Convention—he declared that the “audacity of hope"" and the “insistence on small miracles” unite Americans more than blue or red states divide them—the self-proclaimed “skinny kid with a funny name” became one of the most admired politicians in America.
The Marshals identify and evaluate assets and manage and dispose of the majority of the assets seized and forfelted through the program.
Amount distributed to victims of crime and claimants in fiscal 2017 $144. million Amount shared with participating state and local law enforcement agencies in fiscal 2017 Donald W Washington Director Donald W Washington was nominated by President Donald J Trump to lead the United States Marshals Service on Oct 2, 2018.
Derrick Driscoll Tapped as USMS Acting Deputy Director Acting Deputy Director Derrick DriscollWashington Derrick Driscoll received approval as United States Marshals Service acting deputy director by Attorney General William Barr April 23, announced USMS Director Donald Washington.
Don Lemon’s sister, 58, dies in drowning accident BY LISA GUTIERREZ FEBRUARY 02, 2018 08:26 AM Christian Non-whites in the United States and elsewhere who wish genes from the United States moved along racial lines, inside and outside the United States as religious missionary work.
Philosophy of Racial Rape of Whites, Black Hebrew Isrealites and Payback River Carrying It Out Test volunteer Linda Newkirk United States Marshalls and FBI COINTELPRO Every time my mother would leve the house she would come back shaking from having been in a fight and I often blamed her for that.
The group appears to have formed around Hillary Clinton, although no direct evidence has yet emerged to tie her to the group.
In 2012, Lord James has come to the following i conclusions about Foundation X, “I think there may have been a massive piece of money laundering the integrity of the British bank the Royal Bank of Scotland, in doing so.
Images for sam hopkins lawyer death eee a Mm Ee a Google Sharon Malone &§ Q Dr.
Defense Intelligence Agency 3 “p> NEWS OPINION VIDEO SHOWS SCHEDU ‘ag i Ne TEMS Ct Met MS Mes ea LL ELECTION 2016 IMMIGRATION DRUGS SPECIAL COVERAGE ALJAZEERA PNM ian Oy.
My goal is to represent all community forums, meetings in aha Mit sara —— AB ea Reem mies church basements, youth summits _ and the like.
Waiting until a crime is committed, Holder recalled Machen TOOLBOX telling him. was too late to develop relationships.
L Quote retrieved from My Experiences With A Drug Kingpin and copied or modified to here i i | i i i ; Retired Brig.
He was heavily involved in CIA drug trafficking, especially in s South America, and had many friends within both the Medellin and Cali cartels.
Me a7 a &n eS On rents that continued in America was mind control... kn Wee eee Anyway, when he wasn’t financing Hitler, Prescott Bush teamed up with Illuminati families such as the Harrimans, the DuPonts, the Rockefellers, and the Hearsts, plus the Knights of Malta, to overthrow the United States government.
When the CIA transferred the assassination unit to Blackwater, 1t continued the trend.
Beonvigu ""Ric"" Prado is a paramilitary, counter-terrorism, and special/clandestine Operations specialist, with a focus on international training operations and programs.
Mr Prado is now co-owner of Camp X, Special Operations Lone Operator Training Group and continues his service training and supporting the ""SPECOPS"" Community as Subject Matter Expert at the SWCS' ASOT and ASOT Managers Course, Dragon Warrior, Emerald Warrior, among others.
Defense Intelligence Agency Ultra powerful peer of the NSA with world continental development goals such as Asia and Africa and including cultural, medical, and biowarfare goals The DIA 1s a factual fit to Barack Obama's war on Nationalists and a factual fit to have continental development interests in Africa and perhaps also said Asia to create a NeoCon vision around the world.
The Defense Intelligence Agency's potential interests in me. e DIA has an interest in concealing Obama DNA and Birther dates tied to my family.
I have an elite interest in BDSM theory and practitioners and also European music, and inci Johnson and York were both keen on space projects, but when NASA was established later in 1958 all space projects and most of ARPA's funding were transferred to it.
Zo Insane Cases of Genetic Engineering DARPA’s Supersoldiers #1 The United States defense company DARPA has been interested in the human genome for years, and as you might expect from the company that’s created 99 percent of the world’s deadly robots, their interest isn’t purely for educational purposes.
Metro Churches www.fullcounsel.org Full Counsel Preparatory Academy Psych Ward Political Psychology and Voting Behavior (done behind my back in the band of mercenary Office Mobs, vote by secretly planted Mercenaries to block me from the office on evidence planted in the gangstalk) PsyOps creating the appearance i have a disorder seeking out teens or tots for photography, sexuality.
Durigm and after WWI disgust of Russian military and MI acts were in a high state and the massacre of Russian aircraft designers and 14 million Russian by Stalin after WWII drove much of the German and Allied forces contempt and fear of Russia and this included Vatican fear of both Russia and Germany after German retaliation for Operation Valkerie and some other solution, a biological solution, to race and war was sought.
But gays and non whites assaulting me as State sanctioned acts, then over thirty years institutionalizing me as I respond within the law to the lawless attacks is the story of my life. am convinced not only am I a targeted individual but I was radiologically attacked in my midsection imprisonment.
Yrare by a narcissist is directed towards the person that they feel has slighted them.
Get in Touch with Our Team Tia Marsili Evelyn Gu Trinitas Nsabimana Caroline Girgenti Director of Trusts Assistant Director Account Manager Advocate Or will ever have white family or friends.
Bhatia was never charged but has been fired and is no longer with the company.
Hee eee ee ae Sound And Fury accusation towards me (empty of any accusation, just character assignation towards me like saying ""Ed you are DIRT"" utilized the Newton's Third Law of Motion Corrective Ploy.
Historically Downtrodden victims | Centuries ago victimizer _| | Centuries ago victimizer _| victimizer ai er Reaves Badge) Day CoPs Viginalntism Bullied Victim For public appearances sake the assaults on a white supremacist white seperatist looks not only legal but expected.
Psych Ward Ed Let us Begin with WHO is Stalking me, Why, How and a few other such questions Etiology, again visiting this elsewhere in the book.
Wikipedia e In defaming an alleged white supremacist a Dregg none white or gay will photograph a white or other woman despicably or catch a racketeer dressed as me doing so e The Law Enforcement, perhaps sometimes United States Marshalls fighting white supremacist will defame me behind my back as *the* peeper. e Again behind my back the I will be Doppled as masturbating to the surreptitious pictures but caught doing so, and something had ""triggered"" me to take the picture, gym women.
South Texas Federal District Court Nearly from the first moments of Corpus Christi I found it the worst toilet stain of people and city I ever encountered in all the world.
The black man who is at the scene may have proof in his hands | am an exploiter of females.
Road Blocking Roadblock Tree In Road identities switched out Monk Pretender too old to get accross river Two Monks and a Woman a Zen Lesson Try this as the Young Monk says the Old Monk is too old for that lady.
Oh those brave cops are too busy to investigate this. ed.donegan ed.donegan Placed along my as | am on my way to TMobile.
Same thing happens on my way to gym V2 Ah — | As I was walking to TMOBILE to undue loosing my SIMM chip I have to take out in the gym GPS tells me to turn Right up the slight hill at the right off frame of this event planted in my path.
My cell phone in use for ""k""navigation knowledge map usage to a store, illicit ""R"" eproductive interests staged against my will.
Instead of stolen-clothes impersonators breaking into my residence or evidence plants at my residence, impersonators use sound stages of other apartment units with same layout as my own apartment floor plan.
From Wikipedia, the_free encyclopedia Austin meeting with United States ambassador to Iraq James Jeffrey and Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta in 2011 hel tla elele F Me elit melee) eo te lets Be eae _ view pics | view widls Pert dee eel ee eee eee ellis | enjoy public play with the friends | have here.
But | seek a deeper connection eID te ieee ie kee co a) Dole l ile) balm ee mele ete) omelette Public play is great.
Pree eye ee ee DaAssRaper commented on one of Heterolnflexible’s pictures ele MUR Mies oR Gs ee ult mst oleie Mei mu tel el med You clearly have opinions and are sharing them.” view comment BEE United States ele mlm el ea Cre i ee eee ee Baltimore Playhouse Ete eee “Here is some unsolicited advice.
Real Ed (scapegoa ""Mistress Victoria"" ""dat Ass"" model to the retarded, the adult entertainer called for the retarded child, finds teen or tot porn in the treehouse the retarded White Supremacist person lives in Below, an ARC of Nothern Virginia owned vehicle in their parking lot after I had shopped for one later request and was turned down for a Toyota 4Runner.
The ARC of Northern Virginia know of some non whites who could use some White Supremacist White Seperatist DNA. and THEY ALSO own the treehouse and represent the victims victimized by the Treehouse As well be revealed in the following chapters Marines hire white models and use dummy impersonators of to to host the white models.
One possibility of somethig earlir was switcing out my airline ticket TO Canada.
Foundation Work Preparations are made in advance of the game, including the hiring of any assistants required.
Bh hig TR Cheryll Lloyd friendly ""ccl"" . motel operator, wants some DNA from a faked trist in a hotel room, or faked activitiy in my home bedroom.
Mere innuendo, less than name calling. refutes the central point finds the mistake and explains why it's mistaken using quotes Refutation contradicts and then backs it up with reasoning and/or supporting evidence Paul Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement lists ad hominem as the second lowest type of argument in a disagreement.
A Republican, Sessions previously served as United States Senator from Alabama from 1997 to 2017, resigning from the position in order to serve in the Trump administration.
Wikipedia James Comey < Former Director of the Federal Bureau of investigation James Brien Comey Jr. is an American lawyer who was the 7th Director eT of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2013 until his dismissal in Sa eee ee ES a May 2017.
IVF Feb 20 Barack Obama 1961 IVF Son, Edward Donegan 1998 5 Donegan DNA 3 NULL here in the U.S., early celibate death homeless or in no sex allowed hospitals.
Donegan DNA backfilled by CIA Behnghazi MKULTRA into African area Origins of Obama and the Rise of African Windsor Kings 2011 Probability of detecting lst Cousin or closer ~ 100% Or me, Edward Paul Donegan, brother Completely unnecessary poverty beyond description mar my otherwise successfull attempts to recover from Alc 13.
During my time in National Institute of Health and Public Health Service detention, facing all black PHS, Tom Donegan is pictured in his home with an African also tied to Trinistas Nsamimbari, also an African who 1s part of trust fund management.
Family Me The answer I have sought for 35 years Niggers are worth a damn.
Maybe during ""the shrub's administration,"" my mother's name for the younger Bush.
She and I at Grave Point just north of DCA airport, our retreat when the stress was the highest there was always Gravel Point to relax in.
She loved lots of the George Washing Parkway as did I Lady Bird Park was a nice walk and she loved Lady Bird Johnson, I love hikes on George Mason Island I loved George Mason in history.
My father flew for TWA into that airport where there still was a museum of that era in Terminal A She would tell about the cross winds for take offs and landings and what was aircraft noise for others was not for us.
As the planes flew in they looked like some kind of jacks spun off their axis, X forms flying sideways coming into land on ruways not at all aligned with the form of the X It was even more befuddling to watch the unevenness of the winds by watching the X forms of fuselage and wing rotating around like a compass being taunted by magnets as the pilots tried to keep the vector of the calamity pointed towards the assigned tarmac.
But the cars, the unmarked cars were following us still at Gravel Point Parking lot.
I leave several times from her company to go approach the cars and the result was always the same.
They would role up their often down windows and just drive away and they still do, as of 2020.
But we had grown somewhat accustomed to all that, me less so. 7 2 1 1s about Gangstalk and my mother and I facing for decades.
The six stove pipes of inexplicable things, things without cause shown to me, non seqitur, non sequa, not flowing from anything in my life, unprovoked and unexplained hostility towards me, treatment of me as though I were some suspect when I am not, retaliation without explanation for no corresponding act I could find anywhere in my life.
What I have noticed for 30 years including in the workplace were, inexplicable to me, Doppelgangers who dressed as me, carried the same workplace folios, etc., yet were not me but there to be confused with me.
In 2019 a serious every moment of my life quest since the 1990s came to a resolution.
The bizarre and inexplicable treatment of me, and the Doppelgangers in these areas of my life, setup behind the scenes conspiracy against my rights because people at what i call Bifurcations, behind my back social and other sabotage, are incited, brought into, a criminal conspiracy against me.
I have accused stalker assailants of cheap shots without basis attacking me and my mother for 40 years, most all of the cheap shots and harassment so entirely non sequitur to me life I could not possibly figure out who they were or what they were referring to.
It was in discovering what the Doppelgangers were doing, taking picture of females who then owed MY dna to the victim female, this situation tied to my DNA made some sort of sense.
Attacking me without explanation ""sells"" to the public that I rather than the United States Marshall photographed the female and the United States Marshall will then ask a dominatrix to punish the United States Marshall who has the camera in his hands.
He will say he got the camera from Dr, Jekyll, me, thought it was his camera.
What the United States Marshall wants is my DNA, and as me, he, through a Dominatrix j will sign my DNA over to his wife and children.
This, blaming me for the United States Marshalls conduct breaks my eggs, inciting retaliation against me, and makes them an omelet.
This is how the family databases problem by Sidney Gotllieb illegal use of my DNA is solved.
My White Seperatism and White Supremacism formed because of unprovoked assaults on me and my mother have been from non whites, gays, retarded, others.
Had it not been for this I might have been a socially progressive Libertarian rather than a wannabe genocidal Libertarian, something of an anomalous political condition.
My feeling now, that my father offered the CIA, DOD, USA, too much when he subjected himself to atomic bomb blasts in 1961 so the effects on human DNA could be tested, and this after Hiroshima.
He wanted to defeat Adolf Hitler and others who assured with world non whites were racially inferior.
I now believe it is the United States which is inferior and abused my father, mother, and me.
Without knowledge of the racial inferiority existing as public knowledge, the Means, Motive, and Opportunity system of solving racial crimes against me can not be explained by normal means.
In Reverberations I was forced in the dark world of deeper truths, having in my quest for understanding, have to look into the abyss of blacks, gays, retarded, and designer babies and motives for genetic engineering.
I have spent my life fighting off assailants who will not identify themselves and placed in psych wards.
Released from those psych wards, I now right this book section and place you within my judgment.
During the course of this, researching racial theory, I found something I call Deep Pockets Legal Targeting.
Non whites have accused whites as oppressors and demanded wealth transfer.
The proof of oppression, Disparate Outcome Theory, is merely that the non white underperformed on seemingly neutral test, thus must have experienced discrimination.
I like my father and mother, have worked for justice for all in every aspect of our lives.
I am targeted for false claims and racial assaults because of the desire for me DNA, the desire for who I am.
Myiopia My white supremacism results from my judgment of my assailants.
My assailants pass only one test only true for being fraudsters, everything else about them is false.
But this opening chapter does restate some of the modeling of the crime ring and how it affects me.
For the purposes of telling that story I will need to describe the covert ops teams which have surrounded me, framed me, and assaulted me and so I will repeat a few things and add a new one.
These have a money laundering system of impersonating me and ""spending"" my DNA on adult entertainers, asking to be punished for the pictures on their phones, which they claim I took.
They are drug addicts and felons with sex offense histories which are asked to false flag me, then be punished for what Dr Jekyll, or out of wedlock distant Windsor, is ALLEGED to have done.
That is the Tx line, the statements or acts from that a protection racket is needed.
For reasons I never could understand or understood in part I became assaulted by the genetically unwashed This led to my resentment and suspicions of non whites, and speculation of their low IQ motives.
This lead to a greater need to attack me through money laundering rather than give any ""bragging rights"" to a White Supremacist in the treatment of the retarded or autistic.
Etiology and Profiteering in Personal Eugenics and Repugnant Markets MY lawsuit failed, railroaded and undermined, but I quoted this.
Though false impressions deny the fact I DO have very high IQ and retardation firms want my assets, not treat my supposed retardation.
Rights gotten by blackmail, then to personal Eugenics, Marshalls bying themselves ""self supporting programs of equipment out of seized assets, like muscle cars for Marshalls use out of seized assets"" and selling genes to poor families at $1 or to the gov for 5 Billion.
In a wide ranging interview, linked past murders and coverups in past administrations to current murders., Linked murders in the Iran/Contra scandal under Reagan to murders in Mena under Clinton to current murderous scandals such as Chris Stevens and SEALs deaths under ""Extortion 17"" together as part of an ongoing weapons and gun smuggling for profit Claims that groups inside the intelligence community run guns for huge cash dumps which buys off politicians and news outlets.
It is the power of this racket, and paid off media and lots of cash and glam dommes to go around, and lots of espionage against my property that I am being property ghouled.
The power of the racket I am up against, and the power of the agencies behind it get ""favors"" etc., like planted magistrates who support the program, DAs who want the geno rights for county programs, powerful families part of deep secret histories of early geno testing and genes re-usage under Sidney Gottlieb, etc., and the difficult to broach issue of race and IQ, and inflammatory subject matter of this topic 7 Psych History If you know I have a ""pscyh history"" this is why I seek you to consider it void.
If I read one of the few psych reports I ever had access to like FMC Butner I would believe it.
I did read it and what a hit job, but I could see how it would be believed.
These were hit jobs of complicit people in what is called a Gangstalk where ""preemtion"" rather than trial has meant criminal harassment under color of law of me for years.
Because I have speech spasmodia and bad handwriting, tied to a rare gene FOXP2, I have appeared to have bipolar disorder It is difficult already to fight off COINTELPRO or United States Marshall use of tactical resources against what it considers the enemy, an Alt Right person like myself, suffering the disgusting public experience of tots or others acting in an exploited way laying in wait on the predictable paths I am walking.
The record I would have had of my life replaced with trying to prove a police conspiracy has made me an easy target for psych wards.
Today I try to avoid taking the fight with plain clothes aggressors, no matter how provocative their acts towards me.
I decided to lose the cheap shot fights, not fight them, take it, as much as I can, and win the war.
My family DNA was used without permission by the CIA DOD Illuminati, and I have to look bad to women, be ostracized, and out of any possible wife and children.
This conspiracy against my associative and reproductive rights is based on evidence plants and I am a victim of that.
Pile on does not help here, but the ongoing manufacture of pretexts for legal and social assaults upon me, my property, and rights continue and I am in an exigent human rights crisis against Gangstalk.
I never sought a dime from my coding and research of Political Rights.US, of the WWII HFDCA videos, or other volunteer work.
In fact I shunned profit fearing it would cost me my 2K per mos I live on.
Now, abused by the Disability System, I have tried to return to high tech work, but my path to that and health have been blocked.
Monique’s Althiem Sent: Friday, May 27, 2011 2:36 PM To: Ed Donegan Subject: RE: CFP media volunteer Hi Ed, Thanks you for you interest in volunteering for the CFP conference.
The choice is up to you whether you want to give an overview of the different panels/keynote speakers you attendend or whether you want to concentrate in depth on one particular panel/speaker.
You will get full credit for the article and you can even post a link to your own blog. -The article has to be exclusive to the CFP blog.
Plain Clothes Police Brutality Undercover law enforcement, sometimes identifying themselves to others as United States Marshalls, frequently actively using amphetamines, covered in tattoos, driving Dodge Challenger muscle cars as standard equipment, are part of an illegal operation of police brutality and rape to cover some illegal United States genetics goal, ,and this police brutality scheme has brought about my torture, and upon my death, my murder from the accrued physical and medical tole upon my body.
Lack of available medical care or housing as well as lack of sexual reproductive opportunity and lack of sexual partnership for me has been the goal of the police harassment, as has sexual assaults upon me meant to demean and humiliate me, ,and my DNA 1s illegally used for [VF against my will and with no notice to me or accounting to me or payment to me.
When I arrived in Texas TRinistas Nsambari and African activist from D.C. connected to Obamas was brought into the ARC of NOrthern Virignia to adminster the sale of my mothers house assets.
This Sony Ericsson K6001 is being bluejacked by the Siemens M75 pictured above.
Wikipedia e Arbitration Arbitration *, a form of alternative dispute resolution, is a way to resolve disputes outside the courts.
In the past, O'Keefe and his Project Veritas Action have been criticized for strategically editing footage to create false accusations about people or groups *K In this covert operation a series of fight picking moves are a threat to me I keep away from.
Torture by Expressive Acts and Circumstances in Life I have been tortured to death and raped over a period of time through “soft violence” in broad daylight, with people watching, and with no one coming to my defense.
United States DOD PsyOps using Disinformation, Social Sabotage, and other schemes to maneuver away support or Human Rights for me will be covered later in more detail but a short description will be made here.
Following extensive dental surgery I was denied pain killers by starving me out financially.
Potential Witness List including Conflicted Politicians The material in here is concentrated from other parts of the book where the material is in the context of the history relevant to the quote and citation of the quote.
Stanley Armour Dunham of Boeing Corp, arrested by the CIA during WWI, Madeline Dunham, CIA Hawaii, Hawaiin Bank.
In some states, however, factual impossibility 1s not a defense, as courts rely on the fact that the person still had the intent to comm Like other inchoate crimes such as attempt, a defendant charged with conspiracy can raise the defense of abandonment or withdrawal.
Police officers are citizens like anyone else, though they have broad powers as police officers to protect people and to enforce the law.
List of Possible Criminal Charges ° Assault and battery e Sexual assault ° Misusing public funds ° Drug dealing ° Ticket fixing ° Homicide Police officers have access to evidence such as controlled substances obtained from arrests and searches and many have stolen evidence either no longer used in criminal cases or never turned over for prosecutions following search and seizures to sell in unlawful drug transactions.
A similar RICO operative in an apartment Canadian domina will go to and that apartment taken to be mine.
Acting as Confidential Human Source Informant (Probation and ~ Supervised Release Conditions) * A confidential human source or informant is a defendant who engages in the prohibited activity of associating with persons engaged in criminal activity for the purpose of furnishing information to or acting as an agent for a law enforcement or intelligence agency.
Henry Bortner, of the CIA From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia My father and mother are tied to Sindey GOttlieb illegal science and the FOXP2 speech and language gene CIA Speech Pathologist Biologist in Assasinations division was a part of, in the MKULTRA Manhatton Project and I was born under atoic testing at Manhattan Beach to an Atomic Bobing and Atomic Testig USA Army Air COrp family.
Edward Paul Donegan begotten from James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan by Eva Ban November 18 1961.
Sasha and Malike , IVF , I just learned were born when I was at AOL Time Warner Netscape at my brothers referal to me for a job, at the exact time I noticed weird Doppelgangers of me emerging 1999 era.
The family bible disappeared on my mothers side or was about to, and my mother continuously complained my brother came to her house one day, with no warning, and began throwing out all of her hats.
Others mentioned in the PRG chief’s memo include CIA Deputy Director for Intelligence Edward Proctor, the CIA Deputy Director for Science and Technology Carl Duckett, and Director of the Office of National Estimates John Huizenga. pyi\ 3 PA DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY ABOUT Us DARPA and the Brain Initiative Behavior recognition to brain trait genetic mapping to genetic alteration, IQ or behavioral health improvements, diseases eliminated such as retardation, autism, other diseases.
There 1s speculation that they possibly had knowledge of the birth and care for Barack Obama in Kenya and were later murdered to cover the trail.
Hammer Sickle FBI 1024 Now it turns out that back in the 1940s, the FBI was extremely interested in the parents of the husband from this Chicago couple.
George W Bush May Have Big Surprise From DEA Date: 08/10/1999 6:44:54 AM Eastern Daylight Time From: To: I was thinking that the Gunther Russbacher prison interview video was not going to show up, like Chip Tatum's video.
Waco 'On FEBRUARY 28 1993, at 4:20 AM, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms . attempted to execute a search warrant relating to alleged sexual abuse charges and illegal 1 weapons violations.
Koresh and six others in his cult were CIA deep-cover operatives who had refused an order to activate against an unknown target.
The initial engagement plan was designed to result in the deaths of United States officers to justify a large-scale retaliation.
While he was in the service, Reagan obtained a film reel depicting the liberation of the Auschwitz concentration camp; he held on to it, believing that doubts would someday arise as to whether the Holocaust had occurred.
Reagan was just an actor who read speeches etc Reagan was also a part of the judaeo-masonic hollywood community and most likely had met Foster there at a young age.
Most higher level judaeo-masons are in fact pedophiles/pederasts and the Hollywood community is a sex cult and the propaganda wing of the judaeo-masonic led occult world state.
Remember that this 1s all presented as something ""wonderful"" and magical but in fact it's backed up as the absence of terrible satanic rituals, drugs, torture, hypnosis and more of the most excruciatingly painful pavlovian anchors imaginable.
The story gets even more bizarre that the new world religion, actually satanism, is pushed by Foster's character, she is a high priestess of judaeomasonry and it's false science dictatorship.
During Bush's year in charge of the CIA, the United States national security apparatus actively supported Operation Condor operations and right-wing military dictatorships in Latin America.
This is part of our series about CIA employees who have made the ultimate sacrifice.
Yet as these things like women walking down the street in front of me, out of my control that they got in front of me, are pieced together with other pieces, like ambiguous statements from others in places of business, pizza shops, etc., then behind my back those out of place things can be ""fit together"" in a way the the resulting assembled puzzle makes sense out of those little evidence plants around me that 1 Was told were nothing to be noticed and merely random other things around me.
R Capone’s Soup Kitchen, situated on what is ~ flow a parking lot on the corner of 9th and State St, served over 120,000 meals to hungry people.
Begin faking exploitation by photo bombing my normal use of cell phone by placing teens and tot buttocks on the non display side of the phone whenever I hold the phone in use of any type uage.
Place me in the lens view of people who saw me, filmed me, in the area of a photographed teen or tot.
Someone other than Edward Paul Donegan creates on the phone that person has a photo of a the teen or tot and that photo will be alleged to the memory chip of Edward Donegan's smart-phone or a phone alleged to Edward Paul Donegan Call something in Edward Paul Donegan's possession a camera and in some way later ""tape a photo to it"" as if the shopping cart, solar cell, or whatever had been a camera generating a picture taken by something else and someone else.
Bragadicio assaults on me by those who ""see me in the area"" photograph me in hostile way and show the hostility towards me they would show a pedophile WITHOUT calling me a pedophile and without accusing me of me anything.
SATURDAY FEB 20 9pm MAD GARDENS 3750 e VAN BUREN announce LUA ase AFTERWORDS, a post-show talkback with the cast, will occur after the matinee performance on FEBRUARY 17.
Art and Life Dune and and NWO Galactic Family Lines Planning guide for Planetary Leaders copied or modified to here o Dune is set in the distant future amidst a feudal interstellar society in which various noble houses control planetary fiefs.
Witness e¢ Corrupt and Murdering Police, Samuel Lapp is a witness to © Jacob Lapp Deceased hushand of family © Reacheal Lapp o Samuel In 1984, an Amish community outside of Lancaster, Pennsylvania attends the funeral of Jacob Lapp, who leaves behind his young wife Rachel and eight-year-old son Samuel.
One of my points is that all is easilu visible, that it is a sham, but from the top of instituions down the shams are supported and bolstered, because DOD PsyOps got the top of organizations, put puppetes their, and are under DOD PsyOps control.
Storyline The twentieth episode of season seven finds Al confronting a burglar named Richard Johnson, who attempts to sue him for injury after he breaks into the Bundy house.
When Lumerian empath Alkar decides to use others' bodies to channel his dark thoughts so the shadows can be cleared for him to perform mediations, regardless of any fatalities, it's the kind of selfishness that warrants a verbal smackdown from Picard.
Together with the judges of the United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, they have demonstrated for all Americans how easy it 1s to turn the spying tools of the federal government against domestic political opponents.
Black Hebrew Isrealite Beliefs and Carrying the out described in Cyphertext Saved from Loo Cv) rma #Anunnaki #Elohim #Nephilim They look like humans with black, dark green and redish brown skin colors with black human features.
They created the first human race of the human species from THEIR image and likeness over 240,000 years ago.
Whistleblowers Journey:Live in DC VIDEOS PLAYLISTS COMMUNITY CHANNELS ABOUT a HOME Good v Evil We Must Fight On is Sovereign United States versus Illuminati and Murders.
A Modern War Story In Ed Donegan's opinion, author of this book, she may have had information on the decision to add genes to the genetic stock of Middle East as part of democracy building like Manafort was also doing.
JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 Reforming a planetary society with the complexity of yours in no easy matter.
Aftermath To cover the manufacture of Obama numerous aircraft may have been downed, my family harassed, there may have been murder of journalists, ill conceived or not fully discussed or disclosed genetics programs around the world, political corruption and political assassinations in the United States of judges, journalists, etc., It all appears to have gotten started on February 20 1961.
What is worth noting about Tom Dunham is he is a high tech employee of great skill, Libertarian Atheist BDSM scene of electronic digital couture, Electronic Frontiers Foundation civil liberties leaning, married to an Asian wife and progressive on social matters.
The religios component of this should not be overlooked including in Justice Scalia's assasination and the religious order backing a genetics scheme. | y I| C) w ° «© i(e} @ FEMALE Gender View li Size View Full Size unemployed ( pation Contact me ; san francisco, ca.
United States ocaion My Web Page tee dee dunham Links Wiehiest bacitatar Hello, my name is Tomas Dumas Dunham This is my itfroductbon wr, On Blogger since blog, my story of pain and torment.
The alien in my April 2012 closet took my daughter, so | took another's.
Wikii Leaks and Edward Snowden deserve recognition in being part of public discussion as a check upon government error.
Kevin Ives were hit by a cargo train in Alexander, Arkansas as they lay on the tracks.
On AUGUST 23, 1987, the bodies of 16-year old Don Henry and 17-year old ABOUT United States jean@idfiles.com ron@idfiles.com mark@idfiles.com linda@idfiles.com webmaster@idfiles.com In the 32 years since her son’s murder, Linda Ives has been relentless in her search for answers, but when she found the answers, there was no place to go with them.
I googled what did they see and the top link was Wikipedia with this, unmodified by me, Edward Paul Donegan Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here 1 Suspects and theories * One week before the boys died, a man wearing military fatigues was spotted not far from the train tracks.
My mother, my father, and myself, also victims of that scam, still fighting this together with all that we were and are.
The United States hasn't generated many great philosophers, but former longshoreman Eric Hoffer was arguably the greatest of them.
I am not safe in the USA because the USA is under Sway of old enemies including Feudal British Crown The British Windsor Family, OSS/CIA, Vatican, Mossad, international actors with plans for the world and mistakes of the past they made in the USA to clean up.
Russiab Beyond Instagram Good night from Before Kaliningrad became a Russian city in 1945, it was part of the Kingdom of Prussia, and later, the German Empire.
And the KOonigsberg Cathedral arguably is the most significant of such landmarks Z, his is the story of my family in the Manhattan Project Los Angles blast exposure testing, MKULTRA, and the Pacific Missile Crisis.
Subversion supporting Windsor CIA OSS Vatican activities Violent Street Gangs on drugs and armed operating as Neighborhood Watch both peep in my identity AND SIMULTANEOUSLY THREATEN TO KILL ME FOR HAVING PEEPED Top Tier,3 Level, White House Regular Police < should | Myself, my property Operatives be, is not — | attacked by street gangs Police pay assailants in front of me.
Violent Henchmen Law Gang Enforcemenet Member Layer 2 Espionage Agent | Confidential (Has support of others Informants including Media who in | Layer 2 Deniability of operation) | Espionage Asset Crony Deep State Shot Callers can and do get support for this operation and covering it up Masonry rejected the Central European theory, the theory that non whites were genetically inferior, and were a uniting non-white threat against Central Europe.
Pagan Reich, A Pagan's Castle, Free Mason, CIA, USA, MSM Assaulted The goal of Gang Stalking The expressed goal of Gang Stalking is to silence a victim, drive a victim insane and possibly to the point of suicide, or destroy the victim's reputation and believability as the person will likely be viewed as mentally ill should they complain or report the abuse.
MKULTRA may be called MK Vacuum or MK Glory Grandstanding (other parties using my intellectual and other property illegally and in pretensious gloat) Politicians of World Genetic-Communism and Deep Pockets digging litigation against White preference me.
That the haves complain about the genomic inferiority, neediness, of the aggressors only further fuels sympathy for the assailants, the needy, against those who have. go Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here I Persecution is the systematic mistreatment of an individual or group by another individual or group.
U Archetype Google knowledge panel retrieved from link and copied or modified to ; here 1 The concept of an archetype appears in areas relating to behavior, historical psychology, and literary analysis.
Natural Birth I know very little about my State birth, my State identity.
King George V, working with RCA and the Illuminati, is said to have traits similar to FOXP2 such as strong even morose emotions. bk History of the British Monarchy/Windsor Rulers Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here The House of Windsor was created in 1917 when George V relinquished all German titles from the British Royal Family and this included changing the families last name from Wettin and house name from Saxe-Coburg and Gotha to Windsor, after the Monarch's ancestral home, Windsor Castle.
It was likely in the underground railroad of people the Catholics and Free Masons were rescuing at various locations or trafficking at varioius locations or creating identities for at varous locations (Anglicans and Mombossa Kenya, Hawaii, Los Angles, Cape Cod, and perhaps other locations) my father met my mother Glorian Donegan a Kutschera tied to Austrian Nazis and perhaps even Eva Braun or others, certainly the Von Trapps who she seemed to live among until she was 9.
The DuPonts and North American Aviation, Boeing, the Kennedys, and others were all on the ""flying saucer"" of I1luminati works not onlly present in my life in South Carolina but as Manhattan Project defense contractors.
Inferiors U Petty Official Google Featured Snippet copied or modified to here petty official in British English. a minor official in government, etc.
Petty official definition and meaning |_Collins English Dictionary U Petty Tyrant retrieved from link and copied or modified to here This American Life is a weekly public radio program and podcast.
Ten years after his arrest, Steve Raucci broke his silence and gave an interview to Paul Nelson at the Times Union in Albany.
I have had learning disabilities, extrema off-the-scale ADD it has been called, speech spasmodia resulting in poor effect in meetings written language problems of dropped words or conjugations, spellings, etc., and study problems in school.
Petty Officials and Ranked Society Veco Society Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here —— A ranked society in anthropology is one that ranks individuals in terms of their genealogical distance from the chief.
The public saw their braggadocio towards me and likely also saw and heard that (behind my back) others without my grant of authority to do so were pleading me guilty to peeping and even paying the peepers to pretend I did it and stigmatize me in public but non-verbal non explicit-ways.
