October 23 when JFK sent out troops to invade Cuba, stopped by Cuban troops at the Bay of Pigs.
I will be telling you about the conflicts, the outcome, and most importantly my opinion.
So now i will start to talk about the conflicts that led up to the Cold War and other major conflicts with in the Cold War.
I hope you learned a lot about the topic and about my opinion if we should have gotten involved or not.
I also learned a bit of information my self and how close we were to starting nuclear war.
But now i know the smart decisions that JFK had made to save our country.
So i thnk it was a good choice in JFK's part to get involved and stop the bombing.But in other ways i thnk its a bad idea because if we hadnt gotten involved then maybe they wouldn't have ever set off the bombs and then that whole conflict wouldn't have ever started.
So, then Russia and the United States might have been closer, more friendlier country's.
Second Paragraph and Third Paragraph Second Paragraph:During World War2 Russia and America combined forces to defeat Hitler and succeeded.After the war between Russia and the United States a split occurred.
Because of the political differences and because Russia was a Communism and the United States didn't like that AT ALL and the United States was a democracy and Russia didn't like that either.
But, for Russia that was very important materiel so the communism got very angry and joined alliances with Cuba.
In 1948 the split really began and that was what they called the Cold War.
The split or hatred between the United States and Russia was so great that both of the countries threatened to bomb each others countries.Third Paragraph:By 1962 the Soviet Union and the United States were practically playing tug of war.
Meaning, if JFK threw a bomb at Cuba then Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev would throw right back.
Also in the United States the Americans were getting very nervous because they didn't know if a bomb would fall from the sky and kill them all.
Another major conflict was on October 23 when JFK sent out troops to try and invade Cuba but where stopped by other Cuban troops at the Bay of Pigs.
