Gerald Ford LBJ and Senator Richard Russell LBJ and Senator Richard Russell – 2nd Conversation LBJ and Tom Kuchel LBJ in the Oval Office During Vietnam LBJ – Conversation with Adlai Stevenson LBJ – Conversation with George Reedy LBJ – Conversation with McGeorge Bundy LBJ – Conversation with Richard Russell LBJ On Not Running for Reelection LBJ Phones Joseph Haggar, Jr.
Malcolm X Biography Malcolm X – The Ballot or the Bullet March for Jobs and Freedom Jobs and Freedom – A Philip Randolph Jobs and Freedom – John Lewis Jobs and Freedom – Roy Wilkins Jobs and Freedom – Whitney Young, Jr.
In addition to demanidng that Russian Premier Nikita S Khrushchev remove all the missile bases and their deadly contents, Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba in order to prevent Russian ships from bringing additional missiles and construction materials to the island.
After several days of teetering on the brink of nuclear holocaust, the world breathed a sigh of relief.
The showdown in Cuba may indeed have been the result of such accumulating anxiety among the Soviet political elite.
Viewed in hindsight, it is not surprising that the Soviets chose Cuba as their stage of operations against the United States Ever since his rise to power in 1959, Cuban Premier Fidel Castro struggled to survive America’s efforts to “encourage” his political demise.
The cozy alliance which ensued between Castro and Khrushchev laid the ground for what culminated in a Soviet missile base in Cuba and ended in the Cuban missile crisis.
They include President Kennedy’s personal recollections of discussions, conversations with his advisors, meetings with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and members of the president’s executive committee.
But if you persevere, you will become a first-hand observer to one of the most important events of the cold war.
Monday, October 15: A U-2 reconnaissance aircraft, piloted by Richard Heyser, reveals several SS-4 nuclear missiles in Cuba.
After learning of the missiles during breakfast, President Kennedy convenes his Executive Committee to consider America’s options.
Amid scheduled campaign trips to Connecticut and the Midwest, President Kennedy meets with and advises Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko that America will not tolerate Soviet missiles in Cuba.
After an evening meeting, President Kennedy spends about four minutes recording his personal recollections of discussions that day.
JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern] Friday, October 19: JFK meets with the secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff before leaving on a scheduled campaign trip to Ohio and Illinois.
JFK discusses various military options and possible consequences with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Joint Chiefs chairman General Maxwell Taylor states that the JCS was initially agreed on military action along with the blockade.
Under the public guise of an “upper respiratory infection,” President Kennedy returns to Washington from Chicago after being convinced by Robert Kennedy that he must meet again with EX-COMM to discuss, among other things, the discovery of additional Soviet missiles in Cuba.
When confronted with questions regarding rumors of offensive weapons in Cuba, Kennedy asks the press not to report the story until after he address the American public.
When a U-2 is actually brought down by a missile from a SAM site four days later, JFK decides not to issue the order.
Bundy suggests that the president should delegate the authority to order an air strike against a SAM to the sec. of defense.
JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern] Tape 34.1A-34.2, October 23, time unknown: Discussion of diplomatic efforts at the UN and the vote by the Organization of American States: Discussion about possible Soviet responses to the quarantine especially in Berlin.
JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern] Wednesday, October 24: Soviet ships reach the quarantine line, but receive radio orders from Moscow to hold their positions.
RFK concludes that the president could not have done less and that his judgment has now been supported by our allies and almost allthe OAS states.
The brothers talk about the political side of the crisis and Khrushchev’s apparent willingness to embarrass the president before the upcoming congressional elections.
JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern] Tape 37.4, October 25, 10:00, Review of the movement of ships toward the quarantine line and potential United States responses: Brief discussion of the arrival of Fidel Castro’s list of baby food, plasma and medicines as part of the continuing negotiations for release of the Bay of Pigs prisoners.
JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern] Friday, October 26: EX-COMM receives a letter from Khrushchev stating that the Soviets would remove their missiles if President Kennedy publicly guarantees the United States will not invade Cuba.
JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern] Tapes 39. and 39.
JFK Library release notes prepared by Sheldon M Stern] Tape 40.0, parts 1 and 2, October 26, afternoon or evening : Intelligence briefing by CIA director, further military planning and a discussion of the Sino/Indian war between JFK and the Indian ambassador to the US: As McCone reviews the latest pictures of the missile sites, JFK asks if anyone has seen the London Times which claims that the United States has misread the photos and misidentified ground to air missiles as ICBMs.
JFK decides not to order an attack on the SAM site as agreed earlier [tape 34.1, 21:OO] but agrees to strike all the SAM sites if any additional planes are attacked.
JFK secretly authorizes UN secretary general U Thant to offer a UN-sponsored trade of the American missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba with assurances of prompt United States acceptance.
General Taylor reports that the JCS wants an air strike no later than Monday morning unless there is irrefutable evidence that the missiles are being dismantled.
McNamara insists that the case should be made that this is not so much a trade as a way of preventing a Soviet military attack on a NATO member nation.
Ambassador Thompson suggests that “These boys are beginning to give way.
WE ARE LOCATING A REPLACEMENT COPY TO COMPLETE THE REMAINDER OF TAPE 42.
RFK also urges putting off military action for 24 hours; “One day -I can ‘t believe it’s going to make that much difference.
The CIA’s early morning intelligence update concludes that Soviet technicians have completed the work necessary to make all the MRBM sites fully operational.
Fidel Castro, furious over the fact that he was not consulted before Khrushchev’s decision, refuses to allow UN inspection of the dismantling of the missile bases.
As he is about to leave the room, the president calls his secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, to discuss having commemorative calendars made for that month of October, with the dates of the crisis highlighted, as gifts for the members of Excomm.
Three decades later a Soviet military official would reveal that mobile tactical nuclear weapons and more than 40,000 Soviet troops were in place in Cuba for use in the event of an American invasion.
