BARTON J BERNSTEIN President John F Kennedy has been variously praised and blamed for his handling of, the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962.
Kennedy should either have acceded to the Soviet missiles in Cuba, or at least tried private diplomacy before moving to the quarantine.
Many assessments focus on Kennedy's rebponse to the Soviet demand on Saturday, October 27, that the United States withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
The Atomic Bombings of Japan and the Origins of the Cold War, 1941-1945, the editor of Politics and Policies of the Truman Administration, and a contributor to many journals and edited volumes.
Critics, on the other hand, have either denied that there was such an agreement or have stressed that it was dangerously loose.
It required that Premier Nikita Khrushchev trust Kennedy's hedged, private promise and accept public defeat in order to avoid an American invasion of Cuba and possibly allout war.
New evidence-recently declassified minutes, some staff reports, key diplomatic cables, and some published parts of Robert Kennedy's still-closed papers7 -reopens these issues about the Turkey-Cuba missile trade and its background.
This evidence reveals that President Kennedy was partly responsible for installing the missiles in Turkey and that the president and some advisers, from the early days of the crisis, were privately more flexible than memoirists or critics acknowledged.
The new evidence establishes that Kennedy privately offered a hedged promise on 27 October 1962 to withdraw the Jupiter missiles from Turkey at a future time.
Unfortunately, these documents do not resolve the problem of what Kennedy would have done had Khrushchev insisted on a public pledge.
In 1957 the Eisenhower administration decided to arrange to send missiles to Europe, largely to strengthen NATO, both militarily and psychologically.
Most NATO allies, however, fearful of antagonizing the Soviet Union and in many cases of inflaming domestic opposition, refused the weapons.
The missiles would be owned by Turkey; the nuclear warheads would be owned by the United States and in the custody of its forces; the weapons could be launched only on the order of the Supreme Allied CommanderEurope on the approval of both the American and Turkish governments; and the sites would be manned by soldiers of both nations.
The legal provisions raised serious problems about actual practices during a crisis.
Such questions undoubtedly added to the fears of the Soviet Union, for the missiles would be close to the border.
The Jupiters were liquid-fuel IRBMs, taking hours to fire, quite inaccurate, very vulnerable, and hence only useful militarily for a first strike, and thus provocative.
The skin of the Jupiter was so thin that a sniper's bullet could puncture it and render it inoperative.
They added prestige, emphasized Turkey's key role in NATO, and exaggerated the warmth of relations with a great power, the United States.
Turkish officials probably did not understand the strategic liabilities; perhaps they believed that the missiles, because of their first-strike capacity and the ambiguity of actual control, were sufficiently frightening to deter the Soviets from pressuring Turkey.
Unlike the Eisenhower planners and the Turkish officials, President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara worried about the provocative nature of these weapons.
As a result, according to some memoirists, Kennedy actually ordered the removal of the Jupiters before October 1962, and thus was shocked and dismayed to learn during the Cuban missile crisis that they were still in Turkey.
In fact, his administration, not Eisenhower's, had actually installed these weapons in late 1961 to fulfill the 1959 agreement.
Instead, according to the committee, the government should deploy to the area a Polaris submarine, with its sixteen missiles, operated and controlled by American personnel.
It would be mobile, concealed, and thus virtually immune from a Soviet attack.
As a result, unlike the Jupiters, the Polaris would add to deterrence and better protect the United States, NATO, and Turkey.
Kenneth O'Donnell and David Powers, with Joe McCarthy, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 337, states that JFK had given the order five times.
Alfred Goldberg, Historian, Department of Defense, for locating this source for me.
The committee was to be chaired by a representative from the State Department, which, unlike the Defense Department, was not deeply troubled by the provocative nature of the Jupiters and which was likely to serve as a partisan for Turkish interests and resist cancellation of the weapons.
Kennedy, a knowledgeable leader who understood bureaucratic politics, probably cared more about not offending the Turks than about withholding the Jupiters.
This message was probably clear to the chair and other representatives.
The details of the committee's activities remain classified, but another document, probably a report from the committee's chairman, establishes that the Jupiters were still not in Turkey in early summer.
American credibility and the president's prestige required doing what the Defense Department regarded as militarily dangerous.
In addition, McGhee continued, ""the Turkish reaction was strongly adverse"" and General Lauris Norstad, commander of NATO, ""underlined the military importance of sending IRBM's to Turkey.
An analyst cannot determine whether he failed to recognize the provocative nature of the Jupiters in Turkey, or whether he thought that they would make the Soviets uneasy and thus deter some small-scale adventurism, or whether he believed that the missiles were primarily valuable as symbols of the alliance.
What is clear is that Norstad's reasoning helped undercut the analysis of Secretary McNamara and his ""whiz kids,"" who hoped to make deterrence more reasonable and thus chafed at the resistance of allies, the American brass, and the State Department.
The most likely explanation is that McGhee's report summarized Kennedy's own thinking that summer.
Nor did he wish to weaken the NATO alliance politically and deeply offend a key American ally, Turkey, by reneging on Eisenhower's commitment.
Perhaps, as McNamara later hinted, the administration might have been tempted to promise a Polaris for the future, when it would be available, instead of deploying Jupiters then, in mid-1961.
Because there were no extra Polaris subs then, such a promise in mid-1961 would not have met Kennedy's needs or Turkish hopes.
But in 1961, there was no felt need for haste, since the Jupiters were deemed a minor problem in a nuclear edifice that, for the new administration, required major remodeling and expansion.
According to some memoirists, President Kennedy raised with the State Department in early 1962 the issue of withdrawing the Jupiters, which would become operational in about July.
At the NATO meeting in May, according to Roger Hilsman, Secretary of State Dean Rusk found that the Turks still objected, primarily on political grounds.
There is no evidence that the administration offered a Polaris as a substitute, and Turkish officials probably would have found the submarine less attractive.
The missiles, because they were visible, added more tangible prestige; and they were subject, in principle, to some Turkish control.
Still, he did not order withdrawal, but only implied a study of its feasibility.
The President has directed that the following actions and studies be undertaken in the light of new bloc activity in Cuba.
For additional doubts that Kennedy ever ordered withdrawal, see George Ball to Bernstein, 22 February 1979.
So far as the available records and recollections indicate, however, the Defense Department accomplished nothing in the next seven weeks to phase out the Jupiters.
Obviously, removing the missiles first required a plan and then probably diplomatic negotiations.
Probably the Defense Department was again flirting with the possibility of substituting deployment of a Polaris (there were nine) near Turkey for the Jupiters.
Given that his government had installed them, and they had just become operational in about July, he could not have been so foolishly optimistic.
Thus it is too simple to conclude, as have some analysts, that Kennedy ordered removal of the missiles and that the bureaucracy thwarted his instructions.
A more subtle approach would acknowledge that a chief executive may often express preferences for policies, and that he may sincerely reinterpret them as orders when his own inaction leaves him woefully unprepared in a crisis.
In this way, a president can place blame on a subordinate, and other aides who listen to his charges tend to believe that the president actually issued an order, and not simply stated a wish or hope.
Practitioners of the ""bureaucratic politics"" model develop a vested interest in uncritically accepting such dubious evidence precisely because their model so nicely ""explains"" it.
Thus, the model first helps define the reliability of the evidence and then explains it-a dangerous, circular process.
The memoirists tell us that neither Kennedy nor his advisers, with the exception of CIA director John McCone, deemed such Soviet action as likely.
There was already evidence that recent Soviet deliveries to Cuba probably included surface-to-air missiles and possibly planes.
The NSC memorandum had suggested the danger of the Soviets equating ""offensive"" missiles in Turkey with those in Cuba.
The Soviet weapons were designed for aggression and deployed secretly; the American weapons were defensive and deployed openly.
Put simply, the Soviet action was dangerous and dishonorable, the American action peaceful and honorable.
It was a strained, self-righteous document, characteristic of the administration's public pronouncements during the crisis.
THE UNITED STATES CONSIDERS A TRADE On Tuesday, October 16, when learning of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, some administration members feared that the Soviets would point to the Jupiters for justification.
During the six days, from October 16 to October 21, when the Executive Committee of the National Security Council deliberated on how the administration should respond, United Nations ambassador Adlai Stevenson, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, and some other advisers occasionally suggested trading missiles to settle the crisis.
On Wednesday, October 17, Stevenson warned Kennedy that world opinion would equate United States missile bases in Turkey with the Soviet bases in Cuba.
In fairness to Stevenson, on Wednesday, when he offered this counsel, the ExComm was leaning toward an attack on Cuba to eliminate the missiles; in that context, he was probably more concerned to head off disaster than to phrase an exact plan for negotiations.
The problems of when, how, and under what conditions to offer a trade-whether explicit or informal-would bedevil thinking on this matter throughout the crisis.
His proposed settlement would have included withdrawal of Jupiters from Turkey and abandonment of the United States naval base at Guantanamo.
The irrationalities of the classification-declassification system are well illustrated by the fact that the typed copy of this item was declassified by the State Department in August 1974, but the handwritten copy (which is trivially different because of some crossing out) was kept classified until summer 1978, despite requests and appeals for declassification in the intervening years.
Because he was an outsider, not respected by either Kennedy brother, his counsel, even when similar to that of the trusted McNamara, easily rankled the tired members of the ExComm.
Whereas they viewed themselves as ""tough"" and decisive, they viewed Stevenson as indecisive and soft.
President Kennedy ""sharply rejected the thought of surrendering [Guantanamo],"" according the the ExComm minutes.
According to the minutes, ""he agreed that at an appropriate time we would have to acknowledge that we were willing to take strategic missiles out of Turkey and Italy if this issue was raised by the Russians.
The quoted minutes in Schlesinger's account leave unclear whether the president was willing to countenance an explicit public trade of the Jupiters, or whether he was suggesting something private, hedged, even evasive.
On Sunday morning, October 21, high-level State Department officials flirted with the Cuba-Turkey missile trade.
The first memo called for sending United Nations observation teams to Turkey, Italy, and Cuba to ""insure surprise attack,"" and suggested discussions on NATO bases in Italy and Turkey.
The last memo suggested trading Guantanamo but did not offer the bases in Turkey and Italy.
On Monday morning, the day the president announced the quarantine, Attorney General Robert Kennedy sketched the administration's public line, at least for the next few days.
The deliberations of the past week, especially the Sunday evening meeting, certainly suggested them as part of an exchange.
Probably the time was too short, and probably he was also tempted by the prospect of a future trade and therefore unwilling to discard this extra card.
But probably Kennedy was willing to take that risk in order to keep open future options, to protect himself from international embarrassment (would not the -sudden dismantling suggest United States acknowledgement that Turkey-Cuba missile bases were equivalent?), and to avoid domestic charges of weakness and a sellout.
Plans to Trade the jupiters After the president's Monday evening speech announcing the quarantine, some American officials vigorously canvassed the possibility of trading the Jupiters in Turkey as part of the ultimate settlement of the crisis.
This memorandum also dealt with removal of the thirty Jupiters from Italy.
Averell Harriman, Harlan Cleveland (assistant secretary of state for International Organization), Walt Whitman Rostow (director of the Policy Planning Council), and Stevenson, among others, scratched around for some solution involving the Jupiters.
At times, this line seemed to capture the fancy of President Kennedy, but hard questions always lingered for him.
Early in the week, President Kennedy apparently directed the State Department to consider withdrawing the missiles, which spurred Ball to consult key ambassadors.
Removal of the Jupiters as part of an explicit trade would weaken NATO and injure American relations with Turkey, Hare replied.
They were proud that, unlike the Cubans, they were not the ""stooge"" of a great power.
Both Turkey's political prestige and military power were at stake, he claimed, and the Jupiters fulfilled both needs.
He reluctantly suggested a secret Soviet-American agreement and then the prompt dismantling of the missiles.
On receiving Ball's cable, NATO Ambassador Thomas Finletter also replied that Turkish officials would bitterly resent a trade.
Unlike Hare, Finletter did not even glance at the possibility of a secret deal with the Soviets.
Perhaps he did not conceive of this strategy; more likely, he did not want to risk mentioning what he deemed a disastrous course.
By Thursday, October 25, while one special NSC committee was sketching the scenario for an air strike, another was outlining a ""political path""-a summit meeting while the quarantine continued-to settle the crisis.
Only nuclear powers should possess nuclear weapons and missiles, and thus the United States and the Soviet Union would not place these systems in the territory of nonnuclear powers.
Such terms, Harriman explained, would compel the United States to pull missiles out of Turkey and Italy, but not Britain, which was a nuclear power, and Russia would have to withdraw its missiles from Cuba.
By raising the terms to a level of generality, Harriman hoped to conceal what some could regard as a naked trade-missiles in Turkey and Italy for missiles in Cuba.
Harriman was seizing on the crisis to address more basic problems and also offering Khrushchev a way of avoiding humiliation.
The negotiations might be speedy, and the Soviets would recognize that they could take credit for forcing a trade and for promoting disarmament.
Harriman's first choice was a resolution on denuclearization of Latin America, which excluded the problem of Europe.
They seemed to fear that the Soviets would reduce the time required for launching an MRBM, and that they also were advancing quickly on twelve or eighteen launchers for IRBMs , likely to be ready in about five weeks.
The CIA was not sure whether nuclear warheads were in Cuba, but the administration assumed the worst.
The ExComm minutes are scattered with demands that work on the missiles must soon stop.
And Kennedy seemed to have a self-imposed deadline of roughly between Sunday, October 28, to about Tuesday, October 30.50 As a result, plans involving a trade of the Jupiters had to meet his informal timetable.
Those plans that seemed to involve lengthy negotiations would be unacceptable, unless they stipulated a way of getting the Soviets promptly to halt work on the sites.
While Harriman's plan may have had this liability, two others-one from a special NSC committee and the other from Rostow-certainly did.
On Friday, the special committee offered a proposal, forwarded by Rusk without comment to Kennedy, for a ""face-saving cover, if wish, for a withdrawal of their offensive weapons from Cuba.
Walt W Rostow, sketching a similar plan, believed that he had devised a way out of the crisis while maintaining all of the ""Free World assets"" and actually strengthening the NATO alliance.
For an admission that some MRBMs were operational and probably had nuclear warheads, see McNamara's statement, Washington Post, 25 October 1962, A-10.
Generally newspapers, including the Washington Post, disregarded this admission.
His paperback edition struggles to maintain much of the claim while squirming away from an admission that he failed to research his subject adequately and thus simply missed Bernstein's article in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.
An additional attraction, for Rostow, was that it achieved goals he had long sought-a stronger NATO, establishment of MLF, and removal of dangerous weapons.
Ideally, the analyst would like to know which ExComm members supported which proposals and what kind of informal dialogue ensued.
The special NSC committee's proposal went to Kennedy, as did Rostow's, and probably all the reports reached Bundy's desk.
By Friday, judging from the contents of the various memorandums, there had been substantial informal dialogue.
Many advisers were looking for a road to a settlement, and the Jupiters constituted a possible one.
On Friday morning, the ExComm considered whether Kennedy should seek United Nations assistance in arranging negotiations with the Soviets while they halted construction on the missile sites and, as Stevenson suggested, the United States suspended its quarantine.
Stevenson, who seemed optimistic, ""predicted that the Russians would ask for a new guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba and the dismantlement of United States strategic missiles in Turkey"" in return for withdrawal of missiles from Cuba.
He resented linking the missiles in Turkey with the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
According to the minutes, he said, ""we will get the ... missiles out of Cuba only by invading or trading.
After Kennedy spoke, the dialogue quickly shifted from the Jupiters to Stevenson's proposal that the quarantine should be suspended during negotiations.
The pressure must be maintained, they concluded, to help force a settlement.
Curiously, they did not return to the issue of the Jupiters at that meeting.
There was not even a hint that the United States must dismantle its Jupiters; the Soviets were asking for less than many American officials had anticipated and than some had proposed to grant.
That Friday night, most ExComm members could find reason for satisfaction.
The dangerous crisis would end with one American concession-the pledge not to invade Cuba.s7 Only a few advisers, including McCone and at least some of the Joint Chiefs, were deeply unhappy that Castro would be safe from a United States attack.
Some Soviet ships were approaching the quarantine line; the FBI reported that the Soviet delegation was destroying intelligence documents in likely preparation for war; and a surface-to-air missile shot down a U-2 over Cuba.
In searching for a settlement, the ExComm and other advisers had usually dwelled more upon the American missiles in Turkey , possibly because those in Turkey were closer to the Soviet Union and had provoked more Soviet ire in the past.
There is considerable evidence on the attitudes of the German, French, British, Italian, and Canadian governments, and scattered evidence for belgium the Netherlands, Greece, Denmark, and Norway.
A formal trade, especially a public one, would have unnerved some governments, particularly the German and British, and probably the Dutch; it would have confirmed the analysis of President Charles de Gaulle of France, delighted Canada, and probably pleased the Italian, Belgian, Greek, Danish, and Norwegian governments.
Konrad Adenauer, the steadfast chancellor of West Germany, who always feared that American concessions anywhere might betoken abandonment of Berlin, would undoubtedly have opposed even a private trade.
But he had no real leverage and could not threaten to leave NATO or even acknowledge its weaknesses.
Unwilling to move toward rapprochement with the Soviet Union, Adenauer and his party depended upon the United States and NATO for both military protection and political prestige.
Any trade would have eroded his trust in Kennedy, but it would not have altered Adenauer's policies on the larger issues -Berlin, East Germany, the Warsaw Pact, and the Soviet Union.
True, at home, he would have been compelled to defend himself and his party against charges that the United States would also sell out Berlin and thus against demands that an approach to the East was essential.
Like Kennedy, Adenauer could have distinguished between Berlin and the Jupiters, for he could have defined the 61 Hilsman, To Move A Nation, 220.
The Soviet message of October 27 mentioned the missiles in Britain and Italy but specified only those in Turkey as a requirement for a trade.
So far as the available materials indicate, no one in the ExComm speculated on why the Soviets added the Jupiters in Turkey to the deal and not also those in Italy.
Could the Soviets have desired both to raise the ante and to keep the ""price"" within what seemed acceptable limits7 Perhaps Walter Lippmann's suggestion of a Turkey-Cuba missile trade (Washington Post, 25 October 1962, A-25 and 23 October 1962, A-10) seemed to the Soviets an oblique administration offer.
Already moving toward French withdrawal from NATO on the grounds that the alliance meant American domination and blocked France from an independent foreign policy, de Gaulle could use the missile crisis-whatever the outcome-to support his analysis.
America had acted independently, without consultation with allies, he noted.
Probably no likely action by Kennedy in the missile crisis-whether he traded or not -could have blocked de Gaulle's ambitions for establishing France as an independent force.
That conception, so intimately related to his quest for national and personal grandeur, would not be punctured by United States decisions during the missile crisis.
While he technically supported the president in the crisis, the aged French leader hinted that immaturity had led Kennedy and the United States to overreact.
Fretting that the quarantine might be inadequate, Macmillan wrote in his diary, Kennedy may ""'miss the bus'-he may never get rid of Cuban rockets except by trading them for Turkish, Italian, or other bases.
But by Friday, October 26, when the Soviets seemed to be seeking a way out of the crisis, Macmillan was conciliatory.
Kennedy found the suggestion attractive, wanted to mull it over, but feared that it might provoke the Soviets to insist on dismantlings in Turkey and Italy.
Though Macmillan had proposed a temporary demobilization of his Thor missiles, he later claimed that, despite the obsolescence of the Jupiters, he would not have agreed to the Soviet proposal on October 27 for their removal.
Loyalty to the United States would have shaped the Conservative government's public statements.
During that week in late October, American analysts concluded that Norway and Denmark would welcome a trade of the Jupiters to end the crisis.
They were probably correct about these two Scandanavian allies, who had steadfastly resisted the emplacement of any nuclear weapons on their soil.
When the Soviets made their public demand for including the Jupiters in a settlement, Norwegian government officials endorsed removal of the weapons.
Italy's center-left coalition government reluctantly supported the quarantine, tried to improve relations with the Soviets during the crisis, and anxiously urged Kennedy to negotiate with Khrushchev.
On October 27, when an American attack on Cuba seemed imminent, Premier Amintore Fanfani of the Christian Democrats wanted Kennedy to extend his deadline and probably favored the trade of Turkey's Jupiters.
The Italian Socialist party, upon which the uneasy government coalition depended, had condemned the quarantine and probably welcomed the trade to end the crisis.
In Canada, Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, long unhappy about U.S. dominance, was publicly tactful but privately critical of the president's actions.
Strategic Air Command bombers from the use of Canadian airfields during the crisis.
His devout hope was that war could be avoided, and he did not seem to fear that concessions-and certainly not on the Jupiters-would seriously weaken the NATO alliance.
For Labour and Liberal party responses, see Manchester Guardian, 25 October 1962, 2; Times , 25 October 1962, 8.
For editorials suggesting a trade, see Times , 24, 26, and 28 October and Manchester Guardian, 23, 24, and '25 October 1962.
On British press opinion, also see Washington Post, 30 October 1962, A-8.
The Norwegian officials approved the Sovietproposed deal only if removal of the Jupiters would not strategically impair NATO's defenses.
Probably they knew that this criterion was clearly met, for the issue was psychological and political, not strategic.
The bases were obsolete, the ambassador argued, and he did not seehow the Russians would withdraw their weapons unless the United States reciprocated.
He apparently was not worried about the loss of prestige to the United States or the impact on NATO and seemed to believe that these matters were less important than a settlement.
Unlike de Staercke, and presumably the Belgian government, Dutch officials privately opposed a trade on the grounds that it would undermine NATO's morale.
But Greek officials, while publicly discreet, seemed to lean toward de Staercke's analysis.
When the Soviets demanded removal of the Jupiters, Greek officials privately indicated that this was an acceptable solution.
In some important Latin American nations, despite their public statements supporting Kennedy, there was probably strong sentiment for a compromise involving the Jupiters, in either a public or private deal.
The United States government did win unanimous support for the quarantine from the Organization of American States , but that unanimity was secured, in at least a few cases, by some deft coercion.
The main item on the OAS agenda was United States economic aid, and Washington first moved for a vote of support for the quarantine.
Even then, some governments-including Brazil, Mexico, Bolivia, and Uruguay-feared providing full support for Kennedy's actions, as the State Department knew at the time.
Also see Manchester Guardian, 24 October 1962, 15, and Times (London), 27 October 1962, 8.
Obviously, an analysis of the likely impact of an American deal might also consider the Central Treaty Organization and the South East Asia Treaty Organization , but the declassified documents reveal almost no specific attention to these two alliances.
A trade, even a public one, for the Jupiters was attractive if an invasion was the alternative.
The United States's complex alliance systems did rest partly upon faith in its credibility, but many governments also feared that efforts to affirm credibility could be rash and dangerous.
They did not usually expect the United States to -maintain blind allegiance, and, as the history of recent American foreign relations demonstrated, discretion, tempered force, and the willingness to compromise were also essential to operating the far-flung alliances.
The minutes for Saturday's three sessions reveal that the ExComm easily disposed of the first question and devoted agonizing attention to the second.
Some advisers wanted to arrange a way of pulling out the Jupiters without making a clear trade.
A trade would injure Turkey, NATO, and the United States, according to their analysis.
At various points, President Kennedy indicated that he did not want to yield to Soviet pressure but that he would favor some cosmetic arrangement to get rid of the Jupiters in order to settle the crisis.
At a few points, he seemed desperate and prepared to countenance a trade.
Work on the Soviet missile sites in Cuba must soon stop, Kennedy periodically emphasized, and his lingering implication was that an American attack on Cuba might otherwise become necessary in the next few days.
At times in the Saturday meetings, some ExComm members urged an attack-possibly first on the SAM sites and then on the MRBM and IRBM sites, to be followed by an invasion.
An anxious group of men, hardly more than a dozen, assessed actions that might lead to war or peace.
And the president, listening to their counsel and trying out his own notions, ultimately had the constitutional and actual power of decision.
The vigorous disputes over strategy left him reasonably free to choose. in the ExComm, he never faced a monolith, only shifting majorities.
But if he chose the route of concessions, he would risk antagonizing the military chiefs, who were not his natural allies.
He favored removing the weapons but did not want to appear to be yielding to a Soviet demand, lest he lose prestige and credibility, injure Turkey and NATO, and give the Soviets a public victory.
The suggested trade of forty-two Soviet MRBMs (representing one-third of the entire Soviet strategic arsenal) for fifteen obsolete Jupiters was attractive on military grounds, Kennedy acknowledged.
It would even be hard to get political support for such a position, he acknowledged.
But if the work on the sites ceased, Kennedy noted, ""we could talk to the Russians.
TheWhite House statement, widely interpreted in the press as an outright rejection, was actually more subtle and elusive.
It left the door open for some future agreement on the Jupiters but never specifically mentioned them.
It sidestepped the Soviet demand, asserted that negotiations were impossible until work stopped on the missile sites and they were rendered inoperative, declared that the current crisis in Cuba and European security could not be linked, but mentioned the possibility of postsettlement discussions on arms limitation in Europe, and thus hinted at a willingness to consider removal of the Jupiters after the resolution of the crisis.
That afternoon, a small, weary group met at the State Department to prepare the president's formal reply to Khrushchev.
When the ExComm reconvened at 4 P.M., the president revised the draft to stress his offer to discuss, after the resolution of the crisis, the reduction of general tensions, a halt to the arms race, and a detente between NATO and the Warsaw Pact countries.
As the minutes indicate, this section was designed as an oblique way of offering to discuss withdrawal of the Jupiters later without specifying them and thus avoiding angering the Turks and appearing weak.
Often mixing proposals, ExComm members considered attacking Cuba, or convening a special NATO meeting, or outrightly rejecting the Turkey-Cuba missile trade, and even disarming the Jupiters and then attacking Cuba.
In calling for a NATO meeting on Sunday, President Kennedy wavered between supporting a bid for peace and opting for a course toward war.
The obvious liability was that the attack might kill 15,000-20,000 Soviets and thus compel the Soviets to retaliate-probably in Europe.
As a majority in the ExComm seemed to be shifting to this plot, the president adjourned the meeting.
At least a few lingered in the room to discuss the bizarre course of the meeting.
The arguments of maintaining credibility, of keeping faith with NATO, of meeting obligations to Turkey did not seem to impress him.
Accept the Soviet terms, he suggested, and replace the Jupiters with a Polaris sub.
Kennedy decided to activate twenty-four air reserve squadrons in preparation for the invasion and to frighten the Soviets.
Perhaps the answer is that approval of a public trade would have enabled the administration to yield with dignity but opposition would not have blocked a secret deal.
Adenauer loyally supported Kennedy, but de Gaulle, having retreated into privacy until the French voters cast their ballots, refused to see the American ambassador.
Even with war near, the French leader, ever disdainful, would not modify his ways and thus reinforced, at least for himself, his sense of olympian superiority.
What neither the NATO delegates nor the United States's chief European allies could know was that Kennedy was still mulling over a trade.
Robert Kennedy's secret meeting with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, at 7:45 P.M., before the evening session of the ExComm.
Acting on the instructions of the president and Secretary Rusk, the attorney general invited Dobrynin to a private meeting at the Justice Department.
Robert Kennedy looked exhausted , 'rhe President is in a grave situation, and he does not know how to get out of it.
Khrushchev makes the same claim (The Last Testament, 512), as does Anatoly Gromyko, ""The Caribbean Crisis,"" in Mezhdunarodnye konflikty , eds.
It allowed Khrushchev to present himself as a man of peace-a leader who had rescued Kennedy from his bellicose generals and admirals-and thus to obscure his acquiescence in response to a virtual ultimatum.
Certainly, it could not help him save face internationally, since no one would know of the deal.
Critics of the missile crisis have stressed JFK's fears of an electoral and bureaucratic backlash and also his own lust for combat and victory.
A few of the memoirists, Robert Kennedy included, have asserted that the United States would soon have attacked Cuba.
Delay a decision one more day on accepting the Turkish-Cuba missile deal.
It might have denied him the appearance of victory and even confirmed that the Soviet deployment was analagous to the installation' of the missiles in Turkey.
Certainly the hawks, especially in the Pentagon and CIA, would have been embittered.
The Republican party would have condemned him for ""selling out"" United States and NATO interests.
His party might have suffered a sharp setback in the November congressional elections.
That electoral defeat would have imperiled his foreign policy and further emboldened the hawks in the bureaucracy.
The United States's-and Kennedy's-international prestige and credibility would have been somewhat weakened, at least briefly, even though some NATO governments would have endorsed the settlement.
Kennedy could have blunted some of the criticism at home and abroad by encouraging European allies to support the trade publicly.
He might have called upon Latin American powers for similar assistance.
That act would not have violated the agreement with Khrushchev, but it might have punctured charges that Kennedy had made a great concession.
Bombers, Inspection, and the No Invasion Pledge,"" Foreign Service Journal 56 :8-12.
In 1963, McNamara told the House Appropriations Committee, ""without any qualifications whatsoever there was absolutely no deal, as it might be called, between the Soviet Union and the United States regarding the removal of the Jupiter weapons from either Italy or Turkey"" (U.S., Department of Defense, Appropriations for 1964, 88th Cong., 1st sess., 1963, pt.
