Its purpose is to review the evidence concerning the nature, scope, and timing of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba in 1962 and to discuss the implications of that evidence.
It was judged, however, that the major features of the Cuban venture were the result of deliberate, rational Soviet decisions that took into account the detailed knowledge of United States reconnaissance capabilities acquired by the USSR in May I960.
It is believed, therefore, that the conclusions represent the most likely interpretation in view of the totality and interrelationship of the evidence available more than a year after the crisis.
Because the quality of the evidence ranges from conclusive to ambiguous, an effort has been made throughout the study to indicate clearly the degree of certainty surrounding the information and the judgments based on it.
The time period covered begins in early I960 and ends in November 1962 with the withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba.
Valuable assistance was provided in the preparation of the study by the Office of Scientific Intelligence, the Office of Current Intelligence, and the National Photographic Interpretation Center.
Although that study also discusses Soviet objectives, the timing of the decision, the Soviet estimate of risk, the course of the buildup, and the reasons for retreat, it is focused differently.
Whereas this study collates and studies the hard facts of the buildup, drawing its principal conclusions therefrom, the Research Staff study examines the buildup within the broader context of a survey of Soviet foreign policy, placing primary emphasis on political factors, and considers the probable reasons why the USSR estimated that the Cuban venture would involve only a low degree of risk.
In those areas where the studies overlap, they reach similar conclusions.
Where the studies do not overlap, one study provides additional background for the reader of the other.
C Soviet Merchan/Shipping Air Defense Systems ' A Early Warning and Target Acquisition Radar Capability 1.
Evidence on the Detection and Tracking of United States Reconnaissance Overflights During 1962 27 B Surface -to-Air Missile System 28 1.
Location and Timing of Offloading of SAM Units and Associated Equipment . , '31 3.
Timing of Establishment of Individual Sites and Support Facilities 3 3 5.
Development of an SA-2 System Capability 37 C Fighter Aircraft 38 Naval and Ground Systems 41 A Coastal Defense Missile Systems 41 1.
A Soviet View of the Risks B The Decision 58 60 64 65 66 69 71 73 74 76 77 78 83 83 Probable Soviet pbjectives The Withdrawal 91 92 1.
Although some of these forces were combat-ready during the critical week in October before Khrushchev announced the Soviet decision to draw back from direct military confrontation with the US, the original Soviet timetableapparently did not call for the completion of many of the major elements of the military establishment in Cuba, including the air defense system and medium-range ballistic missile units, until some time during the first half of November.
The concept and execution of the venture clearly indicate that the Soviet authorities made no appreciable effort to orevent or delay United States detection by aerial reconnaissance of the oitensive weapons during the deployment phase.
It is believed that tne most likely explanation is that they judged the risk of a United States military reaction to be very slight.
The chain of events that culminated in the Cuban crisis of October 1962 can be traced back to the visit of Soviet rirst Deputy Premier Vikoyan to Cuba in February 1960.
This visit constituted the first public endorsement of the Cuban revolution, after a year oi Soviet -eserve following Castro's seizure of power and Soviet diplomatic ^cognition of the regime.
It was followed by a series of economic assistance agreements and. in the third quarter of I960, the first Soviet deliveries of land armaments.
Soviet military aid to Cuba thereafter proceeded cautiously and deliberately, particularly when compared with assistance to other countries, as though the Soviet leaders were carefully testing both United States reactions and their relations with the Castro regime.
Deliveries of fighter aircraft to Cuoa, . probably punned before *• ^""""^^J""^ ™'^ about June 1961.
Thus the SAM units and other air defense elements were not planned to become operational as a system for at least a month and a half after the presence of MRBM's in Cuba rendered Soviet intentions subject to detection.
In addition, the geographical pattern of SAM deployment indicates that maximum protection of the strategic missile sites was not the governing consideration.
The SAM deployment pattern was planned to provide an islandwide area defense, affording no greater protection to the strategic missile sites and other military installations than to all other locations on the island.
The precise degree of combat readiness of the 24 MRBM launch positions in Cuba at the time of the crisis cannot be determined from available evidence, even in retrospect.
The principal uncertainty concerns the presence or absence of nuclear warheads; the evidence on this aspect of the buildup is so ambiguous and inconclusive that it is not poss\ble to reach a judgment based on factual information.
It is clear, however, that the Soviet program for the MRBM units was not complete by the time of the crisis.
These units were originally deployed in a field mode, following which work was begun on the preparation of more permanent facilities.
This work was not completed at any of the sites by the time dismantling began but probably would have been convicted by about mid-November.
Similarly, some of the sites may not have been fully equipped when the crisis occurred.
If nuclear warheads were available, these shortcomings probably would not have prevented the launching of some missiles from all six sites during the critical week in October but might have affected significantly the time ed to launch a salvo, as well as its effectiveness.
With respect to the IRBM sites, which required far more extensive o-eoaration, there is conclusive evidence that construction had not been "" * n d of October, nor had the missiles and most system The missiles were almost certainly hen the United States quarantine was imposed.
The 42 U-28 jet light bombers and trainers delivered to Cuba beginning in late September were almost certainly not considered by the Soviet planners as an integral part of their offensive capability in Cuba parently were intended for the Cuban forces from the outset.
Although the Soviet authorities were fully aware of United States photoreconnaissance capabilities by May I960 and may have been aware of United States overflights of Cuba by mid1962, they made no effort in planning and executing the Cuban venture to reduce the risks of detection by United States reconnaissance.
This is evidenced not only by their concurrent deployment of offensive and defensive systems but also by their failure to camouflage or conceal unique MRBM system equipment, particularly the missiles themselves, before the crisis.
The measures taken after the crisis began probably were a reaction to the initiation of lowaltitude reconnaissance.
Furthermore, there was no apparent effort to minimize the length of time during which some MRBM units were detectable before all of the MRBM units were emplaced, equipped, and combat-ready.
Hence there would have been a period of about 2 months between the arrival in about mid-September of the first MRBM's and the estimated completion in mid-November of the full MRBM deployment program.
The conclusion seems inescapable that the Soviet leaders in their planning did not regard the possibility of United States detection as critical to the success or failure of the Cuban venture.
Unless the Soviet authorities were convinced that no measures could be taken to delay or prevent United States detection, as seems unlikely, they must have chosen to disregard United States reconnaissance capabilities.
Thus they probably judged with considerable assurance that the United States would acquiesce in the deployment of strategic missiles in Cuba or at least would not attempt to force their removal by reacting militarily.
J°"" cern ' ""^ deployment of strategic missiles proceeded unscreened by an activated SAM system even after President Kennedy's statements ox 4_and 13 September implied that the United States possessed Photographxc e«den of the buildup to that time and explicitly warned the USSR of the grave consequences if the United States detected offensive weapons in Cuba.
There is some evidence that planning and -tial preparations occurred in the USSR and Cuba during the first quarter oM^ unlikely, however, that the final commitment was made un til April or May. probably after Moscow had assessed and acquiesced in Case assertion of authority over the Cuban Communist movement in late March and early April.
One element in the Soviet miscalculation of the ^^^ Wn the Soviet view of the role and signmcance of ioreign military bases Having lived restively under the shadow of United States strategic bases for more than a decade, the Soviet leaders probably have come to Tgardthem, particularly in the age of the ICBM. as a £%^ but not major phenomenon of great power r elations Ca to s Cu presented Khrushchev with his first opportunity o ^ l ^^"" ^nira-v base He may have felt confident that the United States would ""de-"" and 'the r""« s he did that military bases on the opponent's Soviet-US relations.
Kh-ushchev probably had a greater objective in sight than simply ruixusncnev wi / o uf cf«.rr, Hem snhere.
HirpW the SO.V1.' ^a^po^on ^""^^^^U b»« advantageous in a host ot otner ways. would have increased Soviet missile strike capabilities against the United States by more than 50 percent at the end of 1962, the Soviet leaders must have realized that their relative power gain would have been highly transitory in view of United States ICBM and Polaris programs.
It is possible, therefore, that had the Cuban venture been successful, it would have been followed shortly by some further Soviet initiative to achieve a dramatic victory elsewhere for a long-standing policy objective, such as Berlin, which also could alter the long-term ""world relation of forces.
THE EVIDENCE The evidence presented in this study was developed by examining information compiled on an all-source basis that related to the deployment of Soviet forces in Cuba.
The major part of the evidence consists of aerial photography of Cuba obtained by overhead and peripheral reconnaissance and by surface photography of Soviet shipping en route to Cuba.
Within the limits of coverage and the art of photographic interpretation, such evidence is regarded as conclusive.
It was particularly % establishing the validit ble Although information obtained from agents, refugees, and diplomats appeared initially to constitute a major source of evidence,* it was frequently proved to be unreliable.
As a result, in almost all cases it could not be evaluated with confidence unless information was available from other types of sources against which it could be checked.
For example, more than ZOO reports contain references to the presence in Cuba of missiles before January 1962.
Numerous reports also contain references to construction activity and equipment observed during the spring of 1962 in areas where SAM sites were located later.
However, photography of these areas obtained during or after the reported period of observation failed to reveal any such activity or equipment.
Reports originating from diplomatic sources in 'Cuba were relatively sparse before the crisis; thus they did not contribute significantly to the body of -evidence used in this study, the time span of which ends with the withdrawal of offensive weapons.
Nevertheless, in spite of these limitations, the vast body of collateral reporting provided some unique and valuable information that could not otherwise have been obtained.
Referred to in this study as collateral information. 7 I Soviet Military and Economic Relations with Castro's Cuba Before Mid-1962 Before the creation of their military establishment in Cuba in the latter half of 1962, the Soviet leaders extended military aid to Castro cautiously and gradually, remaining well within the limits 6et by the precedent of their aid to other countries in the Near East, Asia, and Africa.
The USSR did not give Castro some of the more modern weapons, such as the SA-2 system, which it contracted to supply to Indonesia, Iraq, and Egypt during this period, nor was there anything exceptional about the quantity of material or the terms under which it was supplied.
Although the Bloc had come to account for about 80 percent of Cuban foreign trade by mid-1962 and although there was a steady rise in the amount of credit available to Cuba for economic development, there was no comparable pattern of growth in military shipments.
Even in retrospect the military assistance provided by the USSR and other members of the Bloc from mid-1960 to eariy 1962 does not contain indications of any objective beyond improving the ability of the Castro regime to defend itself from an invasion or internal uprising.
Soviet military assistance to Castro, when compared with that provided to other revolutionary governments (for example, the regime of Qasim in Iraq), indicates that the Soviet leaders initially were somewhat reluctant to extend similar aid to Cuba.
The first Soviet-Cuban military assistance agreement was reached some time between Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February I960 and Raul Castro's return visit to the USSR in the summer of I960, or some 12 to 18 months after Castro had seized power. 3y contrast the Soviet agreement on aid to Iraq was concluded 4 months after the revolution that put Qasim in power.
Whereas MIG aircraft and freauently naval vessels had been among the first items delivered to other recipients, Castro did not receive aircraft until the second quarter of 1961, and the first naval vessels did not arrive until January 1962.
As far as can be determined, the equipment delivered before mid-1962 was limited to items useful primarily for defensive purposes.
Furthermore, the equipment was composed of the more obsolescent items in the Bloc inventory.
The total value of the arms supplied to Cuba before mid;962 is estimated at roughly $100 million, which probably ranked Cuba below only Indonesia, Iraq, and Egypt as a major recipient of Soviet military aid.
A Military Aid As Cuba's efforts to purchase military goods in the West became increasingly difficult in 1959 and early I960, the Cubans began to make military contacts with Bloc countries, mainly Czechoslovakia.
Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February I960, when the USSR finally abandoned its reserved attitude toward the Cuban revolution and publicly endorsed the Castro regime, appears to have been an important milestone in the developing relationship.
Sergeychik, Deputy Chief of the Engineering Directorate of the State Committee for Foreign Economic Relations, which has been associated with other typical Soviet arms agreements with underdeveloped countries.
When Raul Castro visited the USSR in the summer of I960, the first shipments of Soviet arms probably were being readied.
There is no information available, however, on the details of the arms agreement ■ or even the approximate da>te on which it was signed.
Although photography of Cuban militia carrying Czechoslovak rifles suggests that a shipment of small arms may have arrived in July or August I960, the first major shipment of Bloc arms to Cuba arrived on 8 September I960 aboard the Soviet freighter Ilya Mechnikov / The cargo reportedly included T-34 tanks, antiaircraft artillery, machineguns, ammunition, electronic equipment, and other military materiel.
What effect, if any, the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961 had on Soviet arms shipments is conjectural.
The first of a total of more than 60 MIG-15 , MIG-17 , and MIG-19 aircraft apparently arrived at the end of May , and all the aircraft were delivered by mid-June.
Although it is possible that delivery of these aircraft was expedited in response to argent Cuban appeals engendered by the invasion, they probably had already been scheduled for delivery in 1961, inasmuch as Cuban pilots apparently were training in Czechoslovakia in the third quarter of I960.
No corresponding increase in shipments of other kinds of equipment was observed; in fact, no additional shipments of military equipment were detected until December 1961.
Bloc military assistance to Cuba in the second half of 1961 seems to have been focused on assimilation of new equipment, intensive training, and completion of reorganization of Cuba's military establishment along Soviet lines.
Arms shipments were resumed at the very end of 1961, and the first naval Vessels appeared early in 1962.
However, collateral reports indicate that these shipments were confined to tanks, artillery, trucks, and other land armaments, with the exception of 12 torpedo boats and 6 Kronshtadt class subchasers that were delivered between January and April 1962.
Throughout the period of arms delivery, Cuban personnel were being trained in the Bloc and by a military training mission (principally Soviet\and Czechoslovak) sent to Cuba.
By mid-1962, Soviet Bloc military aid had turned the Cuban military establishment into"" one of the strongest in Latin America.
The ground forces had acquired armored, artillery, antiaircraft, and antitank capabilities on a scale unprecedented in the Caribbean area.
The Cuban air force was otill a very limited organization, but even its small number of older Soviet jet fighters represented a vast improvement over previous capabilities.
But the Soviet authorities had not provided, or apparently even offered, some of the more modern weapons being supplied to other underdeveloped countries, and the aid was limited to improving the Castro regime's ability to maintain internal order and defend itself against an invasion.
B Economic Aid arid Terms of Trade «,-*!, ^n^t"" mid "" 1 962. lines of credit totaling at least $357 million, with $100 million in addition likely, were opened by the Bloc for Cuban basic economic development, although Cuba had actually used by that time only about 10 percent of these credits.
By the time the Soviet military buildup began in mid1962, the 31oc had come to account for about 80 percent of Cuban foreign trade.
Bloc countries generally paid a premium price for Cuban sugar, and Cuba was permitted to run substantial trade deficits.
The terms of trade as reflected by the balance between known prices set on Cuban exports to the 31oc versus prices set on Cuban imports of fuel, food, and raw and semifinished materials (which comprised more than 60 percent of imports from the Bloc) indicate a slight advantage for Cuba compared with world market prices for comparable items.
Information on the terms under which the military aid was supplied is sketchy.
General Activity Relating to the Military Buildup During the period from the end of July through October 1962, the Soviet authorities deployed a number of weapons systems and associated personnel to Cuba that constituted a small but complete Soviet military establishment with all the necessary organizational superstructure.
This section examines the evidence on general activities not related to specific weapons systems and provides a framework for the subsequent assessment of the detailed information on the deployment of specific weapons systems.
It covers evidence of preparatory activities before the weapons and Soviet troops arrived in Cuba; the establishment of the command, control, and communications structure; and theflow of Soviet shipping to Cuba.
A Early Activity Collateral reporting contains many references to the sighting, during the first half of 1962, of construction equipment, assorted vehicles, and Soviet personnel in the general locations where various Soviet military units were later identified.
In several cases the reported locations corresponded closely to the actual locations.
Nevertheless, later photography fails to contain evidence of visible activity in the areas mentioned until at least August and invalidates these reports as a basis for assuming that Soviet forces were present in significant quantities before the end of July.
There is a strong possibility, however, that this reporting reflected an influx into Cuba, beginning in early 1962, of Soviet personnel who were somehow associated with the military buildup_that_ ' ISoviet personnel first began to appear in un~u~sual numbers during February-March 1962 and that by March-April 1962 groups of Soviet personnel were prese nt all over the is land.
Other reporting generally supports this^HHSSBk The Torrens area may have become a sensitive zone in June, and numerous reports, which substantiate one another, reflect a visit by Raul Castro to the reformatory and the evacuation of its inmates about the middle of July, followed by an influx of Soviet personnel in late July.
A similar progression of events is suggested also by reports concerning the port of Banes.
Twenty or 30 families allegedly were evacuated from the immediate port area in January 1962.
Other reports indicate that the entire port area was evacuated sometime during the period between March and early July 1962, that a small number of Soviet personnel arrived almost immediately thereafter, and that large numbers of Soviet personnel moved in during the last week in August.
Also in June a briefing reportedly took place at which officials in the city of Matanzas were advised that in the event of an attack by the United States the USSR would come to the assistance of Cuba within a 7-day period.
Based on the foregoing, it appears that the number of Soviet personnel in Cuba probably did begin to increase early in 1962 and that their very presence in any location could have generated the reports of activity observed during the January-July period.
The influx of Soviet personnel at this time probably had some bearing on the later military buildup and may well have involved activity related to the planning and preparation required before the actual deployment of Soviet forces on the island.
There is evidence regarding Soviet surveying activities in Cuba, but it does not provide any indication of activity that can be directly associated with the selection and preparation of the offensive missile sites.
It seems clear, however, that the Soviet problem of locating the sites geodetically was simplified considerably by the availability of earlier geophysical materials on Cuba.
As in the case of Sov.et economic aid programs to other underdeveloped countries, the Soviet aid program in Cuba included an intensive resource exploration survey.
Such geological and geophysical survey activities necessarily include the utilization of large-scale topographic maps and associated triangulation control points, where available, or the undertaking of operations to establish such control points when they are lacking.
These basic materials would have been directly applicable to the geodetic positioning"" of the Cuban missile sites.
Moreover, the island of Cuba previously had been geodetically tied to the United States mainland by the Inter -American Geodetic Survey, ■ which is operated under the auspices of the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
In addition, during 1956-57 a system of horizontal and'vertical control points for topographical mapping purposes had been established and a complete aerial photographic study of the island accomplished by a highly competent, private United States contractor. pllateral sources have identified a Soviet geophysTcaTTearrTin CubsHnder the direction of one Bogatyryev.
Lru addition, some members of this team appear to have been geodesists whose function probably was to extend triangula'tion control points as required for their intensified survey program.
That the Soviet personnel He further advised that ""the Soviet geologists have taken. all of the information which all companies both mining and oil had in their files and put it all together.
It would not be possible from the fragmentary type of evidence available, however, to distinguish between activity related specifically to the establishment of the sites and activity associated with the more general survey.
In general, the appearance of Soviet surveying groups at any given point or time in Cuba cannot be considered evidence of a Soviet intention subsequently to deploy missiles.
Because the Soviet geophysical team had been in Cuba at least 9 months before missile deployment and a wealth of data had been immediately available to them, it must be assumed that virtually all of the basic data required to locate the missile sites geodetically had been acquired before the missiles were deployed.
Therefore, the time necessary to tie in an individual site to established geographic control points would have varied from only a few hours to a maximum of 1 week, and this final preparation could have occurred after the site area'was initially occupied.
V' C Soviet Merchant -Shipping The pattern of Soviet merchant shipping to Cuba provides a measure of the magnitude and intensity of the Soviet military buildup and 6hows the abruptness with which it began.
A key role in the subsequent flow of Soviet arms to Cuba was played by a group of large-hatch ships, which were the only Soviet-flag vessels capable of loading assembled strategic missiles below decks.
Knowledge of %both the volume and to Cuba is based on a variety of sources^. he nature of Soviet shipments |{3j|photography of deck cargoes obtained while Soviet ships were exiting the Black and Mediterranean Seas, approaching Cuba, and being offloaded.
Sixteen other Soviet dry cargo ships turned back to the USSR after the quarantine was announced.
In comparison, there was no significant variation in the pattern of petroleum, oil, and lubricant shipments.
Although the Cuban buildup required alarge relative increase in Soviet shipping allocated to the Cuban trade, the diversion of this shippir probably was not a serious problem in view of the size of the Soviet merchant fleet and the availability of shipping in the world charter market. * rollowingp., below.
By the time of the United States quarantine the USSR had employed in the Cuban trade all seven of its vessels that were capable of transporting MRBM' s as hold cargo.
Two of these vessels had made voyages to Cuba before the military buildup began in July; the other five all made their maiden voyages during the period of the buildup.
As far as can be determined, the contracts for these ships were awarded in a normal fashion, and there was no evident haste in either the contractual negotiations or the conditions set for their delivery.
The Japanese contract, for example, was negotiated from September to December I960, and the lead-ship was completed in December 1961.
In addition to the three ships already built, the Soviet authorities have placed orders with Japanese builders for five additional ships of the same general type as the initial three.
The Finnish contract is part of a 5-yearxtrade agreement with specific deliveries negotiated annually.
There is no information which indicates that any of these large-hatch ships underwent extraordinary modification of original designs while being built, and there was no sense of urgency noted in the later stages of their construction.
The timing of the contracts and the fact that large hatches are fairly common design features of large and modern ships currently being built in shipyards throughout the world, as well as the absence of any special circumstances involved in the construction of these ships for the USSR, clearly indicate that they were not built for the purpose of covertly carrying missiles to Cuba.
However, the task of clandestinely introducing those weapons onto the island probably could not have been carried out before these vessels became available.
Air Defense Systems One of the most striking features of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba was the concurrency in bringing both defensive and offensive systems to an operational status, indicating a Soviet lack of concern for acquiring the capability to protect the offensive weapons systems against aerial detection or attack during their deployment phase.
This section reviews the evidence relating to the individual elements of the integrated * For a detailed examination of the activities of these vessels, see V, P50, below.
These elements are the early warning and target acquisition radar systems and their supporting communications network, the SAM system, and the force of fighter aircraft.
Although all of these elements were present in quantity in Cuba by the end of September, they were not integrated into an operating air defense system until 27 October, the day before the Soviet authorities announced their decision to withdraw the offensive missiles from Cuba.
The steady expansion of the air defense system for some time thereafter indicates that its activation at that time probably was earlier than the Soviet authorities had planned.
Before the Beginning of the Buildup For more than a year preceding the crisis, the USSR had been assisting Cuba in building an air defense capability, including the provision of a variety of early warning and target acquisition radars.
The fire con""tro^da'rfgenerally were sited with antiaircraft artillery units along the northern coast of Cuba between Mariel and Caibarien, with the heaviest concentration around Havana.
However, there were numerous opportunities for identification of these flights before mid-1962, and the Cubans may well have been aware that their territory was being overflown by July 1962, if not considerably The geographical placement of SA-2 sites and support facilities in Cuba through the time when the strategic missiles were withdrawn strongly suggests that the intention of Soviet planners was to establish an area defense for the island as a whole and that maximum protection of key military targets was not the governing objective.
The Soviet authorities evidently had no intention of employing the SAM system to prevent detection of strategic missile sites under construction and had not planned to activate this system until some time in November.
There was, nevertheless, no apparent reason why SAM sites could not have been individually activated or the group on the western half of the island activated by mid-September to screen the developing MRBM/IR3M sites from aerial reconnaissance.
Almost all the SA-2 sites were ernpiaced and equipped and could have been integrated into a partial or fully developed SAM defense system by 14 October, when the first reconnaissance aircraft photographed an MRBM site under develooment.
The SAM complex defending Cuba consisted of 24 SA-2 sites that at the time of the crisis provided coverage of virtually the entire island.
The individual SA-2 sites were integrated into an island-wide SAM defense system by a network of communication facilities linking the sites, the early warning radar network, and the command and control centers.
Although a few of the Cuban sites were deployed in a slightly modified configuration, the accompanying sketch and photograph portray the typical, fully developed SA-Z site constructed in Cuba.
The site contains six revetted launch positions deployed in a star-shaped configuration around a revetted, centrally located guidance area.
The cables connecting the necessary equipment were laid on top of the ground, and the site thereafter became operational as soon as missiles were present, the essential electronics checks and radar calibrations had been made, and the equipment had been activated.
H after the unit ^re B, More'tnan'naU of the original SA-2 sites were never revetted.
Capability of a n Individual Site to Take Action Anindividual site, whether minimally or fu 1> ■*^ A that is not tied into an over-all command and contro Isys em. limited capability for independent action.
The SAM control system radar performs both a tracking and a missile guidance function against a single target.
The FAN SONG is believed to be capable of tricking a target at ranges up to 64 nm, the SPOONREST at ranges up to Each launch position contains a single launcher and missile, and each hold position contains two missile transporters, each carrying a single missile.
In all, there are 12 missiles at each site, 6 on launcher and 6 in reserve.
Typically the van-mounted target acquisition radar, with associated IFF equipment, is located outside the circle of launch positions but within the site area, which is surrounded by a security fence.
It also is connected by cabling with the necessary power and electronics equipment in the central guidance area.
A communications van is located outside the security fence and provides the necessary command link bet-ween the site and control elements at higher echelons.
A number of general-purpose vehicles and other auxiliary equipment also are required to support a site.
ENTIRE PAGE DEVI ED reaction time becomes increasingly less critical and probably is not a controlling factor in successful target intercept.
Because the U-2 is not a high-speed aircraft, the ability of an individual SA-2 site to launch missiles successfully against it is therefore dependent primarily on the ability of the radar components to provide accurate position data.
Location and Timing of Offloading of SAM Units and Associated Equipment determine the precise times an^rtsatwhichSA2 missiles, associated equipment, and unit personnel arrived in Cuba.
However, the first vessels carrying military shipments for the buildup began docking in Cuba during the last week in July, and the first firm evidence of SAM deployment was obtained from aerial photography of 5 August of vehicles at locations in western Cuba later identified as the Santa Lucia and Matanzas SAM sites and the Pinar del Rio SAM support facility.
SAM equipment, therefore, must have begun flowing into Cuba from the very beginning of the Soviet buildup.
Collateral reporting indicates that parts of a number of ports in western Cuba, including Matanzas, La Isabella, Punta Gerardo, Casilda, and Mariel, were restricted at various times during the month of August while Soviet ships were offloading.
Presumably SAM equipment moved through some of these ports during August.
According to these reports, some offloadings occurred at night, and all offloading of equipment was accomplished by Soviet personnel.
Although the dates and ports of arrival of SA-2 missiles and related equipment cannot be specified, it appears that unit equipment other than the missiles probably moved directly from the ports to the site areas.
For example, a number of informants have reported the offloading and movement of equipment from Matanzas to the immediate area of the Matanzas SA-2 site a day or two before 5 August, when vehicles first appeared at the site on aerial photography.
This Procedure is consistent with known Soviet practice in the USSR and East Germany.
Problem of Operational Status site has r^ed^TJonTs^^^^^^^^^^ 1 ^^ a miss le is the positive identification of one or more missiles on Lecher assuming'that all other necessary equipment is present and properly emplaced.
P * numbers of identifiable launchers and mis^Wl^Z M^X S could not be specifically identified, however ::;::;l r *«, -^1;^^^^^:^ P 7o r c°.«.r ■ z::ts^^^^^° •»■•■ *■ e "" cl r ly ae support facilities were being established in Cuba and re^elv'nLmssles concurrently with the deployment of SA-2 units.
Because it is not possible to determine the precise timing because it *hence their initial «f T^icj^ilf. deliveries to the individual £>A-£ suet.
This re P re ""™. 8 emplacement of all gra phic coverage indicates ^««^ ^tion7a. indicated, of ^""h I^iKi later t£n the ""unit emplacemissiles. he actual up u^ ^tWn a week or two thereafter in ment date. "" probably was reached within a weeK most cases.
Unit emplacement, therefore, could have ■ Tccued at anytime between the negation date and the time the ./first observed and cannot be fixed more precisely.
Of the 20 such cases oX 3 Z gaps in coverage of 10 or fewer days; the remaining 17 had gaps of 23 to 61 days. c Eleven, and possibly 12, units were emplaced on u if ^ mha. between 5 August and 5 September.
Most of them probably ^^n^ ^^^ efore this time, but they cannot With respect to SAM support facilities, the evidence on tLrne P hasin g is even £.. complete than it is on the sites.
Collateral sources reported that about the Td of July or early August the civilian population in the area of the Pinar del Rio support facility ^^^ 'operational on 29 August.
In addition, a ^\^lZ "" Cifuentes, was observed to be operational on 29 August.
On the eastern half of the island, two support facilities, at r■ A~ r,,h* and Victoria de las Tunas, also could have been funcdays.
Although the coverage along the southern coast was much less complete, the major gaps occurred in areas that are sparsely populated -and contained few targets of strategic interest to either the Soviet authorities or the Cubans.
Curiously, Havana, the capital city and presumably one of the areas of greatest defense interest to the Cubans, was defended by only one SAM site, even though capital cities throughout the Bloc are ringed by as many as six individual sites.
Even more revealing, however, was the pattern of deployment as related to the Soviet military presence on the island.
On the western half of the island, two and perhaps three of the San Cristobal MRBM sites were covered by only a single SAM site, at Bahia Honda, and probably only one of the San Cristobal sites had as much as double overlapping SAM coverage.
All four of these MRBM sites appear to have been extremely vulnerable to approaches from off the southern coast.
The same is true for the two Guanajay IRBM sites, only one of which appears to have had double overlapping coverage; both sites appear to have been extremely vulnerable to approaches from the south.
Farther east the area of the two MRBM sites at Sagua la Grande and the area of the IRBM site at Remedios were each covered by only a single SAM site.
The four Soviet armored groups, at Artemisa, Santiago de las Vegas, Remedios, and Holguin, also were poorly defended, in each case by only one SAM site.
In the Santa Clara area, where initially all the MIG-21's were deployed, no specific missile defense was provided.
The same is true for the important transport junction and the Eastern Military Headquarters site at Camaguey.
Alth ough this t ype o f point defense leaves open for all important Soviet military installations, including triple overlaps of some, in addition to a limited interdefense of the individual SAM site., themselves.
By early 1963 the Soviet authorities had made five principal redeployments of SAM sites.
The significance of the fifth relocation the movement of the Cabanas site about 10 miles inland to he nor h-st to Maldonado, is not entirely clear.
This shxftxnay have been occasioned by the earlier proximity of the site to « Guantanamo^ or may have been intended to provide better coverage of the eastern approach to Cuba.
Nevertheless there i ■ n evidence that these sites were activated individual y or integrated ""to a partial or fully developed air defense system -UU day or ^ before the Soviet decision to remove the strategic missiles from Cuba ' was made public. -TTaTeTTedepToyments definitely established a point defense of critical military and civilian targets.
There is no apparent reason why the SAM defense system could not have been brought into operation at a much earlier date had the Soviet authorities so chosen.
Moreover, each of the SAM sites has its own communications equipment, and a variety of Cuban communications, facilities particularly the ROCMI network, presumably would have been available to the Soviet authorities at any time before their own communications facilities became operational or as an alternative to establishing their own facilities.
Nevertheless, despite the initiation of extensive United States reconnaissance overflight activity following 14 October, the first general S^M-associated radar activity did not occur until 26 October, and an mte. grated air defense command communications system did not appear until 27 October.
In the absence of any evidence suggesting unexpected delays or difficulties in establishing the SAM system, it is concluded that the Soviet authorities did not intend to activate SAM sites as quickly as possible either on an individual basis or in any grouping as they apparently could have done in western Cuba by early September.
The SAM deploy. ment program was evidently planned and programed to activate all sites more or less simultaneously, along with the other elements of a complete air defense system that would encompass the entire island, at some time in November.
It appears, therefore, that the Soviet leaders had no intention of employing the SAM system in Cuba against United States reconnaissance aircraft to prevent detection of the MRBM/IR3M sites under construetron and had not even provided for such an eventuality.
Thus the general west-to-east phasing of SAM site emplacement probably was not directly related to MRBM/IRBM site construction in western Cuba More ° ver ' the fact that the air defense system was not activated by the time the MRBM sues had achieved some degree of combat readiness provides a further indication that defense of these sites was not the primary purpose of SAM deployment in Cuba.
The deck cargo of two Soviet ships approaching Cuba on ing MIG-21 crates was known to be nearing Cuba.
The first assembl where they were «» mble ^ K Whe "" *£ ° entTth.se aircraft ... mained through th e ej^t^ct^er^D eployrnent M^^ disclosed ^ • fighter strength on the island.
Th e first indication that ^""^^""^t thT obtained on 9 October 1962, when a nonmtlitary rad ^ vicinity of Santa Clara made an aaao«»^» ^*'„ brealdng the supersonic aircraft flying in Jhe area ^ha ■*£ „ o£ ^.21 LTf. r^X^"".^""^ aMfC-21 aircraft was photogrfph.d taking off from Santa Clara Airfield.
Naval and Ground Systems A Coastal Defense Missiie Systems Four Soviet cruise missile units were debarked in Cuba as part of the first wave of the Soviet military buildup.
Three were immediately deployed to coastal areas, where two probably were operational by midAugust and the third by early September.
The early deployment of the three permanently sited units and the temporary deployment of the fourth provided coverage of the seaward approaches to many of the Cuban beaches most suitable for large amphibious landings.
The configuration of the site remains unchanged regardless of the degree of site refinement.
Based on an assessment of the radar capability of the system, a probable range of 30 to 35 nm has been estimated.
However, because the range to which a given site can fire using its organic radar is a function of the altitude of the site and the height of the surface target, the range to which the sites in Cuba can fire effectively is estimated to be from 23 to 32 nm.
Offloading of Coastal Defense Units and Equipment There is no direct evidence concerning the arrival of the first cruise missile units in Cuba.
Because these sites were not yet operational on 5 August, it is concluded that the units and their associated equipment had arrived only recently, probably on or about 1 August 1962.
Missiles and associated equipment were noted in the Campo Florido area in photography of 29 August, and the presence of an operational cruise missile site at Siguanea on the Isle of Pines was disclosed by photography of 29 September.
Equipment for both these facilities ' probably arrived in Cuba some time during the month of August.
Although the ports at which cruise missiles and equipment were offloaded cannot be identified, it is assumed, because of the proximity of both the Santa Cruz del Norte site and the Campo Florido unit to the port of Havana, that the equipment and missiles for these locations were offloaded there.
Equipment for the Banes site probably was offloaded at the port of Banes.
It is believed, because of the shallowness of the coastline around the Isle of Pines, that the missiles and equipment for the Siguanea cruise missile site probably also were unloaded in the Havana area, shipped across Cuba, and transported by ferry to the Isle of >Fines.
Supporting this contention, an informant reported that from 27 August to 5 September, the date on which his observation ended, a ferry boat made ""continuous runs"" to the Isle of Pines carrying Soviet troops and military equipment, including radar equipment.
Timing of Deployment of Individual Sites During the buildup and crisis period, there were only three permanently located operational cruise missile sites in Cuba -at Banes, at Santa Cruz del Norte, and at Siguanea on the Isle of Pines.
The fourth cruise missile unit, initially located at Campo Florido, probably was deployed temporarily during the crisis at La Sierra and then returned to Campo Florido.
In addition, the lack of equipment revetments, on-site troop housing facilities, the proximity of the site to the Santa Cruz del Norte site, and a subsequent analysis which determined that the launchers were oriented toward Havana indicated that another function, possibly training, was assigned to this site.
In this regard it was noted that an adjacent ""institutional"" * The unit at Campo Florido was absent during the time that a unit was deployed at La Sierra. 42 ENTIRE PAGE DENIED H „f 15 mam buildings appeared adequate to serve the sS P^oi^o^using. administration, and training.
Because of the dissimilarities «£* *™ ^ low . situated at Campo Plorido ""-J^""^^ Sooal unit and ing discussion of the time reeutred^to dep. y . | ^ ^^ temporarily located at La Sierra.
Furthe r development with all equipment present and prop, ly » o£ com pletely rean d refinement o£ these si tes consis «>SP ^ ^ Hme th vetting the major pieces of ^'P£ entl was operational when first after.
T he evidence clearly ^^""^J^^^^'Z^ transportable and capable of relatively rapid « >» p t« their three ^ms evident that the Soviet -*«--» fact.
BtWeen "" ***«*« * nd 10 October carrying un^ alreadv ha^ """"T ""*'"" t0 Cuba "" By that tW the de P l0 ^ th^v hav 7 had ^ SSlle crates °"" Hand, and there is no evidence that they have received additional crated missiles subsequently.
T ^ ^ dCpl ° yed initia11 * t0 P™ vide *» ^erim r; ity ; gaiSt amphibious operations while Cuban units were being trained.
The first they remained throughout t"" * d by the Navy x „the sighting of a Komar-class boat at sea ■ * were se ldom^^ Vicinity 8 of Ma-rieT^n Z9 August.
C Submarines i Cuba was the The establishment of Soviet submarine bases in subject of many clandestine reports received before the October crisis.
However, there is no evidence that substantiates these reports in any way.
It is possible that the installation of the cruise-missile facilities in the vicinity of Banes and on the Isle of Pines and the basing of th* Komar-class boats at Banes and Mariel may have given rise to some of these reports.
In addition, the public announcement on 25 September 1962 of a Soviet-Cuban agreement to construct a joint trawler base resulted in several subsequent reports to the effect that the base would provide submarine support facilities.
On the other hand, it is estimated^^^^^^^^^^^^^ tha t four F-class long-range torpedo-attack submarines (see the photograph, ^Cut^YnXa^e'thalTwa^not specifically related to Z United States quarantine imposed on 24 October.
This deployment assumed additional significance because, in the past, the USSR had seldom deployed even single submarines in the western Atlantic.
Artemisa, ^olgum, ^ ^ numb ers and types las Vegas (see the photograph.
Such weapons ment with either a conventional or a nuclear were not identified at Holguin.
Collateral sources reported the offloading of Soviet personnel and ground equipmentat the ports of Mariel and Bahia Honda as early as the last week in July.
During the first week of August, other collateral reports indicated the movement of small Soviet convoys in the area of Santiago de las Vegas and a number of other points on the island.
However, owing to the imprecision of reporting and the wide variety of Soviet activity throughout Cuba, it is not possible to determine whether the observed convoys included units later deployed with the armored groups.
Subsequent collateral reporting may have reflected the movement of Soviet troop units in the other three areas to which armored groups were deployed.
A similar report indicated that Soviet trucks, tanks, and artillery pieces continued to move into this same general areaim tilat least 26 September.
This convoy was heading east on the Central Highway in the direction of Holguin and may have been part of the armored group.
The sighting of a convoy including large and medium-size tanks and trucks of various descriptions was reported in the Artemisa area on 27 September.
As described, however, it is impossible to determine whether the tanks were part of an armored group or were simply accompanying the other vehicles in the convoy, which were carrying construction materials possibly destined for some other Soviet activity.
During August and September, sightings of armored equipment and Soviet troop movements also were noted in other locations throughout Cuba.
In the Guasimal area, which is near the Sa..cti Spiritus SAM site but more than 50 miles from the nearest armored group at Remedios, a convoy consisting of ""antiaircraft guns, self-propelled guns of various lengths, canvas-covered trucks, and motorcycles"" was seen moving down the highway away from Remedios.
Soviet equipment and personnel also were observed in the Guantanamo district and near the Matahambre mines in Pinar del Rio Province.
In sum, because collateral sources continually ""P^*""* ^^^fsovie equipment and personnel moving throughout Cuba after were deployed at their en «™^£ 8 ; r ""■^JH^e encampments did sible, however, to determine dates prior to w observanot exist.
When those dates are c°**W ™* ££ ^hich the armored tion in photography, a time span »***^£***™ presented in the folgroups must have been deployed.
These aircraft almost certainly were intended for the Cuban Air Force and, at the rate at which they were being assembled, would not all have been operational until about March 1963.
Origin of the MRBM Units The movement of Soviet military forces from one continent and closed society to another produced virtually no evidence concerning the specific points in the USSR from which various units departed.
The £ew pi ft ce ii| S |||| ^ |i M | dir e ct e yid ence regarding this problem are d ^^f rom •™ t """" MuMiu ' |L. he movement of large-hatch ships^ The movement of Soviet large-hatch ships from the USSR to Cuba indicates that MRBM units came from an area fairly near the Black Sea.
An examination of these ship arrivals in Cuba reveals that all but one of those which docked in Cuba during the time period when MRBM's probably were delivered began their journey from a Black Se See 16, above isiiiii The continued presence of these Soviet personnel in Cuba after the withdrawal of offensive weapons cannot be explained precisely.
During ^^ ^ Cristobal S itc 3 :eportedly were being evicted ^ om th d to hav e occurred in was later located.
No reports were ^^^Litio* indicates that some th e Sagua la Grande sites bu collate ^ ^ ^.^ b construction, or prepay ^ ^^s^ the second week in September.
Soviet personnel in the area n • , oUnr, available converning the The most Pl"" sibl % inf °f ""^es that at least eight missiles .t the Poltava , a large-hatch ship of the type used to Tansport the^MRBM's on their transporters as hold cargo, was docked in Mariel on approximately 16 September.
Collateral sources reported that probable MRBM's were unloaded at the port some time preceding the night of 17 September.
The only other case in which a ship arrival can be associated directly with the. delivery of missiles to a site concerns the arrival of the Omsk , another largehatch ship, in Mariel about 16 October and the identification of seven missiles in photography of 19 October of San Cristobal Site 4, where no missiles were visible the previous day.
These two shipments, which account for more than half of the MRBM's later withdrawn from the San Cristobal area, indicate that the MRBM's were unloaded promptly and delivered from port to site within 3 or 4 days.
These shipments also may represent, respectively, the first and last completed MRBM deliveries to Cuba.
Tending to confirm this timing of missile deliveries was the construction of the s e cur emi^s ile o xidizer transshipment point at Punta Gerardo between the^^^^^^^^^g overage of 29 August and that of 25 September. *-*fflgBgBBaawwm Although it is not possible to trace the shipment from ports to sites of the additional 27 missiles withdrawn from Cuba in early November, it is possible to establish with a fair degree of assurance the ships on which they must have arrived.
Although the missiles described could reasonably have been MRBM's, several facts cast doubt on the credibility of this report.
Missiles being delivered to the San Cristobal site area could have been offloaded at a closer port , and the possibility of subsequent observation could have been materially reduced.
The number of missiles reported was too large for a single ship to have delivered, and the only large-hatch ship near Cuba at that time probably was not in Havana harbor.
Soviet Large-Hatch Ship Poltava Returning to the USSR on 3 1 October 1962 After Imposition of the United States Quarantine* Light loading is suggested by the distance of au-rlines above the water.
Crirtobarto^the^cinrtf or San Cristobal »» Sites 1 and 2 during the night of it September and the early morning of 18 September.
HREM's vere transported to the San ori & lft CrMlde slte *«a u asma«|fl^ n __ b<sr of large .hatch ship. lndlcal _, _a__'.v, Kirovs* ... _ouble-loaded t loading.
E-'l , trailers ( i HSm'i on tra] s and the 0-sk < n the icir large holds, and four more ecka of their large holds and four 56 in Cuba with unknown cargoes after the dates on which the sites were found unoccupied were so few that most of them must have carried missiles.
The scheduling of these ships, therefore, spread the delivery of MRBM's to Cuba over approximately the 4-week period spanning the time between mid-September and mid-October.
The Soviet MRBM units in Cuba were initially deployed in a field mode, and very little advance preparation was required.
Development of the sites, which consisted of some building construction, the laying of aggregate floors under missile-ready tents, the construction of hardstands on which to place missile erectors, and the placing of fill or crushed rock on roadways continued throughout the time the missiles remained in Cuba.
Nevertheless, after reaching the presurveyed and minimally prepared site areas, the units could have achieved an operational * The prelimina ry work necessary included surveying to determine the precise geodetic positioning of the sites, relatively minor road improvements, and whatever clearing and grading was made necessary at launch positions and their approaches by terrain conditions at the individual sites.
Probably because of soil and weather conditions in Cuba, the usual but not universal procedure was to construct a hardstand for the missile erector and to lay small, rectangular concrete pads for the rear wheels of the missile transporter, thus providing a relatively close and stable alignment of erector, launch stand, and transporter to facilitate raising the missile onto the stand.
In most cases, however, these measures were taken after the units and equipment were already on site.
Similarly, mis sile-ready tents, in which the MRBM' s were checked out and stored, were erected soon after the arrival of the unit on site, and at a later date aggregate floors were laid under some of the tents.
Aside from microwave towers, one of which was constructed for each pair of sites, the only permanent structures observed that were related functionally to the weapons system were the arch-roofed buildings probably intended for the checkout, storage, and maintenance of nuclear warheads.
Assuming that the necessary checkout and maintenance equipment was present, however, these buildings probably were not indispensable for operational purposes.
Barrack-type structures also were being built at some sites, almost certainly for personnel capability as soon as the system equipment* was emplaced and checked out and the units were familiarized with operating in their new environment.
Because site preparation activities probably had been underway at most of the sites by about mid-September and because the uncompleted condition of roadways and hardstands in some cases may have affected adversely unit reaction time, it is difficult to explain why such facilities we re not complete by the time of the crisis.
The most likely explanation is that the pace at which such facilities, as well as the nuclear storage bunkers, were being developed reflected a program to bring the MRBM system to a fully operational status more or less simultaneously along with a complete air defense system at some time during the first half of November.
Delivery of Oxidizer and Fuel to Sites usee P There is conclusive evidence that supplies of the oxidizer n the MRBM system -red fuming nitric acid -were sent in Cuba at the time of the crisis, but apparently not all MRBM units had been fully supplied with the oxidizer by 27 October.
Photography of a secure port facility at Punta Gerardo on 17 October first confirmed the presence of about 24 cylindrical storage tanks connected to the quay by pipeline, several buildings under construction, and varying numbers of the same type of oxidizer trailer observed at the MRBM . si^es, some of which were in the process of being loaded.
Various features of the facility indicated that it was a storage and transshipment point for a toxic, corrosive liquid, such as RFNA, the only such facility identified in Cuba.
V system equipment includes missiles, missile transporters, fuel and oxidizer vehicles, launchers, warheads, and necessary checkout and control equipment.
Pf 2 9 August shows no indication that this facility, th ex^einguseTTo r the storage of sugar products, was to be converted into a secure RFNA transshipment point.
In fact, the area subsequently occupied by the RFNA storage tanks was still planted in sugar cane.
A collateral report indicated that the RFNA tanks had been installed and that the double security fences were being erected sometime during September.
United States naval photography on 25 September disclosed a freighter unloading at the double-fenced transshipment facility that by that time existed substantially as it appeared in more detailed photography of 17 October 1962.
Although the SA-2 system also used RFNA as an oxidizer, no SAM oxidizer trailers, which are readily distinguishable from the MRBM vehicles, were observed at Punta' Gerardo.
It appears likely, therefore, that this installation was converted into a RFNA handling facility for the purpose of supporting the MRBM forces in Cuba at roughly the same time the first missiles were being delivered to Cuba.
Because RFNA is storable over relatively long periods of time without significant losses, supplies of this oxidizer do not require frequent replenishment as in the case of cryogenic liquids, such^s_ liquid oxygen.
Consequently, the MRBM oxidizer vehicles* at Punta Gerardo during October probably were being loaded for the first time since their arrival in Cuba.
The presenceoflOof these vehicles at Punta Gerardo on 27 October thus indicates that the Cuban MRBM sites had not been fully supplied with oxidizer by that time.
If these vehicles were from a single MRBM site, they represented more than 60 pe rcent of the RFNA storage capacity of that unit, based on the^^^omplement of 16 such vehicles per site, and the unit might not have had sufficient oxidizer on site for its initial round of four missiles.
It cannot be determined whether the RFNA being loaded on 27 October was intended for one or several sites, but it is possible that it was part of the initial supply for San Cristobal Site 4.
That site apparently did not receive missiles until 18 October, and only a few oxidizer trailers were discernible at the site until 29 October, when two groups of canvas-covered vehicles, presumably oxidizer and fuel If, as is considered most probable, kerosine is the fuel used in the MRBM, the Soviet authorities would not have needed special Following 60, below. nd Such a storage point would not ha ny convenient storage point, contained any unusual features.
The mZsl"" Ik GXam PlC ' tHat MRBM UnitS C ^ mOVe into Permanent sites while they are under construction, receive their system equipment rom depots, and launch their missiles from these siL Similarly the documents describe the fairly ra P id movement of MRBM units to presurveyed but relatively unprepared -alternate sites(fen erally resembling the Cuban MRBM sites, from which missiles are launched.
From Readiness 3. which is achieved when all personnel are in position, the missiles and nosecones have been mated and are in prelaunch storage in the launch area, and the propellant trucks are loaded, abou, 2-1/2 hours are required [footnote continued on 60 61] From these descriptions it appears that in the USSR an MRDM unit would be expected to be able to launch its initial round of missiles from even a minimally prepared site in considerably less than a day after all personnel and equipment had arrived on site.
The deployment of such units to Cuba, however, introduced a number of factors that may have affected significantly the length of time required to achieve a combat-ready status, even though the total effect cannot be judged with any precision.
There is no way of determining, however, whether any major difficulties were encountered.
In the case of San Cristobal Site 4, for example, this activity occurred over a period of at least 4 days, culminating in the arrival of the missiles, erectors, and other key system equipment on 18 or 19 October.
At Sagua la Grande Site 1. approximately 35 miscellaneous vehicles did not arrive until 17 October, although missiles apparently were delivered to one or both of the Sagua la Grande sites at least 3 weeks earlier.
Finally, the units presumably required additional time to exercise their equipment and to work out and become proficient in the procedures required for launch operations in unfamiliar surroundings and climatic conditions.
Only a few propellant trailers were positively identified at San Cristobal Sites 3 and 4.
Finally, it is not possible to determine whether nosecones and missiles were ever mated at any of the Cuban MRBM for launch.
From Readiness 2, with missiles on launcher and ""aimed"" but not fueled, about 1 hour is required; from Readiness 1, with missiles fueled and checked, about one-half hour. sites a prerequisite to bringing the missile units to Readiness 3 Matporters did not disclose the additional 13 feet in length required if a nosecone had been attached to a main missile body.
In this case, however, it was clearly an exercise and not an actual alert condition, for the transporters, as determined by the length of their loads, were carrying missiles without noseconcs.
Photography of Sagua la Grande Site 2 on the same day revealed heavy motor vehicle trackage in the propellant vehicle storage areas and on the approaches to the launch areas, as well as the absence of some propellant vehicles from the storage area, suggesting that a similar exercise might have been conducted recently at that site, possibly at night.
There are additional uncertainties with regard to the readiness status of San Cristobal Sites 3 and 4.
At Site 3, as previously indicated, it was not possible to make positive identification of sufficient missile transporters and propellant vehicles to support operations from all four launch positions.
However, this equipment may well have been obscured i"" HiSl^^y the relatively heavy tree cover in the area, as suggested^oyTCewithdrawal of five more missiles from the San Cristobal area than had been identified at the sites.
Moreover, the general appearance of this site, which had the largest number of permanent buildings of any of the MRBM sites, suggested that it had been well prepared.
At San Cristobal Site 4, missiles and other items of system equipment were not received until about 18 October.
Nevertheless, by 26 October at the latest, erectors were in position at the launch area's, suggesting relatively rapid progress toward combat readiness.
There is no firm basis in the evidence, however, for eaction time that would have been required following a decider of missiles that could have been salvoed Reaction time, for example, might have and Although the Soviet '. which v judging the sion to launch or the total n from the 24 launch positions from the 24 launch positions.
B _ t r -J^A ^^^ '' the uncom P leted 1RBM ^^ under con"" trVc^n Cuba ""^ ""^ ^J^Ysl^n^l rate than the MRBM sites ™**""^£^ construction of the first permanent installations.
As a result altho m ^^ i R 3M site may have start ed son, ^ ea h operations until lhe first 1RBMte would no _^ J^^ J har two IRD M sites was about mid-November.
U,. .es^Med Gu^oay Site 1. £**««» *• ' ^^^r^r;^rr^ d * """"""° 1 Wding £ ° r each pair of launch pads.
The .upport^a it ie. and Urge concrete block building V""™™^*™^ be hind their maintenance, and ^'^""^^^Z respective launch positions.
In fact, this equj prne^ have been intended' for Guanajay more ad vance d stage of develop ment than Site 2.
However, there is no evidence ^^^^ftiB^^^ff ^t site construction had begun by 29 August.
Photography of the Remedios site area on 5 September provides no indication of either equipment or activity associated with the subsequent construction of the IRBM site.
Guanajay Site 1 was approaching completion, while Guanajay Site 2 and Remedios were in essentially the midstage of their development.
Based on the progress noted at Guanajay Site 1 between the end of August and mid-October, on the rate of construction at all three sites while under continuous photographic observation until 29 October, and on known Soviet and United States construction practices, a complete construction schedule was established for Guanajay Site 1.
By 29 October, Guanajay Site 1 was essentially complete except for the missile-ready buildings, but it is estimated that 3 to 4 weeks more would have been required to ""cure"" the concrete in the launch areas.
The marked consistency observed in the sequence of construction operations and the time required to accomplish them at Guanajay Site 2 and Remedios indicate that construction of these sites was methodical and probably conformed to a schedule.
Intention to Construct Additional Sites It is possible that a second IRBM site was intended in the Remedios area, but there is no evidence that construction had begun by the time the existing sites were dismantled.
This intention was suggested by the pairing of all other strategic missile sites in Cuba, which also is P 67, below.
C , riSiS l ° a "" aCk thG United States ^ missiles fired from Cuba. .or it is highly unlikely that the USSR would have provided conventional high-explosive warheads for the MRBM's.
Although a thorough effort failed to uncover direct evidence concerning the presence of warheads, there is no assurance h t they could havlbeen'detected by ^^^""^^^ £"" there is also no basis in evidence for concluding that the USSR did not have a nuclear capability in Cuba.
Equipment and Facility There are three bodies of evidence, all ambiguous and ini-,<-~ t n tYto nrpsence of nuclear warheads.
At the missile sites these units generally were located in a rP* bv themselves, just as the propellant vehicles were in separate areas indicating a *p cial function.
In some cases they were positioned tn close proximity to the arch-roofed, probable nuclear weapons facxh""e.
Moreover, most of the equipment at the nussile^te^ ^been identified as to function, and no other equipmentKJPHBipp appears suitable for nosecone handling.
It is known from Soviet documents that nosecones and warheads normally are stored separately from the missiles for which they heads no y increased state of readiness is ordered, the nosers with warhead, are transported to the missile-ready facility nosecones the MRBM nose cones probably were l^rTd :n S the° L of tt nosecone handling unit and would have been transported to the missile-ready tents in these vans.
No vans were observed in the immediate vicinity of missile-ready tents at any of the Cuban MRBM sites, and, for that matter, none of the missiles observed on their transporters was ofsufficient length to have had nosecones attached.
The only activity of the nosecone handling units at the MRBM sites that may have been indicative of some nosecone/warhead checkout consisted of a single instance of photography of a van at one of the San Cristobal sites being loaded or unloadcd, but the cargo cannot be identified.
Otherwise little or no activity It is likely that nuclear warheads would have been delivered to Cuba in special hermetically sealed containers in order to maintain proper temperature and humidity control, regardless of whether they were shipped installed in the n o s e c ones or se p ar ate 1 y f r o m them.
These containers, which appeared to be large enough to accommodate an MRBM nosecone but too large to contain only a warhead, were located in a separately secured area at the end of the runway, together with a number of nosecone dollies and 12 or more probable nosecone vans.
The unit at Mariel was not present in photography of the Naval Air Station taken on 25 September.
However, it appears to have been active before and during the week of crisis in October, as evidenced by the movement of vehicles and the apparent shifting of some containers from one group to another, suggesting that some sort of checkout or processing was underway in the nearby tents.
As in the case of the Punta Gerardo oxidizer facility, the continued activity of the unit at Mariel during the crisis indicates that the deployed MRBM units may not have been fully equipped at that time.
Although the unit at the Mariel Naval Air Station appears to have performed some unique function, there is no way of determining from the available evidence whether its activity concerned MRBM nosecones alone or both nosecones and warheads.
If warheads were in Cuba, this unit may have served as a receiving and initial checkout point through which they were transshipped to the sites.
It must be noted, however, that the facilities at Mariel were of a field type and rudimentary.
Although they might have sufficed for a temporary receiving facility, their appearance seems somewhat out of keeping with the stringent procedures and precautions that normally surround Soviet handling of nuclear weapons, ENTIRE PAGE DENIED especially in view of. the general availability of more appropriate facilities in Cuba.
In addition to the nosecone handling units and their special equipment, each MRBM site was evidently to have its own arch-roofed nuclear warhead bunker.
The size of these bunkers suggests that they were intended for more than just storage of the warheads; probably warhead checkout and maintenance also would have been performed in these facilities.
By 28 October, although three of the bunkers at the MRBM sites might have been sufficiently complete to be used for shelter, none had been earth-covered.
It is unlikely that any of the bunkers had equipment installed or was actually in use.
If warheads were present and operational at the MRBM sites, therefore, they must have been maintained and stored elsewhere, presumably in vans.
Bunkers also were present near the IRBM sites at Guanajay and Remedios.
Because of its size, however, the single bunker at Guanajay pro bably was intended to serve both Guanajay missile sites lt is curious that both of the IRBM warhead bun^^swere^/irtually completed by 28 October, in contrast to those at the MRBM sites, even though missiles and most other IRBM system equipment had not yet arrived, whereas MRBM's and. equipment had been arriving on site for well over a month.
Because warheads for both systems are controlled by the same Soviet authority, it is possible that both the MRBM and the IRBM warheads were to be delivered to Cuba in a single shipment after completion of all of the storage and checkout facilities, which was not planned to occur until some time in November.
Although any shipment of military cargo to Cuba during the buildup period could have included nuclear warheads, the Alcksand rovsk is suspected of having had some special cargo aboard, possibly nuciear warheads, because it was the only ship that departed from and returned to a Soviet Arctic naval port during the entire Cuban buildup.
The Aleksandrovsk cha of the first Soviet ships to depart Cuba, leaving Maricl with a deck cargo of nosecone vans on 5 November and arriving at Cuba Okol'naya in late November.
The reason for this \ voyage from a Soviet Arctic por is not readily apparent.
If the cargo consisted of MRBM or IRBM warheads, Guba Okol'naya probably served only as a transshipment point.
If this is the correct explanation for the voyage of the Aleksandrovsk , it must have been the first delivery of warheads to Cuba, for all other known voyages transited the Baltic or 31ack Sea passages or, in a few cases, the Panama Canal.
In that case, none of the Cuban MRBM sites had a nuclear capacity at the time of the President's speech on 22 October.
Moreover, they could have achieved such a capability during the critical wee^t hereafter only if the cargo of the Aleksandrovsk had been unload ed^^^^^^^nd delivered to the sites, unlikely in view o ft h e generalSovi e t reaction to the crisis. •vhich seems On the other hand, the movements of the Aleksandro\ following the Soviet decision to withdraw the offend sk dssiles seem ENTIRE PACE DE inconsistent with a conclusion that it was making the first delivery of warheads to Cuba.
Because of the cargo's sensitivity, the Soviet authorities presumably would have ordered the vessel to return directly to the USSR as soon as they consider ed if safe to do so.
It is difficult to account for the ship's movemen| unless the ship was to load a cargo Teast equal Sensitivity -tn""at is, additional warheads that had previously been delivered to Cuba from some port other than Guba Okol'naya.
The only remaining hypothesis involving nuclear warheads that seems to fit all the circumstances of the mysterious voyage of the Ale ksandrovsk is that it was carrying 1RBM warheads which for some reason the USSR chose to transship through Cuba Okol'naya, whereas MRBM warheads were shipped earlier, probably from* a Black Sea port.
In order to get the warheads out of Cuba in a single voyage, however, they were all removed on the Aleksandrovsk and returned by the safest route to the Soviet Arctic.
This hypothesis is supported to some extent by the fact that many of the vessels believed to be carrying IRBM equipment to Cuba at the time of the quarantine had departed Baltic Sea ports, suggesting that Guba Okol'naya may have been the nearest or most convenient secure port for IRBM warheads, whereas the MRBM shipments apparently were loaded in the Black Sea.
Alternatively, of course, Guba Okol'naya and the Aleksandrovsk may have had no nuclear significance whatever.
Soviet Statements The only other evidence bearing on nuclear warheads consists of the statements of Soviet officials on the subject.
On 8 November, for example, Deputy Foreign Minister Kuznetsov stated to Ambassador Stevenson that nuclear warheads had been taken out of Cuba ""immediately"" after the decision was made to remove the missiles, presumably on one of the first Soviet ships that left Cuba on 5 November.
Two days earlier, however, Kuznetsov had indicated that the warheads would be removed ""if warheads are indeed in Cuba.
Asi de from an interview between Khrushchev and th^^mlyexpUci^^vieffeferences on the subject; however, there also have been Soviet statements that missiles were operational in Cuba in October 1962, implying that warheads were present.
Although the November assertions regarding nuclear warheads may well have been true, they cannot be taken at face value, in the absence of confirming evidence.
The Soviet authorities probably judged that they would not be compelled to demonstrate the removal of nuclear warheads as they would be compelled to demonstrate the removal of the missiles.
Hence statements that warheads were not present in Cuba, even if true, probably would not have served the Soviet purpose at the time, which was to reassure the United States that the offensive weapons were being withdrawn.
Once the crisis was past, the Soviet authorities could hardly be expected to admit that warheads had not reached Cuba, had that been the case.
Nevertheless, viewed in the context of the over-all Soviet military buildup in Cuba, the evidence strongly indicates that the Il/UIl-28's* delivered to Cuba were not a part of the establishment of a Soviet offensive base on the island but were intended from the outset to be turned over to Cuban forces as the early generation MIG fighters had been.
San Julian Airfield was |^ | |pM^ on 15 October, at which time 2 fuselages and 20 fuselage crates were present.
However, from 27 October to 15 November, the date on which assembly apparently stopped, six additional aircraft were completed, an assembly rate of slightly more than 3 days per plane.
At this rate, assembly of the 42 Il/UIl-28's would not have been completed until March 1963.
Byway of comparison this rate is much slower than the assembly rate of the MIG-21's in Cuba, which was about 1 day per plane.
San Julian Airfield has long been able to handle aircraft of the I1-2S type.
It was not, however, being used regularly by the Cubans before the arrival of the jet bombers, and some repair may have been necessary to make it operational.
Holguin Airfield, on the other hand, before the comoiction of a new runway in June 1962, could not accommodate cither il-28's or MIG-21's, and construction of that runway, as well as of revetments and taxiways, was observed to have been well underway by December 1961.
Although the runway itself was completed by June 1962, work on aircraft revetments and new taxiways continued after the arrival of the I1-2S fuselage crates.
Special facilities for their assembly probably were not required at either airfield, for the aircraft at San Julian were observed being assembled in the open, with no specialized equipment in evidence.
Moreover, at the slow rate at which the Il/UIl-28's were being assembled, all would not have been operational until 2 to 3 months after the estimated date on which the last IRBM sites under construction would have become operational.
This i s evide nced by a substantial body of ""^information indicating that Cubans Pom the areas where Soviet troops and weapons were located; training programs that would have enabled the Cubans to operate these complex weapons had not been accomplished; and an' exclusively Soviet command and communications structure was established to control their use.
Although the Soviet authorities may have planned before the crisis to turn some of these systems over to the Cubans eventually, this transfer could not have been accomplished quickly and would have required training programs such as that carried out with the Il-28's.
At best, direct evidence on which to base a definitive estimate is not available.
Much has already been written about this subject, and a reexamination will not be attempted in this study.
At the MRBM sites, construction'of buildings and hardstands continued, and some training activity may have occurred.
Moreover, vehicles and equipment were dispersed and camouflaged , and antiaircraft artillery positions and personnel trenches were prepared.
These defensive measures may have been occasioned as much by the commencement on the Pres J ° , ^-^^ — nnaissance missions as by reaction to tne President's speech, for the low-level missions must have vividly ^pressed the Soviet personnel at the sites with the danger of attack oy United States forces.
The concealment of equipment also may have been indeed to prevent close observation of deployed units, m addition to .nese measures one cruise missile unit was moved from an inland "" location aoout 25 or 26 October and deployed operationally on the coast.
ENTIRE PAGE DENIED ENTIRE PAGE DENIED ENTIRE PAGE DENIED ENTIRE PAGE DENIED On the other hand, all or virtually all of the Soviet-manned MIG-21 aircraft continued to be based at the same airfield where they had been assembled, but apparently they did not maintain an unusually high level of activity during the crisis and were not dispersed to other airfields until the first week in November.
There was no discernible activity during the crisis at three of the four ground force encampments where the armored groups remained in place and highly vulnerable to attack.
So far as is known, the Komar -class boats also remained generally inactive at this time.
Pattern of Withdrawal authorities, evidently having haaenoug h ofhTgh™Tsk , 1 ow -profit confrontation, had begun dismantling the long-range missile sites and withdrawing the MRBM's and key items 1 of associated equipment.
The missile withdrawal operation was notable for its rapidity and overtness.
Because none of the large-hatch ships in which the missiles had been brought to Cuba as hold cargo was near Cuban waters on the first of November, the Soviet authorities chose to use the shipping immediately available in Cuba to return the missiles as deck cargo.
On 5 November, missile equipment was noted moving into the port area of La Isabella on the north coast, and missile transporters and equipment were observed near Casilda on the south coast.
Following the departure of the missiles, the removal of other MRBM equipment proceeded at a more leisurely pace through December.
In all, 28 MRBM's, presumably from the San Cristobal sites, were removed through Mariel and 14, apparently from Sagua la Grande, through Casilda.
At the time of withdrawal, the two ships observed in photography of 3 November at La Isabella, the closest port to the Sagua la Grande sites, probably were unsuitable for transporting the missiles because of the arrangement of their deck superstructure.
Casilda, therefore, may have been the closest port to Sagua la Grande at which both suitable port facilities and shipping were immediately available.
Finally, the Soviet authorities generally cooperated in drawing back the , a ,-n*,il ns from the missiles when challenged at sea by United States inspection ^ieT a'Tu h 'Z nuclear storage facilities at the MRBNUndlRBM sites have still not been dismantled, there is no ^^V'T^nllr photographic coverage that additional construction work has eenpeformed or that they are being used for storage of any element of an offensive weapon system.
P**£*VJ£« t some uncomfortable days and nights in Havana exercising his P°^ a ° Y persuasion.
In fact, assembly of the Il-28's went on slowly ^ s^ead ly after 28 October until about mid-November, following which n > chan ° e W as observed in the status of the aircraft.
At that time 1 ' ^«» £ < had been completed and an eighth lacked only an engine cowling, most at 'the remainder were still in crates.
After Khrushchev's announcement on November that the Il-28's would be withdrawn all of the aircraft were moved from San Julian and ^^^^l^^^^^ Uis^ceVtatn/irvilw oi the limiTe/ shipping space required and thereur"" of ^veral of the aircraft to the USSR -crated ""d^, that the Il-28's could have been withdrawn at any time after 28 October, act hat they were not. together with the apparent disarray between M scow an^Havana on ^subject, provides further evidence that ^e.e aircraft, as previously indicated, were intended from the outset to be turned over to Castro's forces.
The Soviet program apparently called for the full flowering of the system at some given point in time, probably in the first half of November.
Thus the air defense system in Cuba was not intended to be employed to screen the buildup.
It was not'until the Cuban crisis was almost over and the Soviet authorities had virtually capitulated that the air defense system was brought into operation, and even then it probably was earlier than they had planned.
The Soviet naval defense forces, consisting of 12 Komar-class patrol boats and 4 identifiable coastal defense cruise missile units, were introduced into Cuba in the very early stages of the buildup and rapidly became operational.
These weapons are readily deployable, however, and it is difficult to impute any particular significance to their early operational status, for their maximum usefulness appears to reside in countering landing attempts by fairly large groups of vessels.
They could not conceivably have been deployed to screen the emplacement of other weapons.
It has not been possible to establish with any degree of precision when the four Soviet armored groups were moved into their encampment areas, but this must have occurred between the first week of September and the middle of October.
Although these units may have been the last of the defensive forces to arrive in Cuba, they would have been ready for combat operations as soon as the personnel and equipment were assembled.
The Soviet authorities probably considered these units to be an important element of their military presence in Cuba.
They probably calculated that establishment of the armored groups would serve a variety of purposes, ranging from deterrence of external attack, particularly by small forces, to protection of Soviet forces and equipment from any internal threat.
It is not possible to determine, however, whether these units were in place during the period beginning about midSeptember when the first offensive weapons were being introduced into Cuba.
By the end of August, Cubans were being evicted from the vicinity of some of the MRBM sites, and the first evidence of activity was discernible in the area of the Guanajay IRBM sites.
By mid-September, MRBM's and related system equipment were being delivered to sites.
In view of other evidence suggesting that these aircraft were intended for delivery to Cuban forces, it appears unlikely that the Il-Z8's were regarded by the Soviet authorities as an integral or significant element of the deployment of offensive weapons to Cuba.
Whereas the MRBM units were combat-ready to some degree during the cr\sis and probably would have been entirely combat-ready, with a full refire capability, by midNovember, nbne of the IRBM sites was completed by the end of October and virtually'no system equipment had arrived in Cuba.
Although construction of the most advanced IRBM site probably was begun at about the same time or shortly before the MRBM sites, it would not have been completed until about mid-November, owing to the vastly greater complexity of the construction and facilities required.
The other two sites would have been completed by about the middle of December while construction of a fourth site, if it was planned, would have extended into early 1963.
The observed rate of construction at the IRBM sites was relatively rapid, indicating a Soviet intention to bring them to operational status as soon after the MRBM sites as possible.
The actual program, as has been indicated, with the sole exception of the IRBM force, would have resulted in all of the major elements of the Soviet military establishment in Cuba (that is, the SAM system, MIG-2'1 fighter aircraft, armored groups, and MRBM units) becoming fully combat-ready more or less simultaneously at some time between the end of October and mid-November.
Yet the 12 to 16 planned IRBM launchers would have been of major importance in strengthening the image of a Soviet strategic threat to the United States from Cuba.
These time relationships and the view that they yield of the Soviet concept of the program are critical to the following reconstruction of what was in the Soviet mind at the time the Cuban venture was undertaken.
It is likely that the decision was not suddenly reached but stemmed from a continuing assessment by the Soviet leaders of the balance of world power and of opportunities for advancement of the Communist cause.
It is beyond the scope of this study to examine the full range of political, military, and economic considerations that might have impelled Soviet policymakers to embark on the Cuban venture, but the nature and timing of the military buildup itself shed considerable light on some of the motivating factors.
A Soviet View of the Risks In a sense the Cuban crisis had its origin in February 1960 when First Deputy Premier Mikoyan was sent to Cuba to conduct economic negotiations with the Castro government.
Following his visit, which signaled public Soviet endorsement of the Cuban revolution, economic aid agreements were consummated, and the first major Soviet arms shipment arrived in September 1960, more than a year after Castro seized power.
However, the pattern of military aid thereafter continued to reflect Soviet caution.
Deliveries of military equipment were limited to items that could be used only for the maintenance of internal order and for defensive purposes.
The first MIG fighters were not supplied until June 1961, whereas such aircraft have been among the first items delivered to other countries receiving Soviet military aid.
Once the process of supplying military aid to Cuba began, it was characterized by a gradual escalation in the type of arms made available, giving the impression that United States forbearance was being carefully tested and that the Soviet authorities may have had continuing reservations about the Castro regime.
The best measure of their miscalculation, apart from its consequences, is the clear indication contained in the concept and execution of the Cuban venture itself that the Soviet authorities believed the risks were relatively low.
Although not conclusive, the evidence strongly suggests that the Soviet authorities were aware, both before and during the buildup, of United States reconnaissance activity over Cuba.
In any event, they had acquired relatively full knowledge of United States photoreconnaissance capabilities in May I960 and could hardly have failed to consider them in planning the Cuban venture.
The conclusion seems inescapable that the Soviet authorities chose to ignore the distinct possibility of United States overflights in planning the Cuban operation.
This choice seems inexplicable unless the Soviet leaders judged with considerable assurance that the United States would acquiesce in the deployment of strategic missiles in Cuba -or at least that the United States would not attempt to force their removal by reacting militarily -and hence that the possibility of United States detection was not critical to the success or failure of the venture.
This view of the Soviet estimate is supported by the fact that the USSR proceeded in the manner in which it did despite the firm and explicit warnings of President Kennedy.
On 4 September the President, after indicating that the United States had recently obtained information which ""establishes without doubt"" the presence of surface-to-air missiles and missilc-armcd patrol boats in Cuba, declared that ""the gravest issues"" would arise if the United States acquired evidence of ""offensive ground-to-ground missiles, or of other significant offensive capability either in Cuban hands or under Soviet direction and guidance.
On the other hand, the Soviet leaders had no reason to interpret the President's statements as indicating that the United States already knew of the Soviet intention to introduce offensive weapons and had chosen to look the other way, thus enabling them to proceed with impunity.
At the time of-the first statement, on 4 September, no activity had occurred at the MRBM or IRBM sites that could be identified from photography, and the first missiles almost certainly had not reached Cuba, although they were on the high seas.
By 13 September, activity at the sites would still not have been identifiable, and what was probably the first shipment of MRBM's was only then approaching Cuban waters -with the missiles below deck.
For example, during the course of a long official statement on 11 September attacking United States Cuban policy in general and the President's request to Congress for authority to call up reservists in particular, the Soviet government asserted that ""the armaments and military equipment sent to Cuba are designed exclusively for defensive purposes.
In contrast to their attitude toward United States reconnaissance, Soviet personnel took considerable pains to prevent ground observation of or access near their weapons and related equipment in"" Cuba.
The security precautions accompanying the offloading, movement, and permanent deployment of these weapons, in general, were well planned and executed.
In fact, Soviet personnel did succeed in concealing from the general population the true extent of the Soviet presence on the island, andven in retrospect it is impossible, without photography, to jucfge 'wheraT*""'' when, and what weapons arrived and were deployed.
These measures probably were intended largely to protect the weapons from both close observation and possible sabotage.
However, the Soviet authorities also may have wished to avoid widespread public knowledge, not only in Cuba but also in the United States and other countries of the Free World, of the extent and nature of their activities in Cuba.
This is suggested by the Cuban action on 25 September in declaring all of Cuba outside Havana offlimits to Western correspondents.
The Soviet intention to establish a military base in Cuba probably had its origins in the • policy deliberations of that time.
The final commitment to set the plan in motion, however, probably did not occur until the spring of 1962, perhaps in April or May.
Within this time span, there is no way of identifying a more precise period of decision.
Some of the evidence suggests an early date; other information indicates a late decision.
In fact, the plan probably evolved over a considerable period of time and may have resulted from a series of decisions.
Although inconclusive, there is some evidence of an influx of ■ Soviet personnel and increased Soviet activity in Cuba beginning in about February or March 1962.
In view of the magnitude and complexity of r the buildup that was to follow, it is possible that an advance party was | sent to Cuba at about this time for the purpose of planning, perhaps on a contingency basis, for the deployment of Soviet forces.
This action r would suggest that the venture was conceived at the end of 1961 or very ■[ early in 1962.
Although this in^ formation appeared to apply to allocation of resources in the USSR and contained no hint of the establishment of overseas bases, the timing of p the decision, the target date, and the motivation could L have applied equally well to plans for the Cuban missile bases.
Because the information of the informant, although secondhand, originated in high ; Soviet military circles, this report may have been a reflection of actual ^ planning for the Cuban operation or of some other plan under considerar tion at the time that was later supplemented or supplanted by the Cuban ^ venture.
In any event, the report indicates that in late 1961 or at the beginning of 1962, Khrushchev was seeking some military means of '"" rapidly and significantly improving the USSR* s bargaining position in the •w German negotiations and suggests the climate in which the Cuban decision was made.
In the springof 1962 the Soviet leaders set in motion in Indonesia another overseas military venture involving the possible commitment of Soviet forces against a NATO member.
The Indonesian decision was almost certainly closely related in time to the Cuban decision and, like the latter, represented an unprecedented projection of Soviet military power into the nonCommunist world, although on a much smaller scale.
Sometime between February and April the Soviet authorities decided to encourage and support actively an Indonesian military buildup against the Dutch in West New Guinea by increased arms shipments and by the deployment to Indonesia of Soviet-manned submarines and jet medium bombers equipped with air-to-surface missiles.
Subsequent events strongly suggested that these Soviet forces would have been committed in the Indonesian-Dutch hostilities which were narrowly averted.
Other evidence connected that the planning of the Cuban .vith the Indonesian buildup suggests Ltion was well.
It cannot be judged whether this Soviet official did in fact possess prior information about Soviet plans in Cuba, but it seems improbable.
However, because the first shipments of personnel and equipment for the buildup did not leave the USSR until about the beginning of July, the final decision to go ahead with the venture possibly could have been made as late as May, particularly if there had been a good deal of prior planning.
Regardless of the manner in which the Cuban plan evolved and the timing of specific decisions, it seems unlikely that the final commitment was made until after Moscow had assessed and acquiesced in Castro's assertion of authority over the Cuban Communist movement and the Moscow-backed ""old Communists"" in late March and early April 1962.
These developments, although in a sense unfavorable to Moscow, at least indicated that the buildup could be carried out in a relatively stable political climate in' Cuba.
Moreover, it should be noted that even if the Soviet authorities had desired to deploy strategic missiles to Cuba much earlier than they did, only two of the large-hatch ships required to transport MRBM's and IRBM's below decks were available before June 1962 and that four others made their maiden voyages to Cuba in August or later.
C Probable Soviet Objectives In deciding to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba, the Soviet leaders probably were seeking to reduce the strategic missile imbalance against the USSR drastically and rapidly.
This would have represented an increase of more than 50 percent above currently estimated Soviet ICBM strike capabilities against the continental United States at the end of 1962.
The Soviet leaders must have calculated that successful establishment of the Cuban missile bases would have been advantageous in a host of ways.
Foremost among these, they probably judged that the Soviet bargaining position in any international crisis affecting vital United States interests would be sharply, improved, perhaps as much by having discredited United States resoluteness and will to resist as by the increase in both the substance and the image of Soviet military power.
The Cuban bases also would have provided a deterrent to United States military action against the Castro regime, which the Cuban if not the Soviet leaders may have believed to be imminent; demonstrated dramatically Soviet support for regimes in underdeveloped countries seeking to realize their ""national aspirations""; and disarmed mounting Chinese criticism.
Finally, if a line of retreat were required immediately or at some future date, the Cuban bases could provide leverage for the removal of United States overseas bases.
Nevertheless, the Soviet leaders also must have realized that the added capability represented by the Cuban missile forces would have left the USSR far short of parity with the United States in either over -all strategic capabilities or missile strike capabilities.
D The Withdrawal confront "" i l apPencd ' Khrushchev w "" faced with a direct military confrontation at a point where the United States was able to concentrate an overrwaiTof g tV nV nti °"" al mUitary f ° rCe "" ^ the S ° viet leaders — -ell aware of this situation.
In effect, the Soviet authorities had only one «ri\n B e cu:r n '!, t0 K mak0 agalnSt ^ ^^^ ° f ""^clonal forces striking Cuba, and that was a nuclear response.
The United States command brought into full military preparedness all. their armed forces, including the troops present in Europe as well as its Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean and the Seventh Fleet based in the Taiwan area.
Several paratroop, infantry, tank, and armoured divisions -numbering about 100,000 servicemen -were detailed for an attack on Cuba alone.
The landing in Cuba was to be covered by several thousand military aircraft.
About 20 percent of all aircraft of the strategic air command were in the air round the clock carrying atomic weapons and hydrogen bombs aboard.
Given this knowledge, the Soviet leaders had no options respecting withdrawal.
The United States position, both as regards what constituted offensive weapons and what must be done about them before the quarantine would be lifted, was made unmistakably clear in the President's address of 22 October and his quarantine proclamation of 23 October.
The stage within which the Soviet leaders were to reach their decisions had then been completely set.
They were in no position to make an adequate response to the conventional forces opposing them and could hardly have felt themselves in a position to consider seriously a nuclear response.
Their job, if the United States held firm, had to be to extricate themselves from a very poor situation as reasonably as possible.
Their subsequent statements, actions, and decisions appear to fit this scenario extremely well.
While carefully refraining from actions that might provoke the United States nuclear strike capability, the Soviet personnel continued work on the missile bases, and the leaders undertook, in an official government statement of 23 October, to muddy the waters by reiterating that their assistance to Cuba was aimed solely at enhancing Cuba's defense potential and charging that the United States ""blockade"" violated international law.
In addition, Premier Khrushchev's reply on 24 October to a telegram from Bcrtrand Russell attempted to drag the United States into universal negotiations by suggesting a top-level meeting ""in order to discuss all the problems which have arisen.
Under the resulting pressure, Premier Khrushchev, in a letter of 26 October, as interpreted in a note from the President to him the next day, proposed to remove those weapons systems considered offensive from Cuba under appropriate UN observation and supervisionand to undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba.
In turn, the US. on the establishment of adequate arrangements through the UN to insure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments, would remove the quarantine measures and give assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
In spite of his letter on 26 October, and before receiving President Kennedy's response, Premier Khrushchev on 27 October forwarded another letter in which he proposed the mutual dismantling of bases in Cuba and Turkey.
The United States rejected this letter on the same day, stood firm in its original position, and held the Premier to the proposal implicit in his letter of 26 October.
Following this exchange, Premier Khrushchev introduced his next maneuver, which was to order, on • 28 October, the ""dismantling of the weapons which you describe as offensive their crating and return to the Soviet Union.
Before this time it does not seem probable that the Soviet authorities consulted the Cubans.
Indeed, Premier Khrushchev, at a Kremlin reception on 7 November, implied that Castro had not been consulted before his announcement of 28 October, indicating at the same time that Castro was extremely bitter at the Soviet leaders for agreeing to remove the missiles.
Cuban bitterness over the Soviet missile withdrawal, confirmed by a number of sources, may have played, in fact, as much a part in Soviet reluctance to remove the Il-28's as their own desire to preserve as much of the Cuban investment as possible.
The next day, in what appears to have been an action coordinated with the Cubans, Premier Khrushchev announced that the Il-28's were being withdrawn and was rewarded by the lifting of the United States quarantine.
