Monthly Archives: October 2012 October 31, 2012 “Cuban 5” Propaganda Film Wins Award 1 Tags: Cuban 5, disinformation, Influence Operation, propaganda “The Cuban Wives” is the Film Winner at the 27th Trieste Latin-American Film Festival Oct., 2012 Special to freethefive.org “The Cuban Wives” by Alberto Antonio Dandolo has won the prestigious Malvinas Award at the 27th Trieste Latin American Film Festival.
That October, Edward Seaga won a landslide victory after charging that Manley’s close relationship with Cuba resulted in Cuban support to leftist terrorists in Jamaica.
In addition, Jamaican security forces had discovered large amounts of small arms ammunition in the aircraft bringing Cuban diplomatic missions to Jamaica.
Concurrently, Jamaican youth sent to Cuba for vocational training returned to Jamaica reported that they also received political indoctrination and military training.
In January 1981, Kingston ended the “brigadista” program – a Cuban initiative wherein roughly 1400 Jamaican youths were trained to become construction workers.
The JLP administration warned Cuba to cease its involvement in Jamaican affairs.
At the time, Cuba had 15 Intelligence Officers assigned to its Embassy in Jamaica.
Superstar Spy’s Career Took Off 1 Tags: Canada, Directorate General of Intelligence , Directorate of Intelligence , Japan, Ricardo Belen Cabrisas Ruiz DGI officer Ricardo Belen Cabrisas Ruiz served as the Commercial Counselor in Ontario from approximately January 1967 through at least October 1970.
According to DGI defector Gerardo Peraza, Cabrisas Ruiz performed so well as chief of the DGI Centro that he was promoted to serve as Ambassador to Japan just a few years later.
The General Directorate of Intelligence was the name previously used by the foreign intelligence wing of the Ministry of the Interior.
The aging dictator has shown confusion in the past when applying the Nazi and holocaust labels.
Castro’s calumny is standard fare in the professionally practiced anti-Semitism of today’s far-left propaganda, which tries to portray its ideological roots as antithetical and in opposition to Nazism and fascism, which it portrays as occupying the right side of the political spectrum.
This has always been a false dichotomy, rooted more in historical schisms that occurred before World War II and the ideological turf-wrangling that took place after.
A story published last week in Germany’s Die Welt puts to rest this false dichotomy, proving that it is extremism itself, rather than the edifying tenets of particular extremist ideologies, that drives radical leaders to murder and oppress their own people, even as they proclaim it a necessary evil to reach the promised paradise of their particular ideology.
According to Die Welt, newly uncovered documents from the German intelligence agency show that Fidel Castro actively recruited former Nazi paramilitary officers to train his revolutionary army in 1962, and offered salaries four times higher than these former Nazis would have received in Germany to come to Havana to impart their know-how.
The report further states that four former Nazis had accepted the offer, and confirmed that two of the Nazi trainers actually made it to the island to begin work.
Castro apparently didn’t stop at purchasing the services of Nazi paramilitary trainers.
According to the documents, Castro sought out the services of two renowned Nazi operatives, Otto Ernst Remer and Ernst-Wilhelm Springer, to help the Cuban government purchase 4000 Belgian machine guns.
Alan Gross, Internal Security, Repression By Jacob Kamaras and Sean Savage with The Jewish Press.com “There are, I think, almost 3,000 Americans in foreign jails.
Ostreicher’s situation is one of three high-profile cases of American Jews overseas who remain either controversially imprisoned or held hostage.
In early October, lawyers for 63-year-old Alan Gross, a United States Agency for International Development contractor imprisoned in Cuba since December 2009 for trying to bring that country’s Jewish community Internet access, announced that a doctor who reviewed Gross’s medical records found a tumor in his right shoulder that may be cancerous.
The tumor is a “potentially life-threatening medical problem that has not been adequately evaluated to modern medical standards” by Cuban doctors, according to Dr.
Since that revelation, Cuba has been “surprisingly quiet in response, and I say surprisingly because typically they tend to be very aggressive at responding to claims about Alan’s situation, and I think the detailed nature of Dr.
Cohen’s assessment has flummoxed them and they’re not quite sure how they can respond,” said Gross lawyer Jared Genser.
In August, Gross’s lawyers filed a petition asking the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention to conclude that Cuba had violated Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights – a treaty that guarantees freedom of expression and the rights to receive and disseminate information freely through any media of choice – by imprisoning Gross.
Gross’s team is expecting the UN arbitrary detention working group to hear the case in mid-November and to issue an opinion in mid-December.
The group’s opinions are not binding under international law and there is no enforcement provision that could compel Cuba to comply, but Genser said a ruling in Gross’s favor could still be a significant step.
On Capitol Hill, the push for Gross’s freedom received broad bipartisan support in September, with 44 United States senators signing a letter to Cuban President Raul Castro asking for Gross’s release.
Alan Gross, Angel Carromero, Cuban 5, Cuban Intelligence, Cuban Missle Crisis, Department of State Security, Fidel Castro, Oswaldo Paya, Raul Castro The past decades have shown that the Castro brothers’ behavior in October 1962 was perfectly characteristic.
By Jeb Bush & Frank Calzon, Wall Street Journal — October 23, 2012, 7:16m.
ET With this week marking the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, Americans are recalling the 13 days in October 1962 when the Soviet Union and Cuba’s Fidel Castro brought the world to the brink of nuclear Armageddon.
But in assessing the crisis, and President John F Kennedy’s decisions over those 13 days, it is equally important to consider what has happened since.
Using what the late United Nations Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick called the “politics of deception,” Cuba’s Castro brothers have maintained power through international deceit, blackmail and hostage-taking.
The past decades have shown that the behavior of the Castro brothers in 1962 was perfectly characteristic.
Fidel Castro has never shied away from a political gamble such as deploying secret Soviet missiles and then lying about them.
He assured other governments that he would never do such a thing, just as the Soviet Union’s ambassador to the United States told the Kennedy administration that rumors about missiles were false.
But the missiles were there, and their deployment was an effort to intimidate and blackmail America.
Today, Havana’s intimidation and blackmail are of a different magnitude, but there are plenty of examples.
Days ago, a Cuban court sentenced young Spanish politician Angel Carromero to four years in prison for committing manslaughter in the death of Oswaldo Payá, one of Cuba’s most prominent human rights leaders.
Payá died while a passenger in a car Mr Carromero was driving, when it veered off the road and hit a tree under suspicious circumstances.
Payá’s family says that Mr Carromero has sent text messages saying that a vehicle was attempting to force him off the road.
The family was prevented from attending the trial and is calling for an international investigation.
For years, state security had tried to intimidate Payá and his foreign visitors, part of a larger effort to discourage democracy advocates from visiting or contacting Cuban dissidents.
Havana similarly tries to intimidate other countries—such as Spain, whose nationals have business interests in Cuba—into accepting its routine violations of human rights, including the beatings of dissidents.
Joining Mr Carromero as a hostage in Cuba is Alan Gross, an American development worker held since December 2009.
In 1962, Fidel Castro wrung $53 million from Washington in exchange for releasing the prisoners he had taken after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
Before that, during the guerrilla war against the Batista dictatorship, Raúl Castro extorted thousands of dollars from owners of sugar mills, threatening to burn down their homes and mills unless they aided the guerrillas.
In June 1958, he tried to force negotiations with Washington by kidnapping 29 American sailors and marines; when word got out that Washington might send United States Marines to rescue the hostages, the Castros freed them.
In dealing with Cuba’s regime, the Obama administration has too often sent contradictory signals of United States resolve.
Though Raúl Castro has refused to allow Mr Gross to return to the United States to visit his seriously ill mother, the Obama administration allowed a Cuban spy to leave an American halfway house to visit his sick mother.
While Mr Gross remains in prison, the Obama administration last year issued visas to Raúl Castro’s daughter and her retinue so they could visit America and attack its Cuba policy.
President Kennedy showed fortitude and resolve in forcing the Soviet Union to stand down.
Whoever wins the Nov. election ought to deal similarly with today’s intimidation and deception from the Castro regime.
Uruguay Protested Cuban Support to Terrorist Group Reply Tags: Organization of American States , Terrorism, Tupamaros, Uruguay October 22, 1974: Uruguay provided a 35-page to the Organization of American States that detailed allegations regarding Cuban support to the Tupamaros.
The report focused on the period 1968 to mid-1973 and was based largely on intelligence from captured guerillas.
The document dealt mainly with the specific training Cuba provided, as well as the existence of the Tupamaros cells in Havana.
Post navigation Older posts 1 2 3 4 5 Blog Stats 294,581 hits Follow Blog via Email Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
