Tense political showdown between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1962, sparked by the Soviet decision to base ballistic missiles in Cuba.
The first of these events was the success of the 1959 Cuban Revolution, which swept proUnited States strongman Fulgencio Batista from power and installed a communist regime led by Fidel Castro.
The administration of United States president Dwight D Eisenhower, which was ideologically committed to fighting the spread of communism, planned an invasion to topple Castro.
The resulting 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, approved and launched by Eisenhower's successor, John F Kennedy, proved to be an embarrassing failure.
Following the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Castro turned to the Soviet Union for economic aid, as well as military support against any further aggression by the United States.
The Crisis The construction of missile bases in Cuba began secretly in the summer of 1962.
By mid-September, the Soviets had begun shipping nuclear-tipped missiles to the island.
Although United States spy planes had photographed construction of the missile sites, intelligence analysts at first believed they were to be used for antiaircraft missiles.
However, photos taken on October 14 clearly showed the presence of offensive ballistic missile sites.
A week later, President Kennedy publicly revealed this information and announced a naval blockade of Cuba.
All ships headed for Cuba would be stopped and searched by the United States Navy; any ships that refused to stop would be sunk.
Kennedy demanded that the Soviets dismantle the bases and withdraw any missiles in Cuba.
Both Castro and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev initially refused the United States demands and denounced the blockade as illegal.
In a series of letters over the next several days, Khrushchev argued that Cuba needed the missiles to protect itself against a possible repeat of United States aggression.
Kennedy, however, refused to accept the presence of offensive nuclear weapons poised so close to United States soil.
For several days, with Soviet ships carrying missiles sailing ever closer to the blockade zone, the two nations stared one another down.
Many people feared that the confrontation would result in a nuclear war between the superpowers.
On October 26, Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy and offered to withdraw the missiles in exchange for a United States promise not to invade Cuba.
They would remove the missiles from Cuba if the United States would withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy publicly accepted the deal Khrushchev offered in writing but privately accepted the second offer—the handful of United States missiles based in Turkey would be removed.
The Soviet ships returned home, and on October 28, Khrushchev ordered Soviet missiles removed from Cuba.
Three weeks later, satisfied that the missiles were indeed gone, Kennedy ended the naval blockade of the island.
The United States retained potential missile bases in Western Europe that were close to Soviet soil.
With their capitulation in the missile crisis, the Soviets had no comparable bases in the Western Hemisphere.
Backing down in the face of United States military pressure also dealt a serious blow to Soviet prestige, and the political damage likely contributed to Khrushchev's fall from power in 1964.
In contrast, the crisis proved to be the one of the high points of Kennedy's brief tenure as president.
By successfully standing up to Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, he showed that the United States was willing to confront communist expansion and Soviet aggression regardless of the risks.
Khrushchev, who before the crisis had considered Kennedy inexperienced and naive, gained a much greater respect for his United States counterpart afterward.
As a result of the crisis, Kennedy enjoyed increased prestige that helped to advance his political initiatives, such as the Peace Corps, the United States program to land on the moon, and support for United States military intervention in Vietnam.
Kennedy was assassinated almost exactly a year after lifting the embargo, and in 1964, the Soviet Politburo ousted Khrushchev as premier of the Soviet Union.
With the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union, Castro's regime outlived even that of his former protector.
As for the United States, entering the 21st century, its attitudes, policies, and enmity toward the Castro regime have remained largely unchanged since the days of the missile crisis.
