The Cold War International History Project Bulletin has previously reported on various new findings regarding the crisis—known to Russians as the “Caribbean Crisis” and Cubans as the “October Crisis”—particularly in issue no. , which featured an extensive compilation of translated documents from the Russian Foreign Ministry archives in Moscow.
In this issue, the Bulletin presents more translated materials from that repository—the Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian Federation —documenting various aspects of Soviet policy during the events of the fall of 1962.
That collection also contains photocopies of some of the same documents that were separately obtained from AVPRF by Raymond L Garthoff with the Archive’s assistance.
Many of the AVPRF documents obtained by NHK were translated by Vladimir Zaemsky of the Russian Foreign Ministry, who granted permission for their use here.
For the most part, unfortunately, these materials shed little light on the actual process of decision-making at the highest levels of the Kremlin, and minutes or notes of the discussions among Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev and his associates during the crisis have still not emerged.
The fact that almost all of the documents below came from the Foreign Ministry archive should induce some caution among readers seeking an understanding of Soviet policy regarding the crisis.
Not surprisingly, for instance, they illuminate diplomatic aspects of the events far more than, for instance, either military or intelligence aspects.
In fact, the Russian Defense Ministry has declassified a substantial amount of material on “Operation Anadyr”—the code-name for the Soviet missile deployment to Cuba—and other military actions related to the crisis, and the Bulletin plans to present some of those materials, with translation, annotation, and commentary by Mark Kramer , in a future issue.
Best read in conjunction with the other Russian documents published in Bulletin 5 and elsewhere, as well as American materials, the documents below are offered merely as useful raw primary source material rather than as evidence for any particular interpretation.
Nevertheless, some preliminary reactions can be offered on a few issues.
Pre-Crisis United States Military and Covert Policies Toward Cuba One issue of vital importance during the run-up to the crisis on which the documents here provide some evidence is the question of how the Soviets perceived the Kennedy Administration’s policies and actions toward Cuba, particularly Washington’s covert operations against the Castro regime and the likelihood that it would take more direct military action.
They clearly show that Moscow’s representatives noted, and blamed the United States government in general and the Central Intelligence Agency in particular for, what it called the “piratical raids” by anti-Castro Cuban exile groups being carried out with United States support against the island.
However, the documents suggest that the Soviets had only a general knowledge of “Operation Mongoose”—although Soviet military intelligence archives might well contain more detailed reports—and Moscow remained uncertain as to the significance of the American support of the harassment operations—i.e., whether they presaged a direct United States military intervention to overthrow Castro— right up to the eve of the crisis.
There is reason to believe that the USA is not preparing an intervention and has put its money” on economic sanctions.
The actual Soviet record of the Gromyko-Kennedy conversation, excerpted here, offers readers a chance to follow in detail this duplicity-filled conversation, in which neither man told the other the most important fact in the situation under discussion.
While stressing that the situation had taken a turn for the worse since July as a result of Moscow’s stepping-up of military aid to Cuba—calling the situation “perhaps the most dangerous since the end of the Second World War”— Kennedy made no mention of the missiles.
It is clear, from his repeated statements of concern, that Kennedy was trying to caution Moscow to rethink its adventure without tipping his cards—and perhaps even signalling a possible way out of the crisis that had not even begun.
Repeatedly assuring Gromyko that the United States had “no intentions to launch an aggression against Cuba,” Kennedy noted pointedly that, “If Mr Khrushchev addressed me on this issue, we could give him corresponding assurances on that score,” and repeated the offer twice later in the conversation.
A little more than a week later, of course, after the world had been brought to the brink, precisely such a declaration from Kennedy would give Khrushchev the fig leaf he needed to swallow his pride and accept the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
The Russian documents reveal nothing new on the issue of whether, in fact, the Kennedy Administration had been moving toward taking military action against Cuba even before it discovered the existence of the Soviet nuclear-capable missiles on the island in midOctober.
In a previous publication, the current author presented evidence that the United States government and military undertook serious contingency planning, and even some preliminary redeployments, in September and the first two weeks of October 1962 toward the objective of achieving, by October 20, “maximum readiness” for either an air strike against or invasion of Cuba, or both, although the article remained agnostic on the issue of whether Kennedy had actually made a decision to attack Cuba or simply wanted the option available.
Recently, a potentially crucial, yet still problematic, piece of evidence from American archives has surfaced to suggest that, literally on the eve of the crisis, the Kennedy Administration was not on the verge of imminent military action against Cuba.
At issue is a recently declassified purported fragment of notes of a conversation on the afternoon of Monday, 15 October 1962, between Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
Given the centrality of Berlin and Germany to the Cold War in Europe, in fact, some United States officials jumped to the conclusion upon the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba that their deployment was actually a Khrushchevian gambit to distract American attention and energy from Berlin, where Moscow might make its next move.
Indeed, during the crisis, a special subcommittee of the White House “Excomm” was formed, under the chairmanship of Paul H Nitze, specifically to assess the situation in Berlin in the event that the crisis spread there, perhaps if the Kremlin applied renewed pressure there in response to United States threats or use of military force against Cuba.
Some evidence has surfaced to show that at least some Soviet officials did suggest the option of opening up a Berlin front in response to Kennedy’s speech announcing the blockade of Cuba on October 22.
On the same day, with evident satisfaction, Gromyko reported to the CPSU CC after his conversation with Kennedy that in recent days “the sharpness of the anti-Cuban campaign in the USA has subsided somewhat while the sharpness of the West Berlin question has stood out all the more.
Soviet Perceptions of Washington During the Crisis While evidence necessary to judge the evolution of Kremlin perceptions of Kennedy during the crisis is still lacking, and intelligence assessments remain off-limits, the reports of USSR Ambassador in Washington Dobrynin between 22 and 28 October that have emerged thus far raise some interesting questions about the accuracy and impact of Soviet reporting on its “main enemy” at a critical moment.
Rusk and Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon as holding a more “restrained” and “cautious” position; actually, although almost all members of the Excomm shifted their positions during the “13 Days” of the crisis, some more than once, Robert Kennedy and McNamara had been among the less militant, preferring a blockade to an immediate airstrike, while Dillon had more frequently sympathized with military action.
Perhaps most interesting, though, in this assessment is the Soviet diplomat’s jaundiced view of John F Kennedy, who is described as a “hot-tempered gambler” who might be tempted into an “adventurist step” because his reputation, political future, and 1964 re-election had been put at stake.
Many other interesting details emerge from Dobrynin’s accounts—above all the evolution of his back-channel relationship with Robert F Kennedy, the president’s brother and Attorney General —but perhaps most interesting are the possibilities such documents offer for reassessing with far more precision how nuclear adversaries perceive each other during crises.
The documents also permit a far fuller analysis of the role of the United Nations, and particularly Acting Secretary General U Thant, in trying to navigate a delicate neutral role between the superpowers and actively seeking a United Nations role in the resolution of the crisis.
Writing both Khrushchev and Kennedy to propose compromise measures to assuage the crisis, traveling to Cuba to seek Castro’s approval for UN inspection of the missile removals, negotiating with Mikoyan, Kuznetsov, and Zorin over the mechanisms to conclude the dispute, U Thant emerges as a fuller figure, particularly as the Soviets courted his support even at the price of additional tensions with Havana.
Kennedy—has occupied a singular place, and not merely because his posthumously-published memoir, Thirteen Days, became a best-selling account of the crisis as well as a unique portrait of what it felt like to be a high-level decision-maker looking down the gun barrel of nuclear war.
RFK also garners special attention for his key role at two particular points in the crisis.
One came early on, in the secret debates in the White House “Excomm” (Executive Committee) after the missiles were discovered in mid-October, when he ardently opposed a surprise United States air strike against the sites under construction in Cuba, likening such an action to Pearl Harbor (“I now know how Tojo felt,” he noted at one point in the debate) and condemning it as morally unworthy; the argument helped turn the tide in the debate away from an air strike and toward a blockade or “quarantine,” which Kennedy announced to the world on October 22.
The second key moment came at the climax of the crisis, on Saturday evening, October 27, with Moscow and Washington seemingly on a collision course, when Robert Kennedy met secretly with Dobrynin at the Justice Department and the two men hammered out the terms of a secret arrangement whereby the Attorney General conveyed his brother’s oral pledge that Washington would quickly pull its Jupiter missiles out of Turkey, as Khrushchev had publicly proposed earlier that day, so long as the Soviets removed their own missiles from Cuba and kept quiet about the Turkish aspect of the deal.
This article seeks to note briefly some of these new findings, and also appends Robert F Kennedy’s own declassified memorandum of the controversial 27 October 1962 encounter with Dobrynin to supplement the Dobrynin’s version published in the Bulletin in early 1995.
First worth noting from Dobrynin’s cables is his initial impression of Robert Kennedy as a hardliner and “hot-head,” driven by political ambition, liable to support impulsive actions, and hardly a character one would predict that Dobrynin would end up collaborating with to resolve the crisis.
This is not altogether surprising given the contentiousness of the issues, the combativeness of Robert Kennedy’s personality, and the fact that President Kennedy had used his brother to transmit personally to Dobrynin on 4 September 1962 a strong message of concern regarding Soviet military aid to Cuba.
The Alekseev cables printed in the current Bulletin, when read in conjunction with the other sources noted above (particularly the Castro-Khrushchev correspondence) helps show how these tensions developed.
Another potential disagreement begins to surface when U Thant explores using Cuban President Oswaldo Dorticos’ proposal to the UN General Assembly of October 8—in which the Cuban said a guaranteed United States pledge of non-aggression against Cuba would remove the need for Cuban military preparations; while Moscow echoed this formulation in Khrushchev’s secret October 26 letter to Kennedy, the Cubans were now deeply distrustful that such a promise could be trusted.
By October 27, a new fissure had opened up over Khrushchev’s public letter that day to Kennedy, which for the first time raised the possibility of a trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey—an idea raised without regard to the sensibilities of the Cubans, who thought they had an iron-clad agreement with Moscow to deploy the missiles that could not be “swapped” for American missiles elsewhere in the world.
On the following day, October 28, Cuban anger deepened as Moscow and Washington settled the crisis over their heads, and to add insult to injury Moscow began pressuring Castro to agree to allow United Nations inspectors to examine the Soviet missile sites on the island to verify that work had stopped.
Alekseev’s excuses that technical problems had delayed the sending to Havana of an advance copy of Khrushchev’s letter to Kennedy—which had been read out over Moscow Radio before Castro received a copy—made hardly a dent in the “picture of incomprehension” painted by another senior official, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez.
In subsequent days, as Castro and Khrushchev jousted in their correspondence and Cuban forces continued to fire on American U2 planes, the Soviets implored the Cubans to display “self-restraint” and not take actions that could “give the aggressors a pretext to blame our side,” and vainly reiterated that “we consider it necessary” to satisfy U Thant’s desire to have the UN conduct on-site inspections on Cuban territory—a demand Castro and the Cuban leadership angrily rejected in an open show of defiance.
Malin, prompts hope that similar materials may soon become available in Moscow.
A full report on the Malin notes on the 1956 crises, translated, introduced, and annotated by Mark Kramer, appears elsewhere in this Bulletin.
This responds to your letter seeking information concerning the destruction of recorded minutes of the meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff referred to in an article by the Deputy Chief of the Joint Staff History Office which you forwarded me as an enclosure.
The minutes of the meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were recorded in various forms from 1947 to 1978.
In August of 1974 the Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff determined that the transcripts generated did not constitute official minutes of the meetings but were merely working papers reflecting the reporter’s version of events.
Accordingly, the Secretary ordered the destruction of virtually all transcripts over six months old after screening for historical significance.
He also directed that all future minutes/transcripts, with minor exceptions, would be destroyed at the six month point.
The practice of recording the meetings terminated in August of 1978 and all materials were subsequently destroyed.
However, it should be noted all of these actions were taken prior to approval of the first Joint Chiefs of Staff records disposition schedule by the Archivists of the United States on 11 December 1980.
The Glasnost Tapes, trans. and ed. by Jerrold L Schecter with Vyacheslav V Luchkov (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1990), esp.1-183.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian ON THE to the Cuban counterrevolutionaries.
At a closed conference taking place on and naval patrols around Cuba, giving spe16 October for the editors and leading corcial attention to the reconnaissance of SoCable from USSR Ambassador to the respondents of the American press, radio, viet vessels.
Dobrynin to Soviet Foreign and television, to provide information on the The head of the Cuban counterrevoluMinistry, 15 October 1962 evaluation of the current international situtionaries, Juan Manuel Salvat, announced ation and the USA’s official position in it, in a press conference on September 7 that According to separate confidential rePresident Kennedy spoke.
There was once a time when recorded of Soviet vessels being air-paby helicopters in the possession of the Cuwar could be seen as an acceptable extentrolled.
The patrols were carried out at critiban members of the group “Alpha 66,” who sion of politics, but nuclear war in its excally dangerous altitudes . are based in Miami, Puerto Rico, and the treme form cannot be seen as such, since it With the aim of ensuring the safety of Yucatan. would lead to huge destruction and the loss our vessels from acts of piracy on the part The American ships carrying these cutof millions of lives in the countries taking of Americans and Cuban counterrevolutionters maintain a constant readiness for milipart in it.
On every transport vessel bound for technical condition of the cutters, performconfrontation between the USA and the Cuba with personnel and arms for one unit ing repairs in the case of damage.
As far as the Ameriwar and, especially importantly, without heights of up to 1,500 meters, as well as for can vessels carrying the cutters are connuclear war. light-armoured naval targets at distances of cerned, the Central Intelligence Agency of Some sort of crisis relating to Berlin is up to 2,000 meters.
On practice shootings the USA, which to judge from all available clearly brewing now, and we will have to the gun-mount has penetrated armour-platinformation is directing all these operations, see whether we can surmount it without reing 25 mm. thick.
The gun-mount requires is counting on the fact that detecting and course to military action.
All in all it is necessary identifying this sort of vessel will not be that the Russians are preparing to soften their to arm 34 vessels. easy, since there is a lively traffic of Ameridemands with regard to Berlin; they want 2.
To confirm instructions given to the can vessels between Florida and the Amerius either to get out of there, or to share with captain of the vessel and the head of the can base Guantanamo in Cuba. them our rights in West Berlin.
They would military echelon regarding the defense of like to start a chain reaction that would ultitransport vessels crossing the sea against 15.
Khrushchev for the regards. tant interests, and no concessions with reforced to take military action against it.
They Further I said that I would like to give gard to them can or will be made to Soviet have enough experience as well in East an account of the Soviet government policy pressure, whatever form that pressure may Germany and the Eastern European counon a number of important issues. take.
The problem now consists of the fact tries to recognize the limits of their capacithat we both have locked horns [in confronties to revitalize and strengthen the Cuban Now I would like to expound the Sotation—ed.]. economy, especially bearing in mind the viet government’s position on the Cuban Nuclear war may be an irrational phedistances involved.
Meanwhile the Latin issue and the USSR’s assessment of the acnomenon, but there is more to it than this, American countries have taken measures tions of the USA. since recognizing it as irrational does not towards isolating Cuba and condemning to The Soviet government stands for the necessarily signify being saved from it.
If failure the Communists’ attempts to spread peaceful coexistence of states with differboth sides come to the negotiating table with their system throughout the other countries ent social systems, against the interference an absolute certainty that the other side will of the Western hemisphere. of one state into the internal affairs of othin no circumstances have recourse to nuclear There can be no talk of a recognition ers, against the intervention of large states war, then that would be one of the surest by the United States of some Cuban govinto the affairs of small countries.
USSR regarding its renunciation of bases dangerous developments connected with the In government circles there is a feelin Cuba in exchange for the USA’s renunUSA administration position on the issue of ing that we quite possibly have some difficiation of bases in other parts of the world Cuba.
It is necessary to paign has been going on in the USA for a Berlin, and that a crisis of the first order may treat Cuba in such a way as to advance our long time and apparently there is a definite arise before Christmas. cause in the general battle into which the USA administration policy behind it.
The strategy and tacnow the USA are making an attempt to Berlin is a vitally important issue for both tics of the USA should be defined by conblockade Cuban trade with other states. sides, and the fundamental positions of both siderations of the defense of its vital interThere is talk about a possibility of actions sides with regard to it remain inflexible. ests and its security not only in connection of organized policy in this region under the Latin American is another vitally important with the Cuban situation, but also in conUSA aegis. region.
Berlin and Latin America are two nection with other more serious threats.
No military acThe preceding is communicated by can lead to grave consequences, to a mistions concerning Cuba could be or should way of information. fortune for all mankind, and we are confibe undertaken until there are signs of overt dent that such an outcome is not desired by Cuban aggression against the countries of 19.
X.62 A DOBRYNIN any people, including the people of the USA. the Western hemisphere.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian son considers that the Cubans must solve has been kept informed of what is happenFederation , Moscow; copy obtheir domestic affairs not at their discretion, ing there.
Cuba belongs to the Cuban Cuba be as expensive as possible both for Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transpeople, not to the USA or any other state. the USSR and for Castro’s regime.
If we speak revolution.62 about dimensions and resources of the two According to the American governcountries the USA and Cuba then it is ment’s calculations, there are currently in During the meeting with President clear that they are a giant and a baby.
The Cuba around five thousand Russian military Kennedy at the White House on 18 October flagrant groundlessness of such charges specialists.
It is strange to think as if small position frankly as well, I would like to sive types of armaments, can represent a Cuba can encroach on the independence of stress that nowadays is not the middle of threat to anybody.
Had it been otherwise, either this or that country of Latin America. the XIX century, is not the time of colonial the Soviet government would never be inCuban leaders and personally Fidel Castro partition and not the times when a victim of volved in such aid.
And such an approach have declared more than once in front of aggression could raise its voice only weeks applies to any country. the whole world and in a most solemn manand months after an assault.
American The example of Laos convincingly ilner that Cuba does not intend to impose their statesmen frequently declare that the USA lustrates this.
If the Soviet Union were consystem, that they firmly favor the non-inis a great power.
This is correct, the USA is ducting another policy, not the present one, terference of states into the internal affairs a great power, a rich and strong power.
But we sufficient to have those statements of the ment during the Vienna meeting about the were trying to achieve an agreement because Cuban government, though those statements equality of forces of the two powers—the we cannot step aside from the main prinare supported by deeds.
But insofar as it is so, inciples of our foreign policy designed for ever aggressive action or adventure can be asmuch as the USSR is also a great and lessening international tension, for undoing justified.
Solutions of almost all the interstrong power it cannot be a mere spectator knots of still existing contradictions between national issues are results, you know, of while there is appearing a threat of unleashpowers, for the peaceful solution of unstatements, dictums, or negotiations being a large war either in connection with the settled international problems.
And in this tween states, in the course of which correCuban issue or situation in whatregard our policy is unvarying. sponding governments give an account of ever other region of the world.
Here is the position and views of the their positions on either these or those quesYou are very well aware of the Soviet Soviet government on the Cuban issue.
The tions, as for example takes place now durgovernment attitude toward such an action Soviet government calls on you and the USA ing the conversations that we have with the of the USA, as the decision about the draft administration not to permit whatever steps USA administration.
And undoubtreference to the settlement of the Laotian sembly, a statement of which the USA Presiedly you are very well aware of this.
We believe, he continued, that the dent is undoubtedly aware. the present is not the year 1812 when NaSoviet Union really acts precisely in the way The Cubans want to make secure their poleon was setting all his hopes upon the which you are describing, and just as the own home, their independence.
They call Neither is it 1941, when Hitler was relying with its commitments. on the USA to renounce encroachments upon his mass armies, automatic rifles, and Regarding the Cuban issue I upon the independence of Cuba, to estabtanks.
Today life and and military equipmust say that really it became grave only lish normal relations with the Cuban state. ment have made a large step forward. this summer.
Is it worthwhile to Nowadays the situation is quite different and tion had been pushed by us to the backwhip up a campaign and organize different it would be better not to rely on armaments ground.
True, Americans had a certain opinsorts of hostile activity around Cuba and at while solving disputed problems. ion about the present Cuban government and the same time inimical actions against those So far as the aid of the Soviet Union to refugees from Cuba were exciting public states which maintain good relations with Cuba is concerned, the Soviet government opinion against that government.
Neither plies of armaments to Cuba, although there Soviet Union, taking into account all of this, industry nor agriculture in Cuba, neither was no threat on our side that could cause to sit cross-handed and to be a detached land-improvement works nor training of the such a necessity.
The I should be glad, Kennedy stressed, to Along with these missiles, the Soviets build-up of the Cuban military might has give assurances that an invasion would not are apparently supplying the extensive rabadly impressed the American people and be repeated neither on the part of Cuban dar and other electronic equipment which the USA congress.
As President I was tryrefugees, nor on the part of the USA armed is required for their operation. ing to calm public opinion and I have deforces.
We can also confirm the presence of clared that, taking into account the kind of But the issue is, Kennedy said, that as several Soviet-made motor torpedo boats aid rendered by the Soviet Union to Cuba, a result of the USSR government’s action carrying ship-to-ship missiles having a range we must keep cool and self-controlled.
I was not able to find a satisfactory expladenly has changed for the worse.
The number of Soviet military technination for those actions of the Soviet Union.
Proceeding with the previous idea, I cians now known to be in Cuba or en route— Kennedy said later, that the Soviet said that for the Cuban government the viapproximately 3,500—is consistent with Union is aware of the American opinion retal issue is the question what is to be done assistance in setting up and learning to use garding the present regime in Cuba.
But we do not have new attempts at invasion or they must unto make information available as fast as it is any intentions to attack Cuba. dertake steps to ensure their country from obtained and properly verified.
You are saying that we have established attack, take care of their defense.
We have There is no evidence of any organized a blockade around Cuba, but that is not the already said that the Soviet government has combat force in Cuba from any Soviet bloc case.
We have only taken the decision that responded to the call of Cuba for help only country; of military base provided to Rusthe ships, after bringing cargo to Cuba, will because that appeal had the aim of providsia; of a violation of the 1934 treaty relating be barred entry to the American ports to pick ing Cubans with bread and removing the to Guantanamo; of the presence of offenup freight. threat hanging over Cuba by strengthening sive ground-to-ground missiles; or of other The actions of the Soviet Union create its defensive capacity.
Regarding help, rensignificant offensive capability either in a very complicated situation and I don’t dered by the Soviet Union, in the use of Cuban hands or under Soviet direction and know where the whole thing can bring us. some exclusively defensive armaments, by guidance.
We, certainly, take on trust statements ent the Soviet government never would have That is our position on this issue, said of the Soviet Union about the sort of armagone along with such an aid.
As PresiKennedy said that, to make things compounded by our Attorney General, Robert dent I am trying to restrain those people in pletely clear on this issue, he would like to Kennedy, in his conversation with the Sothe USA who are favoring an invasion of announce once more that the USA do not viet Ambassador.
Nevproceeding last Sunday when I was voicing my speeches I declared against one of the ertheless, intensified armaments supplies to the aforementioned statement.
Thus, in all American senators, who had previously supCuba on the part of the Soviet Union, which my actions I proceed with due regard for ported such an invasion. began in July of the current year, have comstatements of the Soviet Union that the arI repeat, a very dangerous situation has plicated the situation greatly and made it maments supplied to Cuba have an exclunevertheless arisen regarding this issue and more dangerous. sively defensive character.
My intention, Kennedy stressed, conI said in conclusion that I answered Kennedy that once there sists in preventing any actions that could from the corresponding statements of the was an attempt to organize an invasion of lead to war, so long as those actions would Soviet government, including the statement Cuba and it is known what was the end of not be occasioned by some activty of the delivered to the President today, the USA the affair.
In order to confirm administration has a clear view of policy of and your own statements, Mr President, that the USA administration believes the the Soviet Union on the Cuban issue and everybody know what were the circumdeclarations of the Soviet government about also of our assessment of the USA policy stances and how that invasion was arranged. the defensive character of the armaments and actions regarding Cuba.
I had the task Everybody knows also that the USA adminsupplied to Cuba, Kennedy read the followof giving the President an account of all of istration needs only to move a finger and no ing passage from his statement on the Cuit.
You and we, as I thanked the President for the converWest Berlin and it applies to all the other it was underlined more than once by N.S. sation during which we have discussed quesissues that separate our two countries.
Our Khrushchev, are human beings and you have tions that represent interests for both counpolicy is the policy of peace, friendship, the your own ideology, and you are well aware tries, concerning important aspects of the policy of removing differences by peaceful of our attitude towards it.
The USSR is a foreign policies of the USSR and the USA. means. socialist state, and is building communism.
I also underlined the view of the Soviet govIn conclusion I promised to convey the We are guided by communist ideology.
Khrushchev and tion must be solved not by the force of arto terms over those questions that divide us. expressed confidence that he would accept maments, but by the way of peaceful comKennedy responded that he agrees with it with pleasure. petition and we, the communists, have urged that remark.
As I have already told Mr The conversation lasted 2 hours and 20 this since the days of Lenin.
The Soviet Union is also a large can side Rusk, Thompson, Hillenbrandt solve ideological disputes by the force of and rich country.
A competition in economics, a lot of things to do inside our countries.
As Semenov, Dobrynin, and Sukhodrev. in satisfying the material and spiritual reto the outcome of the competition between quirements of the peope—that is the field the, which I hope will be a peaceful one, A GROMYKO where in a historic, peaceful “battle,” withhistory will decide it.
On behalf of the Soviet government I low any actions that can lead to a collision.
Kennedy said that in the case of N.S. eral American representatives who had viscans called for a convocation of the SecuKhrushchev coming to the USA he would ited the Soviet Union. rity Council on 23 October at 10:30m. be glad to meet him once more.
Appended to the letter was the draft its immediate convocation has already been The Cuban leaders are awaiting the of a resolution which in its main strategic exerted.
We will provide supplementary inforannouncement, and are placing their hopes “The Security Council... mation on our position in the Security Counon the wisdom of our decisions.
Castro said that the USSR, which is in accordance with Article 40 of the Char22.
Authorizes and requests the acting Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transare now being sent to Cuba by the USA, we secretary general to dispatch to Cuba a corps lation by John Henriksen.] as a sovereign nation will never admit them of UN observers to ensure fulfillment of this onto our soil. resolution and to deliver a report.
Alekseev to USSR Foreign nate Cuba’s leading officials and army comtine measures directed against military deMinistry, 23 October 1962 manders, just as they do the popular masses. liveries to Cuba after the UN has been asTo avoid provocations, the troops have sured of the fulfillment of Point 1.
Strongly recommends that the planes and ships only in cases when the enUnited States of America and the Union of Raul Castro has announced that in reemy has initiated attack first.
Soviet Socialist Republics immediately dissponse to Kennedy’s threat, the Cuban govAccording to Castro, the Americans cuss the issue of measures to be taken to ernment would make a decision regarding have denied Cuban workers access to eliminate the currently existing threat to the the mobilization of all subdivisions of the Guantanamo base. security of the Western hemisphere and to popular militia.
All American civilian planes have been peace throughout the world, and to deliver All in all, 350,000 persons will be prohibited from flying over Cuba and from a report on this to the Security Council.” mobilized. approaching its shores.
We will forward the text of Stevenson’s The full mobilization of this group will A radio interception has also been reletter and the draft of the resolution to the take 72 hours. ceived which prohibits American ships from Ministry of Foreign Affairs by teletype.
The forces of the military units in this conducting negotiations with the bases on The United States’ formulation of the group have been brought open channels. imaginary threat posed by Cuba and the to military readiness, and are occupying All new facts will be immediately comUSSR is clearly aimed at concealing and departure positions. municated. justifying to public opinion the USA’s uniThe mass labor organizations are delaterally imposed military blockade of Cuba, voting all their energy to helping the army 23.
Tomorrow at 12:00 noon, Fidel Castro Foreign Ministry, 23 October 1962 Before consulting with the other memwill deliver a television and radio address bers of the Security Council on the time for to the Cuban people.
October 1962 convening the meeting of the Council, we Commenting on Kennedy’s speech, met with the Cuban representative and had Raul Castro said that it was undoubtedly As chairman of the Security Council, I a preliminary discussion of the possibility aimed at American voters and at the Latin have been sent a letter by the Cuban delof Cuba’s submitting to Council an examiAmerican governments that still have dipegate to the UN, nation of the issue of the USA’s aggressive lomatic ties with Cuba.
Castro thinks that, under this pressure, ment, demanding an urgent convocation of The Cuban representative is conferring a whole series of these governments, if not the Council to discuss the USA’s aggressive with his government on this issue. all of them, will break off relations with actions and its blockade of Cuba as acts of We will undertake measures toward Cuba. war. initiating the meeting of the Council no earThe Cuban government, said Castro, According to Inchaustegi, the Cuban lier than 3:00m.
Zorin to USSR clear speech exposing the provocative acpected that the Council meeting will have Foreign Ministry, 23 October 1962 tions of the USA against Cuba, and declarto be convened (given the demands of the ing the the steadfast determination of the Western majority of the Council’s members) 23 October 1962 Cuban people to take up arms, if necessary, on 23 October of this year at 3:00m.
On 23 October at 4:00m., under the The Cuban delegate demanded the immeDuring the examination of the issue in chairmanship of the USSR delegate, a meetdiate revocation of the measures announced the Council, we will declare our objections ing of the Security Council took place, on by Kennedy.
Characteristically, the Cuban’s to the misleading American formulation of the agenda of which was our issue of the speech was greeted with friendly applause it.
We are teletyping the full text to the recent announcements on the Cuban quesdeclaration in which made note of the false Ministry of Foreign Affairs. tion, we will point out that the USA’s agnature of the USA’s address to the Security The next meeting has been set for togressions against Cuba cannot be evaluated Council, which was a clumsy attempt to morrow, 24 October, at 9:00m.
Eastern as anything other than a provocation pushconceal the USA’s aggressions.
All of these countries share a domestic affairs of the Republic of Cuba.
After that the agenda was approved serious anxiety about the situation created We will also propose that the USA govwithout objections from the Council memby the USA’s actions.
All of them recognize ernment immediately enter into direct nebers. the clear illegality of the USA’s actions. gotiations with the Cuban government on The text of the Soviet government’s They do not yet, however, show sufficient the settling of its conflicts with Cuba though declaration on Cuba was distributed as an determination to take any concrete steps. peaceful means, as suggested by Dorticos official UN document, and also as a press Thus, for example, the delegate from the in his speech in the UN General Assembly. release.
In his the blockade and to end arms stockpiling in We will of course vote against the long speech, which was marked by demaCuba.
To call upon all interested parties to tion of the post-war history of international abstain from any actions which could di23.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian manner the foreign policy of the Soviet and to work towards returning the CaribFederation , Moscow; copy obUnion and the other socialist states.
Proceeding from these principles, eral in the fulfillment of this aim. gressions against Cuba (we are teletyping the delegates from the United Arab Repub4.
It is revealing that Dean guarding its political freedom and territofully satisfactory, in part because it does not tried as hard as he could to get around the rial integrity. even indicate (in clear and unambiguous question of the naval blockade imposed by In the speeches of both delegates, doubt terms) that the USA’s declared blockade of the USA on Cuba. was expressed about the reliability and wellCuba must be immediately ended.
Declaring England’s support for the groundedness of the American assertions This evening, after the Security CounAmerican draft resolution, Dean at the same about the allegedly offensive character of cil meeting, the delegates from neutral Asian time expressed his thoughts on the necesthe weaponry installed in it.
Quaison-Sackey and African countries will hold a meeting sity of negotiations between the interested recalled with regard to this the fabrication to discuss the general policy that it would parties. by USA intelligence of false information be most advisable for them to follow with The French delegate Seydoux that has already been used in the past for regard to this issue.
In the course of also supported the American draft resolujustifying aggressive actions against Cuba. tomorrow’s meeting we will decisively detion, representing it as allegedly furthering The delegates from the United Arab fend the position laid out in our draft resothe interests of a peaceful settlement of the Republic and Ghana declared that they canlution, and will exert pressure on the neutrals conflict.
Like Dean, he reiterated the false not justify the USA actions aimed at estabto do the same. assertions by the USA of the allegedly oflishing a blockade of Cuba.
They both emfensive nature of the armaments supplied by phasized that these actions by the USA con23.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian In the speeches by the delegates from peace and general security.
Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transnization of American States, which is opThe delegates of the United Arab Relation by John Henriksen, Harvard Univerposed to Cuba.
U Ghana, and also by U Thant. nuclear forces that threaten the neighboring Thant expressed his support for the proposal Comrade [Deputy Foreign Minister countries.
Aiken appealed for a peaceful that the interested parties meet during this Mircea] Malitza, the delegate from Rumasettlement by means of negotiations.
USA A Dobrynin to USSR Foreign measures for safeguarding their countries’ Proceeding from this point, and bearMinistry, 25 October 1962 defense.
The text of U USSR and Romania), and vote in favor of it overheard a conversation of two prominent Thant’s message to Comrade N.S. if it fails to win the necessary number of American journalists (Donovan7 and [WarKhrushchev has been teletyped to the Minvotes without our support. ren] Rogers) that the President had supposistry of Foreign Affairs.
We do not rule out the possibility that edly taken a decision to invade Cuba today Throughout the entire day, delegations Ghana and the United Arab Republic may or tomorrow night. from the neutral countries of Asia and Afalter their draft resolution, reducing it to an Our correspondent also had an opporrica worked on a draft resolution for the appeal to the interested parties to conduct tunity to talk to Rogers, a correspondent of Security Council.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian ately interested parties regarding the steps which we will not object to.
Khrushchev, the United Arab Republic and Ghanaian if such a response has been made by that 25 October delgates’ speeches, and the whole tenor of time. their speeches, nevertheless clearly indicate According to available information, the The domestic situation in Cuba with that the gist of that formulation is a demand USA will respond to U Thant’s message in regard to the USA provocations continues for the revocation of the measures anthe next few hours. to remain calm and confident.
The industrial and commercial USA’s capacity to carry out the blockade and Federation , Moscow; copy obcenters of the country are operating norits other aggressions against Cuba. tained by NHK , promally.
Castro, opinion that steps undertaken by the erings there is almost no trace of the ostenfor example, approves of the fact that sevKennedy administration regarding Cuba had tation and verbosity that are characteristic eral of our vessels have turned back from been dictated by the desire to stop the genof Cubans.
The Soviet Union’s authority has has expressed a belief in the necessity of Khrushchev and Kennedy in Vienna last climbed to unprecedented heights.
Risk, entailed with these steps made tions of the USSR government in its defense planes over Cuban territory. by Kennedy’s administration, is outweighed, of Cuba are completely convincing the Unverifiable information has been rein his view, by those unfavorable consepeople of the failure of the American provoceived by us and the Czechs from unverifiquences for the USA military-strategic situcations.
The whole country is preparing to able sources on the possibility of an interation, which would appear in the case of the rebuff the aggressors.
The leadrange missiles. in every city neighborhood, in factories, on ership has taken this information into con2.
Regarding how far the Kennedy adthe national estates and institutions, firstsideration, but is not taking it very seriously. ministration is ready to go against Cuba, the aid brigades offering immediate help to the The situation in the Soviet colony is following impression has been forming. wounded.
X.62 ALEKSEEV in Cuba the aforementioned missile launchMilitia observation posts have been ers.
It is necessary to menThe nation is anxiously awaiting the sity.] tion that, according to all reports, the Amerifirst clashes between Soviet steamers and cans are not aware of exact numbers and the American ships constituting the blockCable from Soviet Ambassador to the kinds of our missile weapons in Cuba.
USA A Dobrynin to Soviet Foreign circumstance makes them rather nervous.
The most militant line in the USA Soviet steamers in Cuban ports without seadministration still is held by [Attorney rious complications was met with great reThe situation in Washington remains General] R Kennedy, [Secretary of Defense lief. tense and complicated.
Khrushchev’s response in the comments of American press, radio, men, who insist on a firm approach with the to it and to Bertrand Russell, were comand television, began appearing rays of hope purpose of destroying the missile bases in mented upon here as events of the greatest for a peaceful settlement of the Cuban issue Cuba, not even stopping at invasion of the importance. and they are related to the quiet, restrained island.
Rusk and Meanwhile the radio and newspapers behavior of the Soviet government and its Dillon attribute great significance to [Soviet Dereadiness for negotiations with the USA (it are now holding a somewhat restrained and fense Minister] Marshal R.Ya.
Malinsky’s is necessary to mention that the Embassy is more cautious position, though they also speech. receiving quite a number of cables and letfavor continued pressure upon us.
It is his view that the USA’s current Nevertheless, prevailing here are the According to our information, the first group insane actions against Cuba provide firm expectations for further mounting of crisis was insisting on a categorical rejection of ground for the further expansion of this in the relations between the USA and the that appeal.
Such an answer had been almovement, which will be able to force the USSR over Cuba.
But at the last moment (around ing in to provocations, and of the possibile 1.
Zorin to USSR The President is vacillating right now, country, relate that at the beginning many Foreign Ministry, 25 October 1962 but, judging from everything, especially the people in those locations, especially in the principal direction of USA policy, he is western states, perceived Kennedy’s speech 25 October 1962 heeding the first group, particularly, his of October 22 as a pre-election maneuver, brother.
People, We have been informed that U Thant that the President has largely engaged himamong them those who even not long ago has declared his intention to meet succesself before the public opinion of America were saying that it was “necessary to do sively with the Americans, us, and the Cuand not only America.
In essence, he, as a something to Castro,” now are badly frightbans on 26 October.
He has proposed meethot-tempered gambler, has put at stake his ened about what may be the outcome. ing with us at 4:30m.
Eastern Standard reputation as a statesman and politician, and Noticeably fewer people can be seen Time; before that he is meeting with thus his prospects for re-election in 1964, on Washington streets.
Government offices Stevenson, and after us with Garciawhat—being an ambitious man—he pasare working until late at night.
African embassies warned their sturesponse to Kennedy and Russell as well.
Of course, it is difficult to draw a dents at American universities to be ready We understand Comrade N.S. final conclusion whether there will be such for evacuation home.
In general it is necessary to say that saying that the Soviet Union agrees with U which now is going on, the elements of different sources in the journalist and dipThant’s proposal in its goal of holding predisinformation, for sure, can play a role.
In lomatic corps in Washington agree that curliminary negotiations— allowing the interthis regard it is necessary to mention that rently the probability of a USA armed inested parties to meet for a peaceful settlethe USA administration has undertaken untervention against Cuba is great.
They conment of the crisis and for a normalization of usual measures of control over the press.
In sider that the Kennedy administration needs the situation in the Caribbean area.
This inessence an unofficial censorship has been only a plausible excuse to “justify” such an cludes, on the part of the Soviet Union, the introduced in great measure.
In this regard it calls attention to the voluntary suspension for 2 to 3 weeks of “conducting” of the press strong underlining (in the evening edition arms stockpiling in Cuba, and, on the part on the part of the Kennedy administration papers and radio transmissions) of the asof the USA, the voluntary suspension for has been strengthened.
The USA adminisIn this regard, as it is recognized nearly by sion of “quarantine” activity unless this detration as before is fully resolved to achieve everybody here, a very important role is mand of theirs is met. by “whatever means” the liquidation of the played by the self-possessed and construcWe of course firmly reject any attempts missile bases in Cuba,—underscored Rusk. tive position of the Soviet government, by the USA to impose stipulations either on He also refuted several reports about USA which is restraining futher broadening of the us or on Cuba.
In this matter we will proreadiness to “exchange” Soviet bases in conflict, restraining the hottest heads in ceed from the condition that negotiations can Cuba for American bases in other countries, Washington. only be conducted on the basis of U Thant’s for example in Turkey (in this regard Rusk proposal, that is on the basis of the point criticized today’s article by 25/X/62 A DOBRYNIN about suspending arms stockpiling in Cuba, Lippmann). a proposal which the neutral countries sup5.
After this, U Thant told us that and that the USA for the duration of that To this U Thant responded that for this tonight he had received a response to his same period avoid immediate encounters reason it is necessary to specify what guarsecond message from Kennedy as well, and between their ships and Soviet vessels.
The head of the Brazilian delegation, of our own response). ond message.
Arinos , has We are communicating the text of Since the forthcoming meeting with U worked out a draft resolution on the deKennedy’s response as a separate telegram.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian should discuss the draft with the acting Secwould give him an answer later.
Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transwould be better that the issue of the elimiToday at 16:00 there will be a meeting lation by John Henriksen, Harvard Univernation of all foreign military bases in Latin between Stevenson and U Thant.
Zorin to USSR dent Kennedy as well, expressed his ideas Foreign Ministry, 26 October 1962 for using Dorticos’s proposal of 8 October in the General Assembly as a way to achieve 26 October 1962 26 October 1962 a lasting normalization of the Caribbean basin situation.
Khrushchev’s response to U Thant’s like the Soviet Union, is not ready to agree that he would do all he could, although he second message, U Thant immediately reto that proposal.
We said that today he had presented the Cuban emphasized that now the whole world would pointed out that the Soviet Union would delegate to the UN with the message, to be be again convinced that the Soviet Union is stick to its obligations with unconditional conveyed to Castro, in which he asked that positively and constructively working tosteadfastness if an agreemnt was reached on missile installation work in Cuba, which wards the peace initiative that it undertook, the basis of U Thant’s own proposal.
Khrushchev for the speedy and posiif the arms provisioning continued, it would necessary for negotiations. tive response to his second message. not be hard to detect anyway.
Khrushchev’s relooking for a pretext for not fulfilling the tainable, U Thant answered that he found sponse.
Nevertheless U Thant noted that, as very agreement that would facilitate a conthe key to this in Dorticos’s speech to the he sees it, an agreement has been reached at clusive settlement.
General Assembly on 8 October of this year, the present moment between the Soviet We also noted that while the USA is in which the latter announced that if the USA Union and the USA which, although for only advancing a new proposal that complicates were to give effective guarantees that they a short period , matters, they themselves are continuing to will not undertake a military invasion of ensures the possibility of avoiding dangerprepare intensively for an invasion of Cuba.
Cuba, and will not aid its invasion by anyous encounters on the open sea.
It would be posappropriate blockade measures that have mentary conditions advanced by the USA. sible to discuss a particular procedure for been announced. maritime traffic, or for particular ports of We told U Thant that the Soviet Union 26.
He implied that the of the UN, to exert the necessary pressure Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transAmericans would apparently be satisfied on the USA with the aim of reaching a prolation by John Henriksen, Harvard Univerwith a simple procedure, and would not devisional agreement for 2 to 3 weeks, based sity.] mand searches or inspections of vessels on the initial proposal of U Thant himself.
Khrushchev to President Kennedy you communicated in your telegram. exists as before. of October 27.
In addition, in the letter to already been sent, and for that reason the the newspapers that an invading plane of U Thant it should be also advisable to voice issue you put forth would be explained in unkown nationality has been shot down. support for the proposals of the Soviet govFidel Castro’s speech.
Khrushting to aggravate the situation and initiate cans to launch an adventurist invasion of chev’s letter to Kennedy of 27 October, provocations.
Cuba, using their armed forces, in response Castro said that it had been composed with Castro said that he understood the cruto our steps, undertaken in connection with great diplomatic skill, and that it would have cial nature of these actions, but that, conU Thant’s initiative, particularly in reponse a huge influence on global public opinion. sidering the rise in the army’s martial spirit to our last action.
They know very well that Moreover it puts the USA government and the Americans’ warning, our friends if under present circumstances they were to in a difficult position, and exposes the illewere compelled to take such a step. start an intervention it would brand them as gality of its actions. aggressors and hold them up to shame as Castro supposes that the USA will not 27.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian You should inform comrade Pavlov [a public opinion the presence of special weapFederation , Moscow; copy obpseudonym for USSR Gen.
Khrushchev’s letsisted that he exert the necessary pressure mainly a concern for the USSR and the ter of 27 October, as well as a copy of the on the Americans to make them adopt his USA, that smaller countries cannot advise message to Kennedy of the same date. plan.
Khrushchev’s message ships arriving in the next 2 to 3 weeks in Security Council) with the aim of persuadto Kennedy of 26 October of this year.
Khrushchev’s Stevenson told U Thant, Kennedy is examter, after which any further negotiations message to Kennedy of 26 October, since ining this message in a positive and benevowould be rendered impossible.
Stevenson also let a U Thant said that he shared our conit, albeit in his own interpretation. mistake pass when giving an account of the cern, and would take action.
American naval ships carrying out the lation by John Henriksen, Harvard UniverU Thant asked us to convey to him, if blockade, and because they claim that it is sity.] possible, the text of the above-mentioned important to know which areas are forbidmessage of 26 October in order to take it den.
U Thant said that he SOVIET EMBASSY WASHINGTON for 2 to 3 weeks, based on the proposal apwould give the indicated letter back to SOVIET EMBASSY HAVANA proved by the Soviet Union (whereby the Stevenson.
He again reiterexpresses his sincere thanks to N.S. procedure that will be carried out abroad by ated that the USA was very concerned that Khrushchev for his very constructive 26 USA consulate officials, and within the work there, including the assembly of bombOctober response to U Thant’s message of United States by customs personnel. ers, is proceeding day and night.
Stevenson gave U Thant concerning the inemphasized in various ways that if these Moscow adheres to the opinion that U terception areas for vessels. projects had not been stopped, then the USA Thant should be given a positive answer to Both documents have been returned to would take new actions.
Garcia-Inchaustegui’s question as to what view we shall inform comrade Pavlov This is conveyed for purposes of intelthis would mean concretely, Stevenson reand give him corresponding instrucligence and familiarization. ferred, said U Thant, to the strengthening tions about access to launchers for U Thant of the blockade and to a USA demand for and accompanying persons. the convocation of the Security Council.
Khrushchev’s message of 27 October, going to Cuba right now do not carry any Inchaustegui on 27 October 1962 U Thant declared that the formulation conweapons.” tained in it appears to him a positive one.
Garcia-Inchaustegui informed us of these instructions. that at 20:30 Eastern Standard Time he heard 1.
Federation , Moscow; copy obU Thant expressed gratitude for the tained by NHK , proinvitation to visit Cuba that had been ex28.
Alekseev to Soviet Ministry of Foreign U Thant said that in the event that he Affairs, 28 October 1962 decides to go, he would intend to take sevCable from Soviet Foreign Minister eral aides and experts along with him.
Gromyko to USSR Ambassador to 28 October 1962 U Thant also asked whether the govCuba Alekseev, 28 October 1962 ernment of Cuba (in the event of his group’s Due to F Castro’s absence from Hajourney to Havana) could, on its own initia28 October 1962 vana and according to his instructions, I gave tive, and not because they were official obboth letters to President Dorticos.
Castro promised suspended. mation from comrade Zorin regarding U to meet me on his return.
We are confident that Dorticos, the present conditions of great patriotic ensons Rodriguez, F Castro and the majority of the thusiasm of our people this report would be and made the assumption that insofar as the leaders will understand correctly perceived by infinitely electrified masses as Cuban comrades had several times informed our decision and we will find a common lana cold shower.
Indeed, there are diffiHe said that for the Cuban leaders the intervention and bombings, probably, some culties to explain it to the people, insofar as most important thing right now is to prequick and operational actions were needed, it has been excited beyond limits by antiserve the Soviet Union’s prestige, which had so there was no time for coordinations.
Gromyko mitted to TASS) sion itself because he considered it to be and Cuban Ambassador to the USSR Besides, Dorticos explained, we found advantageous for mankind and the Cuban Carlos Olivares Sanchez, ourselves in a difficult situation insofar as people—but the procedure of its adoption— 29 October 1962 we had officially declared that we would not without a previous consultation. allow any UN observers on our territory.
Rodriguez explained that F him about our assessment of the internasecurity.
Castro was defending our decision in contional situation created as a result of the naAccording to Dorticos, no Kennedy versations with the Cuban leaders, trying to val blockade around Cuba, announced by statements could be trusted inasmuch as convince them that its results would be seen the USA administration. even now the piratical flights over Cuban later, but he had not yet found intelligible Responded to him that we, the Soterritory were occurring and this was done arguments for an electrified people.
As a result of the efforts undertaken available data, Olivares informed that Chernyshov, Second Secretary of the by the Soviet and Cuban sides there have a series of neutral countries accuse Cuba of Latinamerican Department. been received guarantees on the part of the violating the Belgrade Declaration, explainUSA administration of non-aggression ing their conclusions by the accepted fact A GROMYKO against the Republic of Cuba, which will be of the presence of a “Soviet military base” officially formalized after the end of negoin Cuba.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian tiations with the participation of Mr U Told Olivares that such assumptions Federation , Moscow; copy obThant, Acting UN Secretary General.
Kuznetsov on October 28 of the current year. national law and do not contradict a single Responded to him that this statecommonly accepted international norm.
RECORD OF THE CONVERSATION ment has received the full comprehension At the conclusion of the conversation WITH ACTING United Nations SECRETARY and support of the Soviet Government.
Olivares expressed his desire to broaden GENERAL U THANT Speaking of time limits for the withcontacts between officials of the MFA [Minon 29 October 1962 drawal from Cuba of the “Soviet weapons istry of Foreign Affairs] of the USSR and for strategic defense” the Ambassador asked those of the Cuban embassy in such circumThe meeting took place in the UN Secto be informed if those armaments would stances.
Kiselev, O. base in Guantanamo. to Soviet-Cuban relations, for his own oriLoutfi, Narasimhan, and General Rikhye.
Responded to him that, in our opinentation and in order to have the possibility At the beginning of the conversation, ion, the solution of the question of the liqto inform his government personally.
Kuznetsov conveyed to U Thant the uidation of the Guantanamo base, apparResponded to him that I do underheartfelt greetings of Comrade N.S. ently, will require a long time and therefore stand such an interest, adding that the Khrushchev, and the latter’s great appreciathe presence of certain types of Soviet arAmbassador’s desire would certainly be tion for U Thant’s efforts in a noble enmaments in Cuba during that period will taken into account.
Explained that durdeavor, the attainment of a speedy settlehardly contribute to solving it positively. ing the recent events we were obliged, in ment of the Cuban crisis.
Olivares asked if this meant that the order to save time, to use communication He said that the government of the Soviet armaments would be withdrawn from lines of our Embassy in Havana, which enUSSR had ordered him to arrive in New Cuba before the USA administration satissure an uninterrupted, secure, and quick York to aid U Thant in his efforts to elimifies other demands listed by Fidel Castro in transmission of reports to Cuba.
Kuznetsov space or territorial waters of Cuba. reliability the communication would nevertheless like to make use of this Responded to him that when we are through our Embassy in Havana is a more first meeting with U Thant first and forespeaking about the return of Soviet armasuitable method than through the Cuban most emphasize to certain basic features of ments from Cuba to the USSR we mean only embassy in Moscow. the Soviet Union’s position, and the steps a certain kind of armaments, but not armaIn parting Olivares expressed deep taken by the USSR government to assure ments in general.
The Soviet govfact that the American government believes again addressed a request to the United ernment, bearing in mind U Thant’s recomit possible to reach an agreement on the baStates to suspend its blockade.
In doing so mendation, has undertaken to suspend temsis of the USSR’s proposals.
This we conhe emphasized that the Soviet Union had porarily the traffic of its ships bound for sider to be a positive factor.
With regard to undertaken to give orders to its ships to temCuba, and to keep them away for a short this it seems to us that the moment has arporarily suspend traffic to Cuba, which sigperiod of time from the region declared by rived for making a transition from general nals the acceptance by the Soviet Union of the United States as being under quarantine. statements to concrete matters.
The governthe preliminary settlement proposed by U The government of the USSR has also ment of the USSR is ready to do so.
U Thant said that he had also declared declared that on board these ships there are U Thant has expressed his hope that to the Americans that a continuation of the not, and will not be, any arms that President the exchange of opinions will be fruitful and blockade is especially undesirable during his Kennedy and the USA government see as positive, and that it will help eliminate the visit to Cuba.
U Thant has still not received “offensive.” threat now present in the Caribbean region. a response from the Americans, but hopes Later the government of the USSR He has also expressed his thanks to N.S. to have one in the near future, possibly even agreed to dismantle and send back to the Khrushchev for his greetings and his appretoday.
Kuznetsov thanked U Thant for are seen by the United States as “offensive.” tain peace.
Kuznetsov agreed that the time has that for its part it will take any and all meanizes the danger of the existing situation. come for turning to concrete problems and sures to prevent an exacerbation of the situaThat danger intensified late Saturday night ranking them on the basis of their urgency tion, which could lead to a worsening of the and early Sunday morning.
He was happy to note that, conflict and an unleashing of thermonuclear were indications that the point of no return in his outlines as in U Thant’s plans, the war.
U Thant did not sleep that night, quarantine issue occupies first place.
This USSR is bearing in mind the sincere desire conducting endless consultations with suggests that our thoughts and desires are of nations to safeguard peace and calm Narasimhan and Rikhye.
Fortunately nothheading in the same direction. throughout the globe. ing tragic occurred.
Kuznetsov The Soviet government has stressed Khrushchev’s response yesterday to recalled that the Soviet government, as N.S. and continues to stress that the actions of Kennedy’s message represents a very great Khrushchev informed U Thant on 25 Octothe United States, manifested by the impocommitment to the peaceful resolution of ber, had accepted the first proposal of U sition of the blockade, as well as the whole the Cuban crisis.
U Thant emphasized that Thant, which stipulated in particular a volUSA policy towards Cuba, are aggressive, this was not just his personal opinion, but untary suspension of all arms transfers to and aimed at an exacerbation of the situaalso the opinion of all his colleagues and Cuba for a period of two to three weeks, tion rather than a normalization of it.
There the overwhelming majority of the permaand the simultaneous temporary cessation is no need at present to provide a detailed nent UN delegates with whom he has met. of the quarantine activity on the part of the description of American actions during the For this fruitful and positive gesture, said U United States. past week.
Khrushchev’s messages to the ment of the Soviet Union. favorable conditions for carrying out the USA President Kennedy and to U Thant.
After three-day talks since it is depriving Cuba of peaceful goods problem on the basis of the Soviet proposon this issue with the Soviet delegate to the that are necessary to it, it is creating diffials.
Zorin, and the USA delegate to culties for the fueling of the ships remainmade by the Soviet government, as well as the UN Stevenson, U Thant put all his efing on the open sea, and it is incurring losses by the United Nations Organization and by forts, he said, into finding the fastest resobecause of their enforced inactivity.
The Soviet Union aclution of this issue. regard to this, we welcomed U Thant’s knowledges the great efforts that were disAt the present time, U Thant said, afthoughts on the necessity of resolving this played by U Thant. ter his trip to Cuba had been decided, and whole issue in the next one or two days.
Kuznetsov said again that we had the United States is illegal, and is recognized tral countries; not yet given thought to the details, but that as such by the whole world.
Nevertheless, 3) sharing these functions with the Inwe would prefer that the groups of Red proceeding from the situation at hand and ternational Red Cross.
Cross inspectors be made up of citizens of guided by the interests of peace, the govThe government of the USSR has exneutral countries.
If U Thant has any ernment of the USSR at the present moment amined the issue and has asked to commuthoughts, then they could be discussed, and is set on the issue of suspending the practinicate that, if U Thant is not successful in the Soviet government’s views on them cal operations of the quarantine.
It is quite reaching an agreement with the Americans could be sought. natural that we would like these operations on the temporary suspension of the blockU Thant said that, as practice shows, to cease immediately.
Kuznetsov emphasized that the he has in connection with this trip. basic difficulties were in settling this issue.
They are also aware that these U Thant expressed his thanks to the of the quarantine.
Begovernment of the Soviet Union for this matter of arms provisioning, the dismantling fore this they have been trying to avoid diimportant decision, made with the purpose of missile launchers, and the shipping of rect contact between Soviet and American of reducing tension and contributing to setthem back to the Soviet Union.
However, the Americans are afraid tling the Cuban problem through peaceful Union has already given its consent to all that if they allow Soviet ships to approach means.
He promised to convey immediately this, and has even agreed to the 2 to 3 week Cuba, those ships may be carrying arms.
For the content of this Soviet proposal to the arms provisioning point.
Zorin, U Thant of the monitoring system, but is raising the visioning is not continuing. met with the UN delegate from Cuba, pssibility that Red Cross representatives The Soviet Union’s decision on the Garcia-Inchaustegui, to whom he declared could be conveyed onto the Soviet vessels possible use of Red Cross services will in that, since the USSR is not agreeing to the either by Soviet ships, or by the ships of many ways contribute to the settling of this creation of some verification mechanism for neutral countries.
As far as possible cargo problem. ships on the open sea, he, U Thant, proposes checks in the ports of call are concerned, One of the goals that U Thant is setto the government of Cuba to examine the this issue if for the Cuban government to ting for himself on his trip to Cuba is get an possibility of creating such a mechanism in decide, since that is its own territory, and idea of what is being done or has already ports of call.
In doing so he informed the the Soviet government itself cannot make been done with regard to the removal of Cuban delegate of the Soviet views on this any decision on this matter without Cuban missile launchers from Cuba.
Kuznetsov for cil. the information, and said that he understood his explanation, and said that he would imU Thant intends moreover to discuss the latter’s position. mediately pass this information on to the with Castro measures for the safeguarding He went on to say that the government government of Cuba. of the security of Cuba, as well as for the of the USSR has examined in a spirit of coU Thant noted that in the event that the elimination of threats from the USA and operation the ideas expressed by U Thant Red Cross takes on the execution of these certain other countries of Latin America.
Kuznetsov said that we now have to his earlier message of 27 October, which also restrain those who wish to take aggresa clearer idea of the task that U Thant is setsaid that agents of the UN Security Council sive action against Cuba either from within ting for himself during his trip to Cuba.
In could conduct on-site inspections on the fulUSA territory, or from the territory of the connection with this he expressed some of fillment of the obligations that have been countries that neighbor Cuba. the Soviet views on this matter.
Khrushchev’s messages, of the Republic of Cuba to allow these auals, the duties of all parties should be forthe missile installations in Cuba are in the thorized officials to enter the country. mulated and represented in the form of joint hands of Soviet specialists.
The Soviet govU Thant declared that he now underor individual declarations to the Security ernment has stated that it is dismantling and stands better the problem connected with Council that express their positions.
In this removing these launchers from Cuba. establishing on-site inspections on the disway such obligations will have a more defiIt is evident from the message sent by mantling and removal of the missile launchnite character.
Kuznetsov asked whether the in his talks with Prime Minister Fidel Castro, ing the temporary suspension of the quarAmericans are not moving away from the and it is possible that the latter will have antine before U Thant’s departure for Cuba. position laid out in Kennedy’s message. something to say on this matter.
Kuznetsov expressed his agreeReturning to the question of guaranUnion for its part has made many conciliament with the Soviet Union’s granting of tees, U Thant said that such guarantees tory gestures, and that now it is necessary guarantees on arms provisioning and the should be bilateral.
On his own initiative he to persuade the other side to make similar dismantling of missile installations, and so decided to raise the issue of the presence of ones. too the United States should make guaranUN representatives in all the countries of U Thant said that he would immeditees to the effect that it will not infringe upon this region.
If the government of Cuba ately communicate information about the the security and sovereignty of Cuba either agrees to some UN presence, said U Thant, Soviet Union’s favorable reaction to his prowith its own armed forces, or through supthen he intends to propose to the Organizaposal about possibly making use of the serport for other countries, and that it will not tion of American States and the United vices of the Red Cross, and with regard to permit or aid the activity on its own terriStates to admit UN representatives onto the this he wanted to clarify certain details.
These territory of the USA and the Latin Ameriin the event that the Red Cross agrees, the pledges must be firm. can countries, in the interests of removing personnel of the inspection groups can be We have made note of Kennedy’s statethe threat to peace in this area.
The UN ment that the USA will guarantee that no outlines, U Thant has informed the Americannot make recommendations to it on that aggression against Cuba will take place. cans of this idea. matter.
Kuznetsov declared that the Sovessels carrying the inspection groups will that the Soviet Union’s statements are reasviet Union has formulated its duties clearly be supplied by the Soviet Union or neutral suring, while on the other hand the USA is and concisely, and that there should be no countries.
Third, the Americans in their talks making new demands that place the two doubt in anyone’s mind about the fulfillment with U Thant have asked about the vessels parties in unfairly different positions. of these duties.
Kuznetsov concluded that his idea tees to Cuba are concerned, they have alits own cargo. comes down to the point that the statements ready been generally laid out in outline form.
Kuznetsov noted that if the USA ation had been extraordinarily serious, esthe carrying out of these checks through wanted an agreement, they would have pecially towards the end of 27 October, alsome “independent agency.” quickly resolved this matter.
Khrushchev’s mesIn accordance with your instructions, such desire, they can find a million pretexts sage of 28 October had relieved the situawe informed U Thant that the Soviet govand ask a million questions.
U Thant called that message “a most ernment is prepared to give its consent to that such an agreement could indeed be considerable contribution to peace” and checks on Soviet vessels bound for Cuba, reached today, since the positions of all the emphasized that this was the general opinas U Thant proposed in one of his earlier interested parties have in general been ion in the UN. talks with Comrade Zorin, by representaclearly presented.
U Thant said furthermore that he also tive of the International Red Cross, if the At the conclusion of the meeting it was considered it expedient to move towards the USA refuses to lift the blockade unless such agreed that during U Thant’s stay in Cuba, working out of an agreement on concrete checks are instituted.
I emphasized that this contact with him would be sustained through measures for the settlement of the Cuban is of course a temporary measure, for 2 to 3 Narasimhan. situation, and precisely for this purpose he weeks until the settlement of the Cuban The conversation was recorded by V had addressed a request the day before (on problem.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian used the word “blockade”) for a period of 2 to the Soviet government for this new and Federation , Moscow; copy obto 3 weeks, as had been stipulated in U important step towards settling the Cuban tained by NHK , proThant’s first message of 25 October.
With regard to lation by John Henriksen, Harvard Univerquested in that message, suspending arms the practical issues connected with our prosity.] provisioning in Cuba, while the USA had posal for carrying out checks on vessels by not yet lifted the blockade.
For him a very dance with your instructions that the main Ministry, 29 October 1962 strange situation could arise if he is in Cuba issue here concerns the checks at sea, in (he will fly to Havana tomorrow to meet which Red Cross representatives would be 29 October 1962 with Fidel Castro), and the American navy conveyed on board Soviet ships by USSR is still continuing the blockade at that time. vessels or by those belonging to neutral On 29 October we met with U Thant.
Khrushchev, as well as decision about lifting the so-called quaranour own jurisdiction, but that of the Cuban the latter’s wishes for U Thant’s success in tine, even though it is obvious that such a government.
U Thant came back to this point averting a war, strengthening the peace, and lifting is absolutely necessary both politiseveral times, and it was clear that he presafeguarding the seccurity of all nations.
Thant was told that I had been entrusted by pointed out the urgency of lifting the quarFor our part we consider it feasible to agree the Soviet government to aid him, U Thant, antine first and foremost because of the newith this, as long as our Cuban friends do in his efforts to eliminate the current dancessity of laying a foundation, as U Thant not object.
We then laid out the basic himself suggested, for negotiating a settleout checks in ports much faster than on the points of the USSR’s position in the Cuban ment of the Cuban problem.
Moreover, beopen sea, and this would keep the Ameriaffair, as they were defined in Comrade N.S. cause of the continuing blockade, ships carcans from delaying any longer the lifting of Khrushchev’s messages to Kennedy of 26, rying exclusively peace-time goods cannot the “quarantine.” 27, and 28 October 1962.
We noted that the get these goods to Cuba, where they are U Thant then asked how we feel about USA had declared the Soviet proposals to needed, and furthermore the ships are exthe fact that the Red Cross will use mainly be generally practicable, which allows the periencing fueling difficulties, and their idleSwiss personnel to carry out the checks.
We emphasized that doing so he emphasized that, as he knows of those Soviet proposals.
We emphasized the Soviet Union has agreed to U Thant’s from past experience, the International Red that in view of this, the moment had arrived proposal to hold back these vessels bound Cross does not accept any recommendations for moving away from general statements for Cuba for several days, but that the on the make-up of its personnel, and its own about the positions of the parties, and toAmericans keep prolonging the period. personnel is 95% Swiss.
I said that we would wards an agreement on concrete steps to be U Thant answered that the Americans prefer that the personnel of the inspection taken.
U Thant asked us to convey to Comtions on their lifting the quarantine.
Kuznetsov to USSR started suspecting the Soviet Union of conCuba’s security, through the Security CounForeign Ministry, 30 October 1962 veying arms that it calls “offensive” on charcil.
With regard to this we referred to the tered vessels belonging, for example, to relevant point about guarantees on Cuban 30 October 1962 Sweden or Lebanon.
U Thant agreed that security contained in Comrade N S. this would be an absurdity.
We On 29 October I received the permaWe asked U Thant what his intentions also recalled the guarantees that Fidel Castro nent UN delegate from Cuba, Garciawere with regard to the forthcoming negodemanded in his statement of 28 October.
U Thant said that he wanted U Thant did not show any reaction to tative of the courageous Cuban nation, to exchange views with Fidel Castro primaany of this, although he did not object of which is self-sacrificingly standing up for rily on how the dismantling of war sites, any of it, but rather returned again to the its freedom and independence in its struggle which is referred to in Comrade N.S. question of a “UN presence” in Cuba.
He with a powerful and dangerous enemy— Khrushchev’s message of 28 October, would said that if Fidel Castro approves this proAmerican imperialism. be carried out. posal, he will then address a similar I said that I considered it necessary to We told U Thant that the military sites proposeal to the other party regarding the meet first of all with the Cuban delegate, mentioned there were in the hands of So“UN presence” in the USA and certain Latin and I expressed the hope that, in carrying viet officers.
We were given to unout the task that stands before us both, we this, and of course would consult with the derstand that the goal of this “UN presence” would work in close contact with our CuSoviet Union on this matter. would be to avert attacks on Cuba by counban comrades, keeping each other informed With regard to this, we reminded U terrevolutionary Cuban emigres now living and consulting with each other.
Thant that, as noted in Comrade N.S. in the USA and certain countries of Latin Garcia-Inchaustegui gratefully acKhrushchev’s letter of 27 October, the America. knowledged the constant support offered to checks should be carried out after the arms We did not meanwhile express to U the Cuban nation by the Soviet Union, and are removed from Cuba.
U Thant declined when one takes into account that U Thant viet comrades in their joint work in the to spell out his own point of view on this has in mind a “UN presence” on the territoUnited Nations Organization. matter.
It can be supposed that the Ameriries of both parties—of Cuba as well as of Garcia-Inchaustegui said that he had cans will insist that inspections be carried the USA and certain Latin American counhad a meeting with U Thant during which out even during the process of dismantling. tries.
This would mean that with regard to they discussed the latter’s trip to Cuba.
U U Thant said that he meant to exchange this issue the UN would be keeping the same Thant intends, after the negotiations in Haviews with Fidel Castro as well on the matwatch over Cuba as over the USA, which is vana, to leave General Rikhye behind in ters connected with the checks on vessels certainly advantageous.
The issue of leaving General Rikhye security, and guarantees for the security of that he arrange a breakfast today and invite in Cuba will in Garcia-Inchaustegui’s opinother countries which maintain that Cuba the Americans and us.
U Thant liked this ion be the subject of negotiations between represents a threat to them.
X.62 V KUZNETSOV for vessels bound for Cuba and the lifting We told U Thant that really the point of the blockade.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian U Thant about this, as well as with the delto constitute the most important part of the Federation , Moscow; copy obegates from other countries, especially the final settling of the whole problem. tained by NHK , proAfro-Asian countries.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian in order not to show the installations to the near the blockade zone to make it to the ports Federation , Moscow; copy obinspectors.
Kuznetsov to the Soviet sisting less strongly lately on UN inspecstatement that his people have been conForeign Ministry, 30 October 1962 tion during the dismantling process.
They vinced of the Soviet Union’s fulfillment of are said to declare that if it is not possible to its dismantling obligation, and that for this 30 October 1962 reach an agreement about UN inspections, reason the “quarantine” should not be rethey will carry out the inspections themimposed.
U Thant asked whether the Soviet On 29 October a second meeting with selves, and that they have the necessary government could agree to this.
U Thant informed me that the AmeriGeneral Rikhye (U Thant’s military ate to show U Thant himself the dismancans have favorably received our agreement advisor) who was present at the conversatling of certain installations during his stay to the inspection of Soviet vessels bound for tion explained that with inspections by their in Cuba on 30 and 31 October.
In such an Cuba by representatives of the International own forces, the Americans have in mind event he would take a firmer stance, and it Red Cross. flights over Cuba by their own planes carwould be more difficult for the Americans U Thant also informed us that he had rying photographic equipment, and at low to renew their “quarantine” of Cuba. contacted the Red Cross and received a prealtitudes.
If this is recognized as expedient, I reliminary response that the Red Cross was U Thant told Stevenson that the UN quest urgently to give corresponding instrucready to undertake the inspection of vessels can carry out dismantling inspections in tions to Havana. both on the open sea, and in ports of disemCuba only in the event that the Soviet Union barkation.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian In the Red Cross’s preliminary reponse dismantling process.
This Minister Kuznetsov and Ambassador to long the dismantling would take.
On his own would mean that the inspectors would be the UN Zorin to USSR Foreign initiative U Thant put this question to us. admitted to sites where there are installaMinistry, 30 October 1962 We told U Thant that we would ask our govtions when they have not yet been fully disernment, but provisionally the dismantling mantled, and the arms not yet removed.
Khrushchev’s mesried out in a short time, then the issue of the traditional breakfast for members of the sage to Kennedy of 27 October.) inspection during the dismantling process Council.
During the talks with U Thant, his From the talks during the breakfast, the fol3.
At the such checks be carried out not on the open same time they are trying to keep their hands sea, but in Cuban ports.
As far as U Thant’s line is conspections, as Stevenson said, in the form of thoughts on the situation that has arisen cerned, he intends, as he told us, to exchange planes flying over Cuba with inspection around the Cuban issue, and on our possible views with Fidel Castro primarily on the groups on board. position and tactics in the course of future issue of the verficiation of the dismantling 2.
The Irish delegate negotiations with U Thant and the Ameriof Soviet military sites, and also to ascerBoland voiced a proposal, clearly not withcans. tain that this dismantling is actually going out American consent, for convening the First.
Khrushchev of 27 and 28 October, or any Cuban actions against the other Latinthe above-mentioned meeting of the Secuin the last resort by the Security Council’s American countries.
In the event of the Curity Council, but that approving resolutions approval of those statements. ban government’s consenting to this sort of on them should be left for a later date.
In this regard it is significant that the “UN presence” in Cuba, U Thant intends to The delegates from the United Arab Americans, as is evident from available inpose the same question about a “UN presRepublic and Ghana (Quaisonformation, want the future role of the Secuence” on the territory of the USA and cerSackey) voiced objections to Boland’s prority Council and especially of U Thant to tain Latin-American countries.
They believe that the rying out inspections on the dismantling of range the Security Council affair in such a first priority is resolving the matter of guarour missile installations in Cuba. way as to give priority to the issue of the antees for Cuban security.
As far as guarantees of Cuban security mechanism for inspections on the war-site 3.
The Ghanaian delegate Quaisonare concerned, the Americans understand dismantling, and not to the issue of guaranSackey made several remarks about the that a clear and concrete resolution of the tees for Cuba.
The substance of these remarks Security Council could in this respect tie with regard to the guarantees for Cuba are comes down to the fact that the situation in their hands and keep them from proceeding not yet fully clear. the Congo is bad, is becoming worse all the with their aggressive policy toward Cuba, Third.
It appears to us that in these time, and that the recourse at present is the which it seems they do not intend to reconditions it would be expedient, in the inuse of UN forces against nounce.
On 29 October a UPI press bulletin terests of safeguarding guarantees for CuTshombe. said that Rusk “had assured the Latin Ameriban security, to try to bring together into one 4.
Our thoughts on our position and on can envoys that any Soviet-American agreeknot the main issues that must be resolved tactical matters will be sent by separate telement would pursue the goal of the removal for a peaceful settlement of the Cuban crigram. of missiles from Cuba, and in no way would sis, most importantly the issues of control exclude the possibility of new collective on the dismantling inspections and of guar30.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian pect that Kennedy’s statement about the curity Council.
At the same time it seems to us these declarations to stipulate, as a guaranvolving inspections on full and general dispossible and expedient to reach an agreetee of Cuban security, the final end to all armament.
Khrushchev’s message of 28 October Americans call offensive, and of the Soviet sentatives from eight neutral countries beand Kennedy’s messages of 27 and 28 Ocgovernment’s approval of the inspection longing to the 18th Committee on Disarmatober, as well as to Comrade N.S. system that has been worked out. ment.
Khrushchev’s message of 27 October, in The Americans will obviously demand Furthermore a question arises about which the question about Turkey is raised. a declaration from the Cuban government future UN measures on strengthening peace Fifth.
In to its neighbors, in accordance with the goals Cuba. the course of future negotiations, and espeof the UN Charter.
The monitoring process should take the USA and the Latin-American countries only a short time to be carried out— only a neighboring Cuba with the right to make 30.
If you do not delicacy of his situation as the President’s 30 October 1962 believe me, discuss it with them, and they brother and as Attorney General of the will tell you the same thing.
I do not want, Robert Today Robert Kennedy invited me to not to transfer this understanding into a forKennedy added, to claim for myself the meet with him.
We hope that N.S. was prepared to maintain contact with him tion of the American missile bases in TurKhrushchev will understand us correctly.
Correspondasked to take the letter back without delay. gested, of all intermediaries.
Robert ing measures will be taken towards fulfillI told Robert Kennedy that everything Kennedy confirmed this.
Khrushchev Speaking in all candor, I myself, for exthe elimination of American missile bases personally are prepared to take into account ample, do not want to risk getting involved in Turkey.
Robert Kennedy said once again the President’s desire for maintaining the in the transmission of this sort of letter, since that he confirmed it, and again that he hoped secrecy of the oral understanding on the rewho knows where and when such letters can that their motivations would be properly moval of the American missile bases from surface or be somehow published—not now, understood in Moscow.
It is also expedient to tell of our but in the future—and any changes in the explained into account, I believed it condiwillingness, if the President is also prepared course of events are possible.
The appeartionally possible—before receiving any infor this, to continue the confidential exance of such a document could cause irrepastructions from Moscow—to take this letchange of opinions between the heads of the rable harm to my political career in the futer , since a categorical refusal to do governments on many important unresolved ture.
This is why we request that you take so would, in my opinion, only weaken Robissues, on whose resolution the lessing of this letter back. ert Kennedy’s firm statements on the underinternational tension, and of the tension beIt is possible, Robert Kennedy continstanding that has been reached.
Moreover, tween our two countries in particular, is to a ued, that you do not believe us and through leaving the letter with him, after he had very great degree dependent. letters you want to put the understanding in clearly expressed the President’s desire not I request instructions. writing.
X.62 A.DOBRYNIN element of uncertainty and suspicion even In conclusion Robert Kennedy said into confidential channels of contact.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian will however live up to our promise, even if with the Cuban issue have been developing Federation , Moscow; copy obit is given in this oral form.
As you know, it quite favorably, and that he hoped that tained by NHK , prowas in precisely the same oral form that the everthing would eventually be settled.
Currently there is a lessening in miliGeneral of the UN on the normalization of 2.
The Security Council is proceeding We consider that under current condiKhrushchev and John Kennedy in the form from the stipulation that the governments tions we and you should display self-reof a protocol statement that would be preof the countries participating in the protostraint in our official declarations and statesented to the Security Council for all meacol statement will strictly carry out the obments and also in the press, in order to not sures taken in accordance with the UN Charligations they have taken on, which will to give the aggressors a pretext to blame our ter.
As a basis for negotiations, after receivcontribute to the strengthening of trust side for irreconciliability and intractability. ing the consent of our Cuban friends, conamong the countries and to affirming peace We must hold to a firm, but constructive vey to the Americans and to U Thant the generally. stand.
We would like it to be taken into acstatement of protocol, and declare that this 4.
It would be statement is being introduced jointly by the 13 of the protocol statement, the Security good if you in your appearances underline governments of the USSR and Cuba.
It should also Since Fidel Castro’s statement of 28 ing out of the obligations to dismantle and be repeated what you have declared more October contains a demand concerning the remove the weaponry indicated in articles than once about Cuba’s devotion to the cause evacuation of the USA naval base in 9 and 12 of the protocol statement. of peace, to the UN principles, among them Guantanamo, the protocol statement in5.
The Security Council asks acting UN non-interference of states into the internal cludes a point concerning the negotiations Secretary General U Thant to grant the affairs of each other. of the USA and the Republic of Cuba on group of agents the necessary means and All of this is needed, of course, not for this matter.
If however the USA objects to cooperation for carrying out the functions the aggressors’ ears, but for international the inclusion of this point, and this impedes with which they have been entrusted.” public opinion. the reaching of an agreement according to The text of the protocol statement is Telegraph the implementation of these the whole protocol statement, then with the now being submitted to the approval of Fiinstructions. consent of the Cuban representative you del Castro. may not insist on a separate mention of the On receiving the approval of Fidel 31.
Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transtober,e. in other words, the issue of the Confirm reception of this telegram. lation by Vladimir Zaemsky.] military base in Guantanamo.
Alekseev, 31 October 1962 be shown to him and persons accompanyGeneral of the UN U Thant, on measures to ing him, among them General Rikhye, even be taken for normalizing the Caribbean situYou should visit F Castro and, after in the course of dismantling.
Khrushchev. that the Soviet Union had fulfilled its comnot permit U Thant and his advisors to visit Castro read it attentively and, while mitments. the dismantling of military sites, and hondoing so, made two remarks.
Inform also about our consent oring Rikhye’s request to meet with the So1.
There are not some Cuban to permit U Thant’s representatives, if he viet general, Comrade Pavlov and comrades who do not understand the deciraises such a question, to be allowed to visit I made the decision to engage U Thant in sion regarding the removal of the special sites of dismantling even after U Thant’s talks with myself and General weapons, but the whole Cuban people. departure from Cuba, in order to check that Statsenko,13 who would offer him and 2.
Khrushchev did not the dismantling has been carried out and to Rikhye detailed information on the issues understand me or the translation was not be sure about the launchers’ withdrawal raised by them yesterday. correct since in the cable of 27 Octofrom Cuba.
Preliminary to our decision to visit U ber I did not suggest to be the first in delivImmediately inform about these inThant, I informed President Dorticos, who ering a blow against the adversary territory structions Pavlov , who has to fulsupported this step. during the crisis, but in the case if there were fill them without delay.
In our talks with U Thant and Rikhye an aggression against Cuba and Soviet 2.
By the end of 1 Nosense of his cable had been understood cororder to observe compliance with the comvember or at the latest 2 November all weaprectly in Moscow since it was clearly said mitments; this proposal corresponds to both onry will have been sent to ports for loadthere about the condition of an aggression the interests of Cuba and our common ining onto ships.
The arrival times of the ships against Cuba, but even in this case it is terests.
We proceed from the assumption that with the dismantling of the weaponry, and Da’Cunha said that Brazil would not break the Cuban government and comrade Pavlov he answered these questions responsibly. relations with Cuba and would continue to would undertake all the necessary U Thant said nothing about his talks trade. measures on site. with Fidel Castro.
Your instructions were He suggested to begin gradual disarCable report on the execution of these received after the talks with U Thant. mament upon receiving guarantees and to instructions. come forward with a statement about Cuba’s A GROMYKO 31.
X.62 ALEKSEEV non-interference into affairs of the Latin American countries.
Alekseev to USSR Foreign Cable from Soviet Ambassador to Cuba have we spoken about with U Thant and Ministry, 31 October 1962 Alekseev to USSR Foreign Ministry, himself informed about their conver31 October 1962 sation, what has already been recounted to 31 October me by Dorticos.
Archive of Foreign Policy, Russian On 31 October U Thant, after his reCastro’s statement of 28 October, and on no Federation , Moscow; copy obturn from Cuba, informed us of the results other basis.
According to U Thant, his main task Stevenson told U Thant that he would Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transwas to ask whether Fidel Castro would give pass all this on to President Kennedy today. lation by Vladimir Zaemsky.] his consent to the establishment in Cuba of 6.
We asked U Thant what further steps UN groups monitoring the dismantling of he intended to take.
On 28 October the Ministry sent to should be carried out outside the borders of U Thant said as well that he considthe USA embassy a note of protest from the Cuba’s territorial waters. ered it expedient to begin the next day to Soviet government to the American govern2.
U Thant then asked Castro whether work out the details of the monitoring of ment concerning the flights around the Sohe could leave his own representatives beSoviet vessels bound for Cuba by represenviet ship “Simferopol” by American planes hind in Havana for contact with the Cuban tatives of the International Red Cross.
U Thant met in Cuba with the Somagnetic photo-illuminating cartridges. viet ambassador and a Soviet general, who 1.
This has been conveyed for inforU-2 ariplane that had been shot down over mational purposes.
Kuznetsov to USSR ined the future role of the UN to be in the ment of the Cuban problem.
Khrushchev quickly as possible, by way of inspection the idea of raising such a question.
Inform him that neutral observers, or aerial photos), that the article taking into consideration data which you have delivered a report on the content Soviet bases are being dismantled and the had previously received from high-ranking of the conversation with him, as well as on missiles are being removed.
They referred officers of the United States Agency for disarmathe statement that the government of the to the growing campaign of right-wing figment.
This is especially dangerous for Lippmann himself proceeds from the national Red Cross is involved in such moniKennedy on the eve of the national elections. assumption that the issues of American toring.
In reponse to this, you have been inFor this reason it is extremely urgent for him bases in Turkey and Italy can be solved in structed by Moscow to inform McCloy that to receive any available evidence that the the relatively near future.
Khrushchev has been progress of mood regarding this issue in pathetic one.
Nevertheless, by no means can of Soviet ships into Cuban ports, and will All participants said that settling the it be related to the Cuban events.
A corresponding decision can The question of whether to allow obbition on nuclear testing, an agreement on be formalized as one of the first, partial acservers onto Cuban territory is, of course, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, an tions in the framework of disarmament, but an issue that must be decided by Cuba, in agreement between NATO and the Warsaw necessarily waiting for a final agreement its capacity as a sovereign state.
The CuPact members on a series of issues, and so upon a plan of general and complete disarbans, and only the Cubans, can make decion. mament. sions on questions of that sort.
With such as of the loaded missiles, which the Presia pessemistic mood Thompson has returned dent and the government of the USA have 1.
Even dates for the bombing of the the missiles loaded on the Soviet ships.
The Americans should take into The second course of action is to get Pavlov to be guided by this inforaccount that such actions affect the national from the UN some information on the dismation.
Similar instructions to Comrade feelings of the Cuban people, which can mantling of the bases.
The government of Pavlov are being given though the Ministry only complicate the settlement of the diffithe USA could then be satisfied with this as of Defense. cult issues before us.
AVP RF; copy obtained by NHK, the dismantling of missile installations has Thant’s trip.
Judging by your reports [several Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transquestion of how to present this whole affair words deleted—ed.], the USA and several lation by John Henriksen, Harvard Univerto the public opinion of the USA in connecother states belonging to the Security Counsity.] tion with the earlier statements offered by cil may try to complicate the negotiations the President.
Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transing a special UN mechanism for monitorKhrushchev, that the USA would renounce lation by John Henriksen, Harvard Univering the dismantling of the special installathe quarantine without waiting for the insity.] tions in Cuba.
Besides this, his proposal also troduction of a supplementary procedure for stipulates that the other issues of the “Cuinspecting ships, and so on.
The Havana, with a copy sent to Kuznetsov on it may be postponed somewhat.
Make a statement about this duration, for example, of a year, is not apin categorical form to U Thant, Stevenson, propriate.
AVP RF; copy obtained by NHK, as well as to the UN delegates of the other 4.
On the monitoring of the presence” in these countries and in Cuba. dismantling and the removal of the special You may approve the proposal that the 1 November 1962 installations.
We have specified here that our inby 2 November, and that the dismantled of Cuba. stallations now being dismantled can be materials will be removed from Cuba by 7 5.
We shipped out of Cuba by 7 or 8 or at the lator 8 November, or at the very latest 10 Noagree with your opinion.
This must be your point vember, if our ships arrive without hindrance any circumstance touch on this issue in your of departure in your talks with U Thant, in Cuban ports. negotiations with U Thant and the USA repMcCloy, and our Cuban friends.
Proceed on the asject of direct negotiations between Moscow will be granted safe passage into Cuban sumption that for us it is acceptable that the and Washington.
On this point we are keepports. group monitoring the fulfillment of duties ing you informed only for your personal 2.
In the talks with Fidel Castro, deto dismantle and remove the special missile edification. pending on how these talks unfold, you installations from Cuba contain representa6.
They know better than resentatives of the neutral nations belongoffensive.” anyone else whether Cuba needs the shiping to the Disarmament Committee (India, Your proposal to call this weaponry ments of goods presently on Soviet ships Burma, the United Arab Republic, Nigeria, “means for launching nuclear arms at an on the open sea.
These cargoes cannot reEthiopia, Mexico, Brazil, Sweden), if such operational distance greater than main on the open sea for long.
There are also no kilometers” could allow the discussion of are perishable cargoes.
A further We consider unacceptable the AmeriCuba. detainment will only increase these financans’ proposal for the creation of monitorThird.
Cuba is not concealing these ing groups composed of the USA, the relevant to the duties of the parties— the losses from us.
USA, the USSR, and Cuba— and the seis ready to bear the burden of these doubled 3.
On the monitoring of vessels bound curing of their corresponding pledges, folexpenses, in which case it is a different story. for Cuba, after the lifting of the blockade. low the text of the protocol statement and We see that you and we have different apYou should proceed from the fact that we the instructions contained in our memoproaches to how this issue must be resolved. have given our consent to the monitoring of randa.
Bear in mind, however, that as we If our Cuban friends are for some reaSoviet vessels bound for Cuba by the Interhave already informed you, you will be carson not willing to facilitate the resolution national Red Cross.
From this it of the present telegram, only on receiving For at present we are suffering unjustified follows that the monitoring will be shortreports from us that our Cuban friends have expenses. term.
In his first appeal to Castro, U This cannot continue endlessly. regard we are ackowledging his large conThant called on him to cooperate with the We believe that the missiles have tribution.
Thant himself as well as of the United Nareply, Castro invited U Thant to visit Cuba You say that you do not believe the Ameritions that could express itself in such a danpersonally in his capacity of acting UN Seccans.
He held two meetings with Prime cerns should be borne in mind when you Kennedy and in the declaration of Castro.
Minister Castro, when the Cuban issue was are presenting our case to Castro.
In Havana he met some diplonot mean, of course, that they should be was ready to continue its efforts to achieve mats accredited by the government of expressed literally and explicitly.
The most useful conversations were must make him clearly understand that we marked that the acting Secretary General ones with the Ambassadors of Brazil, Yuare worried by the unreasonable position that could exercise a certain influence, using his goslavia, the UAR , our Cuban comrades have been forced to authority, in the process of ultimate settleand the USSR. take. ment of the conflict.
One of the issues on U Thant’s agenda He informed that he was heading for during the trip was to clarify the reaction of 1.
Mikoyan and Yalta as well as during the trip of N.S. interfere in the internal affairs of Cuba.
ImActing UN Secretary General U Thant, Khrushchev to Burma, and also in the position of inspection on the part of the UN 2 November 1962 United Nations in 1960 and again this year would be considered by the Cuban people in the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev for his and would be considered as a humiliation Top Secret encouraging words passed to him in his letof the people of Cuba.
Such a step cannot No copying is allowed ters to U Thant and also through our reprebe accepted by the Cuban government.
Castro informed U Thant that on ThursTransmitting the record of conversaKhrushchev in the Cuban crisis was grateday, 1 November, he was going to speak on tion of com.
Mikoyan fully received by the vast majority of the radio and television with a speech where he The conversation took place with U peoples of all the world and met with gratiintends to mention this issue.
U Thant reThant on 1 November 1962 in the United Nations mistude by the whole mankind.
He remarked portedly advised Castro to postpone this sion . that the people now see much more clearly speech, since it is very delicate and would At the start com.
Mikoyan passed to U the sincere desire of the Soviet Union to be assessed as a declaration of policy with Thant regard from com.
Khrushchev have the UN as an efficacious instrument all consequences that flow out of it.
Khrushchev recalls with warmth war. put off making of this speech with regard to the conversations that he had with the actAfter that U Thant turned to his trip to visit in Cuba.
Cuba and said the following. delayed one more time, then people would Khrushchev and his colleagues believe that The trip was taken in connection with not understand it.
U Thant told Castro that in the interpend the quarantine for 2-3 weeks, on the U Thant asked com.
Mikoyan, having ests of the government of Cuba and the Cucondition that there would be a mechanism in mind the confidential character of his ban people themselves it would be useful to for checking if Soviet ships heading for conversations with Castro, not to raise this have in Havana UN representatives, and, if Cuba were not carrying arms. issue on his own initiative.
Castro agrees, he was ready to leave 2 to 3 U Thant informed Castro also that the As Castro pointed out, in his speech of his officials to establish contacts and to Soviet Union had agreed that the Red Cross he planned to lay out the entire foreign follow-up on their dialogue. should deal with inspection of vessels outpolicy of Cuba and in particularly to emCastro responded that had the governside of the boundaries of the territorial waphasize the five points on the settlement of ment of Cuba agreed at the present moment ters of Cuba.
He said that for the Red Cross the Cuban crisis he had advanced on 28 to the presence of UN representatives in it would have been more convenient to inOctober.
To this U Thant responded that in Cuba, it could have been interpreted by spect ships in the ports of arrival, and not in view of the deliberations on the Cuban ispeople as consent to the presence of inspectthe open sea, if, of course, the government sue in the Security Council and his own ing groups of the United Nations.
The Security saying so, he referred to American radio Castro said to this, that his government Council did not authorize him to discuss broadcasts which affirm on an hourly basis would not allow groups of the Red Cross to with the sides issues of permanent or longthat the U Thant mission had exactly the inspect Soviet ships on Cuban territory, but term character of settlement of the conflict inspection goals in mind.
Under such terms if the USSR agreed to the inspection, then in the Caribbean sea. people might have misperceived such a step. the UN should start organizing this business To this Castro responded that a tempoCastro asked U Thant not to insist on this on the open sea. rary resolution of immediate problems did proposal.
Responding to the question of U Thant not resolve the Cuban issue as a whole.
The He then declared that, if the Security about a possible time of convocation of a resolution of these immediate questions, in Council accepted some kind of formula to next session of the Security Council on the the opinion of the government of Cuba, had resolve the Cuban issue on a permanent baCuban issue, Castro said that he would have to be linked to resolution of the longer-term sis, then he, Castro, would be glad to have preferred that the Council convene no problems.
The Security Council had to dissome kind of UN presence on the reciprosooner than next Wednesday,e. after the cuss also and resolve the issue about a lastcal basis.
However, this cannot be done in elections in the United States. ing peace in the area of the Caribbean sea. the present phase.
Castro told him that the USA mantling and withdrawal of missile equipvinced that to ensure lasting and secure aircraft of the type U-2 had indeed violated ment, doing nothing on their part concernpeace in the whole world it is necessary that the aerial space over Cuba in violation of ing the guarantees of Cuba’s security. the Security Council should preoccupy itinternational legislation and the UN CharTherefore Castro is right when he self with the issue of ensuring lasting peace ter.
It was shot down by the Cubans, the pispeaks about the need to solve the Cuban in the Caribbean region.
The delegation of Cuba to the Americans). the just and constructive proposals of Fidel would address the Security Council with a Castro also said that any further violaCastro.
Naturally, the Americans will object request to find a lasting and final solution tion of the aerial borders of Cuba would be to some proposals of Castro, but his proto this issue.
The government of Cuba is dealt with in a similar way. posals face in the right direction. firmly convinced that such a solution can The next question that was discussed On the time of convening the Security be found only on the basis of 5 points adbetween U Thant and Castro was about a Council, com.
Mikoyan remarked that we vanced on 28 October by Premier Castro. voluntary suspension by the Soviet Union understand the considerations of Fidel on U Thant told Castro that at that point of its supplies of weapons for Cuba for a this score.
He declared by the interested sides, and also by they seemed interested.
Some Latin Ameripromised to raise this issue in the forthcomthe UN, since the acting Secretary General can delegates not only were interested in this ing conversation with McCloy. is taking active part in this, then, in our opinidea but also let U Thant understand that U Thant said that he addresses the ion, the Security Council should be consuch a measure would be desirable.
Americans every day with appeals to susvened at the moment when the current neThe USA so far does not want to openly pend the blockade.
And yesterday, having gotiations would approach the phase of an express its attitude towards this proposal of returned from Cuba, he did the same, makagreed-upon document finalizing this crisis.
Its reaction was reduced to the aring the Americans aware that he was conUntil then convening of the Security Coungument that, well, since this arrangement vinced that the dismantling had begun and cil would hardly assist in this matter. concerns all the countries of Western hemiwas under way as it had been promised, and Com.
Mikoyan voiced the idea that sphere, this issue should be discussed in the that it would be finished by the announced after the end of talks of the sides, some kind Organization of American States. date. of document might be passed for approval Com.
Mikoyan thanked U Thant for his to the Security Council and on its basis and his opinion regarding a possible form of the useful and exhaustive information.
They in following up on it the Council might take document stating the reached agreement. agreed that for the press they will announce a decision on subsequent practical steps.
Khrushchev and the form of summing-up declaration of the to meet again and learn about the results of Kennedy, and also the declarations of Fidel chairman of the Security Council. the trip.
He would like that time to be a more Castro, and that would inform about the Com.
Mikoyan asked U Thant also to generous host than now and to invite A.I. achieved agreement that, thereby, would express his personal considerations on the Mikoyan for lunch and breakfast. have been sealed by the Security Council. time of convocation of the Security CounThe conversation was recorded by said to U Thant that we cil. com.
Zherebtsov V.N. learned with great interest about his initiaU Thant said that it should be done aftive concerning the practicality of having ter the elections in the USA, but everything 2.
XI.62 V KUZNETSOV observers in Cuba, in the USA, and in other depends on the sides’ agreement.
Khrushchev was delighted to see this Then U Thant passed his wish to thank Security Archive; translation by Vladislav initiative of U Thant and considered it to be the Soviet Ambassador in Cuba for his genuM Zubok .] interesting and useful.
It is good that Fidel ine and wholehearted cooperation during the Castro took it in a positive way.
Mikoyan), McCloy invited me was their attitude toward this idea. units.
U Thant said that in conversation with ter of personal interest about the time of ar1.
The Americans express their gratiSoviet representatives he advanced several rival of ships to Cuba to pick up the mentude for the fact that the American plane formulas for solution of the issue in its entioned materiel. making aerial photos of Cuba today was not tirety, and the problem of guarantees in parCom.
Ambassador in Havana had told U Thant being developed, but the Americans hope Zorin he indeed proposed that, provided the about the time-frame of dismantling.
Conthat they will confirm the correctness of the agreement of the sides, the presence of the cerning the time-frame of withdrawal he statement made by the Soviet general in UN in the Western hemisphere, in the said that those ships that are now in Cuba Cuba, to the effect that the missile dismanflashpoints, would be useful.
However, with regard to the tling process has already been started. prove acceptable, then, in the opinion of U continuing quarantine Soviet ships cannot 2.
McCloy offered a detailed account Thant, such a measure would have facilisail to Cuba.
Khrushchev and Kennedy takform confirms that the Soviet “offensive” McCloy underscored that this monitoring ing into account the statement by Fidel armament is really removed from Cuba. should be formal— without inquiring into Castro.
The Americans by all means were Stevenson and McCloy affirmed that the details of the missiles, which are secret). evading discussion of this question and trythe encampments where the Cuban exiles 3.
McCloy spoke a lot about the future ing to bring the whole matter to the organihad been training for an invasion of Cuba prospects of an American-Soviet collaborazation of control over the dismantling and were currently closed. tion which would open up as a result of the withdrawal from Cuba of the Soviet mis2.
Nevertheless, in the course of conlutely demanded the removal of the sonecessary in the first place to reach an agreeversation they were obliged to answer our called “quarantine,” underlining that its conment on the cessation of nuclear testing, questions relating to the settlement of the tinuation in no way can help to create a suitwhich would make a huge impression on Cuban problem in general and disclosed able atmosphere for the solution of the Cupublic opinion.
It would be good if this some of their positions that seem interestban problem and may only complicate the agreement could be signed by Kennedy and ing for further negotiations.
Such a meeting would in this cable we omit our remarks during Soviet Union had complied with the request strengthen public faith that their personal the conversation.
You may learn them from from U Thant for a temporary suspension contacts can be fruitful. the transcript of the conversation which is of armaments’ supplies to Cuba, but that the McCloy also believes it expedient to being sent separately.
USA had not stopped their “quarantine” for conclude an agreement concerning a renun1.
Though reluctantly, the Americans at least some time, as it had been suggested ciation of the military use of outer space, agreed with the need to fix in documents by U Thant. and to sign a treaty on at least one bilateral the corresponding commitments, including McCloy and Stevenson evaded a clear agreement concerning the colonizing of the non-aggression commitment against answer to the question of ending the “quarouter space (for example, the launching of Cuba.
All these statements must be precalled offensive by the Americans, McCloy tions of the issues enumerated above have sented to the Security Council. and Stevenson said that in their opinion it is been completed by that time.
The unwillingness of the Americans to hardly possible from the technical stand5.
Accordmembers of his family, from himself and his not want to put their signature side by side ing to McCloy, at least a month would be own family. with the Cubans’. needed for that.
XI.62 G ZHUKOV ness to include in their statement provisions of methods for control of the dismantling based on corresponding wording from and removal of missiles.
Copy no. tion of their flights which give them confitries of the Caribbean.
I hope that steadily dence that there has not resumed in Cuba we will succeed in eliminating antagonism an installation of the dangerous for them between Cuba and its neighbors.
We do know It was clear that in the immediate fuMikoyan poses a question about the lifting roughly how many missiles currently are ture the USA not going to re-establish of the American blockade on the surroundsituated in Cuba.
In this case we could mandiplomatic and economic ties with Cuba. ings of Cuba for the period of negotiations, age without ground verification.
Stevenson and McCloy stated that as it was proposed by U Thant in his first glad, said McCloy, that today our plane the USA refuse point-blank to discuss the missive to com.
Khrushchev and to had not come under fire when it had been question of liquidating the American base President Kennedy on 24 October this year. flying over Cuba.
Mikoyan says that the USSR acanti-aircraft missiles in Cuba are in the hands 6.
In the course of the conversation cepted recommendation of the acting Genof your people, not the Cubans, although it’s McCloy attempted to broach the subject of eral Secretary of the U.N., and the United possible that there are some Cuban personan eventual evacuation from Cuba of the States did not.
Soviet “ground-air” anti-aircraft missiles. posed that the Soviet Union would stop deMcCloy received a very firm response We have resolutely warded off this probing, livery of weapons to Cuba for the duration that the USA no right to overfly Cuba declaring that such a question could not be of talks , and the United States and nobody can guarantee the security of raised and that we had sold these weapons during the same period would suspend the such illegal flights. to a number of countries, including the blockade.
We raised the question of normalizUnited Arab Republic and Indonesia. ommendations of U Thant, but the United ing relations between the USA their McCloy made the observation that “they are States did not.
We also good machines against attacks from airMcCloy remarks that U Thant seeks to asked what is their attitude to U Thant’s plan space.” start as soon as possible to check up Soviet for a UN presence in the Caribbean.
Here apin the Caribbean, but under the condition of satisfaction over the exchange of opinions parently some sort of misunderstanding Castro’s cooperation.
It was understood that the suspenform elaborate mutual guarantees, acceptUSA positions “are not so far from each sion of the “quarantine” would be condiable to Castro and his neighbors.
Both of them were inquiring whether tioned on the simultaneous introduction of is afraid of them, they are afraid of him, too.
Mikoyan objects that no such unCuban crisis is settled the tension in this reI had no plans to do so but if necessary I derstanding took place. gion would be lessened. assumed it would be possible.
Those who can assemble sufficient amount of armament in Cuba, but antine” is purely academic.
Our military we already stopped sending it there. probably not reach Cuba until next week, are men of discipline, they punctually fulMcCloy.
But there it may happen that some arms are being of the Red Cross will be already in force, are not enough ships around Cuba to carry withdrawn and other arms are being shipped and then, naturally, there will be no need away the equipment which is the subject of in.
You Khrushchev accepted the proposal of U in their way to Cuba and, consequently, preferred United Nations inspections to an inspection Thant and the Americans did not accept it. hampers the withdrawal of missiles.
We believe that a certain words, the “quarantine” turns itself against interested in your ships reaching Cuba soon, understanding was achieved in the letters of your own interests. and we will not obstruct their way.
What ships pass in both directions, if they carry to Cuba to attack the United States, but as a was envisaged in the letters must be impleall your missiles away.
I would like to be on means of containment , mented and will be implemented.
However, the ship that would transport the last misso that there was no aggression against had the United States adopted the same reasiles from Cuba, added McCloy in jest.
Khrushchev J Kennedy gave the will, as was adopted by the Soviet Union, the “quarantine” and then everything will assurance that neither the United States, nor then they would have accepted the proposal be in order.
Stevenson will become the one its Latin American allies would attack Cuba, of U Thant and would have lifted the blockhe had used to be before he was nominated we declared our readiness to pull out some ade immediately. in the UN. types of armaments from Cuba.
It is only on this score, but I would not exclude such lifted the blockade.
You showed such a poor spection of the Red Cross; then the “quaring the talks.
Those ships that are now at hospitality to him, that he can hardly be conantine” might be lifted. sea carrying no weapons at all.
I am great power as the United States should be the United States think pushing him in one direction of the talk, but ashamed to mistreat such a small country. that we should work out an agreement that he veers off.
We learn in government of missives, and confirm the achieved unthe following question.
First of all we want to reach where all that was said in the exchange of the Red Cross.
I have Soviet ships are approaching Cuba, but I equipment from Cuba and we do not want in mind the kind of document that would would prefer that there will be more of them, to tolerate that until the establishment of formulate the settlement of the crisis.
We so that they would sooner take away your inspection by the Red Cross there would be think it is preferable to work out such a documissiles.
I must tell you that we were very an uncontrolled flow of armaments into ment. favorably impressed by the speed with Cuba.
There is already too much out such a document stems from the underMcCloy.
We cannot tolerate its buildstanding achieved between the sides about assembling as well as disassembling [of the up. the settlement of the crisis.
In our opinion, the sole sovereignty and territorial integrity of the spection would cover only its territory, if problem that confronts us it is to work out Cuban Republic, observation of its territothere were no analogous inspection coverconditions for inspection that should be carrial inviolability, non-interference into its ing the territory of the other side, on the basis ried out by representatives of the Red Circle. domestic affairs.
One could set apparently do not want to give such assurI must emphasize that if the letter of J. up two check-points at the approaches to ances.
Kennedy had not told of guarantees of nonCuba’s ports, in the South and in the North, Castro puts forward also a demand to intervention against Cuba, we would not where two ships of the Red Cross could be liquidate the United States base in Guantanamo.
On board there could be hear the legitimate demands of the other ons, and you are back-pedaling on your Red Cross inspectors who could check on side.
Castro does not have trust in ships going for Cuba, so that the character can-Cuban relations, but in any case this isyour word and he has a right , since of this check-up would be via radio inquirsue must be discussed with Castro. the territory of Cuba has already been ining on the ship’s origins, where it goes and The exchange of letters between N.S. vaded.
Inspectors would not board Khrushchev and Kennedy this is in essence would be an official document enforced, ships.
But by itself the excontaining appropriate guarantees for Cuba tion should not create problems.
We would change of letters cannot be considered as a and approved by the Security Castro. be glad to hear from you which ships, in final document.
One must carry out negoI would like to know your opinion your opinion, must be utilized for these tiations to work out such a final document about the guarantees.
As I understood from the Soviet Union, and Cuba should sign a must resolve it and fix it in an agreement.
U Thant, Castro did not agree to UN inspecprotocol, with participation of U Thant.
Khrushchev types of armaments from We hope that you will discuss this issue once and J Kennedy.
I repeat, we think that you should conthe situation will worsen very much.
I must emphasize that we do sider the proposals advanced by Castro. can speak about the assurances of Kennedy not accept the 5 conditions of Castro as the They are legitimate ones.
You should also concerning non-intervention against Cuba, conditions for fulfillment of what had been consider the issue of the base in but Castro must not set new conditions on said in the letter of Mr Khrushchev.
The problem that concerns Castro’s demand, but it does not mean that while, Castro told U Thant that he would us most is that an inspection should be caryou should turn down any discussion of his not tolerate UN inspections.
One cannot turn such a discussion Union and Cuba must agree between each Council about the completion of withdrawal down, when one wants to normalize the situother on what would be the form of inspecof missile equipment.
I think that such a advanced by U Thant; after an agreement on which we have achieved the understandcheck-up need not be difficult to carry out. among the parties involved, which could be ing would be shipped away and that we In addition to that, of course, there is approved by the Security Council, one might would be convinced that they are really the issue of the form of USA assurance that agree on the presence of UN inspectors in shipped away.
This the area of the Caribbean Sea, including I do not think that there would be any also need not present any difficulties.
Cuba, and on the South-East coast of the problems on the question of the access of McCloy.
And to a certain extent this is United States and the neighboring Latin ships and on the withdrawal of missile an answer to the question previously posed American countries.
The main thing is to by Mr Mikoyan. watch over implementation of the underremove missile equipment.
You keep focusing all standing on mutual non-interference beAs to the question on granting the guarattention only on the issue of withdrawal of tween the United States and Cuba.
This is a antees of non-intervention to Cuba, if you armaments from Cuba and on inspection. very important proposal and its implementhink that what the President said is not However, the first-order question is to grant tation would give a change to fully settle enough, one could talk about some kind of to Cuba guarantees of non-intervention the conflict.
One should take into account appropriate commitment . against it on the part of other countries of that Cuba is an independent state.
U Thant expressed this uidation of the American base in and the United States would make an anidea.
However, beside the issue of nouncement that we made sure that these McCloy.
I the base, there are four more points in weapons are withdrawn from Cuba.
Today in conversation agreement with what Kennedy wrote in his up should be done by the forces of the UN, with me U Thant reiterated this idea and said letter to Khrushchev.
After the withdrawal of the certain change of letters between Kennedy and about full withdrawal from Cuba of certain types of weapons from Cuba will be conKhrushchev contains concrete and clear fortypes of armaments under conditions of infirmed, the USA will declare the abolition mulas.
I think that there is no need for any spection and in the presence of the underof the “quarantine” and that it guarantees new understanding, except for resolution of standing that the supplies of this weaponry non-intervention of Cuba.
If the fail to carry out ground inspection, let us the guarantees of Cuba’s security on the part Soviet side has some draft proposals, it is seek other means which would assure us that of the United States will be ensured. desirable to obtain them, and the American the armaments are withdrawn.
Otherwise the Castro raised a number of other issues, side then will do the same thing. danger of conflict will be reborn.
There is no time to conwhen the atmosphere will clear up and the American relations.
It seems to me we missile equipment will be withdrawn from should begin to consider the issues that are should think how to continue the talks.
Cuba, it will be easier to agree on other iswithin the realm of Soviet-American relaV.V.Kuznetsov.
Kennedy has already given appropritions, in the framework of the understandagrees, we will discuss this issue. ate assurances concerning non-intervention ing between Khrushchev and Kennedy.
The Soviet Union can and discussion of the issue about liquidation of and J Kennedy, you blow up only one asmust ensure the withdrawal of the certain our base in Guantanamo is out of question. pect and maintain silence on the other.
You types of armaments and a verification that It was given up to us by the govdodge such issues as lifting of the blockwould satisfy the USA and Latin American ernment of Cuba on a legal basis, and the ade, granting the guarantees of indepencountries.
We believe that all this The question, however, emerges on stances renounce it. should be fixed in the docuwhat form of inspection is feasible under A.I.Mikoyan.
But the government of ment where certain formulas should be recurrent circumstances.
Four days have alCuba puts forward this question, so it should iterated and specified.
We believe that our ready elapsed, and there is no inspection in be discussed. negotiations should result in a document sight.
The government of registered in the United Nations and appossible forms of inspection.
We do not Cuba has put this question even earlier. proved by the Security Council.
The ink has not yet dried were advanced concerning international inThe position of Castro represents an obstacle up on the letter, but Rusk is already declarspection.
If Castro does not want such an on the way to fulfilling commitments foring that the United States has not guaraninspection, one can think of different forms mulated in the letter of Mr Khrushchev. teed the independence of Cuba.
Castro is not and will not lished in your newspapers, and I read about McCloy.
Therefore about is Soviet weaponry and it will be avow the guarantees that have been granted we should adapt ourselves to the new situaevacuated.
The press gave a wrong tion. that he would assist the evacuation of these interpretation to his declaration.
We are proposing to you as they say, remove the pistol from the neMcCloy.
He can and introduce it jointly to the Security Counand withdraw the missiles. obstruct the dismantling [of missiles-cil, then there will be no other interpretaStevenson.
Moreover, I think he is already obtions. kind of protocol will be necessary, besides structing it.
I would like to say a few the declarations that will be made in the A.I.Mikoyan.
Normalization would be But we are glad that when today our plane these technical issues with you.
I would like complete if the Soviet Union, the USA and flew over Cuba, it was not shot at.
As far as to speak on another, more important quesCuba signed a joint document together with we know, the anti-aircraft missiles deployed tion.
It is out of question that we agree with the UN Secretary General on the basis of in Cuba are not in the hands of the Cubans, you now on overflights of your plans over the exchange of letters between N.S. but in the hands of your people.
In any case, intercepted radio-commands and conversathe USA agreed to the inspection over the this issue cannot be resolved without Cuba. tions of the anti-aircraft units deployed in area of Miami, it would be a good thing.
A decision in which Cuba is not a party will Cuba and that confirmed us again in our Then, possibly. the Cubans would agree to not be binding for her.
Kuznetsov. though we do not include anti-aircraft mispermanent overflight over their territory, in Stevenson.
As I see, your sense of drawal of our missiles, here we stand on the Cuba, the USA will make an announcement humor has completely disappeared. same position that was expressed in the letabout the guarantee against any kind of inStevenson.
This would serve the duct of such inspection as was stipulated in A.I.Mikoyan.
However, if course of today’s conversation we laid the Cuba is an independent country, but if it Castro refuses to accept such inspection, we ground for upcoming negotiations.
I think agrees with this, then there would be no need should look for another form.
You to seek other forms of check-up. might continue overflights by its planes givshould reflect on what we have spoken about A.I.Mikoyan.
It ground inspection, as the letter of N.S. in Cuba assembly of types of weapons that seems to me that until the election day it Khrushchev stated, but it is necessary to represent danger for us.
But in this case we would be hard for you to take any decisions, have some kind of element of reciprocity would like to have assurances that our plans but, on the other hand, one should not proso that this understanding does not affect will not be downed.
One could also consider crastinate with liquidation of the Cuban crithe national feelings of the Cubans.
Could you pass to sis. flows from my conversation with U Thant. us the lists of armament that is being withStevenson.
If you could pass to us the lists of what you both sides approve of the proposal of U Stevenson.
The conversation was usewill transport on your ships (of course, I Thant.
We should not put off resolution of ful and I became persuaded that our posiunderstand that these documents will not this issue.
What flag would be on these two tions stay not too far apart. contain specifications of these armaments), inspection ships is of no significance to us.
There is misunderstandthen through comparison of this data with As to the oversight of the territory of ing as far as the issue of the data about the presence of armaments Cuba, if Castro refuses to agree on ground reciprocity of inspections is concerned.
U in Cuba, that is in our disposal, we would inspection, we could limit ourselves to uniThant said that Castro is concerned with the follow the process of evacuation of armalateral conduct of aerial reconnaissance.
For presence on the USA of camps where Cuments that are of danger for us.
I believe this we would only need your assurance that ban emigres prepare themselves for invathat this would be enough.
In this case we our planes will not be shot at. sion similar to one that took place last year. would get on along ground inspection.
You mean that they do you, as we understand, cannot guarantee that tails.
The camps are closed everybecome more relaxed. satisfied with today’s exchange of opinions. where.
It is very important what I would be glad to meet you and follow up where, but in any case the USA does not you are saying.
Zhukov; from the American side parany nationality to be enlisted in our miliCastro. ticipated J McCloy, A Stevenson, A. tary forces, even Russians can do it.
You understand that I canAkalovsky. case, I assure you that there are no more not answer this question.
We cannot conduct business with G.Zhukov However I would like to tell you Castro without its involvement.
But one Yu.Vinogradov. frankly, that any inspection on USA terricould think of certain regional arrangements tory is out of question.
I want to say that the USA gradually to liquidate the antagonism beSecurity Archive; translation by Vladislav is trying to normalize the situation in the tween Cuba and her neighbors.
Now this M Zubok .] area of the Caribbean sea, but on condition antagonism is being heated by subversive of Castro’s cooperation.
I would say that Cuba is the Ministry, 2 November 1962 afraid of them, they, too, are afraid of him.
I source of infection, and the recent events in believe that after the settlement of the CuVenezuela provide an example.
But I would 2 November 1962 ban crisis the situation in this region will not like to dwell now on this issue.
Bulletin in 1995 of lengthy Soviet and American sources, as well as a conTHE CUBAN VERSION records of the same conversations.
The note-taker is presumably dent John F Kennedy’s demand that he after the revolution that brought him to a Cuban national, so he sometimes skips withdraw Soviet nuclear missiles from power), the availability of scholarly pertranscribing the past tense as was used Cuba.
He has entrusted me to convey a transarrived with me to aid Kuznetsov. of the parties on all issues connected with lation of the draft to President Dorticos, and McCloy reported with great satisfacthe Cuban conflict were explained, as well to reach an agreement with him on all points. tion that on 1 November their plane had as the American position in the form in Dorticos, having read through the flown over Cuba without being fired at, and which the Americans consider it necessary document, said that in principle the docuhad made photos.
Mikoyan, two more times it will mean that inspections pose a detailed record of the conversation, which are slated for today. on the dismantling have been carried out. and will send it after I am gone.
The conThere remains the issue of inspections on versation was important, and you should 2.
XI.62 ALEKSEEV the removal of the dismantled weaponry, become familiarized with that detailed which could be resolved through means sugrecord of it.
Soviet vessels bound for Cuba entry into York to CC CPSU, 2 November 1962 I consider all this to be expedient.
A Gromyko to unidentified recipient, 2 and that everything had been removed.
In truth, in Castro’s speech yesterday November 1962 In response to my question about this position was made to seem somewhat whether there was some concrete proposal more flexible.
XI.62 A MIKOYAN has informed Comrade Kuznetsov on 31 was the first point.
I rejected here the possibility of flights As is well known, the tanker over Cuba, since that would affect the sov2 November 1962 “Bucharest” passed through a region under ereignty of Cuba itself.
In future yond the announced limits of the “quaranpassing ships, Narasimhan answered that in negotiations we should proceed from the tine” have received orders to proceed into many cases it will be precisely that, but that assumption that the Soviet Union will asthe Cuban ports, and at present they are now the International Red Cross observers should sume expenses only for the maintenance of on their way toward Cuba. have the right to carry out inspections (to Soviet vessels.
As far as the maintenance of check documents, to inspect ship holds, and the International Red Cross vessels is conA G. so on), if such a necessity should arise. cerned, we will push for the USA or the UN Our representatives remarked that such bearing the burden of these expenses.
Zorin to USSR prepared to provide its own transportation three to four weeks.
But it is possible that Foreign Ministry, 3 November 1962 for the International Red Cross inspectors. the duration could be shorter.
Everything deThis may be ordinary transportation for the pends on how long the removal of weap3 November 1962 conveyance of troops, even though they onry from Cuba would continue.
In the future, for Cuba there is no weaponry considered this, but all the same considered it possible with regard to time limits we will proceed offensive by the USA. to inform the Soviet Union of this proposal with aim of imposing the shortest possible Narasimhan said that the the secretariat by the USA, which, Narasimhan said, works limits.
The USA, in his dismantled installations, and the approval Red Cross to its participation in the organiwords, has no objections to the use of Soby the Security Council of corresponding zation of the monitoring.
Narasimhan asked us to explain, resolutions for the conclusive settlement of the Red Cross could be received today, 3 if possible by 5 November, how soon the the Cuban crisis.
Soviet Union could prepare its ships for the If our approval of the conveyance of Narasimhan also laid out the thoughts International Red Cross observers.
International Red Cross on the open sea near and constituting the International Red Cross Since the Cubans will evidently not the Cuban coast—one 8 to 10 miles off Hagroups.
In response to the question of how agree to admit the International Red Cross vana, and another in the strait between Cuba the USA imagines covering the costs assoobservers onto the territory of Cuba in orand Haiti.
On each vessel there by the International Red Cross, Narasimhan we ask that you inform us what would the should be two groups of International Red said that it was proposing two possible varimost appropriate port in the Caribbean Sea Cross observers.
Each group should contain ants—either through the UN (that is, accordarea in which to take on board these Intereight observers.
The next meeting with Narasimhan is In response to our question about how Our representatives answered that the slated for the morning of 5 November. to manage such a large number of observUSA had illegally imposed the so-called ers, especially when bearing in mind that “quarantine,” that they were now pushing 3.
Khrushchev approved the prohis letter and memorandum do not provoke posal made by Kennedy to declare that there any objections.
Rodriguez put a question to Comare of a type considered outmoded both in Today talks were conducted between rade Mikoyan— where does the Soviet leadits altitude ceilings and in its speed.
We believed, Rodriguez noted, that courage discord and a continuation of the myself. we could not yet talk about victory, since tense state of our relations.
Khrushchev’s letters to tions of war over enemy territory, since it tion of the Cuban revolution, and support Fidel Castro, and also from the discussion does not possess the capacity for attaining for the rebuff to the interventionists; he of the issue in the Central Committee of the the necessary altitude and speed.
He spoke moreover in the category of offensive weaponry at the displayed by the leaders of Cuba’s revoluof the main points of his talks with U Thant, present time. tion in these perilous days, and the readiMcCloy, and Stevenson.
If the USA honestly gave assurances ness of the Cuban people to hold firm.
Then We will send a full record of the conthat it would not invade Cuba, then the posComrade Mikoyan said that when the Cenversation to Moscow via diplomatic mail. session of these planes by the Cubans should tral Committee learned of the misunderFurther information on certain new points not elicit any concern. standing arising in Cuba of several issues touched on in Mikoyan’s explanations will We understood the concerns of the and decisions made by us, they came to the be provided by separate telegram.
Americans when talk began to turn to a deficonclusion that it would be impossible to The talks lasted seven hours, more than nite sort of missile weaponry.
Missiles are clarify these issues by way of mere correfive hours of which were taken up by Comindeed an uninterceptable and instantaspondence.
There is the decision to send Comrade Mikoyan to comrades listened with attentiveness to A.I. no reason to put outdated weaponry in the Cuba to clarify to our friends our position, Mikoyan, were interested in details, and offensive category.
Such weaponry will and to inform them of issues that are of insustained the general feeling of cordiality have a defensive, auxiliary function. terest to them.
As far as photo reconnaissance and rethat he naturally did not have any intention We agreed to continue the talks in the connaissance in general are concerned, used of exerting pressure; his task was simply to same composition tomorrow, on 5 Novemas they are by all countries, experience explain our position. ber, at 2:00 in the afternoon local time. shows that it does not always reflect the acKnowing our Cuban friends, A.I. tual situation.
Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transties, and then the issue will be exhausted.
They do so with the IL-28 normalization of the situation in the Caribbomber.
The American military figures surely know The negotiations are being conducted very well that this was the first Soviet plane I ask that you transmit information on with the aim of eliminating the tense situawith a turboreactive engine.
Your ship tion which has been threatening to explode ago they indeed were rather cutting-edge has been selected for use by the Organizainto thermonuclear war. machines.
But now technology has made so tion of the United Nations for the conveyThe basis of these negotiations is the many steps ahead that we have not only reance of a group of representatives from the agreement reached through an exchange of moved these machines from the arsenal of International Red Cross consisting of 16 messages between Comrade N.S. our army, but have even refused to use them people.
The as targets for the training of anti-aircraft group on board, should be near the port of essence of this agreement is as follows. units in the Soviet Union.
These machines Havana, but beyond the 12-mile zone of The USA is giving assurances that no are soon going to be scrapped, and if we Cuba’s territorial waters.
The vessel chosen invasion will be inflicted on Cuba, not only sold them to some country, it would only be for these operations should arrive in Havana on the part of the United States, but also on for using them as training machines for pion 6 November.
If you have cargo in your the part of their allies— the other countries lot instruction, and to some extent as defenholds leave it in the holds, since the deck of the Western hemisphere.
Your ship’s number has alUnion for its part will remove from the Cuba territory with the escort of anti-aircraft maready been communicated to the UN, as well the missile weaponry that the President of chines, and nothing more.
We are sure that the Ameriin Havana, immediately contact our envoy. we are adhering to it, because it is the only can military and USA intelligence underBring the vessel into complete order, tempossible basis now for eliminating the tense stands this well. porarily move your equipment and crew into situation that has been created.
The agreeIndicate that if the representatives of tighter quarters, and prepare room for the ment is the result of a compromise reached the USA insist on their demand concerning comfortable accommodation of the reprethrough mutual concessions, and it satisfied the IL-28 planes, then by doing so they will sentatives of the Red Cross.
It is assumed both parties. only put the USA in a position in which the that this group will be with you until 12 In accordance with this agreement the whole world will see that the United States November of this year.
You will have to Soviets undertook on 28 October the disis not keeping its word, and is imposing come to an agreement with the head of this mantling of the missiles.
The dismantling unacceptable conditions that create the posgroup concerning food-related matters.
You was completed on 2 November, and the dissibility of a prolongation of the conflict.
At should have ready for operation the ship’s mantled missiles have been transported to that time the whole world will understand motor boat, on which the representatives ports for shipping.
As you have already been that this is precisely the purpose behind the will be able to travel out onto the arriving informed, these missiles will be removed imposition of such conditions. vessels.
You should follow all the instrucfrom Cuba on 7 or 8 or at the latest 10 NoIn Stevenson’s letter of 3 November, tions of the group.
Report on your carrying vember of this year. another issue is raised—it asserts that acout of these instructions, and keep us reguTell the Americans that if they wish to cording to the reports of American intellilarly informed, through closed communicaraise other issues, then they will find many gence in Cuba, the assembling of IL-28 tion, of your operations. such issues on our side as well, issues which bombers is still going on.
In response to this, really affect the vital interests of our counsay that such assertions are an invention of BAKAEV try and which create concerns about our seAmerican intelligence, because it is imposcurity.
AVP RF; copy obtained by NHK, issues at present, because they are too broad, American photos do not corroborate this.
The talks with Castro will take to hold to the statement of their own Presipolemic, and it was indeed a polemic, and place on 5 November at 14:00 local time. dent.
He said that he was against offensive if each side insists on having things its own weaponry, but in favor of the right of each way, then it will render impossible an agree5.
We have not been culty. lation by J Henriksen.] authorized by Cuba to carry on such negoFor this reason it is necessary to show tiations.
Havana, 5 November 1962 If the Americans take as their goal a return to an incendiary situation, it will 5.
In the event that it is necesand to proceed in the negotiations from the Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transsary, you should explain to Fidel Castro that agreement that has been reached.
Alekseev to USSR Foreign message to Kennedy of 27 October. later than 10 November, all these materials Ministry, 5 November 1962 It is obvious that some misunderstandwill be removed from Cuba.
Both we has entrusted me with the task of looking the USA Dobrynin to USSR Foreign and the Americans know that USA missile into the issue raised by Castro.
Kuznetsov during their cussion of this sort of issue on behalf of Today the “Washington Post” pubfirst meeting.
Then the situaKennedy’s connection with not have for us the force of an obligation, tion around Cuba may be normalized.
We Bolshakov19 (the latter was not named disince it is a document publicized by the USA are keeping our promise, and hope that the rectly), and also declared in dramatic tones government in a highly unilateral fashion.
USA too does not renege on its own promhow that connection was used “for the deIt is well known that the Soviets have reises and impose unacceptable conditions that ception” of the President in the issue of the fused to recognize this document, and thus create the possibility of a continuation of Soviet missile bases in Cuba.
It mentions in also the list of weaponry it contains, and to the conflict. particular Bolshakov’s reception by N S. which R Kennedy is referring.
Khrushchev and the ried by the possible consequences of the firthrough him.
President has the force of law, and we will ing at American planes, and that he personThis and several other details are fulfill the terms of that agreement if the ally considered it necessary to say so.
Kuznetsov also spoken about this tion with regard to the flights of American his return from vacation (the article also to Stevenson.
For this reason it is it to Stevenson and McCloy during his reWith this the talks were ended, since clearly obvious that the article was prepared cent talks with them, at which I was present R Kennedy was hurrying to the White with the knowledge of, or even by orders myself.
House to meet with the President. from, Robert Kennedy, who is a close friend, R Kennedy did not go any further into as is the President, of Alsop. the details of the list itself, saying, however, 5.
Kuznetsov to USSR any further statements on this subject, sayForeign Ministry, 6 November 1962 5.
AVP RF; copy obtained by NHK, who was supposed to be flying soon to the Thant.
Khrushchev’s confidential letpressed concern about the Cubans’ firing at the fact that the USA is asking questions ter,20 Robert Kennedy said that he would American planes carrying out observational which can only complicate the resolution of pass it on to the President immediately. flights over Cuba on the dismantling of the the whole problem, such as, for example, Then, assuming a somewhat suprised Soviet missiles.
We the American statement about the “quaranto defend the inviolability of its borders.
U Thant, emphasizing that he Chile, as well as with representatives from seeking to guarantee a lasting peace in this was speaking for himself personally and the United Arab Republic, and that their reregion.
We emphasized that the stubborn would not contact the Americans with reaction was generally positive. refusal of the USA to lift the “quarantine” gard to this issue, asked whether it would Sixth.
U Thant told us, evidently havdoes not at all contribute to the creation of a not be possible—unless, after we approve ing in mind information published in today’s positive atmosphere for the resolution of the the American proposal for monitoring comAmerican newspapers on a seemingly imCuban problem. municated yesterday by McCloy, the Ameriminent meeting of the Security Council, that Second.
U Thant asked a fine-tuning cans accept the agreement—to entrust the he considered it necessary and possible to question with regard to our information on monitoring to representatives of the Interconvene the Council only after all issues the USA attempts to broaden their demands national Red Cross, the same ones who will have been resolved at the negotiations befor the removal of our weaponry from Cuba. be conducting inspections, as is now proing conducted now.
He asked in whose hands—ours or the Cuposed, on the Soviet vessels bound for Cuba.
U if the other side earnestly wants such a settleand agreed that if so he would like to meet Thant asked us to make inquiries to Mosment. with Comrade Mikoyan to get information cow, and to give him an answer “for his own It appears to us that it is expedient to on the results of his negotiations with Fidel personal information.” seek an agreement on the basis of the conCastro.
We ask that you provide us with inforsent we have already given to the American We answered that it was not yet clear mation on this issue. proposals on the inspection process.
In such that Fidel Castro, in his speech of 1 Novema case it may be possible, in our opinion, to 6.
U Thant asked whether there inspections on the vessels bound for Cuba. lation by John Henriksen.] could be a disclosure, through first-hand Fifth.
Zorin to whether instead they would be kept in conhas asked them questions about guarantees USSR Foreign Ministry, tainers.
General Rikhye, who was present for Cuba’s security and about the lifting of 6 November 1962 at the talks, said, not waiting for our answer, the “quarantine,” and that he intends to conthat he had proposed that they be packed in tinue to do so.
November 1962 a way appropriate for long-distance overU Thant reacted with great interest to TOP SECRET seas shipping, with a view for the prevenour information on the exchange of views tion of corrosion, but that they could be with the Americans on the subject of the On 5 November we had a meeting with viewed in their outline forms from beneath “UN presence” in the Caribbean Sea area.
The Americans came to the meeting U Thant was also interested in whether him, and that he wants to reach a positive with the clear intention of exerting pressure all the missiles would be removed by one settlement of it.
We said that it Soviets had still not displayed any willinging back to retrieve the rest.
At the same time the ter this agreement, which is the result of intelligence reconnaissance and that, with Americans kept shying away from a discuscompromise and mutual concessions.
On 28 regard to the IL-28 bombers, the American sion of the issues concerning the Americans’ October the dismantling of the missiles was intelligence information on the continuing fulfillment of their own obligations.
The begun, this dismantling was completed on assembly in Cuba of these planes is incordiscussion at times became pointed, and this 2 November, and the dismantled missiles rect, McCloy asserted that in the photos was an effect created largely by Stevenson have been broughts to the ports for shipping, taken by an American reconnaissance plane and McCloy. and will be removed no later than 10 Noover the area where IL-28 planes were be1.
More than half the discussion was vember. ing stored, it was obvious that there were devoted to an exchange of opinions on the We directed the attention of the Amerimore of them in recent days, and that new issue of the IL-28 planes located in Cuba. cans to the fact that, if they want to raise containers of parts for these planes were Stevenson and McCloy stated that the agreenew issues, then we have many issues that being unpacked.
Khrushchev we will want to raise too, for example conMcCloy stated that once Soviet representaand Kennedy stipulated the removal of all cerning the American military bases on fortives had also denied even the American these planes from Cuba, and their return to eign territories, but that we are not doing intelligence photos of missile bases in Cuba. the Soviet Union.
We adduced concrete facts concerning ers were visible, and that he believed these Kennedy’s statement of 22 October and the IL-28 bombers, showing that this photos. his proclamation of 23 October placed jet bomber is a purely defensive weapon, long We answered McCloy and Stevenson bombers in the category of the so-called ago outmoded, and that it can be used only by saying that their formulation of the issue “offensive” Soviet weaponry in Cuba. for coastal defense when escorted by antiof IL-28 bombers, which were outmoded Kennedy’s message of 27 October referred aircraft units.
We said with regard to this and which have been removed from the arto the “offensive missile bases,” as well as that if the USA representatives insist on their senal of our army, is clearly aimed at comto “all armament systems that can be used own demands concerning the IL-28 planes, plicating the whole affair, at slowing the for offensive purposes,” apparently includthen in doing so they will only place the completion of the negotiation work, and at ing jet bombers in this category.
Khrushchev indicated in his message will see that the United States are reneging had already been achieved at these negotiaof 28 October that the Soviet government on their promise, and imposing unaccepttions.
We returned to these opinions many had issued instructions to dismantle and reable conditions that create the possibility of times in the course of the talks.
The Americans call both We said that Stevenson’s assertion in the issue of removing the IL-28 bombers missiles as well as jet bombers offensive his letter of 3 November, that according to from Cuba, it would be impossible to reach weaponry. the reports of American intelligence there any agreement.
McCloy and Stevenson came back was evidence that IL-28 bombers are still At the end of this part of the talks, many times in the course of the talks to these being assembled in Cuba, is a fabrication Stevenson asked whether it should be unarguments, interpreting them in such a way by American intelligence that clearly aims derstood that the Soviets are refusing to reas to make it seem as though the Soviet to avoid the settlement of the conflict and move the IL-28 planes from Cuba.
If so, he Union had committed itself to dismantle and the normalization of our relations, and that said, then our position in the negotiations return to the Soviet Union from Cuba not indeed tightens the tensions.
States take as their goal a return to the inrepeated that these planes are not offensive, We explained our position in detail to cendiary situation of earlier, then this is and that the Soviets will proceed from this McCloy and Stevenson, in accordance with scarcely in the interests of the USA or the fact in their actions.
We proready thinking of presenting us with an ullar that at the present time there is only one pose to select reasonable positions, and to timatum on this issue and blaming the Sobasis for an agreement, the one established proceed in our negotiations from the agreeviets for the situation created at these negoby the exchange of messages between Comment that has already been reached. tiations?, we asked in response.
As far The Americans contested our views of diately said no, there was no ultimatum at as Soviet obligations are concerned, that the purely defensive character of the IL-28 all. agreement stipulates that the Soviet Union bombers.
McCloy and Stevenson asserted Stevenson said that perhaps the Soviwill remove from Cuba the missile weapthat “in Castro’s hands” these bombers could ets would think over this issue again, and onry that the President of the USA has called be offensive weapons, and that for the Latin that the next day or the day after that they “offensive,” and that it will never in the fuAmerican region they represent a threatencould discuss it again.
The ing weapon which the other Latin Ameriwilling to discuss any issue in these negoUSA in its turn committed itself not to incan countries do not possess. tiations, but that as far as the issue of the vade Cuba, and not to allow any invasion In response to our statement, in accorIL-28 bombers was concerned, it is the by the other states of the Western hemidance with your instructions, that one canAmericans who should think it over, since sphere.
Then Stevenson and McCloy asked of the fact that McCloy, in talks at his counIn McCloy’s words, President Kennedy was one more question— about the nuclear wartry house yesterday, was still talking about counting on continued progress at the neheads on the missiles, and about nuclear the USA’s lack of objections to the use of gotiating table.
We stated that the Amerithe Red Cross representatives. tions referred to by Stevenson were opencans’ formulation of still another issue could At this time McCloy asserted that, ended any longer.
We emphasince the Soviets had refused to approve the clear, and it is only the USA position that is sized that the Soviets would fulfill to the use of American ships for this purpose, the hindering forward movement.
McCloy stated Answering our questions, McCloy said that in the correspondence between N S. in response to this that the USA did not want this still did not constitute a definitive reKhrushchev and Kennedy, and to be guided to allow “nuclear warheads to be found in sponse from the Americans, and that he by precisely that spirit when attentively reCastro’s hands,” and wanted to be sure that would inform his government of our proviewing the considerations we had exthere was no such weaponry in Cuba. posal. pressed.
McCloy said moreover that, since We expressed our surprise with regard We ask that you inform us on the issue ground-based inspection in Cuba was imto such a change of the USA position on the of the warheads. possible, the Americans would want to be issue of using Soviet vessels for the Red allowed the same possibility for checking Cross inspections.
Security Archive, Washington, D.C.; transthe possibility to ascertain that they have all 5.
McCloy York V Kuznetsov to USSR Foreign cessfully to complete the negotiations, and and Stevenson did not enter into any real Ministry, 7 November 1962 that the Soviets would fully and precisely discussion of these issues, even less than fulfill their obligation to remove from Cuba they had before at the earlier meetings.
On 6 November we had a meeting with the “offensive” missiles, along with every6.
At the end of the talks, Stevenson the Americans, with the participation on thing associated with them.
They have made no comment on ties for the Red Cross inspection of Soviet The American ships will come up close this information, and have asked no quesships bound for Cuba. to the Soviet vessels in order to see and photions.
McCloy told me that the day before he tograph the missiles being shipped.
When the crisis began, the removed from certain missiles during the 7 November 1962 Cubans were full of determination to fight, observation.
The desire was expressed that and for this reason when the events took a the missiles be shipped on the decks of the On 7 November 1962 a meeting took different turn, the feeling arose in them that ships.
Gilpatrick emphasized that they did place with the permanent Cuban representhey had experienced a failure.
Kuznetsov informed him that in problem, for Cuba it was also her own probtheir technical characteristics. recent days we had been discussing with the lem, one which roused the whole nation, and The Americans emphasized that they Americans a series of problems deriving from that communal feeling came the faconsidered it important to become confrom the exchange of letters between the mous five points appearing in Fidel Castro’s vinced that the entire quantity of missiles Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the statement.
Khrushchev, and President ernment can be sure that the uncertainty removed from Cuba.
Kennedy, including the issue of assurances which arose in the first moments of the criThe question was raised as to how and and guarantees that Cuba would not be atsis has been dispelled, and that the Cuban where a meeting could be arranged between tacked by the USA or by the other countries nation is delighted by the firmness and the American ships with the Soviet vessels neighboring Cuba. peace-loving actions of the Soviet Union. carrying the missiles.
The Americans proAt the present stage of the discussion, Lechuga also said that he had had a posed that we inform them of the ship’s we have not yet gone so far as to work out meeting with the Red Cross representatives, numbers of all our vessels which are headed any documents or the details of the agreewho had raised the issue of their inspection out of Cuba bearing missiles, so that the ment.
The Americans are now trying to find on the open sea of the vessels entering and captains of the American ships from which pretexts for avoiding definite and concrete sailing from Cuba.
They made no mention the observations will be conducted can be statements.
All in all, they have not been of the establishing of an inspection proceable to make contact with the captains of displaying any spirit of cooperation at the dure in Cuban territory.
Lechuga said that our ships, and arrange a meeting-place with negotiating table. he had answered the Red Cross representathem without disturbing the itineraries of the In the American press there are fretives, in provisional fashion, that it did not Soviet vessels.
We said that in that case it quent statements about how the USA has seem that the Cuban government would ofwould be necessary for the captains of our apparently won a triumph in the Cuban crifer any objections to that, since the issue at vessels to have the ship’s numbers of the sis.
But it is clear to anyone who is able sohand did not concern Cuban territory, but American ships as well, in order to find out berly to assess the events that, thanks to the rather the open sea, and since this whole whether they should get in contact with firm and peaceful policies of the Soviet affair more directly concerns the USSR and those particular ships.
We believe that the American propossteps in the negotiations with the Americans, Lechuga stated that in the talks with als for carrying out an observation of the steps that should show whether or not the the Deputy Secretary General of the UN removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba are Americans really want to put an end to the Loutfi, the latter had told him that the peacceptable.
In the event that they are apcrisis and to prevent a repetition of this danriod of five days, proposed by the Soviet proved, we ask to be immediately informed gerous military situation.
We intend to put Union as the maximum period in which the of the ship’s numbers of the Soviet vessels, before the Americans the issue of how they inspection of vessels could be conducted, and of the departure schedules of the ships will fulfill their obligations regarding the was insufficient, since within this period the carrying missiles out of Cuba after 7 Noguarantee against an attack on Cuba.
Red Cross representatives would not even vember, unless all the missiles will have Lechuga said that Cuba supports the be able to prepare their ships or send them been removed by 6 or 7 November.
Loutfi also menthat the misunderstanding which had arisen tioned that the USA had raised the question 7.
We are generally definite positive results have been attained, tocol statement be not formally signed, but opposed to the carrying out of any inspecthat we have definite assurances of nonaffirmed by special separate statements by tions at all.
The Soviet Union agreed to the agression against Cuba, and that the issue the governments of the three countries—the possibility of using Red Cross observers for now is how the USA will fulfill its obligaUSSR, the USA, and Cuba.
It is impossible to forget that the whole ments in their collectivity will constitute an assurances that the missiles had been reworld is currently watching how the events agreement. moved from Cuba.
Mikoyan via the the Cuban representative will introcuce it of view that we are now conducting negoSoviet Embassy in Havana, as a protocol draft.” tiations.
With the resolution of this problem, 10 November 1962 In the next meeting with our Cuban there should not be any infringement at all comrades, you should clarify their views on on the sovereignty of Cuba or its legal rights.
We request that you In response to the question as to Moscow agrees with their remarks on the inform us immediately of what you find out, whether vessels could now proceed unhinProtocol draft on the elimination of tensions so that we can give corresponding instrucdered to Cuba, Lechuga answered in the afassociated with Cuba.
The text of the Protions to Comrade Kuznetsov. firmative. tocol statement, including the remarks by With regard to the “IL-28” bombers, our Cuban comrades contained in it, has 10.
We are lation of the sovereignty of Cuba, the norms also in agreement on your explanations conYour instructions have been carried of international law, and the principles of cerning the Cubans’ second proposal—on out.
The continuation of such the UN presence in the countries of the Carself attentively with the content of N.S. flights would lead to a prolongation of tenibbean.
Khrushchev’s confidential oral message to sions, and any measures taken by the CuWe understand that our Cuban comthe President.
When he got to the place that ban government in connection with this will rades have agreed with these ideas of yours. spoke of Nixon’s defeat in the elections,21 be justified, and all responsibility for any Third.
We ask that N.S. would be much better if Adenauer kept his tions being conducted in Cuba itself.
As a said that in the proposal that he had adstand the difficulties in this area that have personal opinion, however, I noted that it vanced, the issue is once again raised of a now arisen because of Premier Fidel was unlikely that such an imminent date full elimination of all the tension that has Castro’s position, and we are not insisting could be acceptable to us, all the more so existed, that is, beyond the immediate lifton this as an unalterable and fundamental since the fundamental USA obligations— ing of the blockade, the obligations of all condition.
But the removal of the IL-28 guarantees of non-aggression against Cuba, the parties should be fixed in appropriate planes—in an atmosphere of growing critiand other obligations—remain, as before, UN documents, and non-aggression against cism within the USA—is a matter of great unfulfilled; moreover, they themselves are Cuba and a strict observation of its soverconcern to the President.
All this may be announced immediRobert Kennedy said that the timethat an agreement could be reached on all ately. frame he had referred to—30 days—is not this points.
It is important, from the point of I answered Robert Kennedy that his in any way definitive.
That time-frame had view of American public opinion, to have proposal is entirely unacceptable for the been “given to him,” but he though that there some inspection conducted in Cuba, even Soviet side.
I then demonstrated the was room for negotiation here as long as in the form of several UN posts.
Khrushchev generally found the dure is imposed on the other countries of Khrushchev’s oral message that had been President’s proposal acceptable.
In conclusion I expressed to make note of one more condition, Robert solve this too.
Robert Kennedy mentioned, my certainty that conveying his proposal to Kennedy continued.
After such an agreeas an alternative to this, the plan put forth Moscow would prove fruitless. ment has been reached, especially if it is not by Brazil, but then he immediately said that Thinking a moment, Robert Kennedy publicized, it would be important for us that, this aspect of the issue was being studied said that he would like to confer with his even if the end of the agreed-upon period by Stevenson, and that he, Robert Kennedy, brother the President, after which he would for the removal of the IL-28 planes has not could not go into details with regard to it.
I yet been reached, at least some planes will can however repeat the firm assurances of agreed. have been disassembled by this time, or if the President not to invade Cuba.
He authoAfter an hour and a half (all this hapthey have just been taken out of containers, rized me once again to say this now.
This is necesfor the President, and he asks that we conwould reach an essential agreement that the sary, since even [West German Chancellor sider his proposal.
IL-28 planes would be removed by a defiKonrad] Adenauer is starting now to critiFurther discussion came down to a renite date.
After such an agreement has been cize us publicly for trusting the word of the iteration of the positions of the parties.
But the with me at any time. the date agreed upon for the removal of the President, Robert Kennedy emphasized, has When he left, he glimpsed a crowd of IL-28 planes be publicized.
Soviets have any objections to the public willing to lift the quarantine immediately if Realizing that this was a friendly welcome disclosure of that date, then the President the agreement mentioned above can be party arranged by the embassy community would not insist on it.
Khrushchev would be entirely any guarantees with regard to inspections arrived in Washington, he said that he would sufficient.
As far as the date is concerned, it in Cuban territory. like to meet with the troupe.
It is imporcome back in their disarmament negotiaPlisetskaya when he found out that he and tant that this aspect be properly understood tions to the Soviet proposals that stipulated she had been born in the same year, month, in Moscow, since the President himself has posts in airports, in the major ports, at railand day, and said they would celebrate their great difficulties in dealing with this issue road hubs, and on motorways in order to birthdays in a week.
Khrushchev’s Robert Kennedy corrected himself, normal mood in the White House after the response.
Khrushchev’s responses. though this fact is concealed in various ways and warheads, in other words that we have By the way, the remark I made has no direct by American propaganda. fulfilled the obligations we assumed, while connection to the subject presently under the USA is not fulfilling its own obligations; discussion, the subject from which I di12.
XI.62 A DOBRYNIN for this reason, in order to conduct assurgressed, he continued.
Dobrynin to USSR parties should have been formalized in apa White House meeting I heard that far from Foreign Ministry, 14 November 1962 propriate documents under the auspices of all the countries of this area would agree to the UN. participate in such an agreement.
Thus if you Having familiarized himself with our Robert Kennedy stated that the USA insist on all the countries of the Caribbean response, Robert Kennedy said that he government would not cease its flights over area, the whole affair might be delayed even would pass it on to the President today.
I am saying all this, Robert Kennedy Then, saying that he would like to express a other guarantees that the government of concluded, not in order to discuss the delittle of his own views provisionally, RobCuba would carry out its end of the agreetails of this issues—I do not know them ert Kennedy stated the following. ment.
Mr Mikoyan’s long stay in Cuba myself, since they are the responsibility of The President—he, Robert Kennedy, shows—or at least this conviction has been Stevenson and Kuznetsov—but rather to expects—will be disappointed by the answer created in us—that Premier Castro does not show that time is needed for all this, and when he receives it.
The exchange for assurances—public or not— understand the circumstances that have been President has put forth a proposal that he that before some definite date the IL-28 created, but this does not relieve the diffibelieves serves the interests of both parties, planes would be removed.
Both parties significantly less tense situation than the one be reached.
But for this As far as we know, in every such case it has I told Robert Kennedy that the posithere must be a certain time in which all the categorically rejected, and still rejects, the tion of the Soviet government has been details of the future agreement can be idea of observational posts within its borclearly laid out in today’s response by N.S. worked out.
The Soviet Union has fulfilled ferred to above could be carried out immeRobert Kennedy was immediately told its obligations.
Khrushchev’s rethe situation of tension that has been cre334 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN ated in the Caribbean Sea can be eased.
Mikoyan, onto the territories of any Latin American 18 November 1962 14.
Mikoyan, proposed in the draft resolution put before ing at American planes was not submitted 15 November 1962 the UN General Assembly by Brazil, Boto our approval, we do not consider it poslivia, and Chile. sible to take part in this.
The question is small, but delicate, and its Cable from Mikoyan to CC CPSU, resolution would be greeted with satisfacA GROMYKO 23 November 1962 tion.
In this respect, this meeting can be I am reporting on the situation on the characterized as definite progress.
Indeed, it now decides the fate of Cuba, sailing out of the Canadian port of 30 November 1962 the world.
The others will reach this zone behonor of the American Secretary of the Inage was sustained.
The guests included portant to do everything to restore fully the There are 13 dry-cargo vessels and 7 R Kennedy, Deputy Secretary of State trust on which so much depends.
Ball, the chairman of the selves understand the need for this, for we They have all successfully passed through President’s Council of Economic Advisors must look ahead.
Within the blockAll the American guests were with their that he fully agrees with the idea of the imade zone these flights occur more frequently, wives, except for Robert Kennedy who portance for preserving peace and for the aerial photos are taken, American ships came with his eldest daughter, age 13.
He basic improvement of relations between our come up close to them, inquiring what cargo has seven children in all.
Khrushchev and president Kennedy, follow close behind the Soviet ships until who had the flu, had gone to Florida to bring their mutual understanding and trust of one they reach the territorial waters of Cuba. them up to condition. another.
Mikoyan to step define his approach to his relations with the into another room, where one on one USA president.
Khrushchev values the The Minister of the Merchant Fleet first touched on the matpersonal quality of these relations.
But for concessions and compromises, succeeded in ington, D.C.; translation by John Henriksen, the Minister of Justice averting this war.
Mikoyan, no336 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN ticed the positive role you, the president’s crease in tension between countries Union.
Udall’s conscientiousness [dobrosbrother, played during the confidential necontinues further and the political atmoovestnost’] was confirmed and he did not gotiations between the president and the sphere warms up, then this trip would not give in to this pressure and said what he head of the Soviet state.
Khrushchev and offered a toast understood correctly, in the critical moment, J Kennedy “people of strength and peace.” to health. what those interests were.
Inport] the need to search for ways of avoidconcretely by the broadening of exchanges deed, if one speaks the truth, there’s not ing the repetition of similar crises in the fuand in our agreement to the sale of bourgois much left to do; it is only necessary to put ture.
You also the president. ings of sympathy for the Soviet people grew do not have an open society.
You have more R Kennedy noted that he agreed that stronger, and he said so despite criticism of advertising , but society is closed, little of essence remained to be done inthese statements in the USA, still in Sepbut in its own way.
When the arms race is deed, “it’s 90 percent done,” although there tember.
He asked to transmit his invieliminated and disarmament takes place, we are still difficulties that must be overcome. tation to visit the United States to the Chairwill then open many places in which the But he, R Kennedy, did not intend to anaman of the Council of Ministers, Comrade presence today of foreigners is forbidden. lyze these difficulties.
Mikoyan by their Heller how he would explain the fact that, settlement. parents.
There are some people, whom you know Heller avoided answering by changing influence of the president.
R Kennedy for years, but actually don’t know, and sudthe topic of conversation, not wishing to smiled, but he didn’t say anything. denly after decades you see the real face of enter an argument where he felt himself In concluding the conversation, R the man.
When he returned to his homeland after visstatement on the appropriateness of transRobert Kennedy showed interest in iting the Soviet Union he landed in an atferring power and means freed up by the visiting the Soviet Union and expressed this mosphere of anti-Soviet hysteria.
Mikoyan said that this was a good get anti-Soviet statements out of him, veloped countries and of the people of the idea and completely realizable.
If the decounter to those he had made in the Soviet states participating in the arms race.
Mikoyan invited Heller to visit the circled over the vessel six times and then authority given to me by the Constitution Soviet Union. flew away. and the laws of the United States, hereby Those present asked Mikoyan if, in his 3.
The ship “Krasnograd” left from the declare that at 23 hours 00 minutes Greenopinion, Castro is interested in normalizing port of Mariel on 6 December at 7:30, carwich time on 20 November 1962, I rerelations and about Castro himself as the rying on board 15 IL-28 planes. scinded the powers given to the Defense ruler of Cuba.
The captain answered that Dobrynin and Bubnov transcribed the there were 15 “IL-28” planes on board.
USSR Merchant Fleet to the CC CPSU, EDITOR’S NOTES 7 December 1962 The Minister of the Merchant Fleet V BAKAEV 1 Gromyko here evidently refers to Dorticos’ I am reporting on the removal of 42 speech to the United Nations General Assembly of 8 OctoIL-28 planes from Cuba.
We recorded the identification numbers Moscow to USSR Foreign Ministry, 2 Kennedy had asked Congress to approve the of the planes.
The captain gave his conthe text, but Kennedy appears to be referring to sent, and towards dawn on 7 December the The Embassy of the United States of the meeting between Robert Kennedy and Soviet USA destroyer carried out an inspection of America is expressing its respect to the MinAmbassador Anatoly F Dobrynin on the same the Soviet ship. ister of Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soday as the 4 September 1962 statement to under2.
The Embassy has been 6 The Russian text is unclear as to whether it reThe “Kasimov” was also subjected to entrusted by its government hereby to bring fers to a “bar-man” or a last name constant overhead flights by USA war to the attention of the Ministry the operasuch as “Berman,” “Barman,” or “Burman.” planes whose identification numbers we retional portion of the Proclamation, issued 7 Possibly a reference to journalist Robert J. corded. by the President of the United States of Donovan.
A bomber of the “Neptune” class, with America on 21 November 1962, on the lift8 It is noteworthy that the Soviet message strongly the number 6-145922, asked us to open the ing of the quarantine announced on 23 Ocimplies that a United States invasion of Cuba would not packing of our deck cargo for photographtober 1962. trigger a military response from the USSR, but ing.
This request was fulfilled by the cap“I, John F Kennedy, President of the only political condemnation.
After this, the plane United States of America, acting with the brewing disagreement between Moscow and Ha338 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN vana, for Castro’s message to Khrushchev on 26 translation of which appears in an appendix to STATE DEPARTMENT, RUSSIAN October 1962—in which he called on the Soviet Blight, Allyn, and Welch, Cuba on the Brink, 481ARCHIVES COOPERATE ON leader to authorize a “harsh and terrible” attack 482.
Washington, had been used as a back-channel goPresident John F Kennedy and Soviet leader 10 A seccessionist rebel leader from Katanga beteen to deliver messages between Khrushchev Nikita S Khrushchev, including exchanges beProvince in the Congo and the Kennedys, meeting frequently with Robtween the two concerning the Cuban Missile Criagainst whom the UN was considering the use of ert Kennedy.
As the document indicates, this sis in Oct.-Nov.62 that were declassified by military force, which it later used to quash the channel ended after the Kennedys concluded that Russian authorities five years ago and published resistance.
Bolshakov had been used to mislead them by in Spring 1992 in Problems of Communism.
Robert Kennedy told the pro-communist Pathet Lao in Laos. upon which he announced his retirement from his brother that he had informed an “obviously Kennedy’s decision followed a private appeal in politics.
You go through normal State Department channels randum from Attorney General Kennedy to made a statement that you were very pleased with rather than the confidential back-channel President’s Special Assistant for National Secuthe results of these elections.
They, the elections, Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy had established rity Affairs , 11 July 1962 (regarding indeed, were in your favor.
Thus, no copy meetings apparently held on 18 and 19 June upset us either—though that is of course your of the communication reached the United States archives. 1962), in United States State Department, Foreign Relainternal affair.
Director of the Department of History and Soviet missile division deployed to western Cuba.
SSOP, Khrushchev dated 26 October 1962, an English Washington, DC 20402-9328.
This is a second phase by the Russian and transcribes the tioned by the Soviets has been attained. of help because before that there were commeaning of the phrase into the simple mercial and credit agreements but these last past tense.
Says he will respond to the deliveries have been in aid. dently transcriptions of memo notes questions, and asks to be excused for he will When Khrushchev visited Bulgaria [on taken during a speech and do not seem speak for a long time.
Their overall with the doubts expressed by Fidel in order things to us, he said “although I was in Bultone is colloquial.
When the meaning to explain them. garia, I was always thinking of Cuba.
I fear was clear enough, I changed the puncHe thinks that the main problem conthe yanquis will attack Cuba, directly or intuation and divided very long sentences sists in explaining why they have sent troops directly, and imagine of the effect on us of into shorter ones.
In stood, it is very difficult to understand the not allow this to happen.
Although the plan this latter case, I tried to be as literal whole situation.
He did not think we had is very risky for us, it is a big responsibility as possible; translating word by word. doubts about this.
Cuba must be Editor’s and translator’s insertions apthe Cuban revolution is a permanent preocsaved “They thought it over for three days pear in brackets, as opposed to parencupation of ours, especially since its socialand later all the members of the Central thetical phrases in the original docuist character was declared.
The translation preserves some rialists were defeated in Giron [Beach at the have to think a lot about this action in order apparent errors in the originals regardBay of Pigs—ed.], we congratulated ourto save Cuba and not to provoke a nuclear ing parentheses and quotation marks, selves, but we also worried.
He ordered the military to develop the where the punctuation marks are not did Plan and to consult with the Cubans.
In general, however, the sense a stupid thing but we knew they would conus that the main condition was to carry out of both documents is understandable tinue harassing because Cuba is an example the Plan secretly.
Our military told us that even to a reader who is unfamiliar with that they could not tolerate.
Our assessment four months were needed for the preparathe events.—Carlos Osorio (National was that they had two parallel plans; the first tions.
We thought the enemy would learn Security Archive).] one consisted of the economic strangulation about it right in the middle of the plan and of Cuba in order to bring down the regime we anticipated what to do.
We foresaw Havana, 4 November 1962 support, as an alternative to the other plan. that, in order not to provoke a war, we could We consider the victory of the Cuban use the UNO MEETING OF THE SECRETARIAT OF revolution as an enormous contribution to and the public opinion.
Its defeat would be an would not provoke a war but a blockade NATIONAL PALACE, irreparable damage to Marxism and to other against weapons and fuel instead.
Such a defeat would mean a terrible you were closer we could have used our Air cuss their differences with the Cuban blow against the world revolution.
It is our duty yanquis do have bases surrounding us in what has been stated by the imperialists. to do everything possible to defend Cuba.
Given They trust us as much as they trust them“Our comrades told us that the ecothe situation, we cannot strike back. selves.
He is willing to discuss for as long nomic situation in Cuba had worsened due Okinawa is too far away too.
The into the yanquis’ pressure and the enormous sibility was to cut the communications with terests of the Soviet Union are common to military expenses.
In Berlin this is possible. ours in the defense of the principles of Marxcoincided with the plans of the yanquis.
We We have not thought of building a Soism-Leninism and in all the other interests. had a discussion about the economic decline viet Base on the Island to operate against and we have helped without you requesting the North Americans.
You are very modest in your requests and sider that the policy of bases is not a correct terms of the procedures used to deal with we try to help you.
We only have bases in Germany, this crisis. weapons for free and donated equipment for first because of the right we have as an in100,000 men.
Asks whether Mikoyan concial negotiations, we have looked at all the Warsaw Treaty.
Evidently, viet weapons , in addihave troops in Hungary and Poland, to prothis order was never carried out.
Kennedy tion, declaring that they will not attack Cuba tect the troops in Germany and the commudid not want to talk about the missiles until nor permit that it be attacked.
But two Republithe outcome, we have gained, because they We do not need bases to destroy the can Senators learned the news and they had will not attack Cuba and there will be no United States because we can attack with no alternative but to act.
We what Kennedy would do and we worried In normal conditions, it would be natudo not have a plan to conquer North about the preparations or maneuvers of Vieti ral that we send you a project America.
The only thing we need to do is to an operation named after Castro but backfor you to study and you could then publish launch a counter strike, but that will serve wards.
But that can be done only in normal conto destroy them without having to send in blockade, we did not have data showing ditions.
An invasion was expected within the our troops. whether it was a maneuver or a preparation next 24 hours.
When Fidel sent his cable, We have sent the troops and strategic for aggression.
If a missiles only to protect the Island’s defense. we received the news confirming that it was cable was sent it had to been crypted, that It was a plan of containment an aggression.
Conso that the yanquis could not provoke an that the maneuvers were suspended due to sultations would have been appropriate, but explosion in Cuba.
If the missiles are well a storm, the storm was over and the maneuCuba would not exist and the world would camouflaged and the yanquis do not know vers were not carried out.
After the attack, they where they are deployed, then they can help the concentration continued.
The military told us that has strongly criticized Kennedy’s words the warmongers of the Pentagon.
The yanquis were not going approve of the kind of weapons that Cuba ing an overall evaluation, in spite of the psyto locate them.
They could not destroy them. should own and thus they organized a dichological defects, we can see that the adDuring July and August, they did not find rect aggression.
We were surprised that to destroy the nuclear missiles and then landCom.
What Kennedy only made reference to technicians ing and destroying the resistance. guarantees offered by Kennedy have really and not to our troops.
Later we learned to respond because it is an attack against ments cannot be rejected in a nihilistic fashthat he knew more than he was saying, but Cuba and against us too because our troops ion.
Although agreements can be breached, he was not revealing it not to hinder the elecwere here and this was the unleashing of they are important for they are useful for a toral campaign.
We would destroy North certain period of time. we were going to solve the Berlin problem, America.
They would inflict huge loses on In addition, a problem arose with the in order to distract their attention from the us; but they would make every effort to deTurkey issue.
We told him that we agreed to this. the midst of our discussions, we received a why we included it.
The bases in Turkey are We would please him and we would solve cable from Fidel that coincided with other of no importance because in case of war they it later.
Given that such a England that could damage all the bases of bringing up this problem.
When the North short time was left, we used diplomatic anywhere in the world.
Because when policy-makers Cuba, they also concentrated their campaign want to avoid a war, they have to use diploFidel asks whether there were in fact on Berlin.
It’s important to underscore two letters , terest in Cuba, but appeared as if concenthat Kennedy says now that he was not one that mentioned the issue of Turkey, trated on Berlin.
In the middle of October, against the presence of troops here and that which was broadcast on Radio Moscow, and they learned he accepts ground-to-air missiles.
But once another in which the issue was not menabout it through Cuba, via the West Gerknown, the strategic weapons, were not usetioned.
We sent two letmany information service who passed it to ful anymore... [notation ters, one on the 26th that was not published, the CIA,3 they first learned about the misin original—ed.] and another one on the 27th.
They took aerial pictures and located The withdrawal of the missiles, was a Turkey was not included at the beginning, them.
That but we need assurances that the missiles will this issue. would be better for Cuba, but from a miligo.
In this situation, Thant has played a tary point of view of the interest of Cuba, it We can provide the pictures of the disgood role.
If we decided to withdraw mantled weapons and how they are loaded. situation, he even seems to have a little symall the weapons from Cuba, then we could Nor we will oppose that you observe the pathy for our position.
While in Moscow, demand the withdrawal from Guantanamo, ships on the high seas, at a particular diswe received a plan of guarantees.
They will see something on thought this plan seemed interesting and terms.
I did not tell them that, but that is useful for Cuba. that is important from a political perspecour opinion and we will provide them with tive.
So we will not conern coast of the United States and other countries in interpret that as an attempt to trick them. tradict your declaration, against the the Caribbean will be approved (Central All it is about is seeing the sites, where the inspection or the aerial verification.
They America because this way you deprive the weapons were and their shipping for a few feared that the Cubans would not allow us aggressor of the possibility to carry out its days.
Cuba is in the hands of the Cubans. to withdraw the missiles, given that they goals.
Of course, this can be circumvented, But because we were the owners of those have 140,000 and you only have 10,000 however.
We thought that you, after the said that the U-2 that was shot down here, OAS , and consultations, you would accept the inspecwas shot at with Russian missiles and probit is the United States who profits from it instead of tion.
Why did we think that we think there may be Cubans who are able to it is the UNO that will deal with this part of could accept a verification of the dismanoperate those weapons.
We kept on insistthe American Continent, this constitutes a tling by neutrals, without infringement of ing that they lift the quarantine immediately. blow to the Monroe Doctrine.
It was understood I told them that if they wanted the missiles that the representatives from Latin Amerithat no State would accept an infringement withdrawn faster, they should lift the blockcan countries agree with this plan, the North of your sovereignty.
Because the ships that are now in Cuba Americans avoid responding to it.
I told them they should did Stevenson) that the U Thant Plan does from abroad the territory of the Embassy issue instructions so that the inspection of not exist.
When the ships be carried out without anybody United States inspection and they said they can give discussing the problem of Indochina and boarding the ships.
It would rather be cartheir word that in Latin America all the Vietnam in Geneva , an agreement ried out in a symbolic manner, asking by camps was reached to create an International Conradio, as it was done with the tanker are liquidated.
They said that Cuba Stevenson said they will accept the prowas a revolutionary infection, he said that ———— posals of U Thant.
A he proposed not to bring weapons to Cuba formula can be searched in which Cuba will We spoke about the problem of disand to lift the blockade.
We have complied abandon the clandestine work in exchange mantling with with this and they continue. for their not attacking.
He said that “given We have loses because the ships wait Fidel was right when he said that it’s that Cuba is opposed to the North Amerion the high seas.
The losses are considereasier for the USSR to maneuver and maincan inspection, he did not insist on this forable, that is why we have allowed the contain a flexible policy than it is for Cuba, all mula for them to verify that the weapons trol of the Red Cross.
The Red Cross is betthe more as the yanqui radio reaches Cuba will not be kept hidden in the forest. [no ter because it is not a political institution, easily.
It is not just to say that we are more close quotation marks in original—ed.] nor a governmental institution.
I talked to them about the aerial phoposed two inspections, one at the shipping You have to maneuver to save the Revolutographic inspection, but I responded that harbors and another on the high seas.
I told them wanting to hurt his feelings, we responded In retrospect the question that arises is that their planes have flown over Cuba and that we accept the inspection on the high whether it was a mistake to send the misthey were convinced that the dismantling is seas and not at the shipping harbors. siles and then withdraw them from the Isbeen carried out.
Our Central Committee says that this pointed that not everything is finished.
We consider that the mistold them that this is nearly completed and verification is easier at the harbors.
U Thant siles did their job by making Cuba the fohe did not talk further about it.
After they were said:] We have to be sure that they are not has already two ships.
In Latin America no country has the be analyzed taking into account the set of The Soviet Government’s decision on power that Cuba has.
No Latin American agreements we have reached the weapons the 28, is based on the letter to Kennedy and bloc can defeat Cuba. were brought under those precepts.
The real basis for In order to understand on what victory them is the military agreement that was to the 28 decision lies within these two docurests, you may compare the situation of be published once all the weapons were ments.
Kennedy’s letter on the 28 was an Cuba now and four months ago . brought in and once the Elections were held agreement to the proposals Khrushchev sent The first advantage is that the North Ameriin the United States.
These agreements repon the 26 in the sense that he cans stopped talking about the Monroe Docresent a firm desire of the Soviet Union. was willing to resolve the issue of all the trine and before, the whole basis for their That is why this has to be analyzed weapons if the United States ceased the aggression. policy toward Latin America was that docunder the light of what we intended to do The aggression was the only reason for the trine. and not under the light of what happened. military strengthening of Cuba.
Before, they declared they would not If all the steps were carried out, we Once Kennedy accepted this proposal tolerate the existence of a Marxist-Leninist have no doubt that they would have served which we did not know of the conditions regime in Latin America, now they declare as a containment to the plans of the North were set to carry it out starting with a declathat they will not attack Cuba.
And the ration by the Soviets stating that their side did not tolerate a country from abroad in objectives of the Soviet Government and was on board and that they would proceed the Caribbean and now they know of the Cuba would have been attained. to discuss it with the Cuban Government. existence of Soviet specialists and do not At the same time, we knew that the I think that such a declaration, instead say a thing. deployment of missiles in Cuba had in sight of communicating an order to withdraw the Before, you could not have any action the defense of the Socialist Camp.
They Strategic Weapons, would have decreased of the UN in favor of Cuba and now it is were important not only in military terms, the tension and would have allowed to carry working in that sense, all the peoples are but also from a psychological and political the discussions in better terms. mobilized. point of view.
Besides serving the interests But this is a mere analysis of what hapThe prestige of the Socialist Camp has of Cuba, they served the interests of the pened, it does not matter now.
Although Socialist Camp as a whole, and we evidently ters now is simply to know what to do and the United States brought the world to the agreed with that.
That is how we have unhow to attain the main goals that are to stop brink of a war, the USSR, by pacific means, derstood the step taken, and we also underthe aggression and to secure the peace at was able to save Cuba and the peace. stand it was a step in the right direction.
If a true and effective peace Peace has been secured for several also agree with the need that a war be are attained in the near future, then under years and Cuba must be consolidated for it avoided and we do not oppose that.
In this the light of the recent events we will be to continue building socialism and continue case, all the measures oriented to attain the able to judge better the steps taken.
The fubeing the Light-house for Latin America. two objectives were undertaken.
We are in ture outcome for which we need to struggle The prestige of Cuba has grown as a absolute agreement with the goals sought will either credit or discredit the value of consequence of these events. by the Soviet Union, the misunderstandings the acts of the present.
It is evident that atarise as a result of the way they were attaining that outcome does not depend so _________________****________________ tained.
They were not one explanations given and of the effort made Fidel asks whether he will hundred percent normal. for us to understand the things that occurred. speak about the Soviet policy in Berlin.
In assessing how the events occurred, We know they happened in abnormal cirMikoyan agrees to do so in a later interview. we think they could have been dealt with cumstances.
That is why what is important Havana, 5 November 1962 nothing to do with the course of the events to discuss is what are the steps to take in the given the messages that were exchanged befuture.
We want to reaffirm our trust in the CONVERSATION BETWEEN THE tween the Soviet and North American GovSoviet Union.
My letter’s only MONDAY, 5 NOVEMBER AT THREE goal was to inform the Soviet Government COMMENTS OF MIKOYAN (transcribed IN THE AFTERNOON. of the imminent attack, and it did not conby Dorticos) tain any hesitation on our part.
We expressed that the invasion was companero Mikoyan talked about the inWe consider that the intentions of the Sopossible, but we understood that it was the spection of the Soviet ships as a Minimum viet Government cannot be determined only least probable variant.
But that inspection would take by the analysis of what happened in face of event was an aerial attack to destroy the straplace in a Cuban harbor.
That should have been the common vealing the existence of the missiles to the U.S. ground to talk about common actions.
Tell companero Mikoyan that I undo not agree on this, it is difficult to talk present in most historical accounts of the Ameriderstand very well the interest of keeping U about future plans.
Soviet officials may have been Thant on our side, but for us, that is a critipolitical issue.
The North Americans perinferring a West German role from the presence cal issue.
It would have a disastrous effect sist in obtaining a political victory.
The North Americans say that sue of the inspection is to affront the Cuban Republic of Germany’s foreign minister, Dr. the inspection is inferred from the letter from Revolution.
They know there are no misGerhard Schroeder, for meetings with senior Khrushchev to Kennedy on the 28 (Fidel is siles.
The verification on the high seas has American officials, though there is no indication making reference to the letter of Khrushchev the same effect as in the harbors.
The only that he brought any intelligence data concerning on the 27 where he accepts the inspection difference is the humiliating imposition that Soviet missiles in Cuba.
But on the 23 we reCarlos Osorio .] as “Ortsac”—a fact which was leaked to the press ceived a letter saying, in an obvious psychological warfare tactic.
Besides, on one ocpreparations for a possible United States Navy blockade casion we heard of the proposal of U Thant 1 See Vladislav M Zubok, “`Dismayed by the of Cuba.
WE WOULD RATHER FREE THE SOpolicymakers, including a conference in Moscow VIET UNION OF THE COMMITMENTS IT HAS WITH United States AND RESIST in January 1989 and a gathering in Havana exactly three years later in which Fidel Castro played FOR IMPORTANT WITH OUR OWN FORCES WHATEVER an active role.
WE HAVE NO ferences was James G Blight, Thomas J Watson RIGHT TO ENDANGER THE PEACE OF Institute of International Studies, Brown UniverINFORMATION, THE WORLD, BUT WE HAVE THE sity.
Khrushchev’s meeting with Robert Kennedy, representing that of his brother.
While Robert ship to just how personally affronted the from the Soviet leader that only defenKennedy at the very outset of the crisis Kennedy brothers were, and to their sive weapons were being shipped to had made some belligerent statements apparent determination to confront SoCuba.
REMAINING TAPES FROM terials from the Kennedy AdministraSchlesinger, Jr., citing in particular the CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS tion.
A sneak attack was not in While extracts of ExComm discussions neously announced the release of our traditions.
The apreal master of colorful expression that markable the meeting of minds that pearance of such a document could expressed the true essence of the issue. managed to take place on the evening cause irreparable harm to my political Yes, we are quite satisfied with Nixon’s of October 27.
As Kennedy was leaving the Emmemorandum of the meeting, printed Dobrynin’s cable lends contempobassy after a tough hour-and-a-half disbelow, offers additional evidence as to raneous corroboration to the assertion cussion, mostly consumed by haggling how sensitive the agreement on the in his 1995 memoirs that Robert over the United States demand that the Soviets Turkish Jupiters was considered.
Even Kennedy, even in 1962, had linked his take their IL-28 bombers out of Cuba, in this “top secret” memo to Secretary actions in the missile crisis to his own of State Rusk, Kennedy appears to have political future in keeping secret the he glimpsed a crowd of dancing couples penciled out a sentence noting that “per arrangement on the Jupiters.
Instead, in a blalenging incumbent President Lyndon B arrived in Washington, he said that he tant falsification of the historical record, Johnson (and then Vice-President would like to meet with the troupe.
Minthe revised memo would leave unmodiHubert Humphrey) for the Democratic gling with and greeting almost all the fied the assertion that RFK had affirmed nomination in 1968, but he, too, would members of the troupe, he delivered a that it was “completely impossible for fall victim to an assassin, killed that welcome speech in which he said that NATO to take such a step under the June on the night of his victory in the the President was preparing to attend present threatening position of the SoCalifornia primary.) their premier the following evening.
At viet Union” and “there could be no deal Several additional Dobrynin rethe end, he kissed Maya Plisetskaya of any kind” regarding the Jupiters. ports of conversations with Robert when he found out that he and she had Robert Kennedy’s abhorrence of Kennedy after the crisis appear in this been born in the same year, month, and the idea of leaving a written trace of the Bulletin, mostly dealing with disagreeday, and said they would celebrate their under-the-table “understanding” on the ments and details concerning the terms birthdays in a week.
But a few human and more normal mood in the White to Dobrynin a letter from Khrushchev touches also lighten the diplomatic disHouse after the tense days that shook to Kennedy which had explicitly afcourse, and hint at the developing rapWashington, even though this fact is firmed the private deal.
Mr Khrushchev and he A wily diplomatic trouble-shooter since had misled us.
I said those miscrisis and a day before the Udall affair sile bases had to go and they had to go had met with President Kennedy at the TOP SECRET right away.
Office of the Attorney General ment by at least tomorrow that those Before the meal was served (as Washington, D.C. bases would be removed.
This was not Mikoyan related in a cable printed in October 30, 1962 an ultimatum, I said, but just a statethis Bulletin), Robert Kennedy invited ment of fact.
He should understand that Mikoyan into a separate room for a teteMEMORANDUM FOR THE if they did not remove those bases then a-tete in which he underlined the imSECRETARY OF STATE FROM we would remove them.
His country portance above all (“even more imporTHE ATTORNEY GENERAL might take retaliatory actions but he tant than the fates of my children and should understand that before this was your grandchildren”) of restoring perAt the request of Secretary Rusk, I over, while there might be dead Amerisonal trust between his brother and telephoned Ambassador Dobrynin at cans there would also be dead Russians.
Mikoyan not only agreed approximately 7:15m. on Saturday, He then asked me what offer we and assured Robert Kennedy that October 27th.
I said a letter had just Khrushchev felt the same way, but said come to the Justice Department at a been transmitted to the Soviet Embassy that the Soviet government applauded quarter of eight. which stated in substance that the misthe president’s “self-possession” and We met in my office.
I told him sile bases should be dismantled and all willingness to compromise at “the most first that we understood that the work offensive weapons should be removed dangerous moment, when the world was continuing on the Soviet missile from Cuba.
In return, if Cuba and stood at the edge of thermonuclear war.” bases in Cuba.
Further, I explained to Castro and the Communists ended their Moscow, moreover, Mikoyan him that in the last two hours we had subversive activities in other Central added, had “noticed the positive role found that our planes flying over Cuba and Latin-American countries, we that you, the president’s brother, played had been fired upon and that one of our would agree to keep peace in the Carduring the confidential negotiations” U-2’s had been shot down and the pilot ibbean and not permit an invasion from between the United States and Soviet leaderships killed.
He then asked me about pressed an interest in visiting the USSR, I told him that this was an exKhrushchev’s other proposal dealing an idea which Mikoyan warmly entremely serious turn in events.
We with the removal of the missiles from dorsed, especially should relations bewould have to make certain decisions Turkey.
I replied that there could be no tween the two rivals improve after surwithin the next 12 or possibly 24 hours. quid pro quo — no deal of this kind viving the rough Cuban There was a very little time left.
Cubans were shooting at our planes, had to be considered by NATO and that Those relations did in fact improve then we were going to shoot back.
This it was up to NATO to make the decisomewhat in the succeeding months, could not help but bring on further insion.
I said it was completely imposleading to, among other events, John F cidents and that he had better undersible for NATO to take such a step unKennedy’s conciliatory American Unistand the full implications of this matder the present threatening position of versity speech in April 1963 and the ter. the Soviet Union.
If some time elapsed signing of U.S.-Soviet pacts on a limHe raised the point that the argu— and per your instructions, I menited nuclear test ban and a hot line bement the Cubans were making was that tioned four or five months — I said I tween Washington and Moscow.
The success does not there could be no deal of any kind and 4 Dobrynin’s cabled report (dated 24 October upset us either—though that is of course your that any steps toward easing tensions 1962) of the October 23 meeting with RFK can internal affair.
You managed to pin your politiin other parts of the world largely debe found in CWIHP Bulletin 5 , 71cal rival, Mr Nixon, to the mat.
I repeated to him that this matter published memorandum of the meeting.
Neither 12 See Dobrynin cable of 12 November 1962, could not wait and that he had better of those accounts note RFK’s agitated state, which printed in this Bulletin, and also Schlesinger, contact Mr Khrushchev and have a Dobrynin highlighted.
John F Kennedy Library, Bos5 See Dobrynin cable of 5 November 1962 in this For the ton, MA; provided to CWIHP by Prof.
All Warsaw Pact during the crisis, the weapons and about the danger of unauevidence suggests that the Soviet Union events of October 1962 did have imthorized actions, the crisis put these neither consulted nor even informed its portant effects on the alliance, particurisks into a whole new light.
By unEast European allies about the installalarly on the nuclear command-and-conderscoring how easily control could be tion of medium-range and tactical trol arrangements that were established lost, the crisis inevitably bolstered nuclear missiles in Cuba before the dein the mid-1960s.
This article will draw Moscow’s determination to ensure strict ployment of the former was revealed by on recent disclosures from the East Gercentralized command over all nuclear the United States government.
Nor did the Soman, Czechoslovak, Polish, and Hunoperations, including nuclear operations viet leadership consult its Warsaw Pact garian archives to show how the Cuban conducted by the Warsaw Pact. allies about the removal of the missiles. missile crisis influenced Warsaw Pact One of the most disconcerting lesAlthough the Pact declared a joint milinuclear operations.
Nevertheless, enough evidence that at the height of the crisis Fidel out solely at Moscow’s behest.
The has emerged from East-Central Europe Castro sent a top-secret cable to Mosjoint alert was formally cancelled on 21 to permit several tentative conclusions. cow urging the Soviet Union to launch November 1962, the same day that the The article will begin by briefly rea nuclear strike against the United States Soviet Union ended its own unilateral viewing the “lessons” that the Cuban if United States forces invaded Cuba.
It will the Soviet Union would be willing to ripheral was the alliance to the Soviet then delineate the command-and-congo to war—and risk its own destrucUnion’s handling of the crisis that it was trol arrangements that were set up in the tion—in defense of Cuba.
Nikita not until long after the matter had been mid-1960s for Warsaw Pact nuclear Khrushchev’s response to Castro’s plea resolved that the Soviet Prime Minisoperations, and examine the East Euindicates that the Soviet leader had no ter, Anastas Mikoyan, bothered to inropean states’ unsuccessful efforts to intention of ordering the use of nuclear form the East European governments alter those arrangements.
The article weapons, regardless of what happened about the Soviet Union’s motives for dewill conclude with some observations to Cuba. ploying and withdrawing the missiles. about the legacy of the Cuban missile For Khrushchev, this episode was The marginal significance of the crisis for Warsaw Pact nuclear operaespecially unnerving because he iniWarsaw Pact during the Cuban missile tions, a legacy that endured until the tially had given serious consideration crisis hardly comes as a great surprise.
Pact itself collapsed in 1990-91. to providing Castro with direct comIn 1962 the Pact was still little more mand over Soviet forces in Cuba, inthan a paper organization and had not “Lessons” from the Missile Crisis cluding the nuclear-capable Frog yet acquired a meaningful role in Somissiles and Il-28 aircraft. viet military strategy.
The “lessons” that Khrushchev decided not to give Castro alliance’s purview beyond the contiSoviet officials derived from the crisis any direct jurisdiction over Soviet tacnent.
Despite fears that the showdown were of course not the only factor (or tical nuclear forces; indeed, the draft over Cuba might spark a NATO-Wareven the most important factor) shaptreaty on military cooperation between saw Pact confrontation in Berlin, the ing the Warsaw Pact’s nuclear comthe Soviet Union and Cuba, which was situation in Germany remained calm mand structure, but they seem to have due to take effect once the presence of throughout the crisis.
Hence, the been of considerable influence, at least the Soviet missiles in Cuba was pubstandoff in the Caribbean was a matter implicitly.
The rules of engagement for a vivid reminder of the dangers that cable to Moscow in which he apparently Soviet troops in Cuba did not permit the might have resulted if the Soviet Union mentioned that Castro wanted him to downing of American planes except had delegated any responsibility for prepare for a nuclear strike and that, as those carrying out an attack.
Pliev then mistakenly thought that Castro had orin Cuba, Army-General Issa Pliev, who requested that his decision be approved dered Soviet troops to fire at the plane— was chosen for the post because of his and that he be given due authority to but everyone was certain that further long-standing and very close friendship order the preparation of tactical missiles incidents of this sort might cause the with both Khrushchev and the Soviet for launch if, as appeared imminent, crisis to spin out of control.
The risks Defense Minister, Marshal Rodion United States troops invaded the island.
At no time during the viet leaders immediately turned down especially great if the local commander crisis did Pliev have authority to order both of his requests and reemphasized had been given independent the use of either medium-range or tacthat no actions involving nuclear weapauthority to order the use of nuclear tical nuclear missiles, but it is now ons were to be undertaken without diweapons.
After all, Pliev and other ofknown that several weeks before the rect authorization from Moscow. ficers based in Cuba, whose lives were crisis—in the late summer of 1962— Still, the very fact that Pliev sought directly at risk during the crisis, were Malinovskii had considered the possito have the restrictions lifted, and his naturally inclined to overreact to uninbility of giving Pliev pre-delegated auseeming willingness to use tactical tended “provocations” from the opposthority to order the use of tactical misnuclear weapons if necessary, provided ing side.
To the extent that such oversiles against invading United States troops if a sobering indication of the risks enreactions could not be avoided in fuPliev’s lines of communication with tailed in giving discretion to local comture crises, it was essential that the conMoscow were severed and all other manders.
The risks would have been sequences be minimized and that furmeans of defense against an invasion especially acute in this instance because ther escalation be prevented.
A written orthere were no technical safeguards on ously, it would be vastly more difficult der to this effect was prepared on 8 Septhe nuclear weapons in Cuba to serve to regain any semblance of control if tember 1962, but in the end Malinovskii as a fallback in case Pliev (or someone local actors “accidentally” resorted to declined to sign it.
Thus, at the time else) attempted to circumvent the prothe use of nuclear weapons. of the crisis Pliev had no independent cedural safeguards.
This is not to say Hence, the accidents that occurred authority to order the use of nuclear that it would have been easy for Pliev during the Cuban missile crisis underweapons or even to order that nuclear to evade the procedural limits—to do scored the need for rigid safeguards, warheads, which were stored separately so he would have had to obtain coopboth procedural and technical, to prefrom the missiles, be released for poseration from troops all along the chain clude the use of Soviet nuclear weapsible employment.
The limitations on of command—but there was no technions except in the most dire emergency.
Pliev’s scope of action during the crisis cal barrier per se to unauthorized acThis lesson, like the others that were reinforced by two cables transmittions.
This litical control over Soviet nuclear crisis, as the procedural safeguards for applied above all to nuclear weapons forces. nuclear operations proved sufficient to deployed abroad, where the lines of forestall any untoward incidents.
For communication were more vulnerable Nuclear Operations and the most part, Khrushchev’s and to being severed or disrupted. the Warsaw Pact Malinovskii’s faith in Pliev was wellOne further lesson from the Cuban founded.
Whenever Warsaw Pact exerslovakia was concluded just after the ments by NATO, Khrushchev warned cises included combat techniques for Soviet Union had worked out a similar that the Pact would be “compelled by nuclear warfare (as they routinely did arrangement with Hungary.
In every respect, almost all other Hungarian officials. after, the Czechoslovak, East German, then, the East European governments Much the same was true of an agreeand Polish armed forces began receivwere denied any say in the use of the ment that the Soviet Union concluded ing nuclear-capable aircraft and surfacePact’s “joint” nuclear arsenal. with Poland in early 1967.33 Only a to-surface missiles from the Soviet The exclusivity of Soviet comfew top Polish officials were permitted Union.
The Bulgarian and Hungarmand was reinforced by secret agreeto find out about the document. ian armies also soon obtained nuclearments that the Soviet Union concluded The Soviet agreements with all capable aircraft and missiles from Mosin the early to mid-1960s with Czechofour countries covered nuclear warcow; and even the Romanian military slovakia, East Germany, Hungary, and heads slated for use on delivery vehicles was eventually supplied with nuclearPoland regarding the storage of nuclear belonging to Soviet troops stationed in capable Frog-7 and Scud-B missiles.
The case the delivery vehicles would have The wartime command-and-confirst such agreements were signed with been transferred to direct Soviet comtrol arrangements for the new East EuEast Germany and Czechoslovakia bemand.
Under the new agreements East ropean weapons were still in flux in fore the Cuban missile crisis.
The SoEuropean officials had no role in the use 1962, and a variety of options were unviet-East German agreements, signed at of the Pact’s “joint” nuclear arsenal, nor der consideration.
The East ropean military official later confirmed posal” if the West German government German authorities had no say at all in that “the procedures for the defense and gained a role in NATO’s nuclear operathe location or maintenance of these protection of these special-purpose stortions.
At the time, Soviet officials facilities, not to mention the use of the age centers for nuclear warheads were had reacted warily to this proposal, but munitions stored there. such that no one from our side had perhad not dismissed it out of hand.
Soviet agreements with Czechoslomission to enter, and even Soviet offiMoscow’s stance changed, however, in vakia were somewhat more complicials who were not directly responsible the aftermath of the Cuban missile cricated because no Soviet troops had been for guarding and operating the buildsis.
From then on, all wartime compresent on Czechoslovak territory since ings were not allowed in.”34 mand-and-control arrangements for althe end of 1945.
Two preliminary Thus, by the late 1960s the Soviet lied nuclear operations were made to fit agreements were signed in August 1961 and East European governments had a single pattern.
The East European and February 1962 entitling the Soviet forged a nuclear command-and-control countries’ weapons were still officially Union to dispatch nuclear warheads structure for the Warsaw Pact that gave described as components of the “Warimmediately to Czechoslovakia in the exclusive say to the Soviet Union.
Moreover, the thousands of eral Bohumir Lomsky, in December tactical nuclear weapons deployed by 1965.31 The treaty provided for the The effects of the Cuban missile Soviet forces on East European terripermanent stationing of Soviet nuclear crisis could also be felt, if only implictory were not subject to any sort of warheads at three sites in western itly, when the Soviet Union had to deal “dual-key” arrangement along the lines Czechoslovakia. with complaints from its allies about the that NATO established in the midThis third agreement with CzechoWarsaw Pact’s nuclear arrangements.
Their concerns came clear during the meeting that Soamong other things, an East European were prompted in part by changes in viet views on such matters would prerole in any decisions involving the poSoviet military doctrine in the midvail.
Sub1960s, which seemed to open the way simply called for both German states to sequently, at the July 1966 session of for a nuclear or conventional war conforswear nuclear weapons, proposed the the PCC in Bucharest, officials from fined to Europe.
Under Khrushchev, creation of a nuclear-free zone in cenRomania, Czechoslovakia, and HunSoviet military doctrine had long been tral Europe, and advocated a freeze on gary renewed their bid for “greater predicated on the assumption that any all nuclear stockpiles.
The implicarights of co-determination in planning war in Europe would rapidly escalate tion was that arrangements within the and implementing common coalition to an all-out nuclear exchange between Warsaw Pact were best left unchanged. matters,” including the the superpowers; but by the time That stance was reaffirmed over the use of nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev was ousted in October next few months in a series of conspicuAs on previous occasions, how1964, Soviet military theorists had alous Soviet declarations that “the Warever, the Soviet Union resisted whatready begun to imply that a European saw Pact is dependent on the Soviet straever pressure was exerted for the sharconflict need not escalate to the level tegic missile forces” and that “the seing of nuclear-release authority.
The same which included simulated nuclear ons, grew far more explicit and elabomessage was conveyed later in the year strikes under exclusive Soviet conrate.
Although this doctrinal shift by the joint “October Storm” military trol.
The same arrangement was premade sense from the Soviet perspective, exercises in East Germany, which feaserved in all subsequent Pact maneuit stirred unease among East European tured simulated nuclear strikes authovers involving simulated nuclear exleaders, who feared that their countries rized solely by the USSR.41 In the changes.
The codification of ex“joint” nuclear forces and operations. tive Committee , where the asclusive Soviet control over nuclear sembled leaders discussed NATO’s weapons deployed in the other Warsaw The Lessons of the Crisis and plans to create a Multi-Lateral Force Pact countries all but eliminated any Allied Nuclear Arrangements that would supposedly give West basis for the East European governGermany access to nuclear-armed misments to seek a role in the alliance’s The legacy of the Cuban missile siles.
Had it not been for the ture of these “corresponding steps” was tactical nuclear weapons.
At a closed dangers that were so clearly revealed never specified, but Romanian and meeting of Pact leaders in East Berlin by the events of October 1962, Soviet Czechoslovak officials at the meeting in February 1966, Romania again leaders might have been willing to conmaintained that the obvious solution pressed for greater East European parsider an arrangement for the Warsaw was for the Soviet Union to grant its ticipation in all aspects of allied miliPact similar to the “dual-key” system Warsaw Pact allies a direct say in the tary planning, and was again rethat NATO adopted.
A few months later, the “Anadyr” was first being planned in the East European soil.
The Romanians Czechoslovak Defense Minister, Armylate spring of 1962, Khrushchev had were especially insistent on having reGeneral Bohumir Lomsky, publicly flirted with the idea of giving Fidel sponsibility shared for all Warsaw Pact declared that the East European states Castro broad command over Soviet tacnuclear systems, including those deshould be given increased responsibiltical nuclear weapons in Cuba as well ployed with the various Groups of Soity for the full range of issues confrontas over all non-nuclear forces on the viet Forces.
Contion of a site in Western Europe, not based in Cuba, but the very fact that the cerns in Moscow about the physical least because the launch of nuclear issue was considered at all suggests that security of nuclear weapons were hardly weapons against West European targets if the Cuban missile crisis had not innegligible before October 1962—in part might well have provoked retaliatory tervened, the Soviet Union might have because of the possibility that requisite strikes by NATO against East European been receptive to some form of nuclear procedures might not be followed—but sites.
The problem would have been “sharing” with its East European allies. it was not until after the Cuban missile especially salient in the case of East Indeed, a “dual-key” arrangement for crisis that Soviet leaders fully appreciGerman officials who would have been the Warsaw Pact, which would not have ated the magnitude of this risk. asked to go along with nuclear strikes provided any independent authority to The Cuban missile crisis also against targets in West Germany.
Thus, the East European countries, could easheightened Soviet concerns about the even though Soviet officials could have ily have been justified as a response to particular dangers posed by crises.
To developed a hedge against the risks that NATO’s policy and as a useful means be sure, Soviet leaders were hardly emerged during the Cuban missile criof strengthening allied cohesion.
But complacent before October 1962 about sis, the safeguards needed for this purafter October 1962, when Soviet leadthe need to maintain tight political conpose would have been extremely burers evidently drew a number of lessons trol over nuclear operations; indeed, the densome, depriving the Pact of the abilabout the risks of even sharing, much stringent centralization of nuclear comity to respond in a timely manner.
From less delegating, nuclear authority, the mand was a consistent theme in Soviet the Soviet perspective, it made far more prospects of adopting a “dual-key” sysmilitary planning.
Even so, it was sense to circumvent the problem entem for the Warsaw Pact essentially not until after the Cuban missile crisis— tirely by eschewing any form of shared vanished. and especially in light of the unexpected authority.
Although Moscow’s willingness to interventions by Fidel Castro—that this It is ironic that the Cuban missile share control over the Warsaw Pact’s factor became a paramount reason to crisis, which barely involved the War“joint” nuclear arsenal would have been deny any share of nuclear-release ausaw Pact at all, would have had such an sharply constrained even before Octothorization to the East European govimportant long-term effect on the alliber 1962 by the lack of permissive-acernments.
It is also ironic that the actions of tion links and other use-denial ficials could not have ordered the use a third party, Fidel Castro, posed one mechanisms on Soviet nuclear weapof nuclear weapons on their own, they of the greatest dangers during an event ons, that factor alone would not have might have inadvertently (or deliberthat has traditionally been depicted as a been decisive if the Cuban missile criately) taken steps in a crisis that would bilateral U.S.-Soviet confrontation.
After all, when have caused NATO governments to beonly must the Cuban missile crisis be Soviet officials seriously contemplated lieve that a Warsaw Pact nuclear strike thought of as a “triangular” showdown; allotting partial nuclear authority to was forthcoming, regardless of what its repercussions can now be seen to Castro in 1962, that was long before actual Soviet intentions were.
That, in have been at least as great for Soviet Soviet tactical weapons were equipped turn, might have triggered a preemptive allies, notably Cuba and Eastern Euwith PALs.
Only by exrope, as for the Soviet Union itself. warheads from delivery vehicles, as had cluding the East European states alto1 This statement is based on a perusal of docubeen planned for the missiles based in gether from the nuclear-release process ments from the East German, Czechoslovak, and Cuba, was regarded at the time as a sufcould the Soviet Union avoid the uninPolish archives.
See,g., “Odvolanie opatreni v ficient barrier against tended escalation of a crisis. zavislosti s usnesenim VKO UV KSC, 25.10.62 unauthorized actions.
For the effects of European armies had been given conmight one day have been ordered to use the alert from 27 October through 23 November, trol over the Pact’s nuclear-capable dethe weapons.
If a future conflict had see the series of top-secret memoranda to the livery vehicles.
After the Cuban misbecome so dire that Soviet leaders had CPSU CC Presidium from Soviet Defense Minsile crisis, however, the option of relydecided to authorize the employment of ister Rodion Malinovskii and the Chief of the Soviet General Staff, Mikhail Zakharov, 5 Noing solely on the physical separation of tactical nuclear weapons, they would vember 1962, 17 November 1962, and 24 Nowarheads and delivery vehicles was have wanted their orders to be carried vember 1962, in Tsentr Khraneniya Sovremennoi deemed inadequate.
In the latter half out as fast as possible, before the situaDokumentatsii , Moscow, F 89, Opis’ of the 1960s, the Soviet Union began tion on the battlefield had changed.
The 1956 Revolution and mentary in Granma, see Appendix 2 of James G viet Command Authority, and the Cuban Missile Realpolitik (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, Blight, Bruce J Allyn, and David A Welch (with Crisis,” Cold War International History Bulletin, 1972), 137.
Mezhdunarodnaya zhizn’ , Nos.-12 effect without authorization from Moscow.
I am Malinovskii and Chief of the General Staff M ficer who was in charge of the “central nuclear grateful to Matthew Evangelista for providing me Zakharov, in TsAMO, “Dokumenty po base” (i.e., the storage site for all nuclear warwith a copy of this document. meropriyatiyu ‘Anadyr’,” F 16, Op.53.
Kuby i pravitel’stvom Soyuza Sovetskikh ing and operating warheads, had received our own 8 “Razvitie voennogo iskusstva v usloviyakh Sotsialisticheskikh Respublik o voennom special codes.
For an English translation of most of nuclear munitions of any type, whether for the 1990 by the Cuban, not Soviet, government.
The Glasnost Tapes, moved out of storage during the portion of Nikita Khrushchev’s memoirs that aptrans. and ed. by Jerrold L Schecter and crisis.
Nor could they have been moved without peared in English for the first time in 1990.
Plieve,” Mirovaya 18 The exact contents of Pliev’s telegram on the nuclear attack against the United States only if ekonomika i mezhdunarodnye otnosheniya (Mos26th are unknown, but the numbering of telegrams United States troops invaded Cuba.
Soon after this correcow), Nos.-9 , 197. that are available makes clear that he sent at least spondence was published in Spanish in the 23 Makarevskii served for many years under Pliev’s two that day, the second of which is the one in November 1990 issue of the Havana daily command.
See also Kramer, eral Staff, Major-General Karel Pezl, in Jan Bauer, F Sekretariat MNO, 1966, OS/GS, 4/2.
The took part in the shootdown are available in “Voina sovremennym predstavleniyam,” passim.
IV, Staaten des Warschauer Vertrages,” January 1965 ing and numbering of footnotes.
Malinovskii, Neues Deutschland , 30 January “Moguchii strazh bezopasnosti narodov,” 1959, 1.
Stenografische Niederschrift,” Feb1962, OS/GS, 26/2. ruary 1966 , in SAPMDB, ZPA, IV 31 “Dogovor mezhdu pravitel’stvami SSSR i 27/208/85.
Mise au 32 See the reports on “Hungary: USSR Nuclear Point du ministere des Affaires etrangeres a Weapons Formerly Stored in Country,” translated Bucarest,” L’Humanite , 19 May 1966, in United States Joint Publications Research Service, 3.
