The United States armed forces were at their highest state of readiness ever and Soviet field commanders in Cuba were prepared to use battlefield nuclear weapons to defend the island if it was invaded.
Luckily, thanks to the bravery of two men, President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev, war was averted.
In 1962, the Soviet Union was desperately behind the United States in the arms race.
Soviet missiles were only powerful enough to be launched against Europe but United States missiles were capable of striking the entire Soviet Union.
In May 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita ▲ John F Kennedy Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
A deployment in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arsenal and provide a real deterrent to a potential United States attack against the Soviet Union.
Meanwhile, Fidel Castro was looking for a way to defend his island nation from an attack by the United States Ever since the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, Castro felt a second attack was inevitable.
Consequently, he approved of Khrushchev’s plan to place missiles on the island.
In the summer of 1962 the Soviet Union worked quickly and secretly to build its missile installations in Cuba.
Early the next day, President John Kennedy was informed of the missile installations.
Kennedy immediately organized the EX-COMM, a group of his twelve most important advisors to handle the crisis.
After seven days of guarded and intense debate within the upper echelons of government, Kennedy concluded to impose a naval quarantine around Cuba.
He wished to prevent the arrival of more Soviet offensive weapons on the island.
On October ▲ Fidel Castro at the 22, Kennedy announced the discovery of the missile installations to United Nations the public and his decision to quarantine the island.
He also proclaimed that any nuclear missile launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack on the United States by the Soviet Union and demanded that the Soviets remove all of their offensive weapons from Cuba.
During the public phase of the Crisis, tensions began to build on both sides.
Kennedy eventually ordered low-level reconnaissance missions once every two hours.
On the 25th Kennedy pulled the quarantine line back and raised military readiness to DEFCON 2.
Then on the 26th EX-COMM heard from Khrushchev in an impassioned letter.
He proposed removing Soviet missiles and personnel if the United States would guarantee not to invade Cuba.
A U-2 was shot down over Cuba and EX-COMM received a second letter from Khrushchev demanding the removal of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy suggested ignoring the second letter and contacted Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to tell him of the United States agreement with the first.
Tensions finally began to ease on October 28 when Khrushchev announced that he would dismantle the installations and return the missiles to the Soviet Union, expressing his trust that the United States would not invade Cuba.
Soviet Insecurity During his presidential campaign, Kennedy had repeatedly spoken of a missile gap between the United States and Soviet Union.
Despite being briefed by the Pentagon that the United States had more missiles than the Soviets, Kennedy maintained his claim that the United States had less.
In the summer of 1961 Khrushchev applied pressure to Berlin and eventually built a wall surrounding West Berlin.
In response, the Kennedy Administration felt it necessary to reveal to Khrushchev that there was in fact no missile gap.
Khrushchev had always known the U.S. had more missiles but now he knew that the Americans knew.
Khrushchev also knew that Soviet missiles were only powerful enough to be launched against Europe but United States missiles were capable of striking the entire Soviet Union.
Cuba was only 90 miles off the coast of Florida but the 60 mile difference was “nothing for a missile,” Khrushchev said.
A Cuban Invasion “If I had been a Cuban leader at that time, I might well have concluded that there was a great risk of United States invasion.” -Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara The second of the two major causes was Cuba’s fear of invasion from the United States Since he had come to power in 1959, Cuban Premier Fidel Castro was aware of several United States attempts to oust him.
First, was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion by CIA-backed Cuban exiles in 1961.
The Armed Forces conducted a mock invasion of a Caribbean island to overthrow a fictitious dictator whose name, Ortsac, was Castro spelled backwards.
The mock invasion and invasion plan were devised to keep Castro nervous.
Finally, the CIA had also been running covert operations throughout Cuba trying to damage the Castro government.
Consequently, Castro was convinced the United States was serious about invading Cuba.
The Build-up Begins “Why shouldn’t the Soviet Union have the right to do the same as America?” -Nikita Khrushchev In April 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
A deployment in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arsenal and provide a real deterrent to a potential United States attack against the Soviet Union or Cuba.
Khrushchev promoted the KGB station chief in Cuba Alexander Alexeev to Ambassador to negotiate for Castro’s approval of the plan.
Castro did not openly reject the idea at first, but instead he gave it serious consideration.
Believing it better to risk a great crisis than wait impotently for an invasion, Castro accepted Khrushchev’s offer.
As the United States monitored the increased shipping activity to Cuba, rumors began to circulate in Washington.
On August 10, 1962 John McCone, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, sent the president a memorandum indicating his belief that the ▲ As this picture Soviets would place demonstrates there medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
On the 29th, a was clearly a close relationship between U-2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba revealed the presence of SA-2 Castro and SAM sites.
Congress and the public, Kennedy announced on September 4 the presence of Soviet defensive missiles in Cuba , but stated that their were no offensive weapons.
On the same day, Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin assured Attorney General Robert Kennedy that no offensive missiles would be placed in Cuba.
Under increasing pressure from Congressmen and intelligence officers, Kennedy ordered another U-2 flight over Cuba for October 9.
When he landed in Florida, a one-star general was there to receive the film.
Monday, October 15 “If there was ever a time I want to be right in my life, this is it.” -Arthur Lundahl, Director of the National Photographic Interpretation Center, upon analyzing the photographs of the missiles After analyzing the pictures from the Heyser flight, the National Photographic Interpretation Center found what they thought were more surface-to-air missile sites.
Closer inspection revealed, however, six much larger missiles — each 60 to 65 feet long.
This is appreantliy a rare photo since few “Mr President, there is now hard photographic evidence that the have been found.
Russians have offensive missiles in Cuba.” -McGeorge Bundy, National Security Advisor Still in his pajamas, President Kennedy was informed of the missiles in Cuba during his breakfast.
He did not react, but it was now clear that for months the Soviets had purposely been deceiving the American president.
Kennedy immediately took charge and scheduled two meetings for that morning.
He hand-picked a group of trusted government officials to advise him on the crisis.
The assembled group was later referred to as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or EX-COMM. (see link for a list of all the members) In that first meeting, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara outlined three possible courses of action for the United States to take against Cuba and the Soviet Union.
EX-COMM worked from the premise that the missile warheads were not yet in Cuba and not attatched to the missiles.
Therefore, the goal of any action they proposed was to stop the warheads from reaching Cuba or to prevent the missiles from becomming fully operational A majority of the discussion that first day revolved around option number three and how the Soviets would respond.
What EXCOMM didn’t know was that the Soviet’s did indeed have nuclear warheads on the island.
No matter what action the U.S. took, EX-COMM expected Khrushchev to retaliate.
Wednesday, October 17 In order to maintain secrecy, Kennedy followed his planned schedule.
As of yet, the Soviets didn’t know the American’s knew of the missiles in Cuba.
If the Soviets found out, they might hide the missiles or launch them if they were ready.
Consequently, Kennedy broke off no public engagements for the next four days.
During the speech he was in a good mood and he even joked, but as soon as Kennedy entered his car to return to Washington he became serious.
Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen met the President at the airport and filled him in on what he had missed during that day’s deliberations.
Throughout EX-COMM’s discussions, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and especially the Air Force strongly argued for an air strike.
Before the Air Force was done, they had planned a massive air attack that would have wiped Cuba off the planet’s surface.
After another U-2 flight on the night of the 17th, the military discovered intermediate range SS-5 nuclear missiles.
EX-COMM wasn’t sure if Gromyko knew of the missiles or if he knew that the Americans knew, consequently Kennedy decided not to confront the minister on the issue.
The meeting began with a polite exchange over minor world events but soon shifted to Cuba.
Gromyko read a statement to Kennedy saying that Soviet aid was “solely for the purpose of contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba and to the development of its peaceful democracy.
In response Kennedy re-read a statement he had made on September 4 saying the U.S. would not tolerate offensive weapons in Cuba.
Gromyko must have wondered why Kennedy was reading him the statement, but when he later reported to Khrushchev he said all was well with the Americans.
As the guests entered the State Department to attend the ball, EX-COMM was preparing to meet just one floor below.
During the discussion a majority opinion had been reached on recommending a blockade.
Those with an opposing view continued to dissent but the majority group wanted to head to the White House to inform the president.
Instead of attracting attention by arriving in a convoy of official black cars, Edwin Martin of the CIA walked the few blocks, and the rest, nine members in all, squeezed into Robert Kennedy’s limousine for the short drive.
At the White House, Kennedy liked the idea of the blockade because it provided the Soviets a way out of the crisis.
Friday, October 19 “I don’t think we’ve got much time on these missiles.” -John F Kennedy Before leaving for a campaign trip to the Midwest Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs, who still promoted the idea of air strikes.
Accordingly, Kennedy, who was already late, asked his brother to continue the EX-COMM meetings ▲ Attorney General to draw up full plans for both scenarios.
Again he chose not to cancel and close advisor this trip because he wanted to maintain secrecy.
Saturday, October 20 “The President may have to develop a cold tomorrow.” -Kenneth O’Donnell, Presidential Aide On Saturday, with Kennedy still gone on the campaign trip, EX-COMM met to discuss the two speeches being prepared.
They approved them with a few minor changes and then Robert Kennedy called the President to say that he had to come back to Washington.
The President was reluctant to do so but he and Robert felt there should be a final consensus.
Canceling his trip by saying that he had an “upper respiratory infection,” he returned to Washington.
Sunday, October 21 On the 21st, Kennedy met with his top advisors to further discuss the missiles in Cuba.
He asked General Walter Sweeney, the head of Strategic Air Command , if an air strike could destroy all the missiles.
The General replied that they could take out all the missiles they knew about.
Next, Kennedy asked the general how many casualties, civilian and military, would occur.
This suggestion, made by George Ball, Under Secretary of State, was an important one.
A quarantine, on the other hand, is merely an attempt to keep something unwanted out of a particular area.
In sum, the United States could have its blockade but the international community would not consider it an act of ▲ George Ball Under war.
Secretary of State Later in the day, the press contacted Kennedy wanting to know who came up with the idea of a blockade about the situation in Cuba.
The press knew that there were offensive which help prevent a weapons in Cuba and that Kennedy was preparing a plan to deal with military confrontation the threat.
Another U-2 flight that day revealed bombers and Migs being rapidly assembled and cruise missile sites being built on Cuba’s northern shore.
The State Department informed American allies around the world of Kennedy’s decision.
United States Senate leaders were called to Washington for a special briefing.
They came out of the briefing surprised and doubting the effectiveness of a quarantine — many wanted an air strike.
In Guantanamo Bay, three Marine battalions were brought in to reinforce the base and military dependents were evacuated.
Military alert was raised to DEFCON 3 and instructions were given to be ready to launch missiles within minutes of the Presidents speech.
At 7:00m., precisely as Kennedy was beginning his speech, jet fighters took off from bases in Florida and headed south towards Cuba.
For the next seventeen minutes, Americans and citizens around the world sat glued to their TV sets listening to the American President.
First, to halt this offensive build up, a strict quarantine of all military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
Second, I have directed the continued and increased close surveillance and it’s military build up.
Third, it shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response on the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev’s first response was to instruct the ships on their way to Cuba not to stop.
In response to Kennedy’s speech Castro mobilized all of Cuba’s military forces.
The Cuban’s, however, were not surprised by Kennedy, for the United States had constantly threatened them.
Ever since the Bay of Pigs, eighteen months earlier, the Cuban’s had been living under a constant fear of invasion.
Tuesday, October 23 On the 23rd Kennedy ordered six Crusader jets to fly a low level reconnaissance mission.
On the same day, the Organization of American States unanimously approved of the quarantine against Cuba.
These countries realized that they were also threatened by the missiles in Cuba.
With the backing of the Western Hemisphere, Kennedy signed the actual Proclamation of Interdiction in the early evening.
Late in the evening, the President sent Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to talk with Ambassador Dobrynin.
Robert Kennedy arrived at the embassy and proceeded to chastise the Soviet ambassador for having lied to the The Organization of United States about placing missiles in Cuba.
He responded, that as ▲ American States far as he new, their were no offensive weapons there.
Shortly afterward, Dobrynin wrote a message summarizing the meeting to be cabled to Khrushchev.
Because communications were still at an infant stage then, Dobrynin had to call a Western Union telegraph station in Washington, which sent a bike messenger to pick up the cable.
Dobrynin recalls urging the messenger to travel back to the station with the utmost speed.
Wednesday, October 24 Dobrynin a important secret go between in the crisis On the 24th EX-COMM convened at 10:00m. , the exact time the blockade began.
The order given to the American ships was to first communicate with the Soviet vessels; then if they did not stop, the American’s were to fire across their bow, and, finally, if they still did not stop, American ships were instructed to blow off the rudder in order to stop the ships’ forward progress.
Two of the major concerns during the EX-COMM meeting were the Soviet submarines accompanying the vessels and the possibility that Khrushchev had not had enough time to instruct the ship captains on what they should do.
At 10:25 EX-COMM received a message that the Soviet ships were turning back.
Also on Wednesday, military alert was raised to DEFCON 2, the highest level ever in United States history.
The notification, sent round the world from Strategic Air Command headquarters, was purposely left uncoded to let the Soviets know just how serious the Americans were.
We will then be forced on our part to take the measures we consider necessary and adequate to protect our rights.
Thursday, October 25 “National security must come first...we can’t negotiate with a gun at our head... if they won’t remove the missiles and restore status quo ante, we will have to do it ourselves.” -President John F Kennedy Tensions continued to build on Thursday with no resolution appearing any closer at hand.
He suggested the Soviets stop shipping offensive weapons to Cuba for two or three weeks and in exchange the Americans would suspend the quarantine for the same length of time.
On the 25th Kennedy politely turned down the offer because it allowed the Soviets to continue preparing the missiles that were already in Cuba.
Early in the morning, Khrushchev received another correspondence from Kennedy which restated the United State’s position.
When asked directly about the missiles, Soviet Ambassador Zorin refused to comment.
Consequently, Stevenson showed the reconnaissance photos of missile sites.
Their effect was stunning, the photographs were unmistakable evidence of the Soviet presence in Cuba.
Lippman suggested a “faceand shows the world the evidence of the saving” missile exchange.
The Soviets would remove their missiles military build-up in from Cuba and the Americans would remove their missiles from TurCuba key.
Days before, EX-COMM had already begun to consider this option and was currently exploring the political consequences.
Some government officials both in the United States and Soviet Union mistakenly interpreted Lippman’s article as a trial balloon floated by the Kennedy administration.
The Soviet tanker Bucharest approached the quarantine line and was let through because there was no reason to believe it carried contra-band cargo.
To close the day, the aircraft carrier USS Kennedy neared the Lebanese freighter Marcula, which President Kennedy had chosen to be the first ship boarded by quarantine forces.
The USS Kennedy radioed the Marcula that night to state it would be boarded the following morning.
Friday, October 26 In the early morning, United States quarantine forces boarded the Marcula.
EX-COMM meeting, Kennedy said that he believed the quarantine alone could not force the Soviet government to remove its offensive weapons from Cuba.
A CIA report from that morning stated that there was no halt in progress in the development of the missile sites and another reconnaissance flight revealed the Soviets were also attempting to camouflage the missiles.
He also agreed to enhance pressure by increasing the frequency of low-level flights over Cuba from twice per day to once every two hours.
At lunch time on the 26th, Aleksandr Fomin, who was known to be the KGB station chief in Washington, requested a meeting with ABC News correspondent John Scali.
At the Occidental Restaurant in Washington Fomin hinted that there might be a resolution.
Fomin proposed the dismantling of Soviet bases under United Nations supervision in exchange for a public pledge from the United States not to invade Cuba.
After lunch Scali went directly to the State Department to inform Roger Hilsman of the meeting.
Since Fomin was a high ranking officer, the United States assumed the proposal was an official one from Khrushchev.
Recent accounts from the Soviet side, however, suggest that Fomin’s proposal was not in fact authorized by Moscow.
The most important occurrence on the 26th was not Fomin’s message to Scali, but a letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy.
The letter was clearly an impassioned appeal, written by Khrushchev himself, to resolve the crisis.
Khrushchev proposed removing his missiles if Kennedy would publicly announce never to invade Cuba.
You and I should not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied a knot of war, because the harder you and I pull, the tighter the knot will become.
And a time may come when this knot is tied so tight that the person who tied it is no longer capable of untying it, and then the knot will have to be cut.
What that would mean I need not explain to you, because you yourself understand perfectly what dread forces our two countries possess.
I propose we, for our part, will declare that our ships bound for Cuba are not carrying any armaments.
You will declare that the United States will not invade Cuba with its troops and will not support any other forces which might intend to invade Cuba.
Then the necessity of the presence of our military specialists in Cuba will disappear.
Later that night, unknown to EX-COMM, Robert Kennedy again went to the Soviet Embassy to meet with Ambassador Dobrynin.
When Dobrynin claimed Soviet missiles in Cuba were justified because of American missiles in Turkey, Kennedy offered to introduce the Turkish missiles into a potential settlement.
Then, the Attorney General reportedly left the room to call his brother.
After the meeting, ▲ Anatoly Dobrynin Dobrynin again cabled the Kremlin.
Saturday, October 27 “I thought I might never live to see another Saturday night.” Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara Saturday was the worst day of the crisis.
First, a U-2 on a “routine air sampling mission” over western Alaska picked the wrong star to navigate by and flew off course into Soviet airspace.
When he realized his mistake, the pilot immediately radioed the for help.
The operator was able to give him directions to turn his plane onto the right course.
By that time, however, the Soviets had detected the U-2 and scrambled MiG fighters to intercept the spy plane.
The Americans also scrambled their F-102 fighters to provide cover for the U-2.
The F-102s, prepared for action, had been armed with nuclear tipped air-to-air missiles.
Fortunately, the U-2 left Soviet air space in time and two fighter groups never met.
The Soviets, he feared, could have interpreted the flight as a reconnaissance mission precluding a nuclear strike.
Next, around noon, news reached EX-COMM that a U-2 had ▲ Secretary of Debeen shot down over Cuba.
Major Rudolph Anderson’s spy plane was fense Robert hit by a surface-to-air missile and crashed in the island’s eastern jungle.
McNamara a key dove iin the crisis dispite EX-COMM interpreted the action as a planned escalation of the situbeing a military leader. ation by the Kremlin.
The order to launch the missile, however, did McNamara has publically stated that not come from Moscow.
Rather, it was a Soviet commander in Cuba he doesn’t not believe who gave the command.
Khrushchev now worried that he had lost in the use of nuclear weapons dispite the control of his forces.
US’s policy to use EX-COMM had previously decided that if an American reconthem in the event of a naissance plane was downed, the Air Force would retaliate by bombmajor war ing the offending site.
Now that it had happened, the Joint Chiefs, who had been pressing for permission to bomb Cuba, pressed even harder.
You’re going to lose airplanes and will be shooting up Cuba quit a bit.
General Taylor insisted that no “later than Monday morning, the 29th” the United States should strike Cuba.
The next event in that long day was a low-level reconnaissance mission flown by six F8U-1P Crusader jets.
Two of the jets aborted the mission early due to mechanical problems, but the remaining four continued on their course.
As the fighters passed over the San Cristóbal and Sagua la Grande missile sites, Cuban ground forces shot at the planes with anti-aircraft guns and small arms.
One plane was hit by a ▲ General Maxwell Taylor a strong Hawk 37mm shell but, fortunately, it returned safely.
Earlier in morning, throughout the crisis Castro lost his nerve and ordered his troops to fire at American airby avocated using craft.
With each new flight the American’s were gaining valuable ineither air strikes or an invasion to remove formation for an invasion Castro believed to be only 24 to 72 hours the missiles from away.
Cuba A Pretty Good Spot Fourth, at 11:03m. a second letter from Khrushchev arrived over a White House ticker.
Some members of EX-COMM speculated that hardliners had pressured Khrushchev to take a more aggressive position.
The letter was also publicly broadcast in order to reduce communication delays but the broadcast also raised the stakes.
You say that this disturbs you because it is ninety miles by sea from the coast of the United States of America.
Too much information on the crisis had already been leaked to the press.
Kennedy feared having someone go public with the Turkey proposal because it could potentially ruin his career.
If the United States buckled under pressure and removed its missiles from Turkey, a NATO ally, the whole alliance could falter.
A political enemy would have a field day holding Kennedy responsible for the Turkey proposal.
One can sense the President’s caution in suggesting the idea of a Turkeyfor-Cuba missile trade in this transcript of an EX-COMM meeting.
He’s got us in a pretty good spot here, because most people will regard this as not an unreasonable proposal, I’ll just tell you that.
We can’t very well invade Cuba with all it’s toll when we could have gotten the missiles out by making a deal on the same missiles in Turkey.
If that’s part of the record I don’t see how we’ll have a very good war.
Kennedy was frustrated even more by the fact that he had wanted to remove the old, unreliable Jupiter missiles months before the crisis.
The strategic value of the missiles in Cuba was immensely larger than the strategic value of the missiles in Turkey.
Now Khrushchev wanted to make a public display of having the Jupiters removed.
Fearing political pressure at home, he couldn’t give in on the question of Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
A long-shot, but it might work suggested Soviet specialist Llewellyn Thompson.
Consequently, the President had Robert ▲ Theodore Sorenson Kennedy and Theodore Sorenson draft a response.
The President informed them of the Attorney General’s meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin on the previous evening and asked for more suggestions on how to use this precious channel of communication.
The group agreed to have the Attorney General meet with Dobrynin again to orally reinforce the proposal.
Secretary Rusk also suggested that Robert Kennedy propose a secret deal on the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
At 7:45 that evening, Dobrynin came to the Justice Department to meet with the Attorney General.
Kennedy handed him a copy of the reply to Khrushchev’s letter and then informed him of the secret deal.
He gave assurances that the United States would quietly remove the Jupiters a few months after the crisis but warned they could not be part of a public deal.
Immediately after the meeting Dobrynin cabled Khrushchev to tell him of the proposal and that the Attorney General had imposed a deadline for a response.
Meanwhile, at the request of Secretary Rusk, John Scali met once again with Aleksandar Fomin.
Rusk wanted Scali to find out why Khrushchev had suddenly introduced the Jupiter missiles into the deal.
When Scali met Fomin in an empty ballroom at the Statler Hotel, he exploded.
You would agree to remove these weapon systems from Cuba under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision; and undertake, with suitable safe-guards, to halt the further introduction of such weapon systems into Cuba.
We, on our part, would agree—upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations, to ensure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments to remove promptly the quarantine measures now in effect and to give assurances against the invasion of Cuba.
In case Khrushchev did not accept the terms of the agreement, Kennedy and Rusk drew up a contingency plan for publicly announcing a Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade.
Rusk dictated a statement to Cordier that called for an open missile trade.
If he received the correct signal from Washington, Cordier was suppose to deliver the statement to Secretary General U Thant, who would in turn make it public.
McGeorge Bundy later likened the evening of the 27th to a tight chess match.
Sunday, October 28 Early in the morning, Khrushchev met with a circle of his advisers outside of Moscow.
During the night he had received statements from both Dobrynin and Fomin, so he was aware how serious the crisis had become.
A general entered and read a statement he had just received that Kennedy was going to make an address to the nation at 5:00m.
That address could be the announcement that an invasion was already underway.
Khrushchev was not prepared to start a war, therefore he and his advisors drafted a letter with the utmost urgency.
Upon completion, the letter was rushed at full speed to the broadcasting station.
In order to complete with greater speed the liquidation of the conflict... the Soviet Government... in addition to previously issued instructions on the cessation of further work at building sites for the weapons, has issued a new order on the dismantling of the weapons which you describe as “offensive,” and their crating.
Most were relieved, but others, especially the Joint Chiefs dubbed the announcement a ploy by Khrushchev to buy more time.
Ambassador Dobrynin arrived at the Justice Department to extend Khrushchev’s best wishes the Attorney General and the President.
In the afternoon Dean Rusk held a press conference and cautioned against gloating over the Soviet decision.
Khrushchev had not had time to inform his ally of the decision, so Castro learned about the agreement over the radio.
What do you mean, that we should have started a war over them?” -Premier Khrushchev to the Soviet Presidium Crisis tensions eased on Sunday, October 28, but the ordeal was not yet over.
The two superpowers still had to hammer out the terms of a formal agreement.
During the course of the final negotiations Castro, who felt betrayed by Khrushchev, tried to halt the removal and inspection of the missiles.
Eventually, with the help of the U.N., Castro backed down and the two sides reached an agreement.
A United Nations inspection team was assigned to monitor the removal of the missiles and the demolition of the missile bases in Cuba.
The missiles were sent back on the decks of the ships so that American reconnaissance planes could count the missiles and make sure that all had been removed.
One stumbling block of the agreement was the removal of ▲ The Soviets display IL-28 “Beagle” medium-range bombers.
Aware of the larger problem theremoved on deck. missiles at hand, EX-COMM had decided to let this minor issue slide during previous negotiations.
With that statement, the United States was able to successfully argue for the removal of the bombers.
Conclusion “Having come so close to the edge, we must make it our business not to pass this way again.” -National Security Advisor, McGeorge Bundy Looking back on the crisis, Robert McNamara claims the world was one step away from nuclear war.
What the military didn’t know then was that they had grossly underestimated Soviet and Cuban force strength.
Military intelligence calculated 10,000 Soviet troops on the island plus an additional 100,000 Cubans.
The Soviets had 43,000 combat-ready soldiers and Castro had mobilized 270,000 Cubans to fight.
Plans for the American invasion called for a first day air strike consisting of 1080 sorties and an amphibious landing of 180,000 troops.
Those troops would have been surprised by the strength of the resistance the found on the island.
Had Kennedy gone ahead with the invasion, casualties on both sides would have been much higher.
Furthermore, EX-COMM was also unaware of the tactical nuclear weapons stationed along Cuba’s shore.
Khrushchev had also given a standing order to his generals that if he couldn’t be reached in the event of an invasion, they had the authority to launch the battlefield nuclear weapons.
If Kennedy had invaded, the outnumbered Soviets would have used their nuclear weapons and then Kennedy would have had no choice but to retaliate with American nuclear devices.
It could take up to seven hours to transmit a message from one capitol to the other.
Khrushchev agrees to pull out his missiles, writes a letter, but it is delayed in transit.
In the time it takes for the letter to reach Washington, Kennedy orders the invasion because Khrushchev took too long to reply.
Once an invasion had started, it would be nearly impossible for the United States to pull out.
Neither side wanted to risk starting another nuclear war over poor communications.
Nine months after the crisis ended, Kennedy and Khrushchev signed an agreement to ban nuclear testing in the atmosphere.
This marked the beginning of what seemed to be a new willingness to cooperate and communicate.
However, on November 22nd, 1963 President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas.
Eleven months later Premier Khrushchev was removed from office by communist hard liners.
One can’t help but wonder what would have happened if these two men had stayed in power.
Perhaps the same two people who brought us so close to nuclear war, now changed by that experience, could have brought us far from it.
Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General and the Presidents brother, played a large role in the crisis.
His memoirs are important because it gave a high level first hand account of what was going on.
This letter is important to our project because it gave us direct access to what Khrushchev had said and it was the turning point in the crisis so it is essential to have.
This article gave us an idea of what Khrushchev was thinking and doing during the crisis.
This program contained recently released tapes of the meeting had with Senate leaders on October 22, 1962.
This program was aired after the fall of the Soviet Union and the opening of Cuba.
Therefore, it contained never before seen interviews and was also able to show what the Soviets and Cubans were doing during the crisis.
This video was very important because it contained live interviews with Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk, Theodore Sorenson, Pierre Salinger, Sergei Khrushchev, and Fidel Castro, among others.
This allowed us to get direct quotes from high level officials which would have been nearly impossible otherwise.
It contains everything mentioned about the NBC video but offered a slightly different perspective and showed different video segments.
We were also able to get live footage from the time of the crisis which we used in our site.
Scali, John, I Was the Secret Go-Between in the Cuban Crisis, Family Weekly, October 25, 1964.
He maintained close contacts with many leaders in Washington including some from the Kremlin.
This article gave us some further insight into the minute details of the compromise.
Thomas Y Crowell Publishers, 1979 Grolier's Multimedia Encyclopedia.95.
It also helped clarify some vague sections and motivations of the crisis.
Simon & Schuster, 1992 This book just like the others contained good information and further increased our knowledge of the subject matter.
