March 23, 2022 at 8:34m.Russia, according to plentiful reports, is warning the United States that the relationship between the two nations is “on the verge of a breach” — a chilling line from a superpower that recalls the harrowing days in October 1962 when the Cold War almost went nuclear.
Soviet Premier Krushchev responded to Kennedy’s disastrous failure in the Bay of Pigs invasion to tackle the Castro regime the year before with a secret agreement with Castro to build up a nuclear tactical arsenal in Cuba.
United States intelligence, through flyover surveillance, found evidence of the buildup of Soviet war infrastructure in Cuba, notably Soviet IL–28 bombers, according to the State Department.
On Oct., Herald readers learned “The Navy Moves on 25 Red Ships,” as our colleagues back then offered up localized coverage — “Evacuees, Baby Arrive in Boston” as families of service members, including Wellesley local “Mrs.
A new news ticker breathlessly briefed every development in the crisis gripping the nation, with “Russia alerted its military forces and those of the Warsaw pact nations, and denounced the United States action as a step toward thermonuclear war” only making the third bullet point.
Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro replied to President Kennedy’s naval blockade over Cuban radio and television, October 23, 1962.
On Oct., under the block headline of “Some Red Ships Alter Course; Blockade Test Still Awaited,” Herald readers experienced some whiplash.
United States President John F Kennedy, right, confers with his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy at the White House in Washington, D.C., on Oct., 1962 during the buildup of military tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union that became Cuban missile crisis later that month.
The meeting was part of a series of talks during their summit meetings in Vienna.
The exhibit opens Friday, Oct., 2012, to recount the showdown with the Soviet Union.
The Soviet ship presumably carries a cargo of missiles being withdrawn from Cuba.
Putin Faces Cancer Surgery; His Temporary Fill In Won’t ‘do Anything Rash’Country Singer Naomi Judd Died By Suicide: Report Tags: archiveBoston HeraldCubaFidel CastroJohn F KennedyThe Kennedys Flint McColgan Flint McColgan is the police and courts reporter for the Boston Herald.
He previously worked covering politics in Pennsylvania and breaking news and government in North Dakota.
Before journalism, he supported himself as an occasionally successful roving pool player in the midwest and southwest. flint.mccolgan@bostonherald.com Join the ConversationWe invite you to use our commenting platform to engage in insightful conversations about issues in our community.
We reserve the right at all times to remove any information or materials that are unlawful, threatening, abusive, libelous, defamatory, obscene, vulgar, pornographic, profane, indecent or otherwise objectionable to us, and to disclose any information necessary to satisfy the law, regulation, or government request.
