Contents of this publication are not copyrighted and items contained herein may be reprinted.
Citation of the DEPARTMENT OF STATE BULLETIN as the source will be appreciated.
The BULLETIN includes selected press releases on foreign policy, issued by the White House and the Department, and statements and addresses made by the President and by the Secretery of State and other officers of the Department, as well as special articles on various phases of international affairs and the functions of the Department.
Information is included concerning treaties and international agreements to which the United States is or may become a party and treaties of general international interest.
Publications of the Department, United Nations documents, and legislative material in the field of international relations are listed currently.
African nationalism is a force of great significance in world affairs today.
The number of independent African nations has grown from 10 to 2% during 1960 alone, and there are many territories still moving toward nationhood.
These numbers alone attest to the permanently significant role which Africa will play in world affairs from now on.
Dramatic developments on the continent of Africa startle us daily in the headlines.
With the bewildering rapidity of events in Africa it is difficult to maintain perspective.
It would be worth while, therefore, to begin our discussion with a short review of the characteristics of African nationalism before considering its current development and pertinent United States foreign policies.
I know I will have your understanding if, in order to encompass topics of this magnitude and complexity, I sometimes employ generalizations which though useful in this context might not stand up under all circumstances.
December 26, 1960 century nationalist movements, and of internal influences uniquely African.
The first of these external influences would of course be 19th century European colonialism, which on the positive side brought with it Christianity and the revolutionary ideals of the 18th century, those in which our own origins are rooted.
African nationalism today has embraced much of the best of our Revolution.
As important as any other factor underlying the nationalist movements of this century, and certainly characteristic of the African freedom drive, is the hope for an end to subsistence living.
This hope has been inspired by the technological revolution which promises mass improvement of living conditions everywhere.
Although the development of the scientific method and many of the basic discoveries which have led to this revolution had their origin in the Europe of the 17th and 18th centuries, it was the United States’ unique contributions to develop methods of production and distribution which have made possible the improvement of living conditions on an almost limitless scale.
These same techniques have unfortunately been employed to destructive ends, and World War IT left with dependent peoples a vivid picture of the ruin and waste of modern war.
From this war emerged a new world power division between the United States and the U.S.S.R. which has impressed the leaders of new nations.
Consequently new nations everywhere seek to avoid the disaster of anew war.
They feel that to maintain a position independent of either competing power is to reduce the likelihood of their involvement in any war growing out of the principal power division.
Finally, African nationalism is influenced, like other similar movements, by contemporary socialist thought.
Its application in Africa varies from central economic planning, which African leaders feel with some justice holds promise of more efficient use of limited human and natural resources, to the one-party system which exploits the communal structure of the tribal society in building a centralized administration which subordinates the life of the citizen to the larger interests of the state.
Africans share with other nationalists the drive for the most rapid development of their resources, but other nationalist movements have not been characterized by the pace of change which appears uniquely African.
In other areas of the world nationalist movements developed over a longer period of time.
Regional Cooperation in Africa African nations exist today apparently in spite of the atomized tribal societies which in many cases still make up their base.
They exist in spite of the inherited territorial boundaries which were drawn without special regard for ethnic and linguistic considerations.
Perhaps the African nationalist leaders’ predisposition toward regional international cooperation is traceable to their efforts to overcome the divisive effects of these numerous ethnic and linguistic units.
Certainly the arbitrary national borders which often divide tribal units between two nations cause confusion and differences which regional cooperation tends to overcome.
The holding of the All-African Peoples Conference in Accra in December 1958 and such meetings as those of the Pan-African Movement of East and Central Africa have demonstrated African belief in the regional approach to their struggle for independence.
There is as well the Ghana-Guinea Union, proclaimed in November 1958, to which it would appear President Nkrumah would af. filiate the newly established Republic of Mali, to judge by his recent remarks about joint sessions of the Ghana and Mali Parliaments.
A similar though less formal | administrative arrangement exists between Gabon, Congo , the Central African Republic, and Chad.
Yegional cooperation has great potential value for the development of Africa and should be encouraged where it is desired by all concerned and where it will in fact provide for more wed utilization of resources.
The Conference of Independent African States has given indications of a desire to grapple responsibly with the kind of| problems in the economic realm for which regional organizations are particularly useful. ouraal experience in the Organization of American States suggests that their value from the security poitt / of view is also great.
Finally, the development of regional institutions based on principles consistent with the United Nations Charter is i valuable in the resolution of regional disagree ments.
It is still possible to get eralize about the strong sense of responsibility | which African nationalist leaders have demotstrated in assuming the burdens of statehood.
The great majority have rejected extremes and estab, lished governments reasonably responsive to the will of the people.
Certainly they have matured rapidly in both political and economic realms.
African Nationalism Is a Significant Force Today Recently, and particularly during this current year, the dramatic movement of African territories toward independence has attracted worldwide attention.
Depending upon the point of view, the movement has been looked upon as either timely and desirable or premature and beset with hazards.
But by and large the birth of these new nations has been characterized by statesmanlike planning and negotiation between representatives of the metropolitan governments and the African leaders.
A great deal of compromise, flexibility, and good will has been demonstrated on both sides.
In the later stages of this process the principal issue was not the question of independence but rather the timing of this independence and the relationship that would exist between the new countries and their former administrators.
It must be said that this process has been singularly successful, with the tragic exception of the Congo, which, for various complex reasons, is still searching for a formula that will result in a stable and unified political and economic state.
The impact of new African nationalism has nowhere been more evident than at the current session of the United Nations General Assembly.
The older members of the United Nations have watched with keen interest not unmixed with apprehension as these countries have begun to exercise their influence.
Contrary to the expectations of some, these countries have not acted as a monolithic bloc either among themselves or with the Asian states.
They have shown a considerable legree of independence and have voted on issues by and large in accordance with their own estimate of their national interest.
Of course on certain issues it was a foregone conclusion that the Afro-Asian states would respond with grtat unanimity—for example, on the anticolonial item.
December 26, 1960 i i the struggle of winning independence from foreign domination to aline themselves against proposals supporting freedom for all states remaining in dependent status.
On more complicated subjects, such as the matter of who should represent the Government of the Congo in the United Nations, there was sharp difference of opinion which was reflected in the speeches and ultimately in the voting which led to the seating of the delegation headed by President Kasavubu.
The urgent economic development needs of these new countries have met with a worldwide response both within and without the framework of the United Nations.
The former metropoles are continuing to supply massive assistance even though they have relinquished control.
The United States, heavily burdened as it is with the cost of assistance programs throughout the world, has made special provision for doing its share to supplement such assistance.
The President has proposed to the United Nations a five-point program to bring technical, economic, and educational aid to Africa in increasing measure through the various facilities of the United Nations Organization.
It is to be hoped that the developed countries will rapidly give effect to their sincere desire to see the new African nationalism succeed both politically and economically.
It is to their interest that the citizens of these countries rapidly be enabled to shoulder the responsibilities and share the benefits of independence and contribute to the strength of the free world.
Indeed a great measure of good will has greeted what has been called in the American idiom the “Class of 1960” of independent African states.
Need for Mutual Confidence One of the clear implications of the new African nationalism is the need for developing attitudes of mutual confidence and trust between the former metropoles—and the Western powers in general— and the newly independent states.
The occasional suspicions and distrust of motives which have arisen at the United Nations and elsewhere are perhaps evidence that the strength and importance of African nationalism may not yet be fully recognized by the Africans themselves.
For it is certain that any attempts of Western governments or individuals to disregard the new status in Africa could be nipped in the bud by the exercise of the new sovereign authority of these states.
Such enterprise must, of course, conform to the laws and interests of the new governments, but, in view of their urgent need for capital investment and development, it would seem logical for them to create an economic climate hospitable to existing investment and inviting to new.
Charges of “neocolonialism” are, I believe, a concept stemming from residual fear of past subordination rather than from the present realities of African nationalism.
For example, Belgium could not reimpose itself on the Congo even if it desired to do so.
That chapter of history is past insofar as the Congo and other countries which have attained independence are concerned.
In relations between the new African states and the West no purpose will be served by the unfounded questioning of motives.
Attention should now be shifted to building confidence and mutual trust.
This is not to say that we do not sometimes fear the consequences of the actions and policies of other friendly governments.
For the most part, however, United States experience on this score has been rewarding, with but a few striking exceptions.
One example was the response from some elements in the new Congo Government to the dangerously opportunistic overtures of the Soviet Union to intervene unilaterally during one of the most critical stages of the situation in the Congo.
In this instance the United States had no other choice than to oppose such intervention and to question the judg. ment of those who, for whatever motives, wer prepared to accept it.
We felt and we are stil] convinced that nations large and small should accept and support the United Nations resolutions designed to stabilize the situation in the Congo.
By and large the new African states have contributed yeoman service in this crisis and have thereby demonstrated their preparedness to play an in. portant role on the international stage.
It is the right and responsibility of every coutry to concentrate on legitimate national goals in its dealings with other countries.
But they, no less than we, in pursuing such goals should avoid actions calculated to interfere in others’ internal affairs.
This particularly applies in the United Nations, which, as the forum of international opinion, presents a tempting arena in which to , advocate policies which may so affront other menbers that the unity and strength of the body asa whole may be weakened.
On the other hand, nations are sometimes too prone to label expressions of views with which they disagree as “interference in their internal affairs” when they may be no more than the performance of a country’s duty to speak out on issues in accordance with its convictions and conscience.
United States Policy The United States has always firmly supported | the independence of those who truly desire it and are prepared to live up to the international obl:| gations and responsibilities which it entails.
The United States policy was mos clearly defined in a statement made by the late| Secretary Dulles in 1953.
Since we are numbered among the nations most able to help alleviate the intolerable poverty, °For background, see ibid., Sept., 1960, 384.
Recognizing the urgency of the task and the defciencies in the resources of the less developed countries, we have worked to open every potential avenue of assistance.
Private investment and industry can make a major contribution to the progress of many areas.
In other instances contributions must be made through bilateral arrungements between individual governments.
In till other instances effective results may be obtained from regional programs.
Finally, it is essential that the entire world community, acting through the United Nations, contribute to the developmental process.
Needless to say, outside help would be of little avail if the recipient nations were not making the utmost effort in their own behalf.
We have, with the consistent approval of most Americans, persevered in this second world organization in a manner which does credit to this Nation which fathered, then abandoned, the Teague of Nations.
We see in the United Nations today an opportunity to develop, albeit slowly, precedents which will one day contribute to a body of law which all nations will accept.
Even over the long years inevitably required to attain such a goal, we will profit by the operation of the United Nations as a forum in which all peoples may find recognition, where the moderating effects , of a free exchange of views will suggest areas of compromise, and where the merciless glare of publicity will reveal the true character of the policies ) o0fnations.
Today the United Nations establishes a standard of national performance reminding each nation that its actions are expected to be consistent with the provisions of the charter.
Tomorrow it is to be hoped that members will uniformly | Tecognize the obligation placed on them to work / inharmony with United Nations decisions.
The first major adjustment in Department of State organi} Zation designed to take account of the African _ December 26, 1960 freedom movement was made in 1956, when a Deputy Assistant Secretary for Africa was appointed in the Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs.
You will recall that it was in 1956 that Tunisia, Morocco, and Sudan became independent, bringing to eight the number of independent African nations.
In 1958 Congress authorized the appointment of an Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, insuring consideration of United States—African relations equal to that given to other major geographic divisions of the world.
Furthermore we are at this moment preparing a supplementary budget request which contains a request for further substantial increase in staff to serve in Washington and in Africa.
Our representation on the African Continent has grown from 21 Foreign Service posts in 1950 to a total at the present time of 40, with one more embassy to be established this month in Ouagadougou, the capital of the Republic of Upper Volta, where a subordinate embassy officer is even now arranging the necessary minimum facilities.
During January 1961 we hope to open two more embassies in the Republic of Chad and the Central African Republic, in February embassies in the Republics of Dahomey and Niger, in April one in the Republic of Gabon, and one in Mauritania before the end of the current fiscal year.
We have consistently followed a policy of immediately recognizing newly independent A frican countries.
The sole exception is Guinea, where the sudden and unplanned rupture with France necessitated a deliberate examination of the status of the new Republic before acting.
Even these unusual circumstances delayed our recognition less than 1 month.
Furthermore, I believe I’m correct in saying that, again with the exception of Guinea, we have been and will probably continue to be the first country to be officially represented in each of the newly independent African states.
The United States has, of course, also supported the applications of all African nations for membership in the United Nations, On the African Continent itself our presence is not confined to formal diplomatic and consular representation.
We have also been active in establishing United States Information Service offices where desired by the new nations.
Thirty955 one information centers have already been established on the continent, and the establishment of 10 more before the end of June 1961 has been authorized.
After long and careful preparation preliminary construction was started during 1960 on a Voice of America radio relay station near Monrovia, Liberia.
This station is designed primarily to strengthen our signal in central and southern Africa and to reduce our dependence on the limited coverage provided by “direct feed” and “package programs” now offered on tape for rebroadcast by local African stations.
Adding to its existing monthly periodical publications, which are the Arabic Al-Hayat Fi America and the West African English-language American Outlook, USIA. this year brought out the first edition of Perspective Américaine, the Frenchlanguage version of American Outlook.
USTA’s African newsreel “Today,” which is distributed theatrically and nontheatrically in English, French, and Arabic, has been greatly expanded to report the activities of the many new nations.
Of special importance in the French-speaking nations of Africa is USIA’s regular English-language instruction program.
Such instruction is eagerly sought to hasten the development of communication with English-speaking neighbors.
Our Government’s cultural exchange program in Africa is growing significantly.
American universities and missionary and philanthropic organizations have, as you know, long been active in exchange programs in Africa.
They have enjoyed certain advantages in that their operations have not raised government-to-government. problems.
There is in addition a constant stream of leaders and specialists and cultural emissaries, including the dramatically successful appearances of “Satchmo” Armstrong and the tour of “Holiday on Ice,” whose travels to and from Africa are financed by our Government.
Contributions to Developing Economies Bearing in mind the varied avenues of contac with other nations which a pluralistic society like ours provides, I would like to stress the present and potential importance of the private sector of ow economy both as a source of capital and as a reser. voir of highly trained technical and managerial] personnel for the developing nations of the world, The Department of Commerce estimated total U.S, private foreign investments to be $29. billion at the end of 1959.
The sum already invested is significant enough, but the percentage suggests the potential increase.
Full development of this enormous potential in any country, of course, depends on the prospect for stability in the country and for the repatriation of profits.
Turning to the contribution of the public sector to African development, 14 individual country or territory programs have already been established and preliminary surveys in an additional 10 nations are being carried out or are completed.
Appropriations for economic and technical assistance to the African area under mutual security legis lation have risen from $63 million in fiscal year 1957 to some $200 million for fiscal year 1961 The figure for 1961 includes an initial $20-million special program for tropical Africa, which is de signed to help meet critical education needs.
Over the years since its establishment, the Development Loan Fund, operating with mutual security funds has lent. a total of $254 million in Africa to finane projects which make a substantial contribution to the economic development of an area.
As I observed earlier, African leaders are pat} tial to sources of assistance free of the coloniil| association.
They logically turn to the United Nations, in whose operation their nations have full and equal voice.
The United States recog nizes that the job of development is paramoutt and is seeking new emphasis on the multilatert| aid channel.
With this in mind, President Eiset:' hower made his five-point proposal for United Nations me) bilization of world resources.
Over ypment funds, finance tion to The United States contributes 40 percent of the Bank’s capital.
Our share is the same for the newly established International Finance Corporation, which has recently announced its first loan toa sugar firm in Tanganyika.
The United Nations Special Fund also receives 40 percent of its budget from the United States.
The Special Fund has already approved African projects valued at $6. million, and it is anticipated that an additional $6 million will be approved shortly.
The Expanded Program of Technical Assistance, toward which our contribution is also 40 percent, devoted $4 million to Africa in 1960 and plans to devote $20. million during the 2 years 1961 and 1962.
Our share of the annual budget of the United Nations Children’s Fund has exceeded 40 percent.
The UNICEF African budget for 1961 proposes an expenditure of $4 million, compared to $3. million for 1960.
The World Health Organization , the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization , the International Labor Organization , and the other specialized agencies all have programs in Africa, and our assistance to their work has always been substantial.
We also support the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa , which was established in 1958 to help concert economic development among the African nations and territories.
Our contributions to the United Nations military operations in the Congo, reduced to dollars and cents, amount to almost $30 million, about half of the announced total for operations during this calendar year.
FurtherMore, we have made two contributions of $5 million each to the United Nations commodity import program for the Congo and to the subsequently announced fund for the Congo which is ‘Intended to finance the reestablishment of essential services there and the start of economic recovery, _ Contrast With Soviet Bloc Activity In reflecting on the urgent need for broad support for this United Nations effort, it is impossible to avoid a note of bitterness over Soviet December 26, 1960 refusal to bear their share of the costs.
This refusal is unfortunately consistent with their usual objectives of promoting chaos and undermining the United Nations as an effective and independent world organization.
In order to place in perspective the United States’ efforts to insure African independence, let me briefly summarize Soviet bloc overt activity in Africa.
The entire Soviet bloc has permanent representation in but 10 out of the 27 independent countries of Africa.
Announced Soviet bloc credits (excluding those to the United Arab Republic) taken all together amount to the equivalent of $198 million, of which $4. million may have been drawn down.
Although relatively restricted, Soviet bloc relations with Africa are new, and there can be no doubt of the vigor with which they have pursued these initial contacts.
We know only too well, of course, that this represents only the beginning of Soviet bloc activity in Africa and that there is no ground for complacency on our part.
When we look at the pattern of bloc aid to Africa to date, it seems clear that this aid is directed at what the Soviets consider to be political targets of opportunity.
In the long run I am confident that our effort is correctly placed if it serves to strengthen and maintain the African spirit of independence and helps make meaningful and satisfying the blessings of liberty which A fricans have so recently acquired.
Conclusion Let me place in perspective, then, the events of this era of African revolution.
Like our own, like that of France, like the Industrial Revolution, the African revolution has aspects which shock and a pace which often confuses.
Old governmental and social structures are replaced by unfamiliar forms.
In each instance there is a re957 lease of energy producing long-term advantages for all affected.
It’s not difficult to point to the advantages of the revolutions which I have just named.
The American Revolution was the first of those to incorporate into a governmental structure the principles of individual liberty and equality.
The words of Lincoln at Gettysburg, “of the people, by the people, for the people,” have been adopted by a number of African nations.
Our system has been called the “Permanent Revolution” because, being truly representative, it has incorporated with a minimum of discomfort the best of succeeding revolutions.
Africa today is undergoing all of these revolutions at once, selecting from each adaptable features.
It would also be natural for the emergence of this vast continent to have a lasting impact on the rest of the world.
If I may hazard a guess, I wonder if this impact may include an end to racial distinctions.
I wonder, also, if this impact may include, after the passions of our era have passed, a fresh approach to international relations with a greater role for international organizations.
Letters of Credence Korea The newly appointed Ambassador of Korea, Lee Wook Chang, presented his credentials to President Eisenhower on December 5.
Malagasy Republic The newly appointed Ambassador of the Malagasy Republic, Louis Rakotomalala, presented his credentials to President Eisenhower on December 5.
Turkey The newly appointed Ambassador of Turkey, Bulend Usakligil, presented his credentials to President Eisenhower on December 7.
The Governments cf Guatemala and Nicaragua have now stated that the emergency which led to | their requests has passed.
For an exchange of messages between President Eisenhower and the Pres dent of Guatemala, see ibid., Dec., 1960, 924.
Or perhaps, for the first time, we are becoming aware of names that have long existed on the continent.
Places well established in the annals of old European colonial documents and in adventure stories now appear in the contemporary press.
A changing map challenges and enlivens our interest in areas that until recently were peripheral to the main streams of our political, economic, and cultural contacts.
As Africa demands more and more attention in the international community, the need for geographic vocabularies on Africa increases, Although years have elapsed since the phrase “Dark Continent” served as a popular synonym for Africa, only the recent sweeping transition of political entities from dependency status to statehood jolts us into full realization of the potential impact inherent in this segment of the Eastern Hemisphere.
Formerly, dotted or dashed lines on the map of Africa denoted no more than limits of European administrative control within colonial blocs; now many such lines must be shown as international boundaries no less legal than the 49th parallel or the Rio Grande on our own continent.
There are capital cities with such unlikely sound*The amalgamation of Egypt and Syria into the United * Arab Republic on Feb., 1958, reduced the United Nations membership by one.
For the purposes of this article the U.A.R. is considered as African inasmuch as Cairo, the capital, is within the continent.
Political repercussions in Africa resulting in the establishment of new sovereign states are bringing about a startling upsurge of African influence in the United Nations and its specialized agencies.
In 1945 the 51 charter members of the United Nations included only 4 African states.
Now, some 15 years later, 48 more states, 22 of which are in Africa, have been accepted as United Nations members.
At present the independent African states form slightly more than one-fourth of the total membership of the United Nations.
Mathematically, the rate of achieving independence has been increasing by leaps and bounds.
Within a period of 10 years, six more states attained full sovereignty.
By the end of 1959, 10 African countries—totaling 27. percent of the area of Africa—were appearing in official lists of coun@ Mr Pearcy is the Geographer of the Department of State.
This is the fourth in a series of articles which he is writing for the Bulletin on the nomenclature of geographic regions.
Now, at the end of 1960, another 16 African states, as well as the Malagasy Republic, have come into existence; and they make up no less than 69. percent, or more than two-thirds, of Africa’s total area.
The percentage of African population living in independent countries now amounts to 74.3, or nearly three-fourths of the total population.
Yet another political entity is scheduled for independence—Sierra Leone on April 27, 1961—and the people in much of the remaining area of Africa are becoming increasingly conscious of potential sovereign status.
New African States and Madagascar The following table identifies briefly the past decade’s roster of new and fully autonomous political entities, giving name, date of independence, and the former terms by which each was popularly known.
For reference purposes both the short form and the long form of the new names are given, except in the two instances where no short form exists.
The appearance of a new state in the world community obliges numerous United States Federal agencies to modify or revise certain routine practices.
The Post Office Department must consider addresses ; the Bureau cf Foreign and Domestic Commerce must review the organization of trade statistics; a Presidential proclamation must officially delve into necessary changes in immigration quotas; and our diplomatic register must include another ambassador.
Commercial and academic organizations also are affected by the details of changes associated with the establishment of sovereignty.
If the new country has even the slightest change in name or a territorial modification, the next National Geographic Society map covering the area must incorporate the new politicogeographic situation in a press run of well over 2 million copies.
Even after a name has beep legally established and recognized there tends to be a lag of as much as 2 years before one can reasonably expect to see widespread representation of the new state in new or revised atlases, on maps, and in various lists of countries that reflect offcial accuracy.
Africa, British West Africa, and French Equatorial Africa are dying hard as political place names, for example, though they were vacated as such in the autumn of 1958.
By checking names in the tabulated summary above one sees that the new states in Africa follow no consistent pattern with respect to their former names, though adding “Republic of” before an established term prevails in a number of instances, Most of the new names can be recognized because they duplicate or partially incorporate the old name.
For example, the new Somali Republic utilizes the adjective term for Somalia and Somaliland, referring to both the former Trust Territory of Somaliland and _ British Somaliland.
The term Cameroun in some form is constant in French Cameroons, State of Cameroun, and Republic of Cameroun and has been accepted as the current short-form name of the new state.
Ghana and Mali, however, represent a complete change from their names as dependencies—in each vase the new name being a throwback to traditional terminology.
A few centuries ago Ghana was an indefinitely delineated empire, lying inland from the present location of the state and domi| nating the upper and middle Niger Basin. likewise existed in previous centuries as a power Mall | ful monarchy, later becoming identified as French | Soudan and other French-controlled territory.
Resurrection of terms used in bygone times is ul derstandable, for any people’s history tends to appear glamorous in retrospect.
Probably the most obvious change in the new names is the disappearance of the adjective form ' of European names denoting dependent or colonial status.
Spanish Morocco, British Togoland, French Guinea, and Belgian Congo exemplify official place names of an era that has passed.
Yet the breakaway from European place-name ter minology is by no means complete if one takes into account the nonpolitical field.
Later on there may be changes as is now the case in Morocco, where city and street names by the dozen are being switched from a European language to Arabic.
Quite apart from the names of new African states is the problem of regional names.
It becomes increasingly necessary to think, talk, and write about broad regions that characterize certain segments of the continent.
Regional terminology is reasonably plentiful in literature on Africa, but regional concepts are not yet sharply defined.
Nor is there much uniformity with regard to the extent of territory implied by individual terms.
For example, West Africa does not necessarily mean the same area to one person as it may to another.
Nor do regional names necessarily remain static; they may lose their popular acceptance with the passage of time and the emergence of other terms.
Barbary Coast and Abyssinian Highlands, names once widely used, have lost their edge in current usage.
The Continent as a Whole Even at the outset it proves virtually impossible to determine by definition any precise delineation of the continent of Africa as a whole.
The exact line separating Africa from Asia is frequently assumed to be the armistice line between the United Arab Republic and Israel.
This line, if it represents the continental limits, does some queer zigzagging, however, because of the configuration of the elongated Gaza Strip, currently under United Arab Republic administration.
From a strictly physiographic point of view a line from the head of the Gulf of Suez to the closest point on the Mediterranean, only 75 miles distant, probably would best represent the Afro-Asian New States oF AFRICA AND MADAGASCAR 1950-60 Name Date of Former name or names independence Short form Long form Libya.
Nov., 1960 | Mauritania % | 1 Although Madagascar is frequently associated with the continent of Africa it is, strictly speaking, not a part of it.
In this article Madagascar is considered as part of the African complex in the general discussion, but the Malagasy Republic occupying the island of Madagascar and its dependencies should not be construed as an African state.
For use on maps showing both countries the Office of the Geographer recommends that the former be identified by the short form and the latter by the long form.
Roughly approximating this land bridge the Suez Canal is not uncommonly construed to be the line of separation.
In fact the Middle East stands out str ingly as a tricontinental region, which by a generally acceptable definition incorporates northeastern segment of Africa Eurasian territory.
At no point does the landmass of the African Continent merge with that of Europe.
The Strait of Gibraltar, only 8 miles wide off Point Marroqui, is the nearest approach of one continent to the other.
Nevertheless, a geographic cliche maintains that Africa really starts at the Pyrenees.
The barren expanses of the broad Spanish Meseta and the smoldering skies of Andalusia are frequently likened to the hot, dry environment of North Africa.
Furthermore, geologists link the structure of the curving Sierra Nevadas of southern Spain with the Atlas ranges of North Africa.
To them the fact that these mountains dip beneath the Mediterranean and thus form an apparently discontinuous chain is a minor detail.
The regional nature of the entire Mediterranean basin combines the African and European shores into a common areal unit.
Offshore islands comprise another part of the vexing problem of precisely defining the continent.
Zanzibar should surely be associated with the mainland, separated from it by only 22. miles of water.
Madagascar is not actually a part of Africa though by reason of its location the two are generally linked geographically.
Tristan da Cunha lies nearer to Africa than to any other continent, but relative position alone is hardly a rule to follow; Sardinia iscloser to Africa than to the European mainland, yet few would question its inherent European associations.
Frequently the islands around the periphery of Africa are related to the continent only if they belong to or form a part of its political entities.
Nonetheless, some islands forming integral parts of political areas on the African Continent are located farther offshore than other islands belonging directly to European states.
For example, Sio Tomé e Principe, an overseas province, of Portugal, lies farther from the mainland of Africa than do the Canary Islands, which make up 2 of the 50 provinces of Spain.
If one includes islands and island groups normally associated with the December 26, 1960 mainland by either sovereignty or proximity, a total of 55 political entities makes up the continent of Africa.
Dimensions in Africa Compared to better known parts of the world, Africa is much larger than we expect it to be.
By their inherent mathematical construction many of the more commonly used map projections exaggerate the area in the higher latitudes.
On most maps the great landmass of Africa, which lies across the Equator at relatively low latitudes, seems smaller than areas of equal size nearer the poles.
On a Mercator projection, for example, Greenland appears to be nearly as large as Africa, whereas it actually comprises only one twentythird the area of that continent.
Usually Africa is shown as a unit on a single map rather than in component parts at larger scales, and this necessitates more generalized cartographic detail.
The mere fact that Africa is far away and less well known to Americans than are Europe, Asia, and South America produces an illusion of restricted dimensions.
One seldom stops to consider, for example, that the continent of North America (including Central America and the Caribbean Islands) is only about four-fifths as large as Africa.
In the heart of Africa lies a boomerang-shaped strip of territory curving east and south from the Sahara Desert to the Congo Basin, within which all points are more than 1,000 miles from the nearest coast.
Thus the very extent of territory in Africa indicates in some measure the potential of future development of physical and human resources.
Even the Republic of Liberia, one of Africa’s “microstates” on the underside of the western bulge on the Gulf of Guinea, is actually larger than the State of Ohio.
Cardinal Directions Terms denoting the four cardinal directions and intermediate compass points find broad usage in identifying African regions.
From a purely theoretical point of view the resulting quadrants represent northwest, northeast, southeast, and southwest Africa.
Though seldom, if ever, used per se, this theoretical division has questionably served as a rough point of departur in the formation of a considerable proportion of the regional terms that have come into common use.
Some directional names have been affected by the history of settlement and the pattern of cul. tural development in an area.
It als came into widespread use in World War II dur ing the North African campaign.
South Africa also has its own traditional meaning, quite independent from that implying the southern half of the continent.
The southern part of Africa, geographically speaking, lies south of the Sahara Desert.
Southern Africa has the same literal meaning, but it is seldom used int definitive regional sense.
Department of State Bulletin m ap Me At pe me C01 ga Mc eas Po Af to Af lan cal cel she alo axl to unc Jom, if has unparture ‘tion of ommon cted by of cul», North rm part les only ; Libya, rited to rely be1 in the Nn. coast h term e trans.
Bulletin south of Morocco, including the political entities adjacent to the north coast of the Gulf of Guinea.
The major impact of European colonization along the west coast of Africa was in this area—from Dakar to Douala—culminating in the establishment of French West Africa and British West Africa.
The “west coast of Africa” would undoubtedly apply to the entire coast of the continent from Morocco to the Union of South Africa, but “West African coast” would be limited to the seaward periphery of West Africa.
East Africa also carries a highly specialized meaning, little related to the eastern part of the continent in a geographical sense.
Mozambique is the modern name for that part of eastern Africa immediately to the south, formerly Portuguese East Africa.
It is paradoxical that, of the four cardinal directions, east receives the least attention, whereas it actually should be most applicable for designating the area along and east of the major political and cultural axis of the African Continent, a line from Cairo to Capetown.
Lack of homogeneity or unity is undoubtedly instrumental in discouraging the use of “east” or “eastern” in other than a purely descriptive sense.
Northwest, northeast, southeast, and southwest Africa seldom find expression in regional terminology in the same manner as Northwest Europe, Southeast Asia, or the Pacific Northwest.
SouthWest Africa is a political entity but was so named by the Germans because of its location on the continent.
Al of these terms, however, may be and are used in context as descriptive locations for one segment or another of the continent.
For example, a map of Africa in four parts might well utilize these quadrant designa* South-West Africa is usually spelled with a hyphen to conform with British custom.
Other Sources of Regional Names Innumerable regions of Africa extend across international boundaries and lines of civil administration and draw their names from dominant features of the landscape or the life upon it.
Land forms, hydrographical features, and natural vegetation form the bases for a substantial proportion of such accepted names.
The generic word (range, highland, valley, basin, savanna, etc.) usually forms a part of the term, as in Zambesi Basin.
A few regional names have economic connotations, such as Ivory Coast, Rio de Oro, and Katanga Copper Belt.
Black Africa has become widely recognized as that part of the continent south of the Sahara occupied principally by Negroes.
Quite possibly the extensive use of the French term “Z’Afrique Noire” has encouraged the translation into English.
A few regions are known by terms difficult to relegate to any category.
One author even coined the term “Abyssomalia” to designate the area of Ethiopia , Eritrea, and Somaliland.
Recognized physical regions may range spatially from broad expanses of the continent to small areas throughout which a common type of landscape predominates.
Africa itself is largely made up of a plateau; so “African Plateau” may serve as a term that, in a vague way, is coextensive with the entire continent, excluding the narrow coastal plain.
Smaller plateaus, mountain ranges, littorals, and a great variety of other relief features that in the past have been sufficiently impressive to pique the imagination of man also have influenced African place names.
The Great Escarpment of South Africa and the Rift Valley that holds Lake Tanganyika and Lake Nyasa are among the most striking relief features giving their names to regions in Africa.
The Nile, Niger, Congo, and Zambesi comprise the big four of Africa, their waters flowing from deep within the continent and affecting names in much of the hinterland.
The Congo River, in particular, recently has influenced the naming of two newly independent states.
Natural vegetation has more than usual in965 People and Places in Africa The following list of adjective and noun forms applicable to the 55 major political entities in Africa hag been prepared by the Geographer of the Department of State from data obtained from various Government agencies, including the Board of Geographic Names, and from several Foreign Service posts.
Adjective Nigerian Northern Rhodesian Nyasaland Portuguese Guinean Réunion Rio Muni.
Noun (for an inhabitant) Nigerian Northern Rhodesian Nyasa or Nyasalander Portuguese Guinean Rio Munian (or Spanish Guinean) Manyarunda (also Murundi for inhabitants of Urundi) 2 Senegalese Seychellois Sierra Leonean Somali South-West African Rhodesian Spanish Saharan Sudanese Swazi Tanganyikan Togolese Tunisian Ugandan South African Egyptian (or Syrian) Zanzibari 1 Malagasy Republic is the official name for the island of Madagascar and its dependencies.
Strictly speaking, it is not a part of Africa but is frequently associated with it.
Equator the continent has large areas in the tropical and subtropical belts, all of which are characterized by distinctive types of vegetation. greatest of all deserts, the Sahara, is the prime illustration of this pattern.
The expression “equatorial A frica” commonly refers to the hot, humid part of the continent at low latitudes, comparable in some ways to the great expanse of tropical forests in the Amazon Valley in South America.
Sudan, according to early Arabic writers, means “Land of the Blacks” and applies somewhat vaguely to Africa south of the Sahara.
On many physical maps Sudan is still used in the regional sense to denote an elongated belt of savanna grasslands extending across Africa between about 10° and 15° north latitude.
Very few of the regions discussed above can be sharply defined in areal extent.
Only coastal margins and political areas of administration of sovereignty lend themselves to reasonable precision of delineation, though even here questions as to the breadth and configuration of the territorial sea as well as boundary problems on land may cloud the issue.
In Africa the physical and cultural regions cannot be delineated in a clear-cut manner because the lines delimiting them must pass through transitional zones of climate and relief.
For example, the Atlas ranges merge gradually into the northern reaches of the Sahara.
Nonetheless, Africa with its spacious surface and lack of a well-defined pattern of occupance must of necessity depend to a great extent upon physical aspects for ri | orientation.
Departmental Organization The Department is directing more and more attention to the surging events taking place on the continent of Africa.
To cope with increasing responsibilities much thought has been given to the organizational arrangement within the Department.
Except for Algeria (under the Bureau of European Affairs) and the Egyptian Region of the United Arab Republic (under the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs), all of the continent now falls under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of African Affairs, created in*1958.
Within the jurisdiction of this office are 15 independent states that have come into existence within the past year.
The Office of Northern African Affairs and the Office of Eastern and Southern African Affairs each have one new state.
A parallel can be drawn between the emergence of the 12 Latin American states that gained their independence in the 20-year period 1821-40 and the emergence of 6 African states in the 10-year period 1950-59, but nothing in history can be equated with the creation of the 16 new African independent states during the calendar year 1960.
It is becoming evident that to keep in step with the fast-moving pace of events in the field of international relations one cannot dismiss Africa as a backward area of grass huts and desert tents.
Indeed, the new states which have just appeared on the map of Africa are in the preliminary stages of developing their resources, attaining a political maturity, and establishing national traditions, as has many a sovereign state before them.
White House press release dated December 6 The President of the United States of America and the President-elect conferred today at the White House.
They first met alone in the President’s office and then were joined in the Cabinet Room by the Secretaries of State, Defense and Treasury.
Also attending this latter meeting were The Assistant to the President and Mr Clark Clifford, who have been acting as representatives of their two principals during the post-election period.
These national objectives will be vigorously pursued by the incoming Administration.
On the occasion of signing the } documents the two representatives expressed their view that these exchanges would assist. the Rumanian and American peoples to obtain a better knowledge of each other.
They also provide for cooperation in the fields of motion pictures, exhibits, books and publications, radio, and television.
These exchanges will take place in accordance with the attached Annex and pursuant to arrangements to be made between the governments and agreement on details between the educational authorities of each country.
It is understood, however, that these authorities intend to make every effort to place each person exchanged in the scholarly institution appropriate to the specialty or scientific subject selected by him and in accordance with the level of his scholarly attainments.
The United States will be willing to receive delegations of Rumanian specialists or technicians in agriculture, petroleum, plastics, medicine, construction, or other fields.
December 26, 1960 The programs and further details of these visits shall be arranged through diplomatic channels.
The specific subjects of interest to those American delegations which will be received in the Rumanian People’s Republic, as well as the programs, shall be determined through diplomatic channels.
In addition to individual artists or small units, the United States will encourage the acceptance by an American impresario of a large Rumanian folk dance group.
In the same manner, the Rumanian People’s Republic will encourage acceptance of individual artists and small units, as well asa large performing group.
During the two-year period that these arrangements are in effect, the Rumanian People’s Republic will make every effort to accept three medium-sized exhibits from the United States, describing various aspects of science, industry, culture and life in the United States, to be shown in Bucharest for three to four weeks and in other Rumanian cities as determined.
The possibility of mounting additional exhibits in each country will be discussed through diplomatic channels as appropriate opportunities may arise.
It is envisioned that these premieres will be held in Bucharest and Washington at approximately the same time.
Both parties agree that all of the films ex. changed, purchased or sold in accordance with this section will be released in dubbed or subtitled versions.
Arrangements for implementing this provision will be discussed through diplomatic channels.
It is further understood that the commitments provided for above shall be subject to the constitt tional requirements and applicable laws and regulations of the two countries.
The Government of the United States of Amer ica takes note of the approval by the Government of the Rumanian People’s Republic of these wderstandings as confirmed in your note of today* date.
Foy D Kon ter Assistant Secretary of State Attachment : Annex on Educational Exchanges.
The Honorable GrorcE MAcovEscu, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Rumanian People’s Republic.
ANNEX ON EDUCATIONAL EXCHANGES Both sides agree that exchanges of postgraduate students and young instructors for purpose of advanced study should be encouraged and supported by both sides.
The students will be selected by the sending side and may specialize in the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, engineering, a ‘riculture, medicine and other fields.
The American side will make every effort to place the Rumanian students from these or other fields in the scholarly institutions appropriate to their specialties or scientific subjects and in accordance with the level of their scholarly attainments.
The Rumanian side will make every effort to place the American students in scholarly institutions appropriate to their specialties or scientific subjects on a similar basis.
Each side agrees that access will be provided for each student to all scholarly and scientific materials necessary in his field of study on the basis of a study plan mutually agreed with his faculty adviser.
In case of necessity, this plan can, where appropriate and possible, include work in research institutions which are outside the system of higher education establishments. ce.
Each side agrees that living quarters will be made available for the spouse of any married student who may desire to be with him during the school year; and to permit the spouses of any other married students at least one 80-day visit during the school year or at its termination.
The costs of travel for field trips arranged on the initiative of the student will be borne by the sending side or by the student himself.
The cost of travel from the student’s home to the receiving country and return to his home at the end of the authorized period of stay in the receiving country will be borne by the sending side.
The receiving side reserves the right not to accept any student for whom it does not believe a suitable program of study or research in the receiving country can be arranged.
The receiving side also reserves the right of final decision as to the institution or institutions where the student’s study or research will be carried out.
Notification of final acceptance and placement of the student must be given at least two months before the beginning of the academic year, if possible.
I have the honor to refer to the recent discussions between representatives of the Government of the Rumanian People’s Republic and the Government of the United States of America regarding arrangements for visits and exchanges in cultural, educational, scientific and other fields which are to take place during the calendar years 1961 and 1962.
It is further understood that the commitments provided for above shall be subject to the constitutional requirements and applicable laws and regulations of the two countries.
The Government of the Rumanian People’s Republic takes note of the approval by the Government of the United States of America of these understandings as confirmed in your note of today’s date.
The Honorable CHRISTIAN A HERTER, Secretary of State of the United States of America, Washington.
The Honorable James W Riddleberger, Director, International Cooperation Administration Supsect: Directive by the President Concerning Steps to be Taken with respect to the United States Balance of Payments 1.
The countries referred to in paragraph 1 are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Hong Kong.
The above policies shall be applied to aid transactions initiated subsequent to the date of this instruction.
The charger feeder found tribut man ¢ ects re Italy on Di Presg re] Foll ments The ” recent that, e commo quota measur ual tar 1960 from t} Decem| irector tration modity funds his inly f ICA h prosential at Mutual S, proof the ig cash nimize > counOF esS f ICA > such ominal would nistrauir the ‘ogra ; to the nds to ident’s 1, Inso. other ‘aph 1 , Denjuxem|, Nord, the to aid late of jant to } place costs, linator sixty order ension do not ulletin finance direct procurement of United States goods and services and a ceiling established for such operations in Fiscal Year 1962.
The United States has agreed to supply Cyprus with 40,000 tons of wheat and 10,000 tons of barley to relieve a grain shortage caused by droughts in 1959 and 1960.
The grain, a grant from the United States International Cooperation Administration, will be provided wder provisions of title IT of Public Law 480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act.
Arrangements are now being made to ship the grain to Cyprus in the earliest. possible time.
The United States barley will be distributed -free of charge by the Cypriot Government to livestock feeders to assist them in maintaining their foundation breeding stock.
The wheat will be distributed to needy persons as direct relief for human consumption as well as for work relief projects related to economic development.
In the agricultural field, only a few new items such as rice, fresh apples and pears, extenders for animal feed, and pectin were liberalized.
In addition to these items, imports of corn and barley will be permitted freely from the United States from January i to June 30 for corn and from November 1 to April 30 for barley.
Licenses will be required for statistical purposes only during this period.
Moreover, a number of important agricultural commodities, including such products as poultry meat, grain sorghums, animal and vegetable oils and fats, canned and frozen fruit and fruit juices, rye and honey, are still subject to discriminatory restrictions.
A complete list of the newly liberalized items will be published in Foreign Commerce Weekly.
The decision now taken does not affect military assistance or other forms of economic collaboration between Greece and the United States.
Moreover the basic bilateral assistance agreement will continue in effect, and short-term specialized technical help may still be provided to meet special needs.
During recent years technical assistance activities have been completed and discontinued in such fields as public health, transportation, electric power, agricultural extension, and land reclamation.
In recent years it has been gradually reduced to its present level of $500,000 annually, which represents a relatively small part of overall United States assistance.
It is also to be noted that Greece has continuing access to other foreign and international sources of technical assistance, including the United Nations technical assistance program and the United Nations Special Fund, to both of which the United States is a major contributor.
These countries are Albania, Communist-controlled China, north Korea, and north Viet-Nam.
Departure for these areas may be authorized in individual cases by the Secretary of State after consultation with the Attorney General.
In addition the new regulations require permanent resident aliens who seek to depart from the United States for travel to or through Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Rumania, the Soviet Zone of Germany, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or Yugoslavia to obtain from the Immigration and Naturalization Service a reentry permit prior to departure from the United States.
These restrictions do not apply to permanent resident aliens now outside the ; United States in possession of a form I-151, alien registration receipt card.
Tact Section 46. is amended by the addition of the follow: pend ing paragraphs and : § 46.
Aliens whose departure is deemed prejudicial t the interests of the United States.
The provisions of section 4 of the Administrative Procedure Act relative to notice of proposed rule making are inapplicable to this order because the regulations contained therein involve foreign affairs functions of the United States.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND CONFERENCES United States Increases United Nations Contribution To Help Finance Congo Force Statement by George D Aiken United States Representative to the General Assembly * The item before us is clearly the most important one that this committee has yet discussed.
Perhaps the most important of these is the fact that the United Nations is now, for the first time, really facing up to its responsibilities toward the newly independent countries of Africa.
It was a recognition of the fact that the welfare, the security, and the independence of the African peoples is a major responsibility of this Organization.
It was a recognition of the fact that a threat to the peace in Africa is a threat to the peace everywhere.
The decision of the Security Council on July 14, 1960, was a dedication by this Organization of the resources of the entire membership to the task of restoring to the Congo the peace, law, and order which would enable the people of the Congo to govern themselves.
Many governments responded magnificently to the call for troops to man the force.
Other countries, far from Africa, also sent their young men to assist the people of the Congo.
Some of the men of the force have already given their lives to assure the success of this historic effort.
It is, in the words of one of our greatest Presidents, Abraham Lincoln, to assure that these honored dead shall not have died in vain.
Wecan assure this only by assuring that the United Nations Force is backed by all members of this Organization and is enabled to complete its task.
It is to finance the expenses of the force already incurred and which are to be incurred up to the end of this year.
Surely there is no alternative to assuming the burden of these expenses even though they be great.
For those governments—and mine is one—which have not furnished troops for the United Nations Force, it is important to remember that the troopcontributing countries have not only furnished manpower but have also assumed extra and extraordinary expenses in doing so.
We must not only assure that the expenses of this Organization for assembling and maintaining the force are met, but we must also assure that the troop-contributing countries are reimbursed for their extra and extraordinary expenses.
The United States is aware that the costs of this operation have been high and will be a burden to many countries.
United States delegation press release 3594 We do not believe that the withdrawal of the United Nations forces now stationed in the Congo is the answer to the Organization’s financial problem.
This problem should be solved by the willingness of all members of the United Nations, including the U.S.S.R., to share this burden in the interests of international peace.
Senator Aiken, in his address to the Assembly’s Budgetary Committee yesterday, made clear the United States proposals to help alleviate the United Nations extraordinary financial problems resulting from the However, the continuing expenses in the Congo. representative of the U.S.S.R. used the same forum to reiterate bis country’s refusal to pay its share of the Congo expenses.
This is consistent with the Soviet policy of seeking to destroy the United Nations and to do everything it can to undermine the United Nations effort in the Congo.
We continue to believe that the efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations are the best means of restoring law and order in the Congo.
We hope that the U.S.S.R. will see fit to recognize that the United Nations Congo operation is a collective responsibility of all members of the Organization and that we must all contribute in proportion to our ability to pay. den the United States is prepared to make a substantial voluntary contribution toward the expenses for 1960 over and above its normal assessed share of the expenses.
We offer this voluntary contribution on the assumption that these expenses for 1960 are incorperated in the regular budget of the United Nations for 1960.
There must be assurance that no one will be tempted to argue in the future—as some have argued without foundation in the past—that there is no legal obligation to pay assessments for expenses which are not incorporated in a section of the regular budget.
First, the United States waives its costs for the initial airlift to the Congo of contin976 gents of the United Nations Force.
This will reduce the budget estimates recommended by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to a figure under $50,000,000 and will benefit all members.
The second part of the United States voluntary contribution is a pledge of a cash contribution of the order of $3,500,000 to $4,000,000.
This will be determined in part by whether other governments are prepared to announce the waiver of claims against the United Nations which are included in the budget estimates.
This cash contribution will be made on the understanding that it will be used to provide a 50 percent reduction in the contributions of those governments having a limited capacity to pay.
We trust that a satisfactory formula can be de. vised to carry out this purpose.
Mr Chairman, the United States is offering these voluntary contributions for several reasons.
First, we believe that the United Nations operation in the Congo is the collective responsibility of all members of this Organization and that we must all contribute—and make our contributions commensurate with our ability to pay. this contribution as a tribute to the governments which have given troops to the United Nations Force and to the troops themselves who represent the United Nations—and all of us—in the Congo today.
And, finally, we offer it as a tribute to those men who have given—again in the words of Abraham Lincoln—“the last full measure of devotion” in the service of the United Nations.
Mauritania Barred From United Nations Membership by Soviet Veto Following are two statements made in the curity Council on December 4 by James W Bares.
In doing so, we salute a milestone in the history of yet another African nation and help to pave the way for the admission of the 100th member of the United Nations.
At the same time we salute France, our oldest friend and ally, for her great achievements in so much of Africa.
The United States is confident that the people of Mauritania, as they take their place in the family of nations, will remain dedicated to the principles expressed in the charter and that their leaders will devote their energies untiringly to the cause of peace.
The United States extends its friendliest greetings to this newest African country and welcomes the opportunity to vote in favor of the resolution before us.
SECOND STATEMENT United States delegation press release 3600 dated December 4 The United States deeply regrets that the Soviet Union has seen fit this morning once more to cast its veto—the 91st veto that it has used to block and frustrate the will of the majority.
We cannot help wondering what the occasion will be for the 92d, or the 93d, or the 94th Soviet veto, indeed, for the 194th Soviet veto, for that matter.
We regret this 91st veto as much as we regret the prospects for the future that it seems to reveal, We regret this veto this morning because it represents a sad Jandmark in the long record of Soviet contempt for the opinions of free people.
We regret it because of the bitter disappointment we know this action brings to the people of Mauritania and to their leaders, who have come here expecting better things.
This action of the Soviet Union displays the cynicism of a country which in the General Assembly calls for the immediate end to one kind of colonial rule but which comes here in the middle nici "" United Nations doe.
December 26, 1960 of the night to stab in the back the newest of the independent countries.
The representative of the Soviet Union has taken this action, as he has revealed in his own statement, in pursuit of a policy of blackmail.
In doing so, he has again acted in gross violation of the charter of this Organization.
France, U.K., United States Refute Soviet Charges Regarding Germany The Representatives to the United Nations of France, the United Kingdom, and the United States on November 25 addressed identic letters to the Secretary-General refuting charges made by the Soviet Union regarding Germany.
A/4595 NovemMBer 25, 1960 Under cover of his letter of 11 October 1960, the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations had distributed as a United Nations document a statement containing a number of allegations about the Federal Republic of Germany and its allies, including France, the United Kingdom and the United States.
This document does nothing more than repeat those charges, frequently refuted, which have been disseminated in the press of the USSR and of certain countries of Eastern Europe.
It tends to suggest that there exists a Government other than that of the Federal Republic of Germany entitled to speak as the representative of the German people in international affairs.
To the extent that the Soviet assertions might still find credence, it seems useful to recall briefly the facts of the situation.
Germany is divided because the USSR, ever since the defeat of Hitler, has done everything possible to establish a Communist regime in the Eastern Zone.
The political parties have had to group themselves into a bloc directed and controlled by the Communist party.
At no time have the inhabitants of the Eastern Zone been able freely to express their opinion about the régime which was imposed on them.
Under these circumstances such elections as have been held have been * United Nations doc.
They have been designed to confirm a situation established and maintained by military, economic and political pressure.
France, the United Kingdom and the United States have frequently proposed the re-establishment of normal conditions in all Germany by the only possible means, the manifestation of the will of the people.
If the danger which threatens the peace were that which the Soviet Government is denouncing, it would have been easy for the latter to prevent or remove this danger by accepting discussion on the basis of the proposals which have been presented to it and which permit, in a few stages, the signing of a peace treaty with a freely elected German Government.
The fact that the Government of the USSR refuses to envisage any negotiation on such a basis is more revealing than all the protestations or accusations contained in the statement of 10 October.
The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom has in this respect said all that was necessary in his speech in the general debate on 29 September.
It undertook Co not to use force in its policy either with respect An to the reunification of the country or to its borders, It undertook not to produce on its territory atomic, } we biological and chemical weapons, as well as a . number of other weapons.
These undertakings The are controlled by the armaments control agency of An the Western European Union.
P The Government of the Federal Republic of | 4” Germany participates, with many other nations, in } pe a common defence organization whose spirit and Foy structure make it impossible for any of its mempe bers to commit an act of aggression.
The present situation of a divided Germany isa , ™ era matter of concern and regret.
Lacking popular + support and legitimacy, the authorities imposed on | 1G East Germany seek to be acknowledged as the | Government of a so-called State.
By such a | orga course, they will, however, succeed only in pro| Deve longing or in heightening the crisis which Europe Tl has known since the end of the war.
Lyman L Lemnitzer, USA, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff John B Macauley, Deputy Director, Defense Research and Engineering, Department of Defense Frederick E Nolting, Jr., Deputy United States Representative on the North Atlantic Council, Paris Gen.
Alternates to Mr Dillon are Ambassador W Randolph Burgess, United States Permanent Representative on the North Atlantic Council, and T Graydon Upton, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.
The major purpose of the meeting is to sign a convention reconstituting the 18-nation Organization for European Economic Cooperation —which played the major organizational role in the restoration of Europe after World War Il—into the OECD, a group with broadened obJjectives and with the United States and Canada as full members.
The convention represents the culmination of hegotiations which began on January 14, 1960, when representatives of the OEEC countries, plus Canada and the United States, met in Paris to sean ‘For background, see BULLETIN of Feb., 1960, 139.
The decision to establish an economic organization linking the countries of Western Europe and North America stems from a United States initiative.
This initiative grew out of the realization that a profound change had taken place in the international economic situation.
The new organization, designed to deal with the emerging economic challenges by providing a forum for consultation and cooperation among the 20 member governments, will be geared to promoting worldwide economic growth and increasing the flow of assistance to the newly developing countries of the free world.
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United Kingdom.
A Selected Bibliography ' General Assembly Executive Committee of the High Commissioner’s Programme.
Dissemination of Information on the United Nations in Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Letter Dated 12 October 1960 From the Representative of the United States to the United Nations Addressed to the Secretary-General Concerning Cuba.
Report of the Committee of Experts Appointed Under General Assembly Resolution 1446 and Provisional Recommendations Thereon by the Secretary-General.
Addressed to the President of the General Assembly Concerning West Germany.
Other materials may be consulted at certain designated libraries in the United States.
Complaint by the Revolutionary Government of Cuba Regarding the Various Plans of Aggression and Acts of Intervention Being Executed by the Government of the United States Against the Republic of Cuba, Constituting a Manifest Violation of its Territorial Integrity, Sovereignty and Independence, and a Clear Threat to International Peace and Security.
Letter dated October 18, 1960, from the Minister for External Relations of Cuba addressed to the President of the General Assembly.
Security Council Second Interim Report by the Secretary-General Under Security Council Resolution 8/4800.
Letter Dated 7 November 1960 From the Secretary General of the Organization of American States Addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations Concerning Cuba.
Leiter Dated 10 November 1960 From the Permanent Representative of Israel Addressed to the President of the Security Council Concerning Confiscation by the United Arab Republic of the Cargo of a Greek Ship Bound for Israel Concerning 8/4560.
Letter Dated 26 November 1960 From the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba Addressed to the Secretary-General Concerning 8/4559.
Budget estimates for the secretariat of the Technical Assistance Board for the year 1961.
Commission on Human Rights, Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
Manifestations of Anti-Semitism and Other Forms of Racial Prejudice and Religious Intolerance of Similar Nature.
Information Concerning the Status of Women in Non-Self-Governing Territories.
TREATY INFORMATION Current Actions MULTILATERAL Trade and Commerce Fourth protocol of rectifications and modifications to the annexes and to the texts of the schedules to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Nigeria, October 11, 1960. : Dec Protocol of organizational amendments to the Genera] tl Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Nigeria, October 11, 1960. 4g Protocol amending part I and articles XXIX and XXX of A the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
G Protocol amending the preamble and parts II and III of St the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Protocol of rectification to the French text of the Gen| the eral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Fifth protocol of rectifications and modifications to the Ge texts of the schedules to the General Agreement on To Tariffs and Trade.
Sixth protocol of supplementary concessions to the Gen | Weig eral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Nigeria, October 11, 1960. rich Sixth protocol of rectifications and modifications to the — texts of the schedules to the General Agreement 0 “¢: Tariffs and Trade.
Declaration extending standstill provisions of article XVI:4 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Done at Geneva November 30, 1957.
Nigeria, October 11, 1960. s _ a ; Bes Declaration on the provisional accession of the Swiss Cot sate] federation to the General Agreement on Tariffs aul, Prov Trade.
Proy Protocol relating to negotiations for establishment of nev Sant schedule IIlI—Brazil—to the General Agreement a Toe Tariffs and Trade.
Declaration on relations between contracting parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Government of the Federal People’s Republic of Yusoslavia.
Declaration on the provisional accession of Israel to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Ninth protocol of rectifications and modifications to the texts of the schedules to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Declaration on relations between contracting parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the Government of the Polish People’s Republic.
Declaration on the provisional accession of Tunisia to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Weights and Measures Convention for the creation of an international office of weights and measures.
Convention amending the convention relating to weights and measures of May 20, 1875.
BILATERAL Brazil Agreement amending the agreement of November 5, 1957 , for financing certain educational exchange programs.
Effected by exchange of notes at Rio de Janeiro October 14 and November 5, 1960.
Chile Agreement providing for the establishment of a temporary Satellite tracking station at Punta Arenas, Magallanes Province, Chile.
Agreement providing for the reactivation of the temporary Satellite tracking facility at Punta Arenas, Magallanes Province, Chile.
France 3 Agricultural commodities agreement under title I of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, as amended , with memorandum of understanding and exchanges of hotes.
Effected by exchange of notes at Lima October 25 and November 24, 1960.
Switzerland Agreement amending the agreement of June 21, 1956, as amended , concerning civil uses of atomic energy.
Today, through a commemorative stamp, we honor a statesman who put his own stamp upon the diplomatic pages of our times.
It is deeply fitting that John Foster Dulles should be commemorated by a stamp which will go to all parts of the world.
For he himself went to all parts of the world in his unceasing search for peace with justice.
How fitting again that this high objective should furnish the theme for For it was both his own phrase and his objective, and he strove with all his strength of mind and body to promote it.
When Foster Dulles died it could truly be said he had done much to extend these ideals throughout the world.
He had helped to strengthen the United Nations, in the creation of which he had had an important role.
He had made it clear to all peoples that justice had to accompany peace, otherwise the latter would not endure.
He had promoted stability as well as peace by arguing cogently and repeatedly for peaceful change.
He had aided the common defense by strengthening and broadening the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Organization of American States, by assisting in the creation of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, by participation in the Central Treaty Organization, and by negotiating the peace treaty and defense agreement with Japan.
He had helped to promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty by his stalwart championship of economic cooperation among nations and of international law and human rights.
He is still here with us in the sense that his policies, ideals, and actions continue to exert their felicitous effect on our foreign policy.
Three and a half years ago he stood here at this very lectern and talked at the dedication of the stamp to Ramon Magsaysay, the heroic late President of the Philippines.
President Magsaysay was the first of the Champions of Liberty of other nations commemorated in our stamps.
As we honor John Foster Dulles today I feel that the peoples of the free world join with us in heartfelt tribute to his memory.
Designations Ernest E Neal as International Cooperation Administration Representative in Sierra Leone, effective November 27.
Chile should not be included among the countries having a large Indian population.
Names and Concepts African Nationalism and United States Foreign Policy People and Places in Africa (table of adjective and noun forms) ra ee eee American Principles.
Secretary Herter Instructs ICA on Procurement Policy : — Educational and Cultural Affairs.
United States and Rumania Agree on Cultural and Other Exchanges for 1961, 1962 he eae ae France.
Names and Concepts : People and Places in Africa — of ere and noun forms) ens pub su oe Germany.
France, U.K., United States Refute Soviet Charges Regarding Germany Greece.
United States Technical Assistance Program in Greece To End by June 1962 een vee Guatemala.
Naval Units in Caribbean Return to Normal Operations Nat kce os eee Immigration and Naturalization.
Letters of Credence Malagasy a Letters of Credence (Rakotomalala) <eet, Italy Relaxes Controls on Dollar-Area ImMauritania.
Mauritania Barred From United Nations Membership by Soviet Veto Military Affairs.
United States Grants 50,000 Tons of Grain “To Shortage in Cyprus United States Technical Assistance Program in Greece ""To End by June 1962 Ss Naval Units in Custiiaaei Return to Sierra Alleviate Nicaragua.
Neal designated ICA representative in Sierra Leone ois North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
President and PresidentElect Discuss Transfer of Executive Responsibility ; a igh ah hans Seas Rumania.
United States Views on Soviet Demand for Ww ithdraw al of United Nations Congo Force United Kingdom.
Penfield, James K Rakotomalala, Louis Usakligil, Bulend Wadsworth, James J Willauer, Whiting 972, Vol.
OFFICIAL BUSINESS A NEW SERIES The Newly Independent Nations Since 1944 the world has seen the emergence of more than a score of newly independent nations.
They represent over threequarters of a billion people—one-quarter of the world’s population.
Pamphlets have been prepared by the Department of State designed to give readers a few highlights on the peoples and the lands which make up these nations.
August 22, page 282, second column, italic paragraph: Mr Rubottom’s first name is Roy.
See Inter-American, Latin America, Organization of American States, and individual countries American States, Organization of.
See North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-ment tion sition Atlantic Community.
See North Atlantic Treaty Organization Free world, need for maintenance of, statement (Kobler), 25 Department of State Bulletin | Collect Latir | Visit Colom Econ ; Lane Trea | At | ID In | ov.
See European Economic Community ; European Economic Cooperation, Organization for; European Free Trade Association; and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Latin American.
See Central America and Latin American Free Trade Association Communications.
See Internassage tional Development Association Development Bank, Inter-American.
See European Economie Community; European Economic Cooperation, Organization for ; and European Free Trade Association Financing of.
King Pres Ex Pres lai Prin Procla Propos Can 12 Excl Reque Visits Add Rad Bisenho und Election Forei:; 7 Khbru O58.
Actions at summit meeting, address , 10 Attacks on United Nations Secretary-General.
See Geneva conference on the discontinuance of nuclear weapon tests German problems.
See Operational and Executive Personnel Program, United Nations Special Fund.
See Disarmament Commission, United Nations United Nations Economic and Social Council. nomic and Social Council United Nations economic commissions.
Commission United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
See Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations United Nations Emergency Force.
See Food and Agriculture Organization, United Nations United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
