Cuban missile crisis, , major confrontation that brought the United States and the Soviet Union close to war over the presence of Soviet nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba.
Having promised in May 1960 to defend Cuba with Soviet arms, the Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev assumed that the United States would take no steps to prevent the installation of Soviet mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Such missiles could hit much of the eastern United States within a few minutes if launched from Cuba.
The United States learned in July 1962 that the Soviet Union had begun missile shipments to Cuba.
By August 29 new military construction and the presence of Soviet technicians had been reported by United States U-2 spy planes flying over the island, and on October 14 the presence of a ballistic missile on a launching site was reported.
Cuban missile crisis Cuban missile crisis Soviet military buildup in Cuba, 1962.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston After carefully considering the alternatives of an immediate United States invasion of Cuba , a blockade of the island, or further diplomatic maneuvers, United States Pres.
John F Kennedy decided to place a naval “quarantine,” or blockade, on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments of missiles.
Kennedy announced the quarantine on October 22 and warned that United States forces would seize “offensive weapons and associated matériel” that Soviet vessels might attempt to deliver to Cuba.
During the following days, Soviet ships bound for Cuba altered course away from the quarantined zone.
As the two superpowers hovered close to the brink of nuclear war, messages were exchanged between Kennedy and Khrushchev amidst extreme tension on both sides.
On October 28 Khrushchev capitulated, informing Kennedy that work on the missile sites would be halted and that the missiles already in Cuba would be returned to the Soviet Union.
Kennedy also secretly promised to withdraw the nuclear-armed missiles that the United States had stationed in Turkey in previous years.
In the following weeks both superpowers began fulfilling their promises, and the crisis was over by late November.
Cuba’s communist leader, Fidel Castro, was infuriated by the Soviets’ retreat in the face of the United States ultimatum but was powerless to act.
The Cuban missile crisis marked the climax of an acutely antagonistic period in U.S.-Soviet relations.
The crisis also marked the closest point that the world had ever come to global nuclear war.
It is generally believed that the Soviets’ humiliation in Cuba played an important part in Khrushchev’s fall from power in October 1964 and in the Soviet Union’s determination to achieve, at the least, a nuclear parity with the United States.
Cuban missile crisis | History, Facts, & Significance | Britannica window.
Demystified VideosIn Demystified, Britannica has all the answers to your burning questions.
This Time in HistoryIn these videos, find out what happened this month in history.
Britannica ExplainsIn these videos, Britannica explains a variety of topics and answers frequently asked questions.
Student PortalBritannica is the ultimate student resource for key school subjects like history, government, literature, and more.
COVID-19 PortalWhile this global health crisis continues to evolve, it can be useful to look to past pandemics to better understand how to respond today.
Britannica BeyondWe’ve created a new place where questions are at the center of learning.
Saving EarthBritannica Presents Earth’s To-Do List for the 21st Century.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Feedback Type Select a type Factual CorrectionSpelling/Grammar CorrectionLink CorrectionAdditional InformationOther Your Feedback Submit Feedback Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
Cuban missile crisis Children's Encyclopedia Cuban missile crisis Student Encyclopedia Print Cite verifiedCite While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
It played an important part in Nikita Khrushchev’s fall from power and the Soviet Union’s determination to achieve nuclear parity with the United States.
The crisis also marked the closest point that the world had ever come to global nuclear war.Cuban missile crisis, , major confrontation that brought the United States and the Soviet Union close to war over the presence of Soviet nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba.Having promised in May 1960 to defend Cuba with Soviet arms, the Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev assumed that the United States would take no steps to prevent the installation of Soviet mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
By August 29 new military construction and the presence of Soviet technicians had been reported by United States U-2 spy planes flying over the island, and on October 14 the presence of a ballistic missile on a launching site was reported.Cuban missile crisisSoviet military buildup in Cuba, 1962.
Cuba’s communist leader, Fidel Castro, was infuriated by the Soviets’ retreat in the face of the United States ultimatum but was powerless to act.The Cuban missile crisis marked the climax of an acutely antagonistic period in U.S.-Soviet relations.
