A Note 1987, A group of American scholars has been re-examining S INCE the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.
This collaborative project, which included five major conferences between 1987 and 1992, was organized initially by James Blight and David Welch and, more recently, by Blight and Bruce Allyn, and has shed new light on events that we thought we understood.
Although the project has been a valuable service for historians and political scientists, its success has at times been eroded by a desire to portray the crisis in as dangerous a light as possible.
On occasion, Blight and Allyn have been tempted to seize upon startling 'revelations' that do not correspond with what actually happened, causing greater confusion than before about certain aspects of the crisis, especially the role of the Soviet Union.
The potential for confusion was illustrated recently by the controversy surrounding the issue of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons.
The issue first gained prominence at a conference in Havana in early 1992, where the speakers from the former Soviet Union included General Anatolii Gribkov, who in 1962 was head of a section in the main operations directorate of the General Staff and helped to plan Operation Anadyr, the Soviet code-name for the placement of missiles in Cuba.
The conference at Hawk's Cay included only American participants, but all subsequent meetings included Soviet as well as American participants, and the last three conferences also featured Cuban participants.
A third book, with transcripts and assessments of the fourth and fifth conferences, should be out in late 1993.
The testi­ mony was, in fact, more guarded and cryptic than Schlesinger implied, but most of the American participants (especially those who depended on English translation) interpreted it in the way Schlesinger did.
Although a few Americans remained sceptical, most of them readily accepted the notion that the commander of Soviet troops in Cuba was authorized during the crisis to use tactical nuclear weapons against invading United States forces.
It also demonstrates that the recent controversy about the use of tactical nuclear weapons should induce greater circumspection in handling new information about the Cuban missile crisis.
The first part of the essay explains how and why the controversy arose; the second draws upon newly released evidence to demonstrate that Soviet commanders in October 1962, far from being authorized to use tactical nuclear missiles as they saw fit, were categorically forbidden to use them without orders from Moscow.
The brief conclusion will touch upon the broader methodological implications of the controversy.
For one thing, Gribkov offered no documentary evidence when he spoke at Havana, nor did he provide any afterwards.
But documents available at the time cast doubt on the notion that Soviet commanders in Cuba a two-part article published in Germany, which differed in some respects from his oral remarks.
Erinnerungen eines Armeegenerals , which also were published in German before they appeared in Russian.
A Russian-language version of Gribkov's reminiscences about the Cuban missile crisis was published in four parts in late 1992 and early 1993.
The Russian version is similar to the earlier German version, but it is lengthier, is structured differently, and contains two crucial retractions, which bring Gribkov's position into line with my own.
If the available evidence supports an established argument, common sense tells us to be wary of an unsupported alternative.
Furthermore, Gribkov was the only Soviet participant at any of the conferences to imply that Soviet officers could have ordered nuclear strikes on their own.
That in itself would not be sufficient grounds to disbelieve him, but it should have made his American listeners sceptical.
Gribkov's presentation, if credible, would have altered the established account of the Cuban missile crisis.
Allyn and Blight have long been aware of the perils of inferring too much from oral testimony, and thus they should have awaited corroboration before they made too much of this important but unproven information.
One of their own conferences had offered a sobering example of the way dramatic revelations can turn out to be unfounded.
In Moscow in 1989, the former Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatolii Dobrynin, startled the American participants by claiming that he had met secretly with Robert Kennedy on 26 October 1962 as well as on the 27th.
This claim, if accurate, would have substantially changed the history of the crisis.
But we now know that it was false, as Dobrynin himself has acknowledged with considerable embarrassment.
The incident should have led anyone once willing to accept oral testimony without corroboration to be sceptical.
Unfortunately^ though, bck of evidence and the precedent from Moscow did little to restrain discussion following the Havana conference.
I asked him why his father had sent troops into Hungary to crush the 1956 uprising rather than letting the Communist regime collapse, as Mikhail Gorbachev had done in 1989.
Sergei explained that his father had been alarmed because the Hungarian revolution had come so soon after the Soviet Union pulled all its troops out of Romania.
According to Sergei, Khrushchev believed the only way to ensure that the withdrawal from Romania would not inspire further unrest was by resorting to military action in Hungary.
This explanation is innovative and intriguing, but, as I quickly pointed out to Sergei, it is also patently wrong.
The withdrawal of Soviet troops from Romania occurred in 1958, two years after the revolution in Hungary.
Sergei's confusion about such a basic point raises troubling questions for those who are willing to accept oral history without supporting documentation.
In this case, I was easily able to demonstrate that Sergei's oral history was inaccurate.
Their statements, however, were ignored, owing to the far more numerous statements by participants ready to take the alleged revelations at face value.
Not surprisingly, the uncritical tone of most of the participants was echoed in Western media coverage of the conference.
In a typical case, one United States journalist blundy informed her readers that 'Soviet forces in Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis were armed with nuclear warheads and had the authority to use them against a United States invasion'.6 Coundess other reporters outdid one another in their eagerness to highlight the newly discovered threat, arguing that 'under the circumstances, it was something of a miracle mat we were spared a 1 Thomas G Weiss and James G Blight, ""When We Teetered at the Brink', Providence Journal, a Feb.92, B-6.
Thanks to Peter Jennings of ABC News, millions of television viewers also were among those who learned the startling 'fact' that Soviet 'battlefield missiles armed with nuclear warheads ... were deployed in coastal areas' of Cuba in October 1962, and that Soviet commanders were on the verge of using the weapons against a US invasion force.
But historical accuracy is not the chief consideration for journalists assigned to cover the latest revelations about the Cuban missile crisis.
Admittedly, Blight and Allyn cannot be held responsible for the blithe way in which reporters and television crews dealt with the issue; but they can be faulted for not doing more to discourage sensation­ alism.
Scholars in any field who believe they have made an important discovery are remiss if they do not emphasize to the media how much work remains to be done to verify it.
Not only did Blight and Allyn fail to do this, in some cases they promoted the sort of coverage they received.
The general who commanded the Soviet troops, Issa Pliev, died in 1979, so he has not 'repeatedly said' anything in recent years.
Ball's views are shared only by several of the Americans who took part in die Cuban missile crisis project.
This programme, which gave pride of place to the tactical nuclear weapons issue, was remarkable for how carelessly it discussed Soviet policy.
In fact, the Soviet Union had snipped nuclear-capable Frog and Scud missiles to all the East European members of the Warsaw Pact before 1962.
By studying Soviet military literature and by observing Soviet and Warsaw Pact manoeuvres, Western specialists on Soviet military policy have long known that, in the early 1960s, Soviet theatre commanders were supposed to be authorized in wartime to order the use of tactical nuclear weapons.
This was the standard Soviet command structure at the time for theatre operations.
Hence, the only relevant question about the role of tactical nuclear weapons in the Cuban missile crisis is whether Pliev was authorized to use them against invading United States troops without obtaining permission from Moscow.
Blight and Allyn try to buttress their claim, based on Gribkov's testimony, that Pliev was authorized during the crisis to use tactical nuclear weapons without permission from Moscow, by citing the draft of an order from the Soviet defence minister, Marshal Rodion Malinovskii, to Pliev in September 1962.
The draft stipulated that if a US invasion occurred and communications between Moscow and Cuba were severed, Pliev should decide on his own whether 'to use tactical nuclear Luna missiles as a means of local war for the destruction of the enemy on land and on the coast'.2 However, this document was never signed by Malinovskii and was never transmitted to Cuba.
The draft does not tell us anything about the procedures in place during the crisis.
Indeed, Gribkov himself has now openly disavowed the inter­ pretation of his testimony by Schlesinger and others.
The following month, Gribkov published a revised version of his memoirs in which he again denied, even more explicitly than in the Krasnaya zvezda interview, that Pliev was authorized to order tactical nuclear strikes during the crisis; in fact, Pliev 'was categorically forbidden to use nuclear weapons of any type', even if thé United States had launched an all-out invasion.
No statement could be more at odds with the claims made by McNamara, Blight, Allyn, and Schlesinger.
This admission by Gribkov, which should set the record straight once and for all, came after definitive evidence had already appeared in Krasnaya zvezda.
General Leonid Garbuz, Pliev's deputy commander in October 1962, and Colonel Nikolai Beloborodov, commander of the 'central nuclear base' in Cuba, which held the warheads slated for use on the Soviet missiles.
General Igor Statsenko was the commander of the SS-4 and SS-s medium-range missiles being installed in Cuba.
Thus, it should now be clear, as Gribkov himself acknowledgest that from the outset of the crisis on 22 October, Pliev was forbidden to order the use of nuclear-armed 'Frog' missiles.
Although Pilev could have used the 'Frogs' with conventional warheads, of which there were twenty-four on the island, he had no authority even to issue nuclear warheads, much less order the firing of nuclear-armed weapons.
Within hours, they received an answer from the Soviet defence minister, Rodion Malinovskii, stating that Pliev's authority was governed by the cable of 22 October.
In other words, the use of nuclear warheads on the 'Frog' missiles was still explicidy forbidden.
On the following day, 26 October, Pliev sent another urgent cable to Malinovskii requesting authority to 'use all available means of air defence' which would not include nuclear weapons — if United States planes attacked Soviet bases in Cuba.
This message, which came a day before a United States U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down, underscores the limits to Pliev's authority during the crisis.
He wanted to ensure that Malinovskii would condone the use of conventional weapons to defend his bases against United States air strikes.
This would be a strange request if, as McNamara, Blight, and Allyn would have us believe, it came from someone who had already been authorized to order the use of nuclear weapons.
What is even more telling is that Malinovskii himself, as defence minister, did not want to have the final say on the matter.
This episode shows how closely Khrushchev was supervising Soviet combat operations at die time.
The assumption that he had taken the risk of giving Pliev the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons during the crisis (regardless of anything discussed when Operation Anadyr was launched) is clearly untenable.
The original text with handwritten notations is reproduced alongside an interview with General Dmitrii Volkogonov in 'Operatsiya Anadyr', Trud , 27 Oct.92, 3.
Although the distance precluded the use of the weapons until an authenticated order came from Moscow, it also ensured that, in the event of a United States invasion, the delivery vehicles would be destroyed long before Beloborodov's troops could equip them with nuclear warheads and prepare to launch them.
Khrushchev had decided at the outset that, faced with the choice of either 'using or losing' the tactical nuclear missiles during the crisis, the Soviet Union would have to 'lose' them.
This conclusion is corroborated by Beloborodov himself, whose testimony is transcribed next to Garbuz's in Krasnaya zvezda.
Belo­ borodov emphasizes diat during the crisis 'nuclear weapons could have been used only if the missile officers had received orders via their own chain-of-command from the General Staff, and only if we, the officers responsible for storing and operating warheads, had received our own special codes.
But that in no way implies that the proscription on the use of nuclear weapons could have been evaded in die same manner.
It was precisely to ensure that such evasion could occur that a host of overlapping procedural safeguards were in place for nuclear weapons.
Thus, although the downing of the U-2 highlighted the potential dangers of the crisis, there is no basis for arguing that the incident revealed anything about the durability of the Soviet nuclear command structure during the crisis.
Indeed, we knew even before the Havana conference, from the top-secret correspondence between Khrushchev and Fidel Castro in 1962, that Khrushchev had no intention of resorting to nuclear war in defence of Cuba, despite Castro's vehement pleas.
This invaluable evidence should have made Blight and Allyn sceptical about any claims that Soviet troops were authorized to use tactical nuclear missiles against an invading force without permission from Moscow.
For if Pliev was authorized to use nuclear-armed 'Frogs' during the crisis as he saw fit, that would mean Khrushchev was willing to take a much greater risk of nuclear war than was previously believed.
By all accounts, Khrushchev and his colleagues did expect a United States invasion of Cuba, as well as air strikes.
And they were well aware that the use of Soviet nuclear weapons against United States soldiers 90 miles from the continental United States would provoke swift nuclear retaliation against the Soviet Union itself.
After all, Khrushchev had often stated that the use of nuclear weapons by either side, no matter how limited, would lead inevitably to full-scale nuclear war.
Blight's and Allyn's contentions about the role of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in the Cuban missile crisis are tantamount to claiming, without evidence, that Khrushchev was willing to accept an extraordinarily high risk of nuclear war merely to protect Cuba.
Fortunately, the declassified Khrushchev-Castro correspondence exposes this fallacy.
The letters confirm that Khrushchev was most unwilling to contemplate a nuclear war.
All the available evidence bears out the recent comment by Khrushchev's chief foreign policy adviser in 1962, Oleg Troyanovskii, that 'despite Khrushchev's propensity to take risks, the possibility of war with the United States was never a realistic consideration for him under any circumstances because he understood better than anyone else that in the modern 1 Ibid.
The possibility of nuclear war in October 1962 was not negligible, and Khrushchev certainly took a major risk in September and October by covertly placing missiles in Cuba; but the evidence demonstrates that, as soon as the crisis began, he went out of his way to forestall developments that could have precipitated a nuclear exchange.
Clearly he did not leave the decision whether to use nuclear weapons with a general based in Cuba.
Until the Havana conference, nobody had suggested that Soviet nuclear operations in Cuba during the missile crisis were locally controlled.
Most scholars simply assumed — correctly, as it turns out that the responsibility for the use of nuclear weapons lay with the central government in Moscow.
The newly declassified evidence has corroborated this assumption and, in the process, has highlighted Khrushchev's restraint.
The documents now accessible at the Russian foreign ministry archive and the former CPSU Central Committee archive are intriguing, but of little value in clarifying the lingering mysteries of the Cuban missile crisis.
Only if historians can gain access to the ministry of defence and general staff archives, the presidential archive, and the KGB archive will we fully understand the role of the Soviet Union in the crisis, and be able to prevent a recurrence of the unnecessary confusion generated by the Havana conference.
Among the holdings of the Central Committee archive are dozens of files in fond 5, opisy 30, 33, 35, 36, 47, 50, 55; fond 4, opis' 14.
Unfortunately, these files shed no light on the main questions discussed here.
