June 2, 2008 By Carlo Wolff The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 generated unbearable tension.
To believe that ducking under a desk or burrowing underground could protect you from nuclear annihilation seemed crazy then , but there was no apparent alternative.
Apprehension ruled.To grasp how frightening and dangerous those 13 days really were, read One Minute to Midnight, Michael Dobbs’s chronicle of events that pitted the United States against the Soviet Union over the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Dobbs’s hour-by-hour unspooling of that charged period, and of the resolution of that tension, is as gripping as any fiction.Dobbs, a Washington Post reporter who spent two years researching this book, presents new material to substantiate his claim that this narrowly averted disaster was a matter of detail, poor communication, accident, and pure coincidence.
An understanding of the fact that we need to live together, albeit uneasily, is what resulted, with face perhaps the greatest loss.Dobbs is an impeccable researcher and reporter.
What gives his book special depth, though, is his gift for characterization.
Take this glimpse of pain-plagued John F Kennedy after he learns that U-2 pilot Chuck Maultsby has veered off-course into Soviet air space:“He was discovering the limits of presidential power.
It was impossible for a commander in chief to know everything that was being done in his name.
There were so many things he would never find out until ‘some ’ fouled everything up.
Three canny protagonistsDobbs is similarly astute about the canny Nikita Khrushchev, a master of the salty, telling homily; and Castro, the grandiloquent, messianic Cuban leader who staked all on dignidad, a conception of national pride that put him into uneasy alliance with the Soviet Union, his country’s chief patron.Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro were the prime movers behind this near fiasco.
The step back from the brinkKennedy and Khrushchev “had the power to blow up the world, but they were both horrified by the thought of nuclear Armaggedon,” he writes.
Chaos may never have come so close to being unleashed as it did in October 1962.
Dobbs’s extraordinary book reminds us that keeping powerful forces under control is particularly hard in the nuclear age.
