Intelligence Wing Strategic Air Command Offutt Air Force Base, Nebraska May 1984 m JHCLASSIFI tu K# 3 3 FOREWORD Project ""Warrior means many things to many people.
To Captain Sandy' Laubenthal this Air Force-wide program meant an opportunity to write a story of intelligence work never before told.
It is a remarkable story truly crediting the outstanding work of SAC Intelligence officers, NCOs, and airmen stationed at Offutt some twenty years ago, It is -certainly time that a story of this .magnitude be told.
Fortunately for all of us, Project Warrior provides the perfect framework for this splendid effort by Captain Laubenthal.
Then, believing that it might be even more interesting to do all-source intelligence analysis, I cross-trained into the Intelligence career field and very quickly became editor of the SAC Intelligence Quarterly.
I didn't really believe it, but I was curious enough to go to the SAC Office of History' and look at a monograph on the Cuban missile crisis which a SAC historian had written in 1963.
Still curious, I looked at the 544th's own microfilmed history for October 1962.
It certainly gave an impression of intense activity, but again it told me nothing recognizable about the oral tradition.
Nevertheless there was plenty of evidence that something of significance had been going on at the 544th at that time.
The 544th had woiTan Air Force Outstanding Unit Award for the period 1 September 30 November 1962, a time during which the wing had been extraordinarily busy.
The citation credited the 544th with ""providing technical intelligence support to all levels of the United States Air Force and' other Government Agencies^ ana stated, ""The support rendered was of great benefit to the Nation and is a standing tribute to sound management, an exceptionally high level of proficiency, devotion to duty, and an ^herent desire to promote the prestige and integrity of National Defense.
Having some experience in finding lost stories, I decided to look for this one and write it as an article for the SAC Intelligence Quarterly.
A good deal had been P^^jshed about the intelligence aspects of the Cuban missile crisis; » n J ty c °""P"" ing that with the material in the archives, I hoped to be able to reconstruct the story of the role of SAC Intelligence.
The SAC archives contained a collection of special Cuban missile crisis histories prepared by various SAC units, including the MiaASSQfQii '1080th Strategic Wing^Hcf Ytt^^gfrSftiglc Reconnaissance Wing; og from these I recovered the story of SAC intelligence collection.
But the rest of the intelligence story proved extremely elusive, ir> spite of fascinating hints that I found here and there.
Someone had put together, apparently from corporate memory, three paragraphs which mentioned U-2s, It Gen Eugene F Tighe, Jr., and a briefing which lie apparently gave.
It was vague and rather confusingly stated, but I was able to glean a little more information for. the article.
General Tighe has retired from his position as Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency , but I had learned that he was still a DIA consultant.
I was concerned, at that point, because I had no DIA sources for the DIA part of the story.
With the assistance of the DIA representative to SAC, I had been talking to the DIA historian about this problem, and we sent a preliminary version of the article to DIA for whatever light they could shed.
I hoped very much that General Tighe, as a person who knew something about the story, would look at .it.
When the article came back, it was covered. with penciled notes from General Tighe, including one piece of information which surprised me very much.
His comments created enough interest in the wing and in SAC Intelligence to make it possible for me to do what.
Later I also talked with retired Maj Gen James C Enney and retired Col Norman E Shaw, who had both been in SAC Intelligence at the time.
Things had begun to fall into place as soon as I sawGeneral Tighe's notes.
By moving medium-range and intermediate range ballistic missiles into Cuba, the Soviets could hope to achieve their first genuine first-strike capability •; against the United States.
BMEWSJ and strikeSAC bomber bases and American missiles with minimal warning.
The United States discovered this -deployment before the missiles were operational.
For 13 days in October 1962 the United States and the Soviet Union stood locked in mutual confrontation; then the Soviets backed off, and the world drew back from the brink of nuclear war.
Over 21 years, much of the historical evidence has disappeared; and -even today, some still has not been released at the SECRET level.
But by examining the published sources and comparing them with the archives of SAC and the recollections of some of the major par• ticipants, it is possible to reconstruct a fairly clear picture of the role of SAC intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis and how it fit into the community-wide effort and contributed to the making of decisions at the national level.
L The Watch on Cuba The chain of events that finally precipitated the crisis is usually traced back to the visit of Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan to Cuba in February 1960, little more than a year after Fidel Castro came to power.
The visit resulted in the first Cuban-Soviet economic arrangements, and Castro may have raised the question of arms as well.
But even earlier, before any Soviet arms were shipped to Cuba, distorted refugee reports of Soviet missiles, Chinese soldiers, and much else had begun to gather in the files of the Central IntelligenceAgency --five inches worth of reports on missiles in Cuba in 1959 alone.The low reliability of these reports made them of marginal value, but a staff of CIA professionals continued to collect, collate, and compare them.
The primary orientation of SAC Intelligence was toward the Single Integrated Operational Plan , and at first Cuba was essentially a side issue since it was not a strategic target.
Nevertheless, the Cuban situation was monitored, like anything else that might eventually become a serious problem.
SAC's Commander in Chief at that time, Gen Thomas S Power, was keenly interested in intelligence; it was not unusual for him to pore over photo mosaics of the Soviet Union, looking for missile sites with a magnifying glass.
His Director of Intelligence,* Brig Gen Robert N Smith, had held that position since 1955 and had laid some of the groundwork for the establishment of the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff , which had been activated at Offutt AFB in I960.
George J Keegan, Jr.,** did not yet consider Cuba a strategic problem, • most of the work on Cuba was-done by the 544th Reconnaissance Technical Group , also located in the SAC headquarters building and commanded by Col Thomas S Osborne.
In Cuba the aircrat t w ere usually .. derated and assembled in open areas, where aerial photography could confirm their identify.
The immediate pretext was supplied by a series ""of demonstrations iS Cuba fueled by discontent over a slackening economy.
UNCLASSIFIED .in.i mm x# Tntelligonce Agency , SAC Intelligence, and others; everyone wanted to be first to find out what was going on, about anything including Cuba.
General Power liked to be able to pick up a ""hot line"" and tell Gen Curtis E LeMay,~who was then Chief of Staff of the Air Force, that his photo interpreters or all-source analysts had found something new.
General LeMay would then pass the word to Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, who had a contest going with Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State.
On a more serious level, General Smith was becoming more concerned about.
He felt that it was genuinely possible that Cuba, because ...of its ...location., . could become a ""spoiler"" in terms of the whole strategic situation, because with only minimal warning the command and control system and SAC bases would be at risk.
By the early summer of 1962, the Pis and all-source analysts, as well as the ELINT specialists in the Defense Analysis Center, had increased their efforts to find out what was going on in Cuba.
In May 1962 the 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing , located at Forbes AFB, Kansas, had flown two higher headquartersdirected ELINT missions in the Caribbean area.
ELINT data was, as always, forwarded to Offutt, where it was processed by the 544th.
The intelligence gained from these missions may have contributed to General Smith's increased concern.
Pis of the Research Center began to study the tracker film from the U-2 missions.
The tracker film was processed first and then correlated with the main camera film, to determine the location of whatever had been imaged by the main, camera.
The quality of the tracker film was variable; but when the resolution was exceptionally good, it was sometimes possible to identify objects along the route which, had not been imaged by the main camera.
Also, the Research Center could get the tracker film sooner than it could get main camera film, which might arrive weeks after the mission.
All-source intelligence--ref ugee and agent reports, communications intelligence, and the like--had begun to highlight certain areas as centers of unusual activity.
The Pis looked closely at these areas on the tracker film and had enlargements made of areas they were interested in.
It was thus that, perhaps in late June 1962, they saw the first positive evidence that the human reports of ""rockets""-in the sense of surface-to-air missiles .--were apparently true, or about to be.
SA-2S were going to be installed in Cuba It would be about mon ac nth between the time the ground scars first appeared and thj. tual installation of equipment; revetments had to be made, earth stabilized, and the like.
A briefing on the SAM discovery was prepared for pre. sentation Yn Washington.
General Power, who was intensely interested in photo interpretation, was a sponsor of the . briefing; he took General Smith and Colonel Tighe to the capital and introduced -them to the -audiences -whowere bji-ng. brief ed.
Colonel Tighe, who was the ""outside briefer"" for SAC Intelligence, made the presentation.
But no one--not CIA, not NPIC, not even the Air Staff-was willing to give credence at this early stage.
Those organizations had not done the intensive background study on the human source reporting which had led the Relelrch Center to its conclusions, and they did not regard the around scars as sufficient evidence that SAMs were to be brought in.
Meanwhile, in July, Soviet shipments _of arms resumed at a considerably increased pace.
The first shipments were detected as they left the Black Sea in mid-month, and the United States effort to photograph all ships carrying military cargoes was intensified.
But many of the ships now transited the straits by. night or in bad weather; others left from Baltic ports, where United States Capabilities were rather limited.
Sources told of trucks lowered into holds for loading and hoisted ° ut « v «""* ^Jj'f at paulins; of technicians who arrived m slacks and sport shirts at Cuban docks, then formed into ranks of fours and moved out in truck convoys; of Soviet ships at Mariel unloading a large quan tity of prefabricated concrete forms whose size and shape suggested possible association with missiles >jnd much more.
Reports of ""rockets"" were numerous; taken together with the. reports of construction activity andequipment observed during the spring of 1962 and new observations of suspicious-looking crates^they were beginning to make the .intelligence community think further about the introduction of SAMs into Cuba.
Roads, faint but suggesting the characteristic ""star of David"" pattern associated with the SA-2, were also distinguishable.
By late August the assessment was—' becoming more solid within the intelligence community at all levels, to the point where the State Department was almost ready to mention SAMs in a background briefing to the press.
To Colonel lighe the major question had become, ""lvhy are the Soviets ringing Cuba with SA-2 sites?""--a phenomenon which spoke of a determination to keep out reconnaissance, h-e had been operations officer of the 497th when the first photos were taken of the first SA-2 site at Glau in East Germany in 1958--a historic deployment tfrat had also apparently b-een intended to deter reconnaissance.
He discussed the issue frequently with the State Department advisor to SAC, Mr Edward L Freers,* who could carry SAC's views to Washington.
McCone admittedly was speculating; long before the build-up began, ..he had suspected on purely strategic grounds that the Soviets might install offensive missiles in Cuba, For the first time, they had access to an area within easy range of the US--and missiles of medium or intermediate range could not reach the Soviet Union if they should ever be turned against the original owners.
But there was no hard evidence, and without it McCone's suspicions seemed incredible even to many others in the intelligence community.
By now the attention of the public as well as theintelligence community was focusing on the military build-up in Cuba.
On 24 August the State Department invited reporters to a background briefing by Roger Hilsman, director of the department's Office of Intelligence and Research.
Hilsman told the reporters that some 20 Soviet-bloc ships had arrived in Cuba since 26 July, carrying large quantities of transportation, electronic, and construction equipment, much of which seemed to be intended for the improvement of coastal and air defenses^ He pointed out that the material might include surface-to-air missiles such as the Soviets had already supplied to Iraq and Indonesia.
If SAMs were present, they were being installed to protect something clse--possibly offensive missiles.
Most ~J2 of the eastern part of Cuba was cloud-covered; but westward, in ^75* tne areas that were clear, photo interpreters at NPIC could for C*5f the first time see SAM sites on the main camera film.
Before the fiST' day was over, eight SA2 sites in various stages of construction ""Sbwere identified along the northern coast of Cuba.
Analysis of the mission of 29 August continued; with a ninth SAM site discovered the following day.
The briefer told him the site was in the eastern area of Cuba, with the 1-aunchers oriented away from the United States; but he had to admit that not everything was known about its capabilities.
If such evidence should be found, it must be kept very restricted, and I want to be -one of the first to know about it. ,OD As the meeting ended, General Carter lingered to make sure he had understood what the President wanted in the way of security protection for the evidence of offensive weapons.
General Carter said he had thought so, but others might have felt that the President meant the various elements ofthe intelligence community were to stay in isolation and try to arrive independently at a mutually acceptable conclusion—which would have been hard to do.
SoTfie search for answers to the Cuban problem continued to involve a relatively large number of intelligence organizations and military commands. ->' Another U-2 mission on 5 September had brought baci imagery of more SAM sites and a MIG-21 FJSHBED, one of the latest Soviet fighters; but this was only more evidence of the defensive build-up.
Then, on 9 September, something happened which caused a reassessment of the safety of the U-2 flights.
A Chinese broadcast revealed that a Chinese Nationalist U-2 had been shot down over eastern China; and in Washington, analysts speculated that it had been brought down by an SA-2, the system credited with bringing down Gary Powers' aircraft in 1960.
As soon. as SA-2s had been identified in Cuba, higher echelons had regarded them as a threat to • the U-2s, and transfer -of the U-2. flights from CIA to SAC was being considered.
SAC's 4080th Strategic Wing AT Laughlin AFB, Texas had beenflying U-2s since 1957.
Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State, suggested that instead of covering all of Cuba m one flight--up one side of a line through the middle of the island, then back down the other--the flights should be shorter and more frequent, dipping into Cuban airspace.
He also proposed a larger number of peripheral flights that would gather intelligence from beyond the three-mile limit.
The planners agreed to this and * (U/FOUOj From the time of its origin SAC had a strategic reconnaissance mission and until the mid-1950s had been the primary airborne strategic intelligence collector.
Then, probably in the summer of 1954, when the U-2 was first being developed at Lockheed, a CIA representative called on General Lemay with a request that SAC pick up the operational aircraft.
General _ Lemay summoned then-Col Robert N Smith, who was still Chief of . the Targets Analysis Division in SAC Intelligence, andCol William J Crumm, Chief of the Operational Plans Division m the Directorate of Operations.
They talked with the CIA representative, who outlined to General Lemay the capabilities of the aircraft that Clarence L Johnson was building at Lockheed.
General Lemay thought the proposed schedule for the •.. completion of the prototype was unrealistic; he told the CIA representative that SAC did not want to assume responsibility for the development of such a unique aircraft in such a short space of time.
So CIA agreed to be responsible for the development of the aircraft, while SAC agreed to fly it operationally.
The U-2 first flew, as ""Kelly"" Johnson had promised, in the summer of 1955.
After it became a successful airplane and demonstrated its strategic value, SAC got its own U-2s; the first aircraft was delivered to the 4080th Strategic Wing in June 1957.
But by that time, as analysis was later, to show, the first medium range ballistic missiles had already arrived in Cuba.
In a press conference later that day, he assured the American people thatthe new shipments to Cuba did not constitute a serious threat to any other part of the hemisphere.
But ""he did-not rule out the possibility that the build-up might become a threat, and he carefully listed the limits Cuba must not overstep.
ELINT requirements were compiled by the 544th*s Defense Analysis Center and provided to the 55th.
From a specially designed compartment in the converted bomb bay of the RB-47H, electronic warfare officers intercepted and recorded signals from early warning, height finder, airborne intercept, and fire control radars.
The ELINT data they collected was routinely forwarded to Offutt, where the Defense Analysis Center processed it.
On 14 September 1962 the 55th had begun to fly higher headquarters directed COMMON CAUSE missions for surveillance of Cuba by means of ELINT and aerial photography.
Analysis of ELINT gathered after the discovery of the SAMs confirmed that the latest SA-2 guidance radar, the C model of the FRUIT SET, was being used in Cuba.
General Smith, Colonel Tighe, and sometimes General Power made several trips to Washington for intelligence sessions at the Pentagon.
Both were built for thelumber trade, with exceptionally wide hatches; they carried trucks on deck and rode high in the water.
A U-2 mission on 17 September had been basiC^-T' cally peripheral and added nothing new.
General Smith and Colonel Tighe were flown to Washington as Sjjgfc' back-up briefers.
The Air Force's Assistant Chief of Staff, £<; Intelligence , Maj Gen Robert A Breitweiser, was present probably as a member of the Board,and General Smith and Colonel Tighe were allowed into the meeting.
Several times the ACS/1 asked General Smith questions or referred to him, so he had the opportunity to present his case.
However, this estimate had been in the making for some days;, the likely outcome of the meeting was, essentially, to put the USIB imprimatur on the final product of a laborious process.
These included confidence in the specialists who had evaluated the information earlier, the scarcity of indications of the presence of strategic missiles, the failure, of the U-2 photography to confirm the human. source reporting and the pattern of Soviet foreign policy.
Finally, they did not want to avoid making an estimate at all, but neither did they want to make a ""worst case"" estimate.
Eut from the perspective of General Smith and Colonel Tighe, a ""worst case"" estimate was appropriate in this instance, to allow for military preparation and possible action.
Very soon, however, some-much less vague and more reliable reports from observers in Cuba filtered up through the system.
They included an advance report that an agent in Cuba had sighted the rear profile of a strategic missile on 12 September—a report that reached CIA and DIA on 21 September, followed by a ""hard copy"" report with a sketch on 27 September.
Analysts at the upper level of the intelligence community had been studying the evidence of the earlier flights as well as the new reports out of Cuba.
By late September Col John R Wright, Jr., at DIA, who had been studying the pattern of SAM installations photographed over western Cuba on 5 September, had noted that the trapezoidal patterns of SAMs near the Cuban town of San Cristobal resembled SAM installations designed to protect strategic missiles in the Soviet Union.
Between 27 September and 2 October, other DIA analysts were also led to the hypothesis that the Soviets were placing strategic missiles in the San Cristobal area.
On 29 September the CIA characterized the central and western parts of Cuba as ""suspicious"" and on 3 October certified them the highest priority for aerial reconnaissance.
The all-source analysis at SAC was leading to similar conclusions about where the missiles probably were.
SAC had long had a requirement to provide cloud-free photography of Cuba for the US, in order to maintain a current baseline photomosaic of the island — not an easy task, given the weather problems of the area.
The State Department argued ""^ agains't this, spelling out the political consequences of the loss of a U-2 over Cuba.
Colonel Wright had recommended to Lt Gen Joseph F Carroll, the Director of DIA, that San Cristobal receive immediate photographic coverage; San Cristobal accordingly became part of the flight plan.
The next day SAC told the 4080th to send Maj Rudolph Anderson, Jr., as well.
On Friday, 12 October, General Power was flying a KC-135 back from Europe to Omaha, with General Smith and General Compton.
When they stopped in Bermuda to refuel, General Power received an urgent telephone call from Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara's office, telling him to come to the Pentagon immediately to discuss a matter of national concern.
General Power went in alone to see the Secretary of the Air Force, Eugene M Zuckert, who told him about the high level of concern over Cuba and the decision to give SAC the overflight mission.
General Power, of course, was not surprised, since he had long since recognized Cuba as both an ever-worsening political problem and a mounting threat to SAC's southern bases; and SAC may possibly have informed him in Europe of the decision that sent Majors Heyser and Anderson to Edwards.
A second meeting followed, in the ""Tank,"" the room in the Pentagon where the Joint Chiefs or"" Staff met.
He had come to the Pentagon that morning to brief General LeMay and then returned to Offutt.
But General LeMay had mentioned the briefing to others, and Colonel Tighe was asked to come back and brief at the JCS level.
He knew there had been discussion of SAC's taking on the overflight mission, and he favored the concept, since the recent U-2 flights had not been getting photography of the areas SAC was interested in.
Another issue discussed at the meeting in the ""Tank"" was the processing of the U-2 film.
The Undersecretary of the Air Force had given SAC responsibility for supervising the delivery and processing of all original film from the U-2 mission.
General Power promised that SAC would get the film to Washington in less time than the CIA had been getting the film through its own system, and that General Smith would personally courier it.
General Smith guaranteed that it would get there if he had to fly the airplane himself.
All this was to alleviate CIA's concern that SAC might make the material ""SAC only,"" when _it_ was of national interest, to be used. for the decision-making of the President.
CIA was very reluctant' to give up responsibility for the overflights; they wanted at least to be sure NPIC could look at the film.
After the meeting, General Power, General Smith, and General Compton resumed their journey to Offutt.
While still on the airplane, General Power started to put SAC's. well-oiled machinery into high gear.
General Compton was given the job of getting the U-2s ready for a flight on Sunday; it could not be done any sooner, because a hurricane was in progress in the Cuban area.
Getting ready for the flight itself kept bothSAC's operational planners and the people at Edwards busy during most of Saturday, 13 October, and well into Saturday night.
The SAC support team arrived at Edwards on Saturday, and the two ""F'J models intended for the operation were painted with USAF insignia.
Also on 13 October, the 55SRW had been directed to fly BLUE INK weather reconnaissance missions of Cuban coastal.areas, since weather was an important factor in planning U-2 flights.
Immediately the 55th established an operating location at MacDill AFB, Florida, and flew the initial BLUE INK sortie.
The weather information was relayed to SAC by radio, and the first U-2 launch was planned for late that night. iXiih^elligence preparations were equally intense.
This was the. first direct evidence of a radical change in the nature of the military buildup in Cuba.
Colonel Keegan's Air Estimates Division had been fully involved in (U the Cuban problem for some time, probably at least since the finding of the short-range cruise missiles at Banes.
SAC had a great deal of ; because cf its strategic the most viable penetration • years the command had floun ig Soviet borders.
Now ;Ci\ CAUSL mis ' Another necessity was the updating of the Committee on Military Overhead Requirements list.
That Saturday night Captain Enn'ey had been planning to go to a SAC in telligence party, but instead he was called -to deal with the COMAR list.
The branch office was collocated with the Research Center in BB-18, an area in the basement of SAC headquarters, uith immediate access to the Pis and all-scurce analysts.
Captain Enney , *~TUj Col on eI~C~ or del and Captain I.nncv both, eventually becaire major generals and served as SAC ' s DCS/In te] 1 igence . 'liNCLAS$F cn UNCLASSIFIED **mm~ found that he had to add Several more places to the list, based on human source reporting; but the high-interest areas such as San Cristobal and Remedios were already on the original list that, had come down from Washington.
Approaching from the south, and 'using the Isle of Pines as the initial point, Major Heyser crossed the Cuban coastline at 1237Z--0737 Eastern Standard Time --at an average altitude of 72,500 feet.
Six minutes later he crossed the north coast and changed course for Florida.
Therehad been no ground fire or any other encounter with Cuba s new defenses.
The mam camera film was unloaded, placed in shipping containers, and rushed to General Smith's KC-135.
The film from the tracker ^ camera-which everyone outside SAC thought of solely as navigation film-was loaded on another aircraft, probably a T-39, to be flown to Offutt for processing and readout.
The people who were waiting at Andrews to receive the film were not en the list.
It was about half an hour before matters vere sorted out and authorized people arrived to accept the turn.
Then General Smith flew back to Omaha, while the main camera film was taken to the Naval Photographic Interpretation Center at Suitland, Maryland, one of several locations *gere the film from the missions over Cuba was to be processed.
Meanwhile the aircraft with the tracker film flew to Offutt and landed.
The film had to be processed at once and sent to NPIC in time for use with the readout of the mam camerafilm, so that exact locations could be determined.
It was taken immediately to the 544th«s Special Projects Lab Branch, * subdivision of the Target Materials Center, which did all classified photoprocessing at Offutt.
Ihe Special Projects Lab """"also located in the basement of SAC headquarters, immediately south of the Research Center.
The 544th had its best Pis on duty waiting for the £ ilm to come out of the lab.
Major Calvin B Olsen, officer m charge o± the Research Center's Immediate Interpretation Section, was one (SJ The processing locations eventually included not only NAVPIC lso the 6594th Aerospace Test Squadron at ^""tover AFB Massachusetts; the 4080th Strategic Wing at Laughlin AFB, Texas, the 15th Reconnaissance Technical Squadron atMarch A ™, California; and Offutt itself.
Airman First Class Michael Davis, a member of of this__ team and one of the sharpest young Pis, had been called in ~ because of his experience in the exploitation of missile sites.
Around three o'clock on Sunday afternoon, Major Olsen telephoned Colonel Tighe at home and told him the film was about to be ready.
Callanan, the assistant chief of the Research Center, went to BB-18 to see it.
Major Olsen and Airman Davis were working in a small room towards the far end of BB-18, one of several roomsused for detailed photo interpretation.
They scanned through the film, looking at it in a viewer and under stereo.
Both had been very much interested in the Cuban problem and knew the terrain very well, so they had no trouble orienting themselves.
They knew where they wanted to look, and very soon Airman Davis sighted MRBMs on trailers.
It was perhaps at this point that the Pis found out that they were not expected to send out a Uniform Photo Interpretation Report * to SAC's usual intelligence custo-"" mers.
NPIC had claimed the right to make the determination, from the main camera film, on what was in Cuba.
Probably no one in Washington had even imagined they could do what they had just done.
Nevertheless, SAC Intelligence was now sure that there were Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba.
General Smith immediately informed General Power, and General Power undoubtedly passed the word to General LeMay before the day was out.
General Smith also directed the chief of the Special Projects Lab, 1stLt William B Sullivan, to make a copy of the tracker film for the Research Center, since General Power wanted to be briefed.
The tracker film which would go to NPIC was done first, probably on the prototype Variscan viewer which allowed the Pis to enlarge the image so they could more quickly identify the location of the aircraft and determine where the clouds were.
This film wa^s dispatched to Washington, probably by T-39, to be available for ""the readout of the main camera film.
HUfCrnw^n -— 21 UNCLASSIFIED pgftpiii x # * Center's copy were enlargeerto make very large briefing boards for General Power, it was very high quality photography, and the Pis were able to distinguish a remarkable amount of detail.
F"" model had been made ready at Edwards, and Major Anderson had been checked out in it.
That evening it was ferried to McCoy, while Major Anderson was flown to McCoy as a passenger on a KC-135.
The eight cans of film were delivered at midmorning on 15 October and. were quickly distributed among the waiting PI teams.
Since this had been a short mission, there were only three teams, of two Pis each, composed of CIA, Air Force, Army, and Navy people.
Because of the Banes site, they searched next for cruise missile launchers and attendant guidance radars.
After a systematic analysis of the photography, the team determined that the six objects were missile transporters.
The measurements, computed manually by all members of the team, were consistently in the 60to 75-foot range.
The position and size of the equipment did not correspond to anything they had seen before.
Di Renzo called in Jay Quantrill, an all-source intelligence analyst specializing in SAMs and MRBMs.
Quantrill searched his looseleaf volumes of photographs taken at Moscow parade's and from Soviet handbooks, settling finally on a full side view of a missile--an SS-4.
NPIC at that time had closer ties with DIA than was later the case; and in the early evening Dave Parker, NPIC's deputy director, called John Hughes, a special assistant to the director of DIA, and asked him to come in and look at what appeared to be an important discovery.
John Hughes had been an Army photo interpreter ' at NPIC whose specialty was missiles.
When he left the Army, Lt Gen Joseph F Carroll, the first Director of DIA, had asked him to become a special assistant.
Now he came to the Center, looked at the photographs, talked with the Pis, and made .up his mind.
Convinced that these were offensive missiles, he went to inform General Carroll.
After hearing the evidence, General Carroll sent him and another analyst to brief the deputy Secretary of Defense, Roswell Gilpatric.
John Hughes presented the facts from notes and told Gilpatric the photography would be available the next day.
Gilpatric asked Hughes to be ready to brief the' Secretary of Defense first thing in the morning.
As the search wenton, a second MRBM site was found, then the beginnings of a third.
He returned at 0600 on 16 October to review the briefing boards and background notes which had been prepared during the night.
At 0730 he briefed Ray Cline, the Deputy Director for Intelligence at CIA headquarters.
There they briefed McGeorge Bundy, the President's special assistant for national security affairs, who informed President Kennedy that there was now hard evidence of the presence of offensive missiles in Cuba.
The President directed him to set up an extraordinary meeting at 1145 to hear the briefing.
The Secretary of Defense had been briefed by John Hughes and General Carroll before he arrived.
Tuesday morning, the 0-2 photography by itself reveal n All they could really distinguish were cl ^*/^f Gilding o£ a as easily have been intended for farming or for the buiiog or a h lull.
Most of them including President ^e^jo^^ad to take ^ . the word of the intelligence community th at n ac Q / Cristobal was the construction of missile bases. meet almost continuously f« ^he next 12 days a his i5SS2UcSSJMr ft x» 5 gor £..1n ^th. joint The dominant feeling that ^ningwas stunned J«P»|J' ike Clearly some form of action ^s rejuired-^erhaps a n a i & on the missile sites.
Ke ; n f J s ,, f r i S ' Sis second was thatsharp increase in the number of """" 2 ""j|^|' o£ H the missiles until . there must be no disclosure of the presence he had decided what to do about them.
Since they could not agree, McGeorge Bundy C>3 suggested that they talk to the President.
On 15 October Major Heyser and Major Anderson had overflown Cuba, bringing back more imagery of San Cristobal as well as other areas.
Even though theSoviets-had .apparently known about U-2 surveillance of Cuba since at least March, no efforts were being made to camouflage what was going on.
Photo interpreters were able to identify missile hold tents at the third San Cristobal MRBM site, which had been bare of everything but arriving equipment the day before.
Along with the tents, pads and missile emplacements were emerging, and concrete arches for a bunkered nuclear storage facility were visible.
The evidence of detailed preplanning and urgency was clear at other sites.
IL-28 bomber crates were lined up at San Julian Airfield, in readiness for assembly.
A SAM site at Bahia Honda was operational, with missiles visible on every other launcher.
Most ominous of all were two sites-at Guanajay, with four pads each and a bunker in between.
They were similar to IRBM sites identified in the USSR and were estimated to be intended for the SS-5, one of the Soviets' most advanced missile systems at the time, with a range of over 2,000 NM. y4 At McCoy, on the evening of 16 October, Col Ellsworth A Powell of Headquarters SAC reconnaissance arrived with a TOP SECRET operations order, BRASS KNOB, which outlined requirements for aerial photographic reconnaissance over Cuba.
With the sharp increase in U-2 overflights, more SAC pilots and SAC ""A"" model U-2s had to be brought into the program.
These pilots were Maj Buddy L Brown, Maj James A Quails, Maj Edwin G Emerling, Capt Gerald E Mcllmoyle, Capt Roger H Herman, Capt Charles Kern, Capt Robert L Primrose, Capt David W Schmarr, and Capt George M Bull.
Of the six missions of 17 October, four were launched from Laughlin in ""A"" models flown by Majors Brown and Quails and Captains Herman and Bull, three taking off in a spot thunderstorm well before daylight, the f ourth — Major Brown — shortly after noon.
The other two missions were flown by Majors Heyser and_ Anderson out of McCoy in mid-morning.
Capt Bull had obtained photography on which the Pis were able to identify two more MRBM sites, under construction at Sagua La Grande.
Their film was ferried to NAVPIC for processing, and the intelligence derived from .their, film was .in the hands of Defense Department officials within a few hours after the U-2s landed.
Major Heyser brought back photography on which the Pis identified what appeared to be a missile fuel storage farm--since the missiles were liquid fueled, they required significant storage facilities.
Major Anderson had flown over San Cristobal and Guanajay to obtain new coverage; from that film, the intelligence analysts estimated that the MRBM sites would have a refire capability and that, the IRBMs at Guanajay would attain an emergency combat capability as soon as 15 November.
Major Brown, overflying San Julian Airfield, had obtained photography revealing the ongoing assembly of the IL-28 bombers, with one already complete.
Almost without exception they were SAC people, though General Smith allowed a few JSTPS people, such as an Army defense analysis expert in Target Development, to be brought in on it.
SAC aircraft maintained a nationwide pickup and delivery service for the film, with General Smith couriering much of it himself.
There was no longer any significant delay in-getting main camera photography.
As soon as possible after the original film has developed, typically within eight hours to a da> and a half, SAC received a duplicate negative which was also couriered to Offutt.
The Soviets had developed a navigation and trajectory system, originally pioneered during World War LI by the Germans, which required the launch pads actually to be oriented in the direction in which the missilewas supposed to go.
One of the Trajectory Center's responsibilities was to determine the planned targets of missile sites in the Soviet Union.
Now they did the same for the sites •in Cuba, finding that they were oriented toward major military and command-and-control installations, including Washington.
Since the afternoon of 16 October, the U-2 photography had come before the United States Intelligence Board so that they could examine it and estimate the degree of danger.
On 17 October they produced their first estimate based en the intensified' U-2 overflights.
If both types were operational, the Soviets would be able to deliver an initial salvo of nuclear warheads on targets in the United States as far away as Wyoming and Montana.
The next day, Thursday, the USIB was .able to estimate that the missiles in Cuba would have a nuclear warhead potential of about half the estimated ICBM capacity of the entire Soviet Union.
Within ExComm, there was no dispute over the tremendous challenge to American prestige which the missiles represented.
The overhanging question, still unanswered, was how to get them out of Cuba without war.
Late in the evening of 18 October, members were still debating whether the best course of actionwas an air strike or a naval blockade.
The trend favored a United States naval blockade of Cuba, in which all ships approaching Cuba would be inspected.
This would leave the President several other options if it proved unsuccessful.
By Friday night there was broad agree-' ment that the blockade would be the best and least provocative response, with further armed action to follow if necessary.
On 18 October Majors Heyser and Anderson flew again; Major Heyser brought back photography of a third IRBM site, this one at Remedios.
Since SAC was flying the missions, the intensity of activity within SAC Intelligence was at a peak that had never been seen before.
In addition to the tracker film, copies of the main camera photography were reaching SAC by plane within hours of the original processing.
The Pis of the S44th picked out areas that had something significant on them and had enlargements made for further analysis.
The information from the imagery was plotted and its intelligence worth evaluated.
C_ UNCLASSIFIED h F CD CD x CO CO UNCLASSIFIED *»— — x „ Intelligence, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, and UIA and compared with their own analysis and that of NPIC and others in the Washington area, to determine what should be briefed to the President.
The RB-47 aircraft of the 55 SRW were still flying their COMMON CAUSE missions for the surveillance of Cuba by means of both ELINT and aerial photography.
On 13 October the 55th had set up an operating location at MacDill AFB, Florida, to support the COMMON CAUSE missions, and on 14 October SAC raised the requirement to two missions a day.
All the material was sent back to Headquarters SAC for evaluation, as well as the ELINT from the U-2 missions.
The ELINT specialists in the 544th's Defense Analysis Center processed the data and made a stuay of Cuban defense elements, matching the ELINT with the photography and determining the location of SAMs and"" radars.
By 20 October all-source analysis had established the offensive order of battle in Cuba as six MRBM sites with 24 launchers, three 1RBM sites with 12 launchers, and 42 IL-28 bombers.
MRBMs had been seen at some sites, but no IRBMs--those were still at sea. iU0 By 20 October, SAC U-2 activities at McCoy had _ become almost a routine operation.
Colonel Keegan of the Air Estimates Division had taken over a part of General Smith's, role as SAC Intelligence representative at McCoy, flying back and forth from Offutt on the T-39s.
Additional crews and support personnel flown 'in from Laughlin AFB, Texas, brought the SAC complement at what was now an operating location to 11 pilots, four navigators, and 68 airmen.
The day of a U-2 pilot slated to overfly Cuba began soon after midnight, when he awoke, ate, and went to the Operations building for his preflight briefing.
By that time the operations planners had completed his mission folder, using information received the evening before from the SAC Reconnaissance Control Center at Offutt.
Pilots usually left McCoy about 0800 local time, and missions lasted two to five hours.
Three missions flew on 20 October, and three more on both 1l and 23 October.
On the afternoon of 19 October, messages had gone to the Atlantic and Caribbean commands, warning of possible air attacks from Cuba, and United States SAM batteries had been directed to increase their readi. ness.
That afternoon, when the President met with rxComm, the decision was made to begin with the blockade and, if need be, move up the ladder of military responses rung by rung.
On the afternoon of 21 October, the National Security Council ratified the decisions already hammered out by ExComm. 1 CIA representatives had left that morning to brief the governments of the United Kingdom, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, and Canada.
On Monday, 22 October, some hours before the President was to address the nation on television, the allies were shown the photographic evidence.
On the morning of 22 October, the JCS issued a blockadeplanning directive to the Atlantic Fleet. -SAC missile crews were ordered to maximum alert.
At noon, from the SAC underground Command Post at Offutt, General Power started dispersing his B-47 bombers to military and civilian airports in various parts of the country, each with its assigned load of nuclear weapons.
He ordered an unprecedented one-eighth of .the B-52 bomber force into the air.
For 30 days and nights thereafter, part of the B-52 force was in the air at all times, in the biggest airborne alert in SAC's history.
As the hour approached, those who could sought out television sets tofollow the President's speech.
Wilsonfai Tliomas S Pimi; hi Geo (till K tapta; II Cm llilti H, i liNCiASSFm 0&mm x# 33 * The next day,"" 23 October, the OAS voted unanimously to support a US-resolution authorizing the use of force m a blockade of Cuba.
At the Pentagon that evening, McNamara announced that the latest U-2 photographs showed work going ahead on the Cuton missile sites and 25 Soviet ships on the way, their course unchanged in the past 24 hours.
That day, special low-level reconnaissance flights by Navy aircraft had begun, to keep abreast of work on the missile sites.
From then into early November, the continuing SAC surveillance was augmented by Navy and TAC low-level sorties, which proved very useful in the technical evaluation of equipment capabilities at installations pinpointed earlier by the -U-2 photography.
General Smith had made an agreement with Col Rockly Triantafellu, TAC's Director of Intelligence, to provide some SAC assistance, because Colonel Triantafellu did not have enough qualified people.
On Sunday, 21 October, Lt Col Norm E Shaw, chief of the Research Branch of the Targets division, was sent down to MacDill.
As yet the only reconnaissance support on the scene was an Army unit with equipment in vans.
Then General Smith sent some photo processing specialists and Pis to MacDill, and TAC brought down some materials from Langley.
A barracks was speedily remodeled into a photo processing center, -in which, as the crisis continued, new equipment was installed directly from the manufacturer.
Since SAC was phasing out its operation at MacDill, the_ simulator was no longer needed.
So the simulator came out, and within three days the building had been transformed into a commandpost and tactical reconnaissance center modeled on SAC's Reconnaissance Control Center, complete with hot lines to Langley and all the other bases where TAC was operating.
SAC had provided TAC with the photomosaic showing where all the sites were, for mission planning.
The aircraft went in low, flying at two to five hundred feet, around midday to get shadow-free photography.
The film was rushed to NPIC for exploitation, though Langley, like Offutt, got copies later.
J collection effort had become even more'intense 25 rnmL rlulu eS J d r ent s P ublic revelation.
This project began after the identification of the pieces that the Soviets brought in for the SS-5 si tes--precast concrete pieces that made the SS-5 a very ""distinctive system.
During the crisis it seemed likely"" that if the Soviets were putting missiles into Cuba, they would start putting them in other places very shortly; and ""How lo Build a Missile Site"" was developed to alert photo interpreters to such deployments and aid in early detection.
The briefing identified each piece of the portable SS-4 and SS-5 launchers and support equipment and cartooned the assembly of the site.
It was"" completed and-presented ■ in-the -mid's t -of-the -crisis ; but it became quitefamous in the intelligence community, and Colonel Tighe later gave it to distinguished groups of military and civilian leaders in Washington and at Offutt.
Target installations were weaponeered, and the Defense Analysis Center studied ingress and egress routes.
DIA's main effort still centered on the analysis with John Hughes as well as the CIA representatives briefing the President in the White House.
Navy reconnaissance planes had made careful note of the ships that carried dry cargo, particularly five ships built in Japan for the lumber trade, with extra large hatches wide enough to accommodate IRBMs below decks.
The position, speed, and direction of each Soviet ship had been carefully plotted, and there was^ reason to expect the first interception within hours.
While military attaches in Moscow watched around the clock for any clue that might illuminate Soviet intentions and reactions to the situation, the United States waited tensely, for. the first Navy attempt * (UJ He too later Became a major general and SAC DCS/Intelligence.
Reporters pressed him to confirm or deny reports that some Soviet ships bound for Cuba had turned »*•""• but he would not comment.
In fact, that afternoon it was beginning to appear that the Soviet ships nearest Cuba had apparently stopped or altered course.
The reason was not yet clear; at the Pentagon, the military chiefs speculated^ that the ships might have altered course to rendezvous with Soviet submarines, six of which had already been reported in the area, and then try to force their way through the quarantine . yLI One certainty was that the Soviets in Cuba were reacting vigorously to the President's announcement.
At the beginning of the quarantine, on 24 October, the_ Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic , Adm Robert L Dennison,. had tentatively asked the Air Force to help locate and identify shipping.
The 303rd was to launch seven KC-97s on 25 October for a 13-hour search of the eastern portion of the area assigned to SAC; the 98th was to launch nine tankers.
The 55 SRW was to prepare to fulfill any subsequent missions requested.:>U The tankers flew the sea search mission, radioing their sightings back to SAC headquarters, from which the information was passed to the Navy.
Soon after they became airborne, Headquarters Air Force contacted the SAC battle staff and asked that cameras be used to get a photographic record of the sightings.
SAC obtained cameras andfilm and shipped them by KC-97 to Lajes and Kindley, but no further sea search missions were required of the refueling squadrons.
Preparations were under way for the use of the RB-47s in the BLUE BANNER sea search.
Just before midnight on 24 October, five tankers ha-d left Forbes for Kindley to support the reconnaissance effort.
They flew to an area near Bermuda for refueling, then searched in assigned areas east and south of the island.
Each carried a second navigator to act as an observer and relay ship locations to SAC, When an aircraft made a sighting, either visually or by radar, it descended to about 5,000 feet to take photographs and determine name and registry.
After a second refueling, four of the aircraft returned to Forbes after a 15-hour mission; the fifth had landed at Kindley beca.use of a radio malfunction.
The film was flown to Offutt, where it was processed by the 544th in a tremendous effort that kept some of the photo processing specialists at their task for over 24 hours straight.
Shortly before noon on the 25th, CINCLANT had requested another mission the next day in the same area.
A JCS message the same day said SAC should be ready to continue these missions-the implication was indefinitely.
These were probably the days during which a ship called the Odessa was the focus of a great deal of concern in the intelligence community.
The Odessa had left the Black Sea and then escaped the reconnaissance network — and a good many people' in the intelligence community suspected it was carrying the nuclear warheads for the missiles.
Navy PB-4Ys looked for it f or .several days, flying the wide expanse of the Atlantic Ocean in cri-sscross fashion, while the President and the Secretary of Defense grew more and more impatient.
Many B-52s and KC-135s on airborne alert flew across the Atlantic to air refueling areas near the coast of Spain.
There may also have been some signals intelligence tipoff suggesting where to look.
The B-S2s used their navigational radar to spot blips in the water and then descended to inspect the ships visually.
The Odessa never came any closer to Cuba but eventually turne*d around and returned to the Soviet Union.
The first intercept of a Soviet-bloc ship had taken place on the morning of 25 October.
Twenty-two hours after the quarantine had gone into effect, the tanker Bucharest was allowed to pass 46 UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED «""^ . b , , t ** 3 "" through the line of warships after declaring by radio that she carried only petroleum.
An East German passenger ship had also been allowed to pass without being boarded, but Navy ships followed both in case a second intercept was required However, Navy reconnaissance had determined overnight that the 16 dry cargo vessels which had changed course or stopped on Wednesday were lying dead in the water or moving in uncertain circles.
Some had turned around-apparently haying received orders no to risk running the blockade wU^-msitiye cargoes United States aircraft tracked them all the way ba^->r.
That afternoon, in a tense meeting of the UN Security cil, the Soviet ambassador to the UN had challenged the United States ssador, Adlai Stevenson, to produce hard evidence -in proof fhrpp a dav The sea search continued.
Early t mo ning y the 6 first boarding and search of a Cuba-boun shiP haH taken nlace with great care not to offend the Soviets unnec essarily A dry cargo ship of neutral registry, sailing under Soviet charter had qSietly submitted to boarding, presumably on Sov let instructions, 'and proved to be carrying no weapons But the point had been made that the Navy was exercising the right stop and search all vessels bound for Cuba.
The latest aerial photographs of Cuba showed that work on the missile sites was^. going ahead rapidly, and serious efforts were under way to camouflage the activity.
The President had ordered more low-level reconnaissance flights, one every two hours.
That evening a long letter from Khrushchev^ to Kennedy arrived by teletype.
It showed some signs of willingness to negotiate the removal of the missiles.
Khrushchev stated that the • ships now sailing -to Cuba carried no weapons at all and suggested that if the President were to give a no-invasion pledge and recall the American fleet', the problem of ""the weapons which you call offensive"" would appear in a different light.
It was a strange, disjointed letter, without any specific commitment that the Soviet missiles would be dismantled in a verifiable manner.
ExComm reconvened at 10 that night in extraordinary session to consider the secret letter.
They decided to treat it as a bonafide proposal meriting a serious reply.
The State Department's Soviet affairs experts worked all night, analyzing the letter alongside a memorandum of a Soviet proposal, made through informal channels, that seemed to outline a settlement tolerable to both sides.
At ExComm, McCone reported that a Soviet ship had detached itself from the others outside the quarantine lineand was headed for Cuba, while work on the missile sites was going ahead day and night, with no sign of slackening.
And before the committee could settle down to drafting a reply to the secret letter, Radio Moscow started broadcasting a second Khrushchev letter addressed to Kennedy.
It was markedly different in style and tone from the first, bearing the signs of Soviet-style group thinking.
It demanded that if the United States wanted the missiles out of Cuba, it must remove its own missiles from Turkey.
These routes were designed to sweep a wide area of suspicion, and crews were briefed to go as low as necessary to make positive identification of all surface vessels operating in the area.
But the third RB-47 crashed on takeoff, killing all four ere* members-the integral crew, Major Britton, Captain Constable, and Lieutenant Rasmussen, and Captain Dennis who had been added to the crew to aid in the search portion of the mission.
Distribution Outside the USA ProQuest Information and Learning, The Quorum, Barnwell Road, Cambridge CB5 8SW, England ilxTJ-iiTlii I.I L2£ in u in jA UNCLASSIFIED steHgT* ess than ten minutes after the accident, Capt Joseph L Carney and his RB-47 crew finally located the Grozny at 2350,\ 6110V,. ""7 hey had descended for ship surveillance and"" recognition m an area where they had sighted three ships.
After determining that, they climbed back., up to find the. other shipping previously spotted in the area.
At approximately 1,500 feet altitude they spotted one of the other snips.
Markings on the ship included the Russian name in seven letters' The smoke stack in the rear has a large red band around it and ' the sickle and hammer displa>ed on the side of the stack The deck was covered with long, silvery cylinders in a fore and aft position.
These cylinders were covered with shields across the top reaching about halfway down the sides of the cylinders and placed so that there was air space between the coverings and 'the cylinders."" 14 ^ fc After the initial identification run, the RB-47 experienced aircraft radar jamming, apparently from the Groznv, which began trying to hide in a squall line.
The RB-47 ia a ""fa s s e s at 'the Hl£HZ from a11 angles while the crew photographed the ship Then they uirected ""Rocket"" to the target area, -anti from ""Rocket's"" command ship they relayed orders to ""Rocket"" to remain unseen by the target and 17 NM in trail.
For over two hours the RB-47 circleo the Grozny while directing the two United States ships to the area. l\ken the Navy had"" contact with the Soviet ship, the RB-47 returned to kindley, where its cameras were unloaded and the film flown to Offutt for processing.
The JCS reported later in the day that surface ships were following the Grozny , but out of si glit.
That same morning, kaj Rudolph Anderson, Jr., had taken off from.cCoy for yet another U-2 overflight of Cuba.
Over the eastern end of the island a projectile, presumably from a Soviet-manned SAM site, exploded near his aircraft.
The news of the loss of the U-2 arrived at HxComm while Radio Moscow was still broadcasting Khrushchev's second letter.
The committee had consideied prethe appropriate-response would viously be an. bat if a U-2 was shot down strike.
Now suddenly the JUPITERs were on the bargaining table, and the United States could not very well sacrifice them under threat from Soviet missiles in Cuba.
I 53 But the President knew that the Turkish missiles were a sideissue.
If he had to order an armed attack on Cuba, it would not be because of them but because the Soviets had tried by stealth to alter the balance of forces between east and west.
And since the quarantine was not apparently succeeding in forcing the removal of the missiles, more drastic steps would have to be taken in a matter of hours, since the MRBMs were nearing operational readiness.
An air strike against the missile sites, followed by an invasion of Cuba, was beginning to emerge as the 33 m lost likely alternative as the day wore on.
Meanwhile .there Robert Kennedyhad first broadcast letter and reply t were a valid proposal, and ing the reply.
He finished of this final approach to had not been overruled since ept a set of terms Khrushchev There was no reason for optimism.
Late that evening, after a copy of the letter had been delivered to the Soviet ambassador, ExComm met again.
They had just served an ultimatum, making it clear that unless the work stopped on the missile sites, there would be a grave risk of war.
Kennedy -arranged with McNamara to review the air-strike planning the next morning.
Sunday, 28 October, was a clear, bright day like that other Sunday on which Major Heyser had made his fateful overflight.
Kennedy's last letter to Khrushchev had been a shot in the dark, eagerly accepting a proposal never formally offered.
The Cuban 54 MMCILMSOIFOi® uhwjwoh-icu WKffi&T overflights were continuing, and there still was no sign of slackening in the work of making the MRPMs ready to fire.
A few minutes before nine o'clock, Radio Moscow announced that it. would broadcast an important statement on the hour.
The Executive """""" Committee waited, speculating gloomily that if Khrushchev's answer was no, the United States would have to launch an air strike._no later than Tuesday morning.
At noon, after an hour-long session with ExComm, he drafted a quick acceptance statement, which was released to White' House reporters and beamed to Moscow over the Voice _of America.
But he was aware that the Soviet commitments had yet to be redeemed, and there remained also the problems of getting UN inspectors into Cuba to certify the removal of the missiles and of making sure that the IL-28 bombers — which the Soviets had formally given to Cuba, instead of retaining control as they had with the missiles--were removed as well.
After the Grozny mission, SAC had terminated its operations at Kindley, and all the 55 SRW aircraft had returned to Forbes by the night of 28 October.
But they remained ready until 29 November to support further CINCLANT requirements.
Since Castro adamantly' refused to allow UN inspectors into Cuba, the dismantlement and removal had to be verified by SAC high-altitude and TAC and Navy low-level photography.
Because of the possibility that an air strike might still be required, ELINT collection against air defenses continued at a high level.
On 30 October the 55 SRW established an operating location at Little Rock AFB, Arkansas., to support the COMMON CAUSE missions, which continued to fly three a day until 22 November.
There he learned that the CIA had never shown its U-2 pilots the product they acquired.
He believed it was important that the pilots see what they were getting, so that they would understand the need for precise navigation and careful photography.
So at Laughlin he started showing them enlarged photos of the results of their missions and briefing' their contributions—an innovation that raised morale and also greatly improved the quality of the photography since the pilots now realized the importance of making checkpoints precisely and keeping the aircraft in .a. -stabLe .mode ..when, collecting the photography, 16 4 The United States photo interpretation team at Laughlin was responsible for making sure that what went into or came out of Cuba was closely watched and meticulously measured.
The PI reports were extremely detailed; in one instance, team members went so far as to count the sugar sacks they' could see through a hatch, in the hold of a Soviet Ship and identify the sacks loaded on trucks.
In this way, using very ' detailed photography',~~""t""he photo interpreters tracked the progress of the withdrawal, as erectors were removed, launch stands broken up, missile ready tents removed.
Convoys moved out, taking the missiles and associated equipment to Mariel and La Isabela and Casilda to be loaded on ships.
The vessels sailed out, to be intercepted by the quarantine fleet for close alongside inspection.
But the same reconnaissance showed that the IL-28s were not being shipped out.
Analysis of the Grozny photographs had revealed, meanwhile, that the mysterious silver cylinders were not disassembled missile's or missile fuel.
By 1 November the United States knew the names of the ships which had been carrying missiles, and the Gr °zny was allowed to proceed to Cuba.
By 10 November it had been determined that 42 Soviet missiles had departed Cuba.
But Castro was still holding out over the bombers, despite the arguments of Anastas Mikoyan, who had been in Havana since 2 November.
The following day, Khrushchev announced that the USSR would remove all the bombers, and Kennedy announced that 'the blockade would be lifted.
By 6 December a total of 42 had been counted aboard these ships batind for the USSR, thus drawing to a close the immediate threat of Soviet offensive systems in Cuba.
On 27 November, when it was clear that the II, -28s were really being moved out, SAC had returned to a normal DEFCON 4 state of readiness.
The day after the last IL-28 left Cuba, President Kennedy visited Headquarters SAC and was given a tour of the underground command post and the Defense Analysis Center.
He presented General Power with a unique plaque' citing SAC's extraordinary role in the Cuban crisis.
But it was overwhelmingly clear that SAC reconnaissance and intelligence had played key roles.
President Kennedy had earlier praised the contributions of the reconnaissance pilots.
But the skill with which they completed their missions would have been largely wasted if the organization for quickly processing and delivering the intelligence they gathered to the highest levels of government had not existed.
The processing of raw data in the form of exposed camera film and. tapes from ELINT recorders was as vital to the reconnaissance effort as flying the mission.
The Cuban crisis was a fast-developing situation in which intelligence had to be quickly processed, interpreted, and the results delivered to decision-making officials in time for them to act on it.
But he believed the Air Force must continue to modernize its intelligence processing equipment to match the speed and sophistication of the collection systems, and to maintain redundancy in this equipment so that the increased demands of a time of crisis, like Cuba, could be met.
Within SAC Intelligence, lessons, learned during the crisis contributed directly to the modernization that has been a continuing theme ever since.
Dean Rusk, Secretary of State General Maxwell D Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff John A McCone.
Southard, ""Two Witnesses for the Defense,"" Studies in Intelligence , Fall 1964; Brugioni.
Most names in the narrative have been checked against this or the Air Force Register.
Article, SECRET, Thaxter L Goodell, ""Cratology Pays Off,"" Studies in' Intelligence , fall 1964; Tighe Notes.
SAC Briefing; Message, UNCLASSIFIED, Foreign Broadcast Information Service, 3 Mar 62.
See note above; Monograph, SECRET, HQ SAC/HO, The C ollateral Maritime Mission of the Strategi c Air Command, 31 Dec 80. — — ; 136.
Monograph, TOP SECRET, HQ SAC/HO, SAC Operat ions in the Cuban Crisis of 1962 , 1963.
Histories, SECRET, 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing, May 1962 and September November 1962.
Histories, SECRET, 544th Reconnaissance Technical Group, October December 1962.
Articles * Article, SECRET, ""Cratology Pays Off , n Studies in Intelligence, Fall, 1964.
Article, SECRET, ""A Crucial Estimate Relived , M Studies in Intelligence , Spring 1964.
Article, SbCKET, ""Tiie Missiles' in Cuba ,"" Studies in Intelligence , Fall 1964.
Article, SECRET, ""Two Witnesses for the Defense ,"" Studies in Intelligence , Fall 1964.
The existence of this journal is to be treated as information privy to the United States official community.) 74 $m ©racoM Mil @mh r if®® (Wbcom msi ©mily Other Sources Briefing, -SECRET, HQ SAC/DIET, ""Cuban Threat Developments , 11 1963.
Interview, SECRET, with Maj Gen James C Enney , and Col Norman Shaw , 5 April 1984.
