This list is unlikely to be complete — I’ve made something of a preliminary survey, but I don’t claim to have checked everywhere — and if there are things I’m missing, please let me know in the comments or by e-mail.
One obvious thing missing are chapters in edited volumes; those are harder to find using traditional academic search engines.
As for the “rules for inclusion,” they are both boring and common-sensical.
Must be something that is primarily in the genre of the history of nuclear weapons or nuclear power.
I’m just trying to make a useful list here and some inclusions/exclusions are going to be necessarily arbitrary.
I have not read all of these — not even most of these — I do not endorse any of them.
I thought about including book reviews, which are often quite useful and insightful , but decided it would make this list completely ungainly and my task disproportionately difficult.
Project Dribble and the quest for nuclear weapons treaty verification in the Cold War era.
Connelly, Matthew, Matt Fay, Giulia Ferrini, Micki Kaufman, Will Leonard, Harrison Monsky, Ryan Musto, Taunton Paine, Nicholas Standish, and Lydia Walker.
Google Scholar proved to be no help whatsoever — too much noise, too little signal, too hard to filter by discipline.
Thanks to my old friend Anthony Walker for helping me with the Japanese translations.
Thanks to Will Thomas and Michael Gordin for giving this a look-see before I put it up.
If I’ve missed something or screwed something up — highly likely — please get in touch.
I wrote an essay-review of this for Historical Studies in the Natural Sciences under the title “Nuclear others,” available here.
Iversen’s biographical account of Rocky Flats was discussed by me in part here.
I discussed these Krige articles on US-UK centrifuge history in this post.
For a discussion of Malloy’s article on radiation effects, see my post here.
For a discussion of Norris and Kristensen’s accounting of those nukes in Cuba and elsewhere, see my post here.
A little discussion of Tobey’s article on nuclear assassination is here, along with my own thoughts.
My article on the “Philadelphia Story” is discussed and linked-to here.
There’s also the upcoming “5 Myths about Nuclear Weapons” by Ward Wilson which is the most concise argument against nuclear weapons that I have come across.
December 28, 2012 at 11:06 am Thanks — yes, there are a number of “2013” books released at the end of 2012, but I figure I’ll just include them in next year’s, just to make things neat and straightforward.
FirstView of Cambridge Journals Online published the following on 11/2/12: Jonathan Hogg and Christoph Laucht, “Introduction: British Nuclear Culture,” British Journal for the History of Science 45 December 2012.
These FirstView things trip me up with regards to citation and keeping track of them.
December 28, 2012 at 11:31 am From the Manhattan Project, I learned that the most efficient way to assemble critical material is to pack explosives around it.
December 28, 2012 at 11:33 am I don’t really try to keep up in any regular way, but I’ve found that having a curated bibliography goes a long way in keep abreast of what sorts of things I ought to notice.
December 28, 2012 at 11:31 am Lawrence Freedman of King’s College London has written several nuke-themed books.
December 28, 2012 at 11:40 am Hi, Alex, Thank you so much for publishing this list.
The Congo ore was of a much higher purity rate than any other ores available to the Allies at the time and made the job much easier.
December 30, 2012 at 10:30 am It is no problem that you write in Russian.
You are correct about the re-opening of the mine during the war – I had forgotten about that.
December 30, 2012 at 7:35 pm Back in the day I was an Emergency Planning Officer in Scotland.
When I first started the job in 1989 we were funded to carry out Civil Defence planning, but I was employed to look at Emergency Planning on an All-Hazards basis.
This was our way of making good use of government resources for a greater public need.
January 17, 2013 at 2:14 pm Another one: Christoph Laucht, Elemental Germans: Klaus Fuchs, Rudolf Peierls and the Making of British Nuclear Culture, 1939-59.
January 2, 2015 at 2:02 pm the state of the field as it is represented in print.
