Thirteen Days is the story of mankind's closest brush with nuclear Armageddon.
The movie captures the tension that the crisis provoked and provides an example of how foreign policy was made in the last half of the 20th century.
Supplemented with the information provided in this Learning Guide, the film shows how wise leadership during the crisis saved the world from nuclear war, while mistakes and errors in judgment led to the crisis.
With the corrections outlined in this Learning Guide, the movie can serve as a motivator and supplement for a unit on the Cold War.
For example, it believed that the missiles were not operational and that only 2-3,000 Soviet personnel were in place.
Accordingly, the air strike was planned for the 30th, before any nuclear warheads could be installed.
Further, 9 SRBMs were ready to be used against the Americans in case of an invasion.
See also McNamara's interview in ""The Fog of War"" HISTORICAL ANTECEDENTS OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Although the crisis began and ended in October of 1962, the story began much earlier.
Almost immediately after World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the U.S. deteriorated, ending the cooperation which enabled the Allies to defeat Nazi Germany.
Russian occupying forces overstayed their tour of duty in the Middle East.
Britain and America thwarted the expansion of the Azerbaijani Soviet Republic into Iran and began the policy of containment attempting to restrict Soviet expansion.
As the Cold War took hold, Americans became alarmed at the spread of Communist regimes in East Europe and East Asia.
The Soviets were worried about postwar unity among the United States and powerful West European nations.
Both the Communist bloc and the capitalist democracies lurched from crisis to crisis.
These ranged from the Soviet blockade of Berlin, the Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace, Chinese shelling of Taiwanese islands Quemoy and Matsu, and the confrontation between Soviet ally Egypt and Western allies Israel, France and Britain over the Suez Canal.
The IRBMs could not reach the U.S. but they could reach Western Europe.
Well over a hundred million people would have been killed in the United States and the NATO countries.
While there were defenses to the long range bombers, there were no defenses to ICBMs or IRBMs.
In 1962 while the United States government knew that its nuclear forces were much stronger than those of the Soviet Union, it realized that losing its major cities with casualties approaching 100,000,000 people was not acceptable.
In addition, through treaty obligations and as a practical matter, no United States government could permit Europe to be destroyed.
However, the Soviets acutely felt the inferiority of their nuclear deterrent.
The effort to place missiles in Cuba was an effort by the Russians to improve their nuclear capability quickly and inexpensively.
Missile transporters and missile-ready tents where fueling and maintenance took place.
The U.S., under the Kennedy Administration, increased military expenditures and increased its lead in nuclear weapons over the Russians, while, at the same time, refusing to disavow a nuclear first strike.
In addition, despite the Bay of Pigs debacle, the United States continued its efforts to destabilize Cuba and to assassinate its dictator, Fidel Castro.
The Soviet leadership didn't realize how much the United States feared Russia's nuclear deterrent.
These missiles would be able to reach almost all of the continental United States The CIA learned of suspicious activity from intelligence sources on the island and the United States sent U-2 spy planes to investigate.
When a U-2 came back with photographs of missile sites under construction, President Kennedy convened his advisors before announcing the discovery to the world.
While some recommended diplomacy, others pressed for military options, such as air strikes or invasion of Cuba.
Navy quarantined the island of Cuba, preventing any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching the island.
In the meantime, the United States mounted a diplomatic offensive attempting to use world opinion to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles.
Soviet ships tested the blockade, but ultimately chose not to challenge the quarantine.
The United States for its part allowed ships with food and fuel through the quarantine.
Acting without Moscow's approval, a Soviet surface-to-air missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot.
In a confidential side agreement, the United States promised future removal of 15 obsolete Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
President Kennedy had ordered these missiles removed months before but, because of objections from the Turks and bureaucratic inertia, the missiles remained in place.
Difficulties in Communications encountered during the crisis led to the installation of direct telephone Communications between the leaders to avoid any future misunderstandings.
In subsequent years, the countries negotiated a nuclear test ban treaty.
Future presidents and Soviet leaders conducted Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in the 1960s and 1970s to limit the number of nuclear warheads poised to strike the other side.
Never again would America and Russia come to the same level of threat that characterized those thirteen days in October of 1962.
The following additional background will be helpful in understanding the concerns of the participants and their statements, as set out in the film.
In the 1930s a resurgent Nazi Germany violated the restrictions on its military set out in the Versailles treaty that ended WW I Looking to expand, Germany demanded that Czechoslovakia cede to it a part of Czech territory called the Sudentenland in which approximately 3 million ethnic Germans (23% of the population) lived.
At a conference in Munich held to consider Hitler's demands, the leaders of the Western powers agreed to the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia to appease Hitler.
Hitler promised that if Germany absorbed the Sudentenland, it would seek no additional territory.
The Munich conference convinced Hitler that France and Britain were weak, leading directly to the German invasion of Poland.
Kennedy, had been one of the few millionaires to back Franklin Roosevelt in the 1932 election.
In private cables to the State Department and in public speeches, Ambassador Kennedy supported the Munich compromise.
From the time of Munich until long after the United States had declared war on Germany, Joe Kennedy advocated a compromise with Hitler and an isolationist foreign policy.
President Kennedy, as a young man, had written a best selling book criticizing appeasement.
Despite this fact, until the end of the missile crisis, John Kennedy carried the burden of his father's stand in favor of appeasement.
On December 7, 1941, the Imperial Japanese Navy mounted a sneak attack on the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
First, the lesson that an adversary might mount a sneak attack had been absorbed by United States intelligence and was partially responsible for the U-2 flights and aerial reconnaissance that discovered the missiles.
Second, throughout the Excomm deliberations, the fear of losing the moral high ground by mounting a sneak attack on the missile bases served as a restraint on the policy makers.
The men in the Excomm had personal memories of World War II and the Korean War.
President Kennedy, for example, volunteered for combat, hiding back problems that would easily have won him an exemption from military service.
When the PT boat he commanded was rammed and sunk by a Japanese destroyer, Kennedy led his men to a small island several miles away, saving one severely injured sailor by holding the strap to a life preserver between his teeth while he swam to shore.
Kennedy was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for his leadership and courage.
Russia had suffered more from the war than any other nation in terms of casualties and property destruction.
Importantly, Fidel Castro, had experience only in a civil war that was relatively painless.
As will be seen, Castro's willingness to provoke a nuclear war was one of the destabilizing factors in the Crisis.
After WW II, the Allies divided the German capital, the city of Berlin, into four zones of occupation.
Shortly after the war, the Western powers consolidated their zones into a new state called West Germany.
The Russians established a Communist state in their zone called East Germany.
The Western sector of Berlin, despite the fact that it was deep within East German territory, became a part of West Germany.
The status, and as time went on, the prosperity of West Berlin increasingly annoyed the Russians and the East Germans.
In 1948 Stalin suddenly stopped permitting access by land to West Berlin.
The Western powers, led by the U.S., mounted an effective airlift to bring supplies to the city.
The Western democracies made it clear that if the Soviets interfered with the airlift there would be war.
Eventually, when the Russians became convinced that the West would not back down, they dropped the blockade.
As such, it was a cornerstone of the Western policy of ""containment"" which sought to block the expansion of Russian influence and Communist ideology.
Through the years, West Berlin became a wealthy glittering city standing in stark contrast to the drab and relatively impoverished life of East Germany.
West Germany also became an economic powerhouse, dwarfing its Eastern rival.
The situation had become intolerable for the Russians and East Germans.
Cable United States Ambassador to Russia Llewelyn ""Tommy"" Thompson to Kennedy, 1961.
As Khrushchev colorfully put it, Berlin was a ""bone in the throat"" of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko stated to President Kennedy when they met during the crisis that after the November elections in the U.S., the Russians would be ""compelled"" to ""take steps to end the Western presence in Berlin.
In August of 1961, to stop the exodus through Berlin to West Germany, the Russians and East Germans sealed off West Berlin and began construction of the Berlin Wall.
Its defenders were surrounded on all sides by East Germany and superior numbers of Russian and East German troops.
If the United States allowed the Russians to take West Berlin, its Western European partners would feel betrayed and the NATO alliance severely weakened, if not destroyed.
In response to the need of the Western Europeans for maintenance of the status quo in Berlin and because of the West's inability to defend the city using conventional forces, United States policy, enunciated by President Kennedy, was that West Berlin would be defended, if necessary, with a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union.
West Berlin was more important to the Russians and the Europeans than was Cuba.
For the U.S., the maintenance of the NATO alliance was, militarily, more important than removing the missiles from Cuba.
However, the United States public would not tolerate the presence of Russian missiles in the Western Hemisphere, nor would the United States have had any credibility with its allies or its foes if it permitted missiles to be secretly introduced into the island.
In April of 1961 the CIA, with President Kennedy's approval, mounted an invasion of Cuba using Cuban exiles as the initial landing force.
President Kennedy had relied upon the advice of experienced men in the government who told him that the invasion would succeed.
The invasion was an unmitigated disaster for the United States government and for President Kennedy.
The responsible officials, the head of the CIA and an assistant were told by President Kennedy that they were to resign after a decent interval.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed Operation Mongoose which actively tried to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro.
Robert Kennedy, at the direction of the President, personally supervised these activities and was very persistent in pushing the CIA for more agressive action against Cuba and against Castro personally.
He now knew that before making important decisions he needed to explore the possible consequences of each alternative course of action and seek advice from a variety of sources, inside government and out.
The Excomm was an unusual body because it included representatives from outside the government, in this case former Secretary of State Dean Acheson.
Governmental officials from agencies not usually involved in critical military decisions were included in the committee.
Chief among these was Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, a Republican.
As shown in the movie, Adlai Stevenson, ambassador to the United Nations and former two-time Democratic candidate for President, advocated appeasement of the Russians.
President Kennedy protected Stevenson from being ousted from the Excomm and removed as Ambassador to the U.N., as Bobby Kennedy advised.
In the end, Stevenson proved immensely valuable to the United States by dramatically showing that the Russians were lying to the world about the missiles.
In contrast to the way in which President Kennedy reached out to a broad array of advisors for help in making decisions in the crisis, Chairman Khrushchev had very few advisors.
He viewed the members of the Presidium, which would have provided the most experienced and logical pool of advisors, as political adversaries.
For more on Khrushchev and the fact that he conceived of the policy and extended the crisis to attempt to obtain more leverage against the U.S., see discussion below.
As it turned out, when faced with the probability that his ploy in Cuba would lead to nuclear war, and given an out by the U.S., Khrushchev acted in a civilized manner and withdrew the missiles.
IN PRESIDENT KENNEDY'S OWN WORDS President Kennedy secretly made tapes of some of the meetings of the Excomm.
But when we said we're not going to [allow missiles in Cuba] and then they go ahead and do it, and then we do nothing, then I would think that our risks increase.
If they don't have enough ICBMs today, they're going to have them in a year...."" pg.6.
Well, actually, it was a rather dangerous but rather useful play of theirs.
If we do nothing, they have a missile base there with all the pressure that brings to bear on the United States and damage to our prestige.
If we attack Cuba, the missiles, or Cuba, in any way then it gives them a clear line to take Berlin, as they were able to do in Hungary under the Anglo war in Egypt.
We will have been regarded as they think we've got this fixation about Cuba anyway -we would be regarded as the trigger-happy Americans who lost Berlin.
And that we let Berlin go because we didn't have the guts to endure a situation in Cuba.
So they would say that we endangered their interests and security and reunification [of Germany] and all the rest, because of the preemptive action that we took in Cuba.
And thirdly, if we do nothing, then they'll have these missiles and they'll be able to say that any time we ever try to do anything about Cuba, that they'll fire these missiles.
So that I think it's dangerous, but rather satisfactory, from their point of view.
Even last night we talked about Cuba for a while, but Berlin -that's what Khrushchev's committed himself to personally.
So, actually, it's a quite desirable situation from their point of view.
If we go in and take them out on a quick air strike, we neutralize the chance of danger to the United States of these missiles being used, and we prevent a situation from arising, at least within Cuba, where the Cubans themselves have the means of exercising some degree of authority in this hemisphere.
On the other hand, we increase the chance greatly, as I think they -there's bound to be a reprisal from the Soviet Union, there always is -of their just going in and taking Berlin by force at some point.
Which leaves me only one alternative, which is to fire nuclear weapons -which is a hell of an alternative -and begin a nuclear exchange with all this happening.
On the other hand, if we begin the blockade that we're talking about, the chances are they will begin a blockade and say that we started it.
So that, once again, they will say that there will be this feeling in Europe that the Berlin blockade has been commenced by our blockade.
When we balance off that our problem is not merely Cuba but it is also Berlin and when we recognize the importance of Berlin to Europe, and recognize the importance of our allies to us, that's what has made this thing be a dilemma for three days.
Because if we do nothing, we're going to have the problem of Berlin anyway.
There was an additional fact that Khrushchev knew that was extremely important and this was a fact he had not understood when he gave the order to put the missiles in Cuba.
The United States population was unwilling to tolerate hostile nuclear missiles in Cuba.
It was therefore impossible for any United States government to permit the missiles to remain and the United States would go to war, if neccessary, to remove the missiles.
The failure to gauge the reaction of ordinary United States citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev's key mistake in his planning for the crisis.
By 1962, with the advent of nuclear tipped ballistic missiles, that feeling of insulation may have been irrational, but it was still very real.
Khrushchev never dreamed that the U.S. populace would react so dramatically to Russian missiles in Cuba.
As a result, Khrushchev had only incomplete control over the Russian military units in Cuba.
The primary example of this was the shooting down of the American U-2 spy plane over Cuba on October 27.
During the crisis, Castro was sure the United States was going to invade Cuba.
Given the massive military buildup in Florida, and a history that included the attempted invasion at the Bay of Pigs and Operation Mongoose with its sabotage and assassination attempts, Castro had good reason for this belief.
He also knew of the Red Army regiments in Cuba and their nuclear capabilities.
He may not have been completely aware of the great advantage that the United States had in ICBMs but he did know that Russian IRBMs in Cuba could deal a massive blow to his hated enemy to the North.
Castro thought that if an invasion would trigger a nuclear war, the Soviets had the best chance of winning if they struck first with their nuclear weapons.
Castro knew Cuba would be incinerated but was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for the good of his friends in the Communist block.
When Castro proposed to Khrushchev that the Russians begin a nuclear war before the invasion, Khrushchev was horrified.
Khrushchev had already decided to remove the missiles, he was just waiting for the right time.
After learning of Castro's position, Khrushchev decided that Russia had to dismantle the missiles immediately.
Finally, Khrushchev backed down because President Kennedy was willing to provide a formal commitment that, if the missiles were withdrawn, the United States would not invade Cuba and that it would not help others to do so.
This commitment was, in fact, a concession by the United States It gave Khrushchev a way to claim that he had achieved an important objective despite removing the missiles.
President Kennedy is credited with forcing the Russians to remove the missiles without provoking a nuclear war.
With the disclosure of once secret documents, our understanding of Kennedy's triumph has changed, but the crisis is still seen as a tremendous success for him and for United States foreign policy.
In the initial aftermath of the crisis and for many years thereafter, it appeared the removal of the missiles had been achieved without the United States making any real concessions to the Russians.
The scope of Operation Mongoose was not known and it had not been official United States policy to invade Cuba.
Thus, the no invasion pledge was merely a restatement of existing policy.
Over the years, as more about the crisis became public, it become clear that the noninvasion pledge was a real concession.
The Kennedy brothers were actively working to change the government of Cuba and to assassinate Castro.
However, as more information has come out, Kennedy's role in restraining the forces in the United States that wanted to conduct air strikes or invade Cuba has been disclosed.
As shown in the film, while preparing for war if it had to come, President Kennedy always chose actions that would not lead to war.
He ratcheted up the pressure on the Soviet Union with steps that always left the Soviets room to maneuver and time to rationally decide what to do.
Through his willingness to agree formally not to invade Cuba, President Kennedy gave Khrushchev a way out of the crisis.
Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly conduct a massive military build-up in Cuba, introducing 40,000 Red Army troops, and that the 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis (yet another colossal CIA intelligence failure), demonstrate the wisdom of President Kennedy's approach.
By restraining those who wanted to initiate air strikes or an invasion, and by starting the United States response with a naval quarantine, President Kennedy avoided war.
A primary example of Kennedy's restraint occurred on October 27 when a Russian Surface to Air missile shot down an American U-2 spy plane killing the pilot.
He could treat the incident as an intentional escalation ordered by the Kremlin or view it as an unauthorized action by an overeager Soviet commander.
One choice led the world much closer to nuclear war and the other kept alive the hope for a peaceful resolution.
If he had been wrong, and ordered the United States Air Force to take out the SAM battery that had fired on the U-2, we would have been several steps closer to war.
Khrushchev, on the other hand, exhibited extremely poor leadership by initiating the crisis.
He put his country and the entire world at tremendous risk of nuclear holocaust.
However, by backing down and removing the missiles with only the no invasion promise, Khrushchev showed foresight and political courage.
Both sides contributed to the crisis, although the consensus among historian is that most responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviets.
It appears that Khrushchev had several goals when he initiated the crisis.
He wanted Russia to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities without waiting for Russian scientists and engineers to improve and build Russia's own missile fleet.
At the time of the crisis, Russia had less than 40 ICBMs while the United States had approximately 170.
The United States had an even greater advantage in strategic bombers and submarine based missiles.
If IRBMs could be immediately installed in Cuba rather than waiting to build the ICBMs that could strike the United States from Russia, the Soviet Union would save billions of rubles.
Even with the great U.S. advantage, there was no defense against the 40 ICBMs possessed by the Soviets.
The casualties in such an exchange, tens of millions, were unacceptable to any United States leader.
Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from invasion from the United States in the service of Russian neoimperialism and Communist solidarity.
Even before the crisis, with the history of the Bay of Pigs invasion and the ongoing ""Operation Mongoose"" the Russians and the Cubans had reason to fear United States intentions.
Khrushchev is reported to have made several remarks to close aids that indicated that improving Russia's nuclear capabilities and reducing the United States advantage were important to him.
Castro's reasons to accept the missiles were based upon solidarity with the other Communist countries rather than defending Cuba from a United States attack.
The presence of Russian missiles in Cuba would hinder many of Castro's other goals, such as exporting revolution to other Latin American countries.
For example, Khrushchev could have just sent the 40,000 Red Army troops (or even 5,000 or 10,000) with a mission to defend the island.
Everyone knew that an attack on a large number of Red Army troops would have triggered a larger war.
After all, if they were confined to the island they would only be defensive in nature.
The only reason for the massive Soviet military buildup on the island was to protect the missiles, not Cuba.
Khrushchev wanted to change the status quo in West Berlin and damage the NATO alliance by using the missiles to force the United States to back down on Berlin, or trade West Berlin for taking the missiles out of Cuba or to distract the United States so that it would not react to a Russian takeover of West Berlin.
Any of these situations, if they had come to pass, would have shown the Europeans that they could not rely on the United States to look after their interests and would have undermined the NATO alliance. ; citing Khrushchev's major goal as changing the status quo in Berlin and improving the Soviet's strategic nuclear position.
The idea for the installation of the missiles was Khrushchev's and his alone.
At that time he was the absolute dictator of the Soviet Union and while the entire Presidium signed onto the plan to put missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev's word was final.Khrushchev 487.
The attempted invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs followed by Operation Mongoose, which attempted to subvert Castro's government and assassinate Castro, certainly helped set the stage for the crisis.
U.S. nuclear policy at the time also helped set the stage for the crisis.
Yet because of the numerical superiority of the Red Army and of the Chinese Army, the United States would not disavow a nuclear first strike as a military option.
United States policy makers felt, with substantial justification, that its ""nuclear shield"" was all that kept the peace in Europe.
The expense of maintaining an army large enough to counter the Red Army in Europe and the Chinese Army in Asia would have put a tremendous strain on Western economies.
Moreover, the Western outpost of Berlin would certainly have fallen and perhaps the entire NATO alliance would have failed, if the Russians had not been convinced that the United States would wage a nuclear war to protect Berlin.
However, the refusal of the United States to disavow a nuclear first strike made the Russians quite nervous.
On balance, responsibility for events which put the future of the world at risk fall much further to the Soviet side than to the U.S.; more to Khrushchev than to Kennedy.
We think that this played a role in Khrushchev's decision to back down and that was his saving grace.
It recalls vividly a confrontation in which nuclear war was really possible, reminding us of an enduring truth about the nuclear age.
It invites viewers 'into the room' as a president and his advisors struggle with a seemingly intractable problem that offers no good options.
Most of the incidents described in the film occurred, including the meetings in which the Russian Foreign Minister Gromyko lied directly to President Kennedy when he assured him that the Russians were not installing missiles in Cuba, the late night meeting between Bobby Kennedy and the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin in which the offer to remove obsolete missiles from Turkey was made, the confrontation at the U.N., the back channel efforts to Communicate with Khrushchev, and some of the specific exchanges between President Kennedy and his advisors.
The language of many important conversations is taken right out of the transcripts or reports of the participants.
That being said, the film leaves the viewer with several important misimpressions.
As shown by his statements quoted above, this was President Kennedy's position.
Secretary of Defense McNamara agreed with him, although many of the Joint Chiefs did not.
The Kennedy Administration would not have been able to govern had it allowed the missiles to remain in Cuba.
Believing Russian assurances that they had no plans to put missiles in Cuba, President Kennedy had gone on record stating that the United States would never accept nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Thus, the credibility of the Kennedy Administration, with its friends and its foes, had been tied to keeping Cuba free of Russian missiles.
The installation of missiles in Cuba was the opening gambit in the Russians' long planned move against West Berlin.
An attack on Cuba would give the Russians an excuse for overrunning West Berlin.
The secret placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba was an agressive move by the Soviets.
Note that none of these reasons for forcing the removal of the missiles had anything to do with the actual damage they could inflict upon the U.S., but instead were secondary effects of the placement of the missiles.
A proper appraisal of the actions of President Kennedy and his administration should refer to these goals.
While important, one must answer the question of whether they were worth risking nuclear war.
To achieve the policy goals of the United States government, the Russians had to be forced to remove the missiles on terms that appeared to be a United States foreign policy victory.
At the same time, the crisis could not be allowed to escalate into World War III, a very distinct possibility if the Russians had refused to remove the missiles and the United States had invaded Cuba.
In thirteen incredibly tense days in October 1962, President Kennedy and his advisors attained these goals.
After that time, the Superpowers introduced new procedures to defuse crises and acted more cautiously.
Given the historical tendency of the United States to invade Latin American countries and the ongoing Operation Mongoose, the Russians and the Cubans justifiably feared for the territorial integrity of Cuba.
In addition, the ongoing United States nuclear arms build up had led to a ""missile gap"" in favor of the United States The United States had completed installation of 15 Jupiter missiles in Turkey in 1962.
This infuriated the Russians and was totally unnecessary because, as repeatedly stated by President Kennedy, the missiles were already obsolete and added little, if anything, to United States military power.
United States policy underestimated the effect of these missiles on the Russians.
United States policy makers clearly understood that Russian nuclear forces could inflict unacceptably high casualties.
For these reasons, United States policy helped set the stage for the crisis and any evaluation of the crisis must take this into account.
General LeMay thought that nuclear war with the Soviets was inevitable and wanted it to occur before the United States lost its 18 to 1 superiority in nuclear missiles.
We are not aware of evidence demonstrating a concerted effort by the military to maneuver the United States into a war.
Our reading and our own interview with a high ranking State Department official who served during that time makes it clear that the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Maxwell Taylor, had President Kennedy's confidence before, during and after the crisis.
The subplot of O'Donnell contacting United States pilots, asking them to bypass the chain of command and make false statements to their superiors, is simply fiction.
Excomm meeting transcripts clearly show that the Chiefs knew that the planes were being shot at.
If we had left it up to the military, there probably would have been a war.
Thirteen Days.However, the movie glosses over the importance of the quick support of our NATO allies in the crisis and even of African countries which would have had an important role if the Russians had tried to send nuclear arms to Cuba by air.
The only available landing strips for refueling were in two countries in Guinea and Senegal, which agreed not to permit the flights.
One is the scene in which the O'Donnell character asks Bobby Kennedy if he thinks that the second Russian letter, the more aggressive letter, was caused by the Kennedys' proposals to trade the obsolete United States missiles in Turkey for the Russian missiles in Cuba.
However, it is true that the second, harsher letter, was prompted by the Kennedy's proposals for the trade.
After offering to remove the missiles in return only for U.S. guarantees that it would not invade Cuba, Khrushchev tried to ""change horses in midstream"" when he was informed of Kennedy's feelers that the United States might also trade the missiles in Turkey.
There is no defense for what Khrushchev did by delaying resolution of the crisis by a day or more just to gain a little advantage.
In that time, an American U-2 pilot was killed and it was only President Kennedy's restraint that prevented nuclear war.
We are lucky that some other incident didn't occur that would have caused a general war.
According to McNamara in ""The Fog of War"", Tuchman related a conversation between two men who had formerly been Chancellor of Germany during different periods of the war.
One asked the other how the war came to be and the other said that he wished he knew.
Know your adversary and see the situation through your adversary's eyes, be considerate of his needs and give him room to move.
Khrushchev didn't look at the missile crisis through the eyes of the United States leaders or its people.
For example, the existence of nuclear missiles 90 miles from the United States coast was intolerable to the public in the United States because of its history of isolation and the protection behind the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.
This may have been irrational since ICBMs launched from Russia would take only a few minutes longer to reach the U.S., but it was a fact.
It was also a hypocritical view, given the fact that the United States maintained nuclear missiles in Turkey and several other countries close to the Soviet Union.
The key factor in Khrushchev's decision to back down was that the United States population was aroused and would force its government to go to war to remove the missiles.
Khrushchev didn't know much about United States history and his experts on the United States failed to tell him about this.
The person making the ultimate decision, in the United States the President, should have the benefit of the best information possible and many recommendations and opinions from both inside and outside of government.
This has already been discussed above, but one more example will be helpful.
During the Excomm deliberations, President Kennedy called in Llewellyn Thompson who had just returned from serving as the United States Ambassador to Moscow.
At times Ambassador Thompson directly contradicted President Kennedy's initial ideas convincing him to change his mind.
People spend years, perhaps their entire lives, studying this question.
As discussed above, try to see the situation through the eyes of your adversary.
The policy maker, while trying to get the best information possible, must understand that there will be many things that he doesn't know.
Every diplomatic and peaceful avenue should be tried before there is a commitment to war.
A graduated approach which always allows your opponent a face saving way out is optimal.
Be flexible and compromise on the little things, but don't appease by giving away the important points.
After the missiles had been removed, President Kennedy described the process of crisis management by stating that one must be firm, obtain the best information possible and act with care.
During the crisis he said, ""there's always some sonofabitch"" meaning that there will be people who through stupidity or because of their own agenda will take actions that push the country toward war.
See the section entitled ""WHY DID KHRUSHCHEV BACK DOWN?"", second paragraph.
In the movie, the O'Donnell character asks Bobby Kennedy to consider whether the hostile second letter was the result of the feelers that he and his brother had sent to Khrushchev which offered to trade the obsolete NATO missiles in Turkey for the Russian missiles in Cuba.
The second letter from Khrushchev was the direct result of the suggestions by President Kennedy that he might be willing to add the missiles in Turkey to the deal.
In the movie at the end, the McNamara character and the McCone character have a conversation in which they mention ""running the table"" on the Russians in several locations, including Asia.
The United States lost the Vietnam War after many casualties and great expense.
Success in one area can lead to over confidence in another that results in a later defeat.
Taking the missiles out of Turkey was not like Munich in that President Kennedy knew the missiles in Turkey were obsolete and scheduled to be replaced by submarine based missiles.
At the Munich conference, the Germans obtained a great benefit,e., Germany was given large amounts of territory and it obtained possession of the Czech fortifications in the only natural barrier between Germany and the rest of Czechoslovakia.
The situation in 1962 was like Munich in that the Soviets wanted the missiles out of Turkey and if they obtained their goal through intimidation and aggressive actions, the political victory might have encouraged them to make more demands.
Overall, it appears that taking the missiles out of Turkey would not have been appeasement because the missiles were already obsolete and scheduled to be replaced with a more formidable threat to the Soviets, submarines carrying nuclear missiles.
President Kennedy worried that a surprise pre-emptive attack on Cuba would be the moral equivalent of Japan's attack upon the United States at Pearl Harbor.
In 1941 Japan made an unprovoked sneak attack on the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor.
Japan felt that United States economic sanctions were hampering its war of expansion in Asia.
Their mission was to defend the island and the local Soviet commanders had authority to use nuclear weapons if they were attacked.
The advantages of involving a large group include: the President is exposed to a wide range of opinions and ideas; a group of people working on a problem can often come up with alternatives and ideas that a single person, no matter how intelligent, would not have considered; a large group, if properly managed, would aid in establishing a political consensus and a unified front against the Russians.
Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson recommended the option of making substantial concessions to the Russians in addition to agreeing not to invade Cuba.
Suggested Response:If it was simply a choice between peace with some concessions and war, the answer is easy.
But that is almost never the choice, because Munich taught us that one concession is usually followed by a demand for another concession, and on and on until war results from miscalculation or when the aggressor simply goes too far.
Wisdom is knowing the difference between a concession and a legitimate compromise.
History has judged the pledge not to invade Cuba to have been a legitimate compromise while additional concessions might have been appeasement.
There was no United States policy to invade Cuba and while Kennedy wanted to depose or assassinate Castro, he could and did say that the United States was giving up nothing by agreeing not to invade Cuba.
Paradoxically, the threat of nuclear war by both countries preserved the peace during the Cold War.
Bobby Kennedy was referring to the situation in which all of the President's major advisors told him that the Bay of Pigs invasion would be successful.
A full scale United States invasion would have been much different than the puny Bay of Pigs effort.
However, it would not have been nearly as easy as the Joints Chief predicted.
United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara observes that America could use a blockade, because it had been mapped out before as a war game.
In that book, an historian argued that WW I was triggered and 13 million people died because parties adhered to standard operating procedures such as the Schlieffen Plan, which could not be stopped.
The advantage of using previously planned out scenarios is that they have been already developed at a time of leisure when the stresses of the present crisis didn't deprive planners of the time to think clearly and meticulously.
The basic drawbacks are that you leave the thinking and decision-making to the people who developed the standard operating procedures and the plans don't take account of changed circumstances.
The United States never signed a peace treaty which took the nuclear first strike option off the table.
A first strike with nuclear weapons was not necessarily a surprise strike.
It also covered the situation in which the numerically superior Soviet armies were overrunning Western Europe and the only way to stop them was with the threat of nuclear weapons.
There is no morally defensible reason to use massive numbers of nuclear missiles that will kill hundreds of millions.
Nor is there a morally defensible reason to respond if your country has suffered such an attack.
In either case, the vast majority of the people killed will have been totally innocent.
The only justification to prepare for a first or a retaliatory nuclear strike is to convince the other side that if he strikes you, you will be able to destroy him.
This theory of Mutually Assured Destruction kept the world free of nuclear war for the last half of the 20th century.
It did nothing to stop the construction of the missile sites or the arming of the existing missiles with nuclear warheads.
It did place the United States in a position to quickly choke off oil and other essential imports to Cuba in case of war.
The quarantine and the preparations of the United States military to invade Cuba, along with public and private assurances that if the missiles were not taken down the United States would remove them, convinced Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles.
Pacifists contend that building a large military and using threats results in wars either because countries decide that war is in their best interests or through miscalculation.
The self-styled ""realists,"" who are in the vast majority, believe that looking weak invites others to take advantage of you and, as Munich showed, appeasement results in further aggression.
They believe that the threat of force and the ability to carry it out usually prevents war.
President Kennedy was told that an air strike would probably not destroy all of the missiles.
As the film accurately shows, the only person to die in the confrontation was Major Rudolph Anderson, the U-2 pilot shot down over Cuba.
In an interview with the History Channel, the Soviet leader of the missile battery that shot down the U-2 stated that he acted without authority from Moscow, deciding to act on his own and let the politicians sort it out later.
The Joint Chiefs wanted to retaliate against the Surface-to-Air Missile battery that shot down the U-2 spy plane.
Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, that the Soviets were installing missiles in Cuba and that they were lying about it.
In 2003 Colin Powell, United States Secretary of State, argued the case for war against Iraq in the United Nations.
Many have noted the similarities and differences between these two events.
Stevenson presented irrefutable proof and galvanized world public opinion.
It did not unite the usual allies of the United States in favor of the Iraq War.
Source, the report of the Republican controlled Senate Intelligence Committee, issued July 9, 2004] It turns out that Iraq did not have weapons of mass destruction or programs to make them; that there was no operational link between Al Qaeda and Iraq, etc.
Stevenson's speech was instrumental in preventing a war and it enhanced U.S. prestige.
Now that the intelligence on which the speech was based has proved to be faulty, the speech has resulted in damage to U.S. prestige.
The next time the United States or the Western nations ask the world or the United Nations to act based on intelligence information, there will be a very strong question about whether that intelligence is accurate.
More proof will be required which will increase the risk of compromising intelligence sources.
It means that in all likelihood for many years, probably for decades, the United States and its Allies in the Western democracies will have to work harder and give up more information to gain the consent and cooperation in international crises.
It means that on some occasions we will not have the support that we need.
A key point in the movie ""Thirteen Days"" is the naval confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship which refused to stop.
The civilians not only have a valuable perspective but they have the ultimate responsibility and therefore need to have absolute control over the military.
In this case, as Secretary McNamara stated, the firing on the Soviet ship sent a message to Khrushchev that President Kennedy may not have wanted to send.
The consensus of the world community, expressed in several treaties, is that nuclear, biological and chemical weapons are special cases and their development should be controlled.
However, the countries that control the weapons do not want to give up control.
For students in the countries that control these weapons, ask whether or not they would be willing to have their country give control of its weapons to an international organization.
For example, advisor Kevin O'Donnell's role has possibly been exaggerated and the civilian/military conflict has been overstated.
The focus of the movie is too limited to give a balanced view of the crisis.
The subplot of going around the military chain of command and getting pilots to make false reports to their superiors about whether they received anti-aircraft fire is fictional.
Movies are entertainment, but they should not give a false impression of historical events.
As long as the essence of the situation is conveyed, then movies dealing with historical issues are beneficial.
The general consensus is that President Kennedy displayed good leadership skills in this crisis and that this leadership was key in avoiding nuclear war.
It gave President Kennedy someone he could trust completely and without any reservation.
Of course, there were many other men involved who gave complete loyalty to the President.
However, President Kennedy understood the horrors of war, especially of nuclear war.
He is the one man in history who has guided the world back from the brink of nuclear war.
A good answer will touch on the issues set out in the note from the authors preceding this question.
We would argue that President Kennedy acted responsibly during the crisis by making, at every step, the choice that minimized the chances of war while preparing for war if it had to come.
A strong argument can be made that Khrushchev acted irresponsibly except in his decision to end the crisis by backing down.
It was irresponsible for him to have risked nuclear war by placing missiles in Cuba and it was irresponsible to delay resolution of the crisis for a day or two to try to force another concession out of the United States On the other hand, the United States and President Kennedy can be faulted for setting the stage by attempting to destabilize the Castro regime and to assassinate Castro.
Teachers are encouraged to review the specific standards to make sure that over the term all standards are met.
