McCone \ forced Kennedy and top national security I advisers that summer to consider options,* | such,as blockades and quarantines, for ret acting to what was then only a hunch about v Soviet intentions.
Two t months later, on Oct., McCone’s hunch * turned into reality when U-2 spy plane phov tographs revealed construction of Soviet J medium-range ballistic missile sites near t San Cristobal, in northern Cuba.
I The discovery raised the threat that Soviet nuclear warheads would be in position to reach the United States mainland with little warning time.
After secretly studying options, Ken| nedy on Oct. publicized the discovery, I declared a naval quarantine of all Soviet and l communist bloc shipping into Cuba and called t on Khrushchev to remove the missiles.
Khrushchev, who j had hoped to have the weapons installed J before they were discovered, was certain * he would have the upper hand once they « were ready to fire.
I Kennedy was determined to take action * before that point was reached.
By Oct., I termed ""Black Saturday"" by Kennedy aides, { the crisis had reached a boiling point.
Among the materials being disclosed are CIA data given Kennedy the morning of Oct., which reported that the agency considered 24 Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles on the island operational.
The 1,000-mile-range missiles, if launched from Cuba, could reach as far as New Orleans, Nashville and Richmond, according to a map provided Kennedy.
Photographs confirmed that the missiles, which were kept separate from their launchers, had been moved to, the launch site in nighttime exercises and that cables, fueling trucks and separate guidance equipment had been put in place.
Nowadays, in the aftermath of the dissolution of the Soviet Union and its communist empire, it is hard to recall — and more difficult to recreate — the tensions that existed 30 years ago, particularly in Washington.
Two years earlier, President Dwight D Eisenhower had announced that United States nuclear missiles would be stationed in Italy and Turkey, just over the border from Soviet territory.
Although Khrushchev boasted about Soviet nuclear strength, he knew it was minuscule compared to the American nuclear arsenal carried on missiles and bombers surrounding his country.
In 1961, when the new, young American president took office, Khrushchev decided to take Kennedy’s measure.
At a meeting in Vienna in June of that year, the Soviet leader determined that Kennedy could be pushed around, and he decided to test him.
The Berlin Wall went up in August 1961, and Soviet nuclear testing resumed that same month.
The congressional election campaign of 1962 provided a stage on which Republicans attacked Kennedy for being indecisive and weak in not facing up to the Soviet challenge, particularly in Cuba.
Kenneth Keating began talking specifics about the buildup and other Republicans followed suit.
Kennedy was forced to defend the Cuba buildup as defensive in nature, a conclusion of his top aides and some CIA analysts.
On Aug., 1962, at a noon meeting at the State Department, McCone set out his views in front of Kennedy’s advisers, who two months later would be wrestling with the question of how to get the missiles removed without triggering a nuclear war.
According to McCone's memo of that meeting, those present were Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen.
Maxwell Taylor and McGeorge Bundy, the president's national security adviser.
The president asked if Soviet missiles in Cuba could be * j taken out 'by an air attack “or would a ground offensive be necessary,” according j tqanqtherCIA memo.
The flights had been stopped in early September after one U-2 on a different mission strayed over Soviet territory in the Far v East, and another was lost over China.
When flights over Cuba were allowed to /• take place at the end of September, Rusk S insisted, because of concerns raised by the '* earlier mishaps, that the spy. planes not fly 4 directly over the island.
He feared that Soi\ viet ground-to-air missiles would shoot one down and cause an embarrassing international incident.
As a result,, those missions failed to cover areas where missiles were eventually found.
Kennedy quietly got McCone to change the wording of certain reports, according to the CIA documents, proof that politicizing See CUBA, All, Col.
CUBA, From A 10 of intelligence information — which was one focus of attention during last year’s Senate confirmation hearings of CIA Director Robert M Gates — was going on 30 years ago.
In an Oct., 1962, memo that was once classified ""Secret EYES ONLY,” McCone wrote that Kern nedy feared that if information about the arrival of Soviet bombers in Havana ""got into the press, a new and more violent Cuban issue would be injected into the campaign , and , OCT. 14, 1962; 0*2 flight discovers missile site in Cuba Qulf of Mexico San Cristoba V North Atlantic J \ BAHAMAS Ocean From Oct. to 22, 1962, dozens of U-2 reconnaissance planes crisscrossed Cuba on orders from President Kennedy to cover the whole island.
On Oct., as the crisis moved to its most frightening stage, Khrushchev sent Kennedy a rambling private telegram, the substance of which was that if the president pledged not to invade Cuba, the Soviet missiles would be removed.
On the morning of Oct., Khrushchev broadcast another message, this time in public, saying that the Cuban missiles would be removed as part of a deal that had to ""There’s been quite a change -in the character of orders given to the Cubans,” McNamara told the president, according to a transcript.
Kennedy began discussions that morning by saying he wanted to take up Khrushchev's proposal for a joint withdrawal of missiles from Cuba and Turkey, but wanted to tie that to an immediate halt to further missile construction.
Llewellyn E Thompson, a former ambassador to the Soviet Union who knew Khrushchev well, disagreed, suggesting that the Soviet leader had made the public offer of a trade “just to put pressure on us, I mean, to accept the other” earlier offer.
After Khrushchev announced the next day that the Cuban missiles would be removed, Kennedy’s aides misled the public into believing that no deal had been made to take the United States missiles out of Turkey, a falsehood that was promoted fpr many years.
The new data also show the young president did not let the crisis interfere totally with his private life.
A White House telephone record lists a call made at 3:40 m. to a Washington divorcee with whom Kennedy reportedly maintained a liaison.
At 9m., according to the records, Kennedy called actor Peter Lawford, his brother-in-law, who was in Las Vegas.
