Although Mikoian makes use of research materials and books on the crisis published on the United States side, his main focus primarily and justifiably covers the Soviet angle of the confrontation.
Anastas Mikoian was a ranking Presidium member and a close associate of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
He was perhaps the only Soviet leader, besides Khrushchev himself, who had any input in the making of foreign policy after Khrushchev had purged his political rivals from power.
Mikoian’s experience and diplomatic skills made him indispensable to Khrushchev as a troubleshooter in places where Soviet policies went badly wrong, as in Hungary in 1956 or, indeed, in Cuba in 1962.
So, even discounting the author’s personal connection to Mikoian, it is understandable that he is at the center of the story, though perhaps with some injustice to other important actors.
For example, this wonderfully illustrated book features about 80 photographs of Mikoian on different occasions, compared to only about 70 of Castro, 60 of Che Guevara, 17 of Kennedy, and a mere 12 of Khrushchev.
Mikoian’s 1960 trip to Cuba, his view on Khrushchev’s decisions to send missiles to Cuba, his recollections of the crisis, and his mission to Cuba and the United States to put out the flames in November 1962.
He also followed his father to Cuba in 1960 and 1962 and adds his personal experiences to liven up the narrative.
The author’s detailed description of his father’s meetings with the Cuban leadership in February 1960 raises a number of interesting questions about the origin and the nature of the Soviet–Cuban alliance.
He cites, for example, an memorandum of a conversation involving Mikoian, Fidel Castro, and Che Guevara, where Castro predicted that Cuba would take the socialist road in ten years.
This enthusiasm helps explain, from the author’s viewpoint, why the Soviet Union sent missiles to Cuba.
He takes sides unequivocally in the old historiographical debate—Khrushchev was not thinking of the strategic balance between the United States and the USSR, even less about using Cuba for extracting advantages in Berlin.
His decision to send missiles to Cuba was motivated solely by one rationale—to save the Cuban revolution from a United States invasion.
We both agreed that this would inevitably be repeated, but with a different force, with an eye to a quick and full victory of the Americans.
They will find themselves in the condition of the same balance, as in the relationship with our country.
Any attack on Cuba will mean a strike directly against their territory.
Khrushchev raised the question of Cuba’s vulnerability at a Presidium meeting and asked Defense Minister Rodion Malinovskii how long it would take for the Soviet forces to occupy an island off its coast in similar conditions.
Malinovskii predicted that the operation would take three to four days, at worst a week.
In the end, the author claims, Mikoian acquiesced to Khrushchev’s adventurism.
Mikoian’s recollections offer striking and revealing details of Kremlin decision-making under Khrushchev.
The first secretary dominated policy discussions; these discussions, in fact, came down to him voicing his opinion—no one else’s mattered.
Mikoian’s own dissenting voice drowned in the flattering and congratulatory chorus of the other Presidium members.
The only question is to what extent Mikoian’s claims that he was the only voice of reason in the Presidium and that he alone opposed Khrushchev’s ill-advised initiative correspond to reality.
Yet the author predictably portrays Mikoian as a lone wise man in an ocean of bureaucratic stupidity.
Speaking of which, Mikoian, Jr., does an excellent job with his insider analysis of the Kremlin’s mode of thought.
This unseemly propensity in part helps explain why Khrushchev, instead of announcing that he would move Soviet missiles to Cuba, tried to sneak behind the United States’ back in a covert operation.
In the end, Khrushchev’s deceit eroded Soviet standing in the eyes of international public opinion and hardened United States resolve to oppose his adventurism.
Another problem with Khrushchev’s attempt to surprise the United States with nuclear missiles in Cuba was that he simply had no contingency plans.
Khrushchev was simply too confident in his own harebrained schemes to permit any second thought.
Thus the author offers credible yet simple explanations for Soviet foreign policy behavior.
At the same time he badly offended Castro when he failed to consult with him about withdrawing missiles from Cuba, volunteered to allow inspections on Cuban territory in the absence of Castro’s agreement, and in other cases.
The author laments Khrushchev’s lack of tact, arrogance, and chauvinism.
Evidently, Anastas Mikoian had a better feel for making friends and influencing people, or else Khrushchev would not have dispatched him to Cuba to patch up problems with Castro in November 1962.
The book includes a lengthy chapter on Mikoian’s talks with the Cuban leadership.
Some of these memcons have been published in English translation in the Cold War International History Project Bulletin.
For example, the appendix to the book contains exchanges between Mikoian and Khrushchev while the former was in Havana.
In his letter of 11 November, Khrushchev complains about Castro’s unwillingness to “make joint decisions and take coordinated steps” —this is after he completely ignored Castro in his negotiations with Washington.
Fortunately, Mikoian did not blurt out Khrushchev’s instructions in his talks with the Cubans; his diplomatic skills helped repair the crumbling Soviet–Cuban alliance, as the author eagerly points out.
One chapter examines more closely the fate of the Soviet–Cuban alliance.
Of course, there is no denial of the sacrifice, or of the extent of the Soviet economic aid to Cuba, which in the end cost the USSR an arm and a leg.
But I am not confident that these factors alone suffice to refute the persistent claims in Western literature to the effect that Cuba switched one imperialist patron for another.
In fact, the evidence that Mikoian presents in his book—for example, the inevitable chauvinism and great-power arrogance in Khrushchev’s treatment of Cuba—require a careful reading of proletarian internationalism so as not to overlook great-power politics under the veil of class solidarity.
But Mikoian’s excellent research, his profound expertise and command of the subject, and his lively and engaging style deserve the highest praise and make for pleasant and informative reading.
Dept. of International History London School of Economics and Political Science Houghton St.
