Neither Khrushchev nor Castro seemed to have any fear that missile placement in Cuba would lead to a nuclear war.
The United States believed that the Soviets were planting nuclear missiles in Cuba as response to American installation in Turkey.
Monday, October 15Photographs of Cuba were first analyzed by specialists in the early evening.
At 8:30 pm a CIA agent telephoned McGeorge Bundy, the president’s special advisor on national security affairs.
Tuesday, October 16Intelligence experts had worked that night on a report.
At 8:00 am an intelligence officer delivered the report to Bundy at the White House.
At 11:45 the executive Committee of the National Security Council assembled.
These included doing nothing, and losing credibility, bombing the Cuban bases or invading Cuba, and lastly a blockade.
Secondly they decided not to take any action until further information was gained, even though urgency was increasing.Wednesday, October 17The president was absent this day on speaking dates.
They discussed the possibilities of an air strike to remove the missiles.
This would mean the bombing of airfields, aircraft, and all possible nuclear warhead storage sites.
This would mean an awful lot of deaths, almost surely drawing a Russian retaliation.
The possibility of a blockade was also discussed and looked promising, except for the legal issues.
This is a prime example of how difficult decision making is under the stressful conditions of a crisis.The U-2’s provided more photographic evidence of missiles increasing urgency and thus tension.
It was estimated intermediate range sites would be ready by 1 December.
This showed that the bases were being constructed, so there would be no time to waste, the Americans had to act quickly.
This increased the pressure on the planning group to come to an immediate decision.Thursday, October 17Newspaper reports began writing about a buildup of air power in the southeastern United States.
These reports were adding more pressure to the urgency of a quick solution.
For the most part of the day the president was not at the State Department for crisis discussions.
At 5:00 pm President Kennedy was to meet Andrei A Gromyko in a conference scheduled prior to the crisis.
As well the legal advisor of the United States was in Paris to stop trade from the west in to Cuba.Friday, October 19Before leaving for political campaigning the president expressed his approval towards a blockade, or in his words a quarantine.
They discussed how to go about a blockade, and the chances of going with an air strike.
Although work was done on alternatives, the decision went to the blockade.
Many of the planners were questioning what reactions would take place due to the blockade.
A proclamation of such a major action was bound to increase the pressure for all sides in the crisis.
Saturday, October 20The president cancelled the rest of his trip, and would be flown back to Washington.
He was then briefed and given the first of five drafts of a speech for Monday evening.
The crisis planners could only wait in suspense as to the world reaction.
Sunday, October 21At 11:00 am there was a meeting of officials with the president.
At 2:30 pm the National Security Council met with the Office of Emergency Planning. “43 letters were drafted for the heads of government of all alliances.
At noon an announcement was made that the president would make an important speech of great urgency at 7:00 pm.
In Cuba a newspaper was printing maps with the build up of American forces.
The same day Krushchev announced that the intent of the missiles was to prevent a war between the U.S.A. and Cuba.
The president stated that he had ordered a quarantine of offensive weapons to Cuba.
He added that preparation of missile sites must cease or further action would be taken.
Finally he called upon Chairman Krushchev to withdraw weapons already there.
Included with the letter was a draft resolution demanding that the Russians were to dismantle and withdraw the missiles under United Nations verification.
In Paris the North Atlantic Treaty Organization went over American reasons for their actions.
United States intelligence got word that a highly placed Russian spy , had sent a terrifying message from Moscow.
Before arrest he was able to send a signal that the Soviets were about to launch a nuclear attack.
Fortunately the signal was not credited and never reached the director of Intelligence, the superior deputies, or the president and his advisors.
The Russians called it a violation of international war, and provocative acts that might lead to thermonuclear war.
They claimed their acts to Cuba were peaceful, and in no way for offensive purposes.
This increased the space between the two nations as the Americans were not getting what they wanted.
The American Foreign Office responded with a statement that Russia was deliberately threatening the United States.
Both NATO and the Organization of American States were behind the United States blockade decision.
To this point the pressure on the United States was great, but this is where the tension between the two countries , really began to build.
Wednesday, October 24This is the first day of the blockade which began at 10:00 am.
During the course of the day a Soviet ship was on, but changed course for Cuba.
The coming of this ship caused a lot of pressure to build, and the change in course a great deal of relief.
All was not well as the two nations began somewhat of a game of pressuring each other.
A message that the proclamation was deemed unacceptable arrived from Moscow that morning.
After the message bulletens were received that Premier Krushchev proposed a summit meeting.
He proposed a stop to everything for two weeks during which talks would go on.
The United States had already rejected negotiations until the missile bases had been dismantled.
The president authorized low level reconnaissance flights of P 8Us, to join the U2s.
Thursday, October 25Now came the time for the first contact, pressures intensified in the White House waiting for the reaction.
The first contact of the blockade came at 8:00 on this Thursday morning.
The Cubans were under a great deal of stress thinking they may be invaded.
Meanwhile the Americans were fearing the approach of Russian ships, and their reactions.
The Americans had made it clear to Mr Thant that they would settle for nothing less than the removal of the missiles.
This simply seemed to increase the barrier of the nations involved in the crisis.
Just before 8:00 am a vessel heading for Cuba was boarded without incident, and was permitted to continue.
This was a great relief, at this time the slightest offensive action could have set off a war.
Further relief arrived at 11:00 pm when the president received a letter from Krushchev, he made an offer to remove the missiles.
This would be done in return for blockade removal, and assurance that Cuba would not be invaded by the western hemispheres nations.
Saturday, October 27On this morning another letter arrived from Moscow.
The premier offered to make a trade of Cuban bases for the American bases existing in Cuba.
The tone and style of this letter brought back some of the pressure that had been relieved by the previous letter.
Without rejecting the offer, the Americans replied that Cuba must be dealt with first as base construction was continuing.
A shock hit the United States bringing with it all, and more of the tension and pressure the government was facing.
At any earlier a time in the Crisis this may have lead to immediate nuclear war.
It was the downing of a U-2 reconnaissance plane, and an attempt on a second by Cuban antiaircraft guns.
Khrushchev was supposedly shocked, and evidence suggests that the order for the shooting came from Castro.
Surveillance had to continue, and this meant fighter escorts and possible direct attack at antiaircraft weapons.
Washington drafted a new letter which generally ignored the second letter from Moscow.
It said that if Krushchev was willing to remove the offensive weapons from Cuba, in return for removal of the blockade, and promise that there would be no attacks from the hemisphere, they had a deal.
None of the officials expected a nuclear war, but the threat of having to remove antiaircraft weaponry was far from comfortable.
Krushchev’s letter said he had ordered work on the missile sites stopped.
This was all to be followed under the verification of the United Nations.
The crisis was caused by the installation of ground to ground ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Through out this time many unforeseen events took place, under great tension and pressure.
These included the first contacts of the blockade, and the downing of a United States reconnaissance plane.
Many critics state that Kennedy gave away to much to resolve the crisis, while others feel it was a tacit agreement to free the world of the threat of nuclear war.
The United States agreed to protect Cuba against attacks from the western hemisphere, and the removal of United States bases in Turkey.
How close to nuclear war did the world come to in the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
