There he viewed displays and demonstrations by four local firms Owens, Lane, Dyer & Co.
His article described some of the wares which established Hamilton as a leading industrial center in the 19th century.
The company, headed by Job E Owens, Clark Lane and Elbridge G Dyer, traced its origin to 1845 and is regarded as Hamilton's first industry.
Its factory was between North Fourth and North Fifth streets, south of Heaton Street.
The company, formed in 1856 by John M Long, Peter Black and Robert Allstatter, also displayed ""sickle-teeth and agricultural machinery"" which it built in its factory on the north side of High Street between Fourth and Fifth streets.
McBeth, Bentel & Margedant, started in 1864 by Charles E McBeth who later was joined by Fred Bentel and William C Margedant, displayed its woodworking line.
Niles, which began in Cincinnati before the Civil War, was then completing its move to its Hamilton shop along the west side of North Third Street.
All of the companies profiled in the 1871 article were located along branches of the Hamilton Hydraulic, a canal which drew water from the Great Miami River four miles north of Hamilton to provide water power for Hamilton industries.
Their goods were transported out of Hamilton by the Miami-Erie Canal and three railroads.
The federal census in 1870 counted 11,081 persons in Hamilton and 39,912 in Butler County.
Ohio, with more than 2. million, was the third most populous of 37 states.
Missiles near Oxford part of Cold War defense By Jim Blount The Cold War, now in a welcomed thaw, was peaking 30 years ago when Ajax and Hercules missiles were placed in Butler County.
In October 1959, when most Americans were troubled by a much-publicized ""Missile Gap,"" construction of underground launching silos was nearing completion west of Oxford.
The Oxford Nike base was one of four bases encircling the Cincinnati region.
Others were at Wilmington and Felicity in Ohio and Dillsboro in Indiana.
Also at Wilmington then was Clinton County Air Force Base, a home for planes of the Strategic Air Command.
The 14-building, 14-acre complex also included barracks and offices in addition to missile control and monitoring facilities.
About 40 men were stationed at the base, north of U S. 27 off Todd Road, about two miles west of Oxford.
All four area missile bases were activated in February 1960 as part of the North American air defense network.
Charles R Arvin, commander of the 5th Missile Battalion, when the bases opened.
Among prime U S. targets, it was suspected, would be the industrial corridor extending north from Cincinnati through Hamilton and Middletown to Dayton — an area whose defense products included steel, machine tools, jet engines and processed uranium.
The chance of a U S.-Soviet war seemed to be increasing as the Oxford base was planned and constructed.
Oct., 1957, the Soviets launched Sputnik I, the first man-made satellite in orbit, taking a lead in the Space Race.
Almost instantly, the United States was believed to be on the short end of the Missile Gap, which continued as a hot issue into the 1960 Kennedy-Nixon presidential election campaign.
May 1, 1960 -about eight weeks after the Oxford base became operational -an American U-2 high-altitude spy plane, piloted by Francis Gary Powers, was shot down over Russia.
The tension mounted in 1961, first with the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba April 17, and then the start of construction of the Berlin Wall in August.
During those trying years, military spokesmen repeatedly admitted that the base in Oxford Township was capable of firing missiles with either conventional or nuclear warheads.
But there was never official confirmation of the presence of nuclear weapons at the local base.
By the late 1960s, new long-range weapons had emerged and missile bases like the one west of Oxford were obsolete.
Journal-News, Wednesday, Oct., 1989 Joel Williams built county's first mills By Jim Blount Joel Williams would have a solid claim as Butler County's first real estate agent.
The Pennsylvania millwright was an enterprising frontiersman whose determined quest for profit put him at odds with early leaders in Cincinnati.
Williams worked as an agent for John Cleves Symmes, who had purchased the land north of the Ohio River between the Little Miami and Great Miami rivers from the government.
Williams also operated a tavern in Cincinnati and a ferry on the Ohio River between the foot of Main Street and Kentucky.
In what became Butler County in 1803, Williams combined his previous milling experience with his real estate skills.
Mills were essential in the settlers' struggle to convert their land from a debt to an asset.
Their financial survival depended on access to gristmills, sawmills and carding mills, which were the trading complexes and community centers on the Ohio frontier until about 1830.
Williams came to this area in the 1790s when it was unsettled and explored the Great Miami River and its tributaries, searching for the most promising sites for water-powered mills.
He scouted the banks of Indian Creek and Four Mile Creek before land west of the Great Miami River was placed on scale by the federal government.
In other places, he sold land to persons who were interested in building mills.
And, in some cases, he sold the site and contracted to build the mill for the land buyer.
It was in the southern end of Fairfield Township at the mouth of Bank Lick, where it empties into the east side of the Great Miami River.
Today, it would near River Road in the vicinity of Burns and Georgetown roads, near the county line.
The Williams-built mill at Bank Lick served the earliest settlers in two important ways.
First, of course, it enabled them to have their corn and grains ground without the expense and time-consuming task of building their own mills.
Williams, as Symmes' agent, would deduct the value of the processed grain from the amount the settler owed Symmes for the land.
Williams is credited with building at least a half dozen mills in Butler County, including a structure on Indian Creek completed in 1805 for Joseph Van Horne.
Meanwhile, Williams was embroiled in a long-runnung controversy in Cincinnati.
In 1789 he had challenged a town plat drawn by Israel Ludlow, who later would be Hamilton's founder.
Ludlow had designated the Cincinnati riverfront as a public landing instead of offering it for sale.
But Williams produced a plat on which he claimed the land along the river, igniting a legal battle which divided the community for years.
Journal-News, Sunday, Oct., 1989 Mass murder overshadowed 1929 stock market crash By Jim Blount A national nightmare began 60 years ago this month, but the event which triggered it was overshadowed here by news of the murder of five persons, including four children.
Within a few months, a fourth of the nation's labor force was jobless, banks failed, personal savings vanished, families lost their houses and farms, and many who had enjoyed relative affluence during the Roaring '20s were hungry in the 1930s.
Statistics are unavailable on the number of area residents who suffered huge losses or financial ruin because of the sudden drop in stock prices in October and November 1929.
When the crash came 60 years ago, Hamiltonians could buy a man's all-wool suit for $19.50 and shirts for 95 cents at Dunlap Clothing on South Third Street.
A woman's dress cost $19.50 to $29.50 at Robinson-Schwenn on High Street.
Kroger was advertising hamburger at 25 cents a pound and pork chops at 33 cents a pound.
At Jonson Brothers Restaurant on High Street, complete Sunday dinners — including soup, entree, dessert and drink — ranged from 60 cents for veal chops to $1 for filet mignon with most meals priced at 75 cents.
Savings accounts were earning 5 percent at the West Side Building & Loan Association on Main Street.
Forty-eight hours before the stock market crash, President Herbert Hoover — the person commonly saddled with the blame for much of the ensuing Depression — was in Southwestern Ohio.
The engineer on the Baltimore & Ohio locomotive of the southbound special was George Wortendyke, identified as a former Hamiltonian.
The president was on his way to Cincinnati to participate in ceremonies marking completion of the lock and dam system on the Ohio River from Pittsburgh to Cairo, Ill.
Hoover was still aboard the presidential special train when the panic began Thursday morning on Wall Street.
The major topic in Hamilton that day was the murder of five family members discovered the previous day in their house on Fairview Avenue in Lindenwald.
The father, who turned on the gas and fled, was captured a year later and in 1931 became the second person sentenced from Butler County to die in the Ohio electric chair.
But the stock market panic had an immediate impact on Butler County farmers.
During the next week, prices for wheat, corn, hogs, livestock and other items traded at Cincinnati markets resembled a roller coaster as they plunged, rose and plunged again.
Journal-News, Sunday, Oct., 1989 Legend of Hangman's Hollow began in 1851 By Jim Blount Halloween is an appropriate time to recall a ghost story with a factual base which is part of Butler County folklore.
It is the legend of Hangman's Hollow, complete with scary reports of ghost sightings and warnings from unseen persons.
There are several versions of the legend, which is understandable because the story survived for many years, and from generation to generation, by word of mouth.
Some verbal variations even differ on the exact site of Hangman's Hollow.
What appears to be the first printed account — complete with the names of key participants, location and the date of the event which started the legend — was published Oct., 1910, in the Hamilton Telegraph.
The report said the story was associated with the first Butler County Fair in 1851.
That year the fair was held on a site Just east of Hamilton along High Street east of Sixth Street.
Four young men from the Darrtown area -Taylor Marshall, Ben Scott, Chambers Flenner and Dan Warwick -went by horseback to the first fair Oct.-3, 1851.
The Darrtown men encountered a small group of people who had gathered in the roadway.
They had been attracted there by the lifeless body of a man hanging from a tree just off the dusty turnpike.
Some believed the man, who had been dead for several days, had committed suicide.
They pointed out that he died with his suspenders around his neck, not a rope.
It was several days later before the victim was tentatively identified as a stockman who had left a Hamilton hotel about a week earlier to call on Butler County farmers.
Others recalled that the apparent victim also had flashed ""quite a roll of money"" before leaving town.
A robbery or murder along a lonely turnpike was not an unusual crime in the mid 19th century.
The 1851 incident beside the Darrtown Pike was not enough to attach the eerie Hangman's Hollow label to the spot.
Instead, it was what happened or supposedly happened, after the robbery-murder in October 1851.
Several times in succeeding years, travelers along the road between Rossville and Darrtown told of seeing a mysterious image in the hollow.
The aberration was believed to be the ghost of the hanged stock dealer.
But they heard a strange voice or voices, possibly coming from one or more unseen ghosts.
In most instances, the voice warned riders to beware of danger lurking there.
According to the 1910 report, for several generations, travelers through the spooky woods spurred their horses for extra speed to avoid an encounter with a ghost or mysterious voices.
