But in contrast to most of the Cold War period, Soviet land-based nuclear missiles threatened American soil not just from launching sites in the USSR, but also from Cuba, 90 miles from Florida.
In the Soviet Union, it was known as the Caribbean crisis, defined in terms of where it took place.
My purpose in this essay is to examine the role of Cuban intelligence in the genesis, management, and resolution of the crisis.
In particular, I seek to explain the organization and operation of Cuban intelligence; its assessments ; its relationship to Soviet intelligence; and its relationship to Cuban politics and policy making.
These are topics that have essentially never been explored in the scholarly literature.
There are few public testimonies by knowledgeable Cuban officials, and Cuba has released very few documents that bear on these questions.
It is likely that when more extensive testimony from official Cuban sources and the full documentary record become available, various aspects of my account will have to be modified.
I shall argue that, despite serious obstacles, Cuban intelligence was for the most part able to collect the information necessary to help Cuban leaders make sound political decisions before, during, and immediately after the October crisis, and Cuban intelligence was able to interpret that information with reasonable though not perfect accuracy.
The operations side of Cuban intelligence performed well in certain tasks and poorly in others, as is the case in all intelligence services; but, on balance, it made an important contribution to national security.
However, six crucial features of the context in which Cuban intelligence operated affected the degree to which political leaders made use of Cuban intelligence (effective political exploitation varied considerably over time), and to some extent influenced the collection and assessment of information.
Before making that argument, however, I will briefly explain the origins and organization of Cuban intelligence in the early 1960s.
THE ORGANIZATION OF CUBAN INTELLIGENCE Building an Intelligence Apparatus Of the three intelligence communities involved in the October crisis, the KGB and CIA were mature institutions, with long histories, highlyqualified personnel, advanced technology, and ample resources.
Beginning in the 1940s, the PSP also managed successfully to penetrate President Fulgencio Batista's security forces.
The PSP underground was led by Osvaldo Sanchez Cabrera, a talented agent and politician, who later joined the party executive.
The urban branches of various groups opposing Batista, most notably the 26th of July Movement and the Revolutionary Directorate of 13 March.
These groups developed significant clandestine networks and information channels, conducted active surveillance, and successfully penetrated Batista's security forces.
The Ejercito Rebelde , which developed the rudiments of an intelligence service in the latter stages of the struggle against Batista.
Shortly thereafter, a very small group within the DIER organized the rudiments of an intelligence section.
DGI became Cuba's chief external intelligence and counterintelligence body.
In contrast with the Department of State Security, which had no Soviet advisor, DGI or 'M' relied very heavily on direct Soviet advice, especially after the middle of 1960.
It did not conduct operations abroad, and focused exclusively on military threat assessment.
Not surprisingly, it directed most of its attention to United States forces and operations.
Soviet advisers and Soviet assessments were extremely influential with Cuban military intelligence.
On the most fundamental issue at that time the likelihood of United States aggression DIM consistently echoed the dire assessments coming directly from Soviet sources.
FIGURE 1 THE CUBAN INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY IN 1961 Ministry of the Interior Ministry of the Revolutionary Armed Forces Department of Direccidn General Direccidn de Direccidn de State Security de Inteligencia Inteligencia Militar ContraInteligencia Militar Internal security External & counterintelligence & Military intelligence, Miltary intelligence counterintelligence external threat counterintelligence services assessment The first major expansion of the resources, range of operations, and activities of Cuban intelligence took place after Playa Giron.
Soviet advisers played an increasingly important role in almost every area, but especially in encryption, communications, and other technical matters, and Soviet intelligence shared with DGI information and reports drawn from their own sources.
Czech and East German intelligence provided assistance and information on a smaller scale.
Prague, Berlin, Paris and Madrid became key Cuban intelligence stations and bases for operations in Western Europe, Africa, and the Middle East.
Havana became the key station and base of operations in the Western Hemisphere for the Soviet, Czech, and East German intelligence services.
Cooperation between these services and Cuban intelligence was regulated by a series of bilateral agreements.
The Events of 26 March 1962 and their Effect on the Structure of Cuban Intelligence An internal crisis within Cuba's power structure that came to a head in March 1962 had important implications for the structure of Cuban 92 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS intelligence.
From the beginning, the revolutionary government of Cuba included groups of various stripes sharing power under the overall leadership of Fidel Castro.
But in early 1960, the old PSP, which had close ties to Moscow, began quietly attempting to fill as many of the leading positions as possible.
At this time, Castro appreciated the necessity of securing increased levels of economic and military aid from the Soviet Union.
However, he was sensitive to the threat Escalante's machinations posed both to his personal position and to Cuban autonomy.
It would be dangerous to rely even more heavily upon Moscow materially while members of the Escalante faction, who were under Moscow's influence, were in positions of authority.
Moreover, Moscow's support for Escalante indicated that the Soviets had designs on the Cuban Revolution incompatible with the course Castro sought to steer.
Thus Castro felt it necessary to crush Moscow's local proxies and demonstrate his firm control before approaching Moscow with the hand of friendship and requesting increased levels of assistance.
Accordingly, on 26 March, Castro denounced Escalante's 'sectarian' efforts to promote relatives and former PSP associates into positions of influence, carefully avoiding any suggestion of conspiracy, any hint of political or ideological struggle, or even any mention of Escalante's Soviet connection.
He placed Kudriavtsev under military custody and expelled him from Cuba, and also sent Escalante into exile.
Having dealt a decisive blow to Escalante's faction, he then sent a secret delegation to Moscow with the express purpose of promoting Soviet-Cuban cooperation, and urging the Soviet leadership to increase the amount and quality of military aid to Cuba.
Shortly thereafter, Cuban intelligence experienced its second period of spectacular growth and its second reorganization.
Castro began to take a strong personal interest in every aspect of Cuban intelligence, even in some cases maintaining personal contacts with operatives and analysts.
This unusual contact between intelligence professionals and the top leadership gave to members of the Cuban intelligence community exceptional access.
Castro gave strict orders not to create problems of any kind with Soviet advisers and experts, and, consequently, relations between the two countries' intelligence communities became considerably closer.
Javier oversaw Information Services; Augusto oversaw Liberacion Nacional (National Liberation, the section devoted to liaison with revolutionary groups abroad) as well as Operations; Rene oversaw Technical Services.
However, Soviet influence within DGI was essentially limited to technical and professional issues.
Soviet intelligence had limited access to, and limited influence over, sensitive aspects of DGI's activities.
Fifteen 94 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS analysts dealt with information coming from the United States and Canada.
United States planning for a military invasion of Cuba and for the execution of Fidel Castro; 2.
The counterrevolutionary activities of exiles and their direct or independent role in a potential American invasion or execution attempt; 3.
Surveillance of United States military bases in the Southeastern United States ; 4.
Dozens of agents assisted by numerous spontaneous informants monitored US military installations in South Florida, particularly Homestead Air Force Base and a nearby facility.
In the summer of 1962, additional agents were sent to collect information and establish new networks in Panama and in the Southeastern United States.
Cuban intelligence maintained close contacts not only with Soviet intelligence, but also with Czech and East German intelligence.
These countries provided technical assistance as well as information from agents in Latin America.
Additionally, Cuban agents operated from covert bases in Washington, Madrid, Paris, Brazil, Santiago de Chile, and Buenos Aires.
Cuban intelligence also had at their disposal the intelligence resources of communist parties throughout the hemisphere, many of whom had excellent contacts within their governments and military establishments.
Fidel Castro and his Soviet advisers considered Empresa B a key indicator of United States intentions, on the ground that any imminent attack against Cuba would be preceded by changes in the daily routine at Guantanamo Bay and various other activities which could be relatively easily detected.
Empresa B was organized by Soviet advisers toward the end of 1960, and was conducted by DIM and DSE, relying almost entirely upon human intelligence.
Cuban workers inside the base provided the most important information, reporting on the numbers, types, armaments, locations, schedules, reinforcements, alerts, alarms, and supplies of American forces.
In 1962, DIM also filed weekly reports on American U-2 flights their frequency, their routes, and their probable objectives.
Regular meetings were held between DGI and DIM analysts to discuss these reports.
Soviet advisers suggested also that Cuban intelligence undertake systematic surveillance of diplomats from certain foreign embassies who had been identified as CIA agents.
These included officials from the embassies of the United Kingdom (the embassy most actively supporting American intelligence), Brazil , Italy, and Uruguay.
Reporting The Cuban leadership received most of its information and analysis from Cuban intelligence directly from Pineiro, either orally or in writing, in the form of weekly reports, and occasional special reports.
Pineiro dealt directly with Castro most of the time, though occasionally also with Che.
As a matter of routine, these reports would be returned to Pineiro within a week, whereupon Pineiro would redirect them to his analysts with remarks, questions, and criticisms.
To those of us working in the intelligence community, it was often apparent that these were not Pineiro's comments, but Castro's or Che's.
While DGI, DIM, and DSE reported separately to the Cuban leadership, DGI provided the bulk of intelligence.
It could tap all of the institutions, resources, and services of the Cuban state in pursuit of its mandate, including, but not limited to, the FAR, MINREX, the Ministry of Foreign Trade, the Prensa Latina news agency, the merchant marine, and the fishing 96 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS fleet.
While Pineiro was jealous of his personal contacts with Castro and actively sought to ensure that he served as the sole channel between Castro and the intelligence community, Castro maintained personal contacts with operatives and analysts throughout the period in question, frequently bypassing Pineiro completely.
This reflected Castro's fascination with intelligence and his taste for conspiracy more than any distrust of Pineiro, and for the most part these contacts did not unduly complicate Pineiro's relationship with Castro.
Nevertheless, they represented both an irritant and a challenge to the efficient management of information flows.
Based on our own sources and on a different reading of Soviet and East European sources Cuban intelligence concluded, however, that no aggression was imminent.
Nor did Cuban intelligence collect any information that it considered significant or reliable concerning attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro.
There were two crucial issues that partly accounted for this discrepancy.
Soviet intelligence interpreted it as a preliminary to a larger American assault.
But the nature of the activity conducted under the rubric of Operation 'Mongoose' indicated to Cuban intelligence that its purposes were merely to collect information and to harass the Cuban Revolution through small-scale acts of sabotage.
From the Cuban perspective a perspective informed by a great deal of recent relevant experience that the Soviets quite naturally lacked Operation 'Mongoose' clearly seemed not to be designed to foment insurrection, to facilitate American military operations, or to provide feints and diversions.
Soviet and Cuban intelligence also disagreed over the political preconditions for an American invasion.
Cuban intelligence insisted that the United States would only undertake open and direct aggression with the sanction of the OAS and its member states under the guise of a collective CUBAN INTELLIGENCE 97 security action.
Even though the United States would have provided the overwhelming majority of the troops and resources, the judgment of the Cuban intelligence community was that Washington would require at least the appearance of international legitimacy and hemispheric solidarity before undertaking a move so likely to trigger international condemnation without it.
Cuban sources indicated quite categorically that there was no indication that Latin American governments were willing, disposed, or committed to associate themselves with such an adventure.
Even those governments unfriendly to Cuba recoiled from American assessments that an invasion would imply an initial cost of 50,000 casualties.
Not only was this an important international consideration, it provided a powerful domestic political argument against an invasion of Cuba within the United States itself.
The Cuban intelligence community was initially inclined to credit the sincerity of Soviet assessments and to try to account for the differences in the two intelligence communities' judgments in terms of divergent assumptions and differences in perspective.
However, the discrepancies were simply too great to explain in this way.
By the spring of 1962, Cuban intelligence had decided that the Soviets were deliberately skewing their assessments.
After Soviet nuclear forces began to arrive in Cuba, however, Cuban intelligence concluded that the Soviets had skewed their assessments in order to persuade Castro to agree to the deployment a deployment intended primarily to serve Soviet geopolitical objectives and not, as Khrushchev professed, intended primarily to deter an American invasion of Cuba.
This remains the prevailing view among the Cuban intelligence community today.
Fidel Castro had independent reasons for desiring a Soviet nuclear deployment in Cuba, however.
He accepted Soviet assessments, and rejected the contradictory Cuban assessments, in part because they coincided with his own assumptions about United States intentions.
It convinced the Cuban leadership Fidel Castro and Che Guevara in particular that Washington would never forgive Cuba for inflicting upon it such a disaster in the United States' own backyard, representing as it did a blow to United States dominance in the Hemisphere.
Cuban leaders felt that the United States would not be satisfied until it had exacted its revenge and destroyed the Cuban Revolution.
Thus from this point forward, Cuban leaders believed that a deadly confrontation with the United States was inevitable.
This led directly to the October crisis, because Cuban leaders eventually came to believe that it was necessary to involve the Soviet Union in Cuba's defense, including a major deployment in situ, in order to forestall a decisive American attack.
Not only did Cuban leaders privilege Soviet over Cuban assessments, but Cuban intelligence was also instructed to treat the inevitable confrontation with the United States as its guiding strategic assumption shaping every aspect of data collection and interpretation.
This did not, however, result in smoother integration of Soviet and Cuban intelligence efforts.
As Castro was jealous of Cuban autonomy, Cuban intelligence officers had instructions not to discuss information, sources, and assessments with their Soviet advisers.
Whenever Soviet advisers perceived important differences of judgment they would ask Pineiro for clarification, which he would typically provide.
After 27 October 1962, however, all meaningful discussion between the two intelligence communities came to an end.
Contingency Planning If the United States had attempted a full-scale invasion of Cuba in 1961, it would have been impossible for Cuba to repel it, given the imbalance in the size, resources, and technology of the two countries' military establishments.
But Cuba could make an American invasion extremely painful for the United States.
Immediately after Playa Giron, contingency planning intensified to inflict this pain in two ways.
First, in case of an aggression against Cuba, the United States would suffer retribution within its own borders.
Cuba would bring war and destruction to American homes, and to American interests and citizens abroad.
Second, Cuba would ensure that the system of American domination in the Western Hemisphere, and the power structure of the United States' local Latin American allies, would also suffer.
Cuba would sow the seeds of social and political unrest throughout Latin America, supporting groups of any kind willing to take up arms against the United States and their allies.
Defensa Activa Revolucionaria involved a large scale training program for irregular warfare.
Cuba trained hundreds of groups from across Latin America between 1961 and 1962.
Exfiltration and infiltration operations became matters of daily routine for Cuban intelligence.
Cuban intelligence became very adept at falsifying identities, forging documents, and other techniques of deception.
The primary targets of these activities were Argentina, Peru, Venezuela, Brazil, CUBAN INTELLIGENCE 99 Colombia, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and the Dominican Republic.
There was a clear and solemn understanding between the Cuban regime and groups operating in these countries that, in case of United States aggression against Cuba, they would retaliate against United States personnel, interests, facilities, and military installations.
Preparations for Operation 'Boomerang' began early in 1962 and were complete by mid-summer.
But retributive acts of terrorism alone could not safeguard the Cuban Revolution.
More important was Castro's decision to request a dramatic increase in Soviet military aid for purposes of both deterrence and defense.
At a minimum, he sought advanced weapons for the FAR and Soviet advisers to train Cuban soldiers in the use of them.
After the Escalante affair, he was also willing to contemplate the deployment of Soviet forces to Cuba.
The chief purpose of Che's mission to Moscow in April 1962 was to communicate this request to Khrushchev.
In Moscow, Che expressed Cuba's desire for greater military aid, but left it up to Khrushchev himself to make a concrete proposal.
At no point did Che suggest a deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles, nor did Khrushchev offer them at that time.
Che did, however, seek to impress Khrushchev with the importance of providing Cuba with something qualitatively different from what had been provided previously.
Khrushchev stated that the Soviet leadership would give very serious consideration to the Cuban request, underscoring that the Soviet Union was willing to deter any attempt to destroy the Cuban Revolution.
Khrushchev did not raise the Escalante affair or the expulsion of Kudriavtsev during his meetings with Che.
Shortly afterwards in late May Khrushchev proposed to Castro the deployment of strategic nuclear missiles to Cuba.
According to Soviet sources, it was only in late April or May that Khrushchev first considered the idea, and it was only afterward that preparations for such a deployment began.
Cuban intelligence concluded after the crisis, however, that the Soviets must have conceived and begun planning the deployment much earlier than this.
The prevailing belief in the Cuban intelligence community was that planning for the deployment probably began in late 1961.
This conclusion was buttressed by additional circumstantial considerations.
Khrushchev and Soviet intelligence knew they were playing the kind of music Fidel Castro wanted to hear.
In April 1962 Aleksei Adzhubei brought the 'hard' confirmation of American intentions that Castro needed to be persuaded to accept a Soviet deployment.
The Soviets knew that they were undermining the credibility of Cuban intelligence in the eyes of the Cuban leadership.
By the time Khrushchev first broached with Castro the idea of a Soviet nuclear deployment in late May, Cuban intelligence later concluded, the operation must already have been well under way.
Secrecy and Deception Once Cuba and the Soviet Union agreed upon a nuclear deployment, Castro and Khrushchev sought to enforce a severe compartmentation of information relating to it in order to preserve secrecy and to deceive Washington.
As a result of this, Cuban intelligence was not informed of the decision to deploy Soviet nuclear missiles to Cuba.
Nor was it informed of the size and nature of the Soviet military buildup.
We discovered these in the course of our normal information-gathering activities in late August and early September.
Indeed, in June 1962, Pineiro had given strict instructions not to reflect upon the topic of Soviet forces and missiles in Cuba in any Cuban assessments.
Only in early September did we receive instructions to cover the controversial issue of missiles in Cuba in our survey of open sources.
As sound intelligence assessment the search for information; its analysis; and the formulation of recommendations required a clear picture of Soviet activities, Cuban intelligence constantly challenged Pineiro's denial that a Soviet nuclear deployment was underway.
Cuban intelligence became concerned that such a deployment might provoke a confrontation with the United States, prompting greater efforts to monitor and anticipate American actions, and to prepare Defensa Activa Revolucionaria.
The campaign consisted primarily of funneling pieces of information regarding the actual presence of missiles in Cuba through counter-revolutionary organizations and their press in the United States, especially in Miami.
This campaign presupposed quite correctly that the CIA would discount this information, because they would not consider the individuals and groups peddling it to be credible.
Thus, ironically, the KGB leaked accurate information about the deployment so as to mask it.
The deception campaign designed to exploit the emigres' lack of credibility was buttressed by correspondence between Cubans and their friends and relatives in the United States.
While this may seem a surprising volume of commentary, it is important to note that the deployment took place while Cuba was still in a virtual state of civil war.
In April 1961, at the time of Playa Giron, the Cuban regime implemented a preventive mass arrest of 250,000 people who had been connected with the Batista regime or with counter-revolutionary organizations, or who were suspect on other grounds.
In the summer of 1962, armed bands of counter-revolutionary insurgents known as bandidos, or bandits, still operated in almost every province.
In such a context, it was impossible for the deployment of 42,000 Soviet troops and their missiles to escape the notice and comment of people opposed to the Castro regime, or people merely anxious about, or intrigued by, the Soviet presence in Cuba.
In late September, word came down to permit these letters to arrive in Miami, as part of the deception campaign; and as expected, CIA officials paid no attention to them.
By early October 1962, Cuban intelligence had become rather amazed and baffled by the failure of the CIA, the Pentagon, and even a majority of members of Congress to acknowledge or respond to the Soviet nuclear deployment.
Even President Kennedy, in public statements on 4 and 13 September, had indicated that he was then unaware of the presence of Soviet forces and missiles in Cuba.
Either the CIA was truly ignorant of the deployment, or it was deliberately withholding its knowledge of the deployment for some reason.
If the CIA was unaware of it, then either this was the most impressive deception of the Cold War (and perhaps even of modern history), or the CIA was incompetent.
Cuban Assessments on the Eve of the Crisis During September and October, Cuban intelligence concluded that a confrontation was brewing between Cuba and the United States over the presence of Soviet forces.
First, open sources in the United States and reports from DSE on the work of CIA infiltration teams indicated that the United States was very close to discovering the Soviet deployment.
Empresa B reports indicated US preparations at Guantanamo for something big.
Soviet intelligence provided extensive descriptive reports on American military exercises in the Caribbean and redeployments of American forces closer to Cuba.
Surveillance of foreign diplomats working for the CIA indicated that they were under severe pressure and were becoming nervous.
In mid-September, Cuban intelligence prepared a report assessing the many risks to the Cuban Revolution of being perceived by the United States as a Soviet proxy in the bipolar superpower rivalry.
Our conclusion was that bipolarity was very harmful to Cuba vis-a-vis the United States because it could drag Cuba into a superpower war.
The assessment was the subject of a very heated discussion with Pineiro.
Pineiro's policy of compartmentation, and his reluctance to submit to the Cuban leadership assessments that would challenge or even contradict Fidel Castro's own thinking which he knew rather well caused great discontent and resentment among many in the Cuban intelligence community.
In that assessment, Cuban intelligence also sought to explain the fact that the CIA apparently had not become aware of the Soviet deployment.
One hypothesis was that the CIA had simply been successfully fooled by the KGB deception campaign, and the deployment had been successfully masked by Soviet forces.
Cuban intelligence was fully convinced that the CIA would detect what was going on.
Certainly by late September there was far too much activity for the CIA to miss.
Another possibility was that the CIA was simply being careful not to tell the President what he clearly did not want to hear, unless it had undeniable physical proof of the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The report suggested that after Playa Giron the Kennedy administration had severely punished the CIA for poor intelligence and operational inefficiency, and that the CIA might be compensating by being extra cautious in its assessments.
Also as a result of Playa Giron, CIA officials were prejudiced against their Cuban agents and against emigres in general.
The CIA was unwilling to risk another clash with the White House, and simply echoed the Kennedy administration's line on the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba.
In sum, the CIA was unwilling to see what the Kennedy administration did not want to see.
The first was that the CIA had discovered the deployment and was engaged in a game of counterdeception designed to give the United States the advantage of tactical surprise in its response.
Outraged by its treatment after Playa Giron, the CIA may have seen an excellent opportunity to get even with a hostile liberal administration that was refusing to admit the possibility of a Soviet deployment in Cuba.
Holding back vital information and refraining from producing accurate assessments for a period of time would eventually force Kennedy into a position of dependence on the security establishment.
However, after Kennedy's assassination in November 1963, the Cuban intelligence community came to consider this last possibility highly credible.
Cuban Intelligence during the Crisis For Cuban intelligence, the October crisis began during the second week of October when U-2s renewed their flights (which had been held up by bad weather), now with more intrusive routes, more frequent schedules, and extended durations.
At the same time, Empresa B indicated important changes at Guantanamo Bay, including the cancellation of leaves, the arrival of reinforcements, heightened base security, the activation of armories, and a trebling of air traffic.
The base was evidently being put on a state of readiness far higher even than that implemented during Playa Giron.
These indications, complemented by United States open sources (media coverage of the issue of Soviet forces and missiles in Cuba, and debates in Congress) led Cuban intelligence to prepare a final assessment concerning the possibility of a confrontation, and possible scenarios for dealing with it.
The final version of this report was submitted to Pineiro some time between 16 and 18 October.
Pineiro signed off on the report, and submitted copies only for the eyes of Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara.
The report assumed that as soon as the United States understood the full nature and magnitude of the Soviet deployment, Washington would certainly attempt a preemptive first strike.
Nor did either consider it possible that Khrushchev would yield to American demands in less than a week without prior consultation with Fidel Castro, and without pressing for a more advantageous settlement.
On 17 October, all directorates and branches of the General Staff of the Armed Forces and of the Ministry of Interior were placed on a maximum 'state of war' alert.
The fact that the United States was not attacking, but instead enforcing a naval blockade, came as a complete surprise.
Cuban intelligence concluded that Kennedy desired to avoid a confrontation, and was leaving the door open for some kind of bargain.
Between 22 and 26 October, Cuban intelligence adopted a military character.
This happened for the first time during the October crisis, although the procedure was not implemented completely.
DGI and DSE personnel were issued arms and uniforms, but retained their separate institutional identities.
DGI became a special unit of 'Punto O', a military base which specialized in irregular warfare directly subordinate to Fidel Castro.
Reports and analyses from other centers and agents in the field were largely cut off because of communications difficulties, the suspension of regular flights, and the absence of couriers.
Cuban intelligence continued to make use of Soviet sources, the reports on Empresa B provided by DIM, and summaries of the communications between Castro and Khrushchev , in addition to open sources.
Cuban intelligence did not have any independent information to this effect, and it is unclear what led Fidel Castro to this conclusion.
As Castro made a similar claim to Khrushchev in his letter of that same night, it seems unlikely that his source was Soviet intelligence.
One possibility is that Castro may have arrived at this conclusion on the basis of the extensive summaries of United States open source material that Castro read on a daily basis.
There were remarks in the US press and in Congress indicating that the blockade would not result in the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, and that the United States would shortly have to mount an air strike or invasion in order to guarantee their elimination.
Whatever the source of his judgment, we were all expecting an American attack in response to the Soviet deployment, and thus the prospect did not come as a surprise.
Outraged at the news and eager to monitor the Soviet reaction to it, Castro immediately gave instructions to DGI, DSE, and DIM to organize a strict surveillance of Soviet bases and personnel.
While a deal was evidently in the works on a bilateral fast-track basis that prevented Fidel Castro from playing any role in the negotiations whatsoever, Castro's hard-line against compromise began to receive explicit support from Soviet commanders in Cuba and Soviet advisers attached to Cuban intelligence.
Two consecutive editorials in Krasnaya zvezda (Red Star), the official journal of the Soviet Armed Forces, similarly took a hard line against withdrawing the missiles from Cuba.
Cuban intelligence concluded that Khrushchev was being challenged from within, especially among the military.
Soviet commanders in Cuban were siding with Fidel Castro against Moscow.
Even more surprising was the shooting down of a U-2 by a Soviet commander, which threatened to derail the process of negotiations.
Khrushchev was forced to move quickly and to strike a deal with Kennedy as soon as possible.
It was the view of Cuban intelligence at the time that Khrushchev's haste to conclude an agreement with Kennedy was not a response to diplomatic or strategic considerations, but a response to challenges to his leadership.
THE AFTERMATH After 27 October, Soviet, Czech, and East German intelligence dramatically reduced the flow of information and assessments that they shared with Cuban intelligence.
This was the beginning of a trend that would last until 1968, and which was only partially reversed thereafter.
Nevertheless, Cuban intelligence was instructed not to withhold information or analysis from Soviet advisers, nor to express hostility or unfriendliness.
To the contrary, instructions were given to make Soviet advisers feel comfortable and welcome.
Ultimately, keeping these channels open would prove to be a great benefit to Cuba.
It was much more difficult to heal the rift between Castro and Khrushchev.
Additionally, Khrushchev faced the task of smoothing over relations with his own military commanders in Cuba.
These were the two purposes of the mission Khrushchev sent to Cuba in the immediate aftermath of the crisis led by First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoyan, who was accompanied by a team of marshals and generals.
Their aim was not only to appease Fidel Castro, but even more importantly, to neutralize the Soviet commanders.
He was absolutely furious with Khrushchev, and outraged at the US-Soviet agreement.
He did not receive Mikoyan for five days, and when finally he did receive him, he criticized every decision made by Khrushchev, and in very strong language refused to associate himself with the Khrushchev-Kennedy agreements.
Neutralizing the Soviet commanders in Cuba was another matter, akin to putting down a rebellion.
Under personal pressure from Mikoyan and from the military delegation that accompanied him, Soviet commanders who at first had resisted Moscow's instructions to dismantle the strategic nuclear missiles and withdraw them under United States supervision ultimately complied.
Castro's anger at Khrushchev stemmed not only from his concern that, by withdrawing the missiles, the Soviet Union would be exposing Cuba to an American attack; even more importantly, Khrushchev's willingness to engage in bilateral negotiations with the United States and explicitly exclude Castro was inconsistent with Cuba's dignity and status as a sovereign state.
Thus, after 27 October, it became a priority to disassociate Cuba from the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement.
Castro was especially anxious to signal Cuba's refusal to be treated like a Soviet puppet.
Every possible channel would be used for such a purpose, and Cuban intelligence played a major role.
Through every station, and using every network, agent, collaborator, and friendly organization, Cuban intelligence launched a world-wide campaign to promote Cuba's independent stand, and to destroy the image of Cuba as a satellite of the Soviet Union.
This was the beginning of significant and lasting changes in Cuba's security and foreign policies.
Henceforward, Cuba would jealously guard its independence from foreign influence.
A crucial part of demonstrating Cuba's independence was increasing the capacity of the Cuban forces to make the United States pay a very high price for aggression against Cuba, not only on the territory of Cuba itself, but also on United States territory and overseas.
Defensa Activa Revolucionaria and Operation 'Boomerang' became fixed features of Cuba's security doctrine, guiding the preparations and activities of the FAR and Cuban intelligence for more than 30 years.
These consumed vast resources, because it was necessary for Cuba to have the capability to threaten American interests and allies on a global scale.
At the same time, contradictory as it may seem, Castro sought to work out a settlement with the United States, independently from Moscow.
Details of these overtures were held very closely by Cuban intelligence, and severe restrictions placed on who had access to information about them.
Cuban intelligence considered the signals Kennedy gave in response to these overtures highly positive.
Castro was very enthusiastic, and became convinced that a settlement was possible.
DGI officials were truly amazed at Kennedy's receptivity, and were optimistic in their assessments about the possibility of more normal relations between the two countries.
However, it was also clear to DGI that Fidel Castro's overture was unwelcome in certain quarters of the Cuban leadership.
Kennedy's assassination in November 1963 brought an end to this hopeful period.
It was considered of vital importance not to let the approach to Washington lapse, but to continue efforts with the new President, Lyndon Johnson.
Cuba persisted for more than a year, but without result.0 During that period, there were two important developments in the operations of Cuban intelligence in United States.
These agents were transported to the United States alongside the many hundreds of Cuban families who traveled in the empty merchant ships that had brought the food and medicines with which the United States ransomed the captured mercenarios of Playa Giron.
Cuba lost contact with a high percentage of those agents, and wrote them off as deserters.
A few managed to obtain key positions in counterrevolutionary organizations and started to provide valuable information relatively quickly.
Others remained as 'sleepers' for six or eight years before becoming active informants.
Even before the crisis ended, Castro began discussing with Pineiro the lessons of the crisis for Cuban intelligence, and its priorities for the future As a result, its role and resources were considerably enhanced.
Communications had proven to be the Achilles' heel of Cuban intelligence, especially after the clash with the Kremlin on the weekend of 27 October.
Cuban intelligence had limited communications capabilities of its own, and had relied far too heavily on transmitting through Soviet channels.
An urgent program was implemented to equip Cuban intelligence with a variety of robust and secure communications, to design cipher systems, and to train personnel in the use of them.
While Cuban intelligence had benefited from its interactions with Soviet, Czech, and East German intelligence, it had also proven itself too dependent upon them, too influenced by them, and too vulnerable to the withdrawal of their information, services, and expertise.
Thus Cuba's intelligence cooperation with Socialist countries was completely reorganized, and many restrictions placed upon it.
Cuban intelligence was also instructed to conduct systematic surveillance of these countries and of their internal developments.
Under the slogan La Lucha Armada es el Unico Camino ('Armed Struggle is the only way') and the strategy of Defensa Activa Revolucionaria, the activities of Liberation National were dramatically accelerated.
LN conducted operations through Mexico, Bolivia, and various Caribbean countries targeting Guatemala, Nicaragua, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Argentina, and Brazil.
Cuba also expanded its activities in Africa and the Middle East, where regional conflicts provided excellent grounds not only for implementing the principles of Defensa Activa Revolucionaria in the field of guerrilla warfare, but also for military cooperation with newly independent countries.
Armed support for anti-colonial struggles had legal and diplomatic sanction from African and Arab states.
Cuban intelligence was particularly active in Algeria, the Portuguese colonies, and Yemen.
Finally, it is important to note the ascendance of intelligence within Cuba's power structure in the wake of the October crisis.
Cuban intelligence played an increasingly important role in decision making, and Manuel Pineiro became a member of Castro's inner circle.
Cuban intelligence became in addition the most important institution in the field of foreign policy making.
In the field of national security, its role increased considerably, and became a major source of friction with Raul Castro and MINFAR.66 SUMMARY Thirty-five years after the October crisis, we can see that Cuban intelligence played an important role at various stages, but we can also see how international politics, internal politics, dependence upon foreign intelligence, and resource constraints prevented Cuban intelligence from serving as a more effective guide to Cuban policy.
From April 1961 to September 1962, Cuban intelligence insisted that there was no substantial evidence indicating that the United States was preparing for, or intended to carry out, an invasion of Cuba.
During this period, Soviet assessments consistently contradicted Cuban assessments, and coincided with Fidel Castro's personal views.
The result was that Cuban intelligence had difficulty having its distinctive voice heard.
Circumstantial considerations suggest that Soviet assessments were deliberately skewed so as to increase the likelihood that Castro would agree to a nuclear deployment whose primary purpose was to challenge American nuclear supremacy, not to deter an American invasion of Cuba.
Cuban intelligence was essentially unable and frequently not permitted to challenge or contradict the strategic assumptions, beliefs, and intuitions of Fidel Castro.
However, intelligence institutions commonly have limited influence over politicians, and thus the Cuban experience is not necessarily unusual.
It was all the more natural that the leadership and the intelligence apparatus would become very interdependent in Cuba since it was a small country extremely sensitive to national security concerns.
By breaking the official compartmentation of information on the Soviet deployment, Cuban intelligence demonstrated both to Pineiro and to the Cuban leadership that the nuclear deployment was easily detected, even at an early stage.
Cuban intelligence officers found it very difficult to believe and continue to find it difficult to believe that the United States did not detect the deployment until 15 October.
Cuban intelligence officials in 1962 were convinced that if the United States intelligence community had performed more effectively, the United States could have prevented the Soviet deployment from taking place, either by diplomatic or military means.
Cuban intelligence considered the American intelligence failure evidence of either ineptitude or conspiracy.
Cuban intelligence expected that the United States would react to the discovery of the deployment with an all-out attack on Cuba.
This expectation was based on the assumption that Washington would consider the deployment a threat of the first magnitude, and would urgently feel the need to remove such a threat.
As the crisis approached, Cuban intelligence attempted to warn the Cuban leadership of the dangers of being dragged into a superpower conflict as a surrogate or proxy of the Soviet Union.
After the crisis and as a direct result of it Cuban intelligence became the most influential institution in national security and foreign policy decision making.
Its role, however, was always limited by the fact that Fidel Castro's strategic assumptions, personal convictions, and intuitions were effectively off limits.
It is evident that before, during, and after the October crisis, American officials evinced a persistent misunderstanding of the true nature of the Cuban Revolution, of its leader Fidel Castro, and of the nature and limits of Cuba's alliance with the Soviet Union.
Cuban intelligence was convinced that United States intelligence in general, and the CIA in particular, failed to understand the independent behavior of Fidel Castro and the many important differences between the Soviet and Cuban agendas.
They similarly failed to grasp Khrushchev's motives at every stage, and failed to appreciate important tensions within the Kremlin.
Ignorance and misunderstanding not only caused the United States to fail to anticipate the possibility of a nuclear deployment they also contributed to the very policies of isolation, threat, confrontation, covert action, and assassination that helped to bring it about.
If the United States government was truly deceived by Khrushchev and Fidel Castro in 1962, it must stand as the most remarkable deception in world history.
But it is a deception that would owe more to these misunderstandings than to Soviet attempts to mask the size and nature of the deployment.
Certainly the Cuban intelligence community believed in 1962 that if American intelligence had performed more effectively, the United States could have prevented the Soviet deployment from taking place, either through diplomatic or military means.
But it was and remains my deepest conviction, and the conviction of most Cuban analysts, that the United States intelligence community had to know that such a deployment was taking place prior to 15 October.
It strains credulity to imagine that United States intelligence would miss such a massive operation first at the Soviet end, and then also in Cuba, failing to confirm the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles until they were virtually ready to attack targets in the United States.
Whatever the explanation for the American failure might be, it is clear that the October crisis had far-reaching effects not only on superpower relations, but on Cuba's relations both with the United States and the Soviet Union; on Cuba's foreign and security policy as a whole; and on Cuban decision making.
Cuban intelligence played a role sometimes a crucial role at every stage.
This Soviet nuclear deployment was backed by almost 42,000 Soviet troops who were equipped with tactical nuclear weapons in addition to strategic nuclear missiles.
El MNINT ; Orlando Piedra and Daniel Efrain Raimundo, Habla el Coronel Orlando Piedra ; Melvin Manon, Operacion Estrella: Con Caamano, La Resistencia y la Inteligencia Cubana, 3rd. ed.
Ediciones de Taller 1989); Jaime Suchlicki, The Cuban Military under Castro (Coral Gables, FL: Inst. of Interamerican Studies, Graduate School of Int.
I have been aided in the preparation of this essay by individuals with extensive experience directly relevant to this topic who must, unfortunately, remain nameless, for personal security reasons.
In addition, I am grateful to Gustavo Villoldo, a prominent Cuban agent working for the CIA, whose recollections proved invaluable.
Cuban sources and records do not refer to the event as the 'Bay of Pigs', as is customary American parlance.
Instead, Cubans refer to it as Playa Giron the site of the final battle and victory.
Through its operations in Miami, and through its collaboration with Guatemalan sources , Cuban intelligence made a crucial contribution to this victory.
Soviet intelligence played an active role identifying the areas best suited for the landing to take place, and narrowing down the likely sites.
Three of the most important PSP operatives inside Batista's security establishment were Col.
Osvaldo Sanchez Cabrera died in Jan.61 while trying to land at Varadero International Airport.
It is ironic that the CIA chose Guatemala to train Assault Brigade 2506, because the PGT, under a Central Committee member code-named 'Aragon', was able to monitor the training closely and report back to Cuba.
I personally reported on preparations at the Retalhuleu training site and on the coming uprising within the Guatemalan Armed Forces.
Miguel Angel Duque de Estrada, head of the Latin American department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and was considered hard information at the time.
It would have been more difficult for Cuba to monitor the activities of Brigade 2506 in almost any other Central American country.
Soviet, Czech and East German intelligence provided information in response to requests from DGI, but also routinely shared information and assessments that th;y considered potentially useful to Cuba.
The role of Fidel Castro's brother Raul a committed Marxist in the PSP's power play remains shrouded in mystery.
At the very least, Raul had been promoting members of the PSP to prominent positions in the Revolutionary leadership since the middle of 1958.
It is generally acknowledged also that Raul was aware of Kudriavtsev's activities.
Other PSP leaders who were not directly involved disavowed Anibal Escalante and pledged their loyalty to Fidel Castro.
This group included Bias Roca; and César Escalante, Aníbal's younger brother and the father of General Fabian Escalante.
The delegation traveled to Moscow in April 1962 and was led by Che Guevara.
It included Cesar Escalante, Emilio Aragonés, and an officer from DGI who went as a personal aide to Che.
The presence of Cesar Escalante was a clear indication to Moscow that the remaining PSP leadership in Havana backed Fidel Castro.
Aragones was a former civilian member of the 26th of July Movement from the city of Cienfuegos.
Though closely associated with the PSP, he was promoted by Fidel Castro and became an influential figure in the early 1960s.
This access did not, however, always translate into influence, as I discuss further below.
Rene had served with DSE and had worked very closely with Osvaldo Sanchez until the latter's death.
Piñeiro himself had no Soviet adviser, jealous as he was of his autonomy and of his strong personal ties to Castro.
Fidel Castro and Che Guevara were both eager to preserve the operational autonomy of Cuban intelligence from Soviet influence as far as possible while at the same time retaining the benefits of professional Soviet assistance.
It is notable that during the period in question, DGI was actively supporting factions within Latin American communist parties who resisted Moscow's attempts to take a leading role in revolutionary activity in the Hemisphere, and who publicly challenged Moscow's revolutionary doctrines.
According to my recollection, this second target was an Air Force installation at, or near the site of, the Krome Avenue Holding Facility a Federal facility operated to hold Cuban refugees prior to clearance and release.
At that time, however, Cuban refugees were held and cleared at Opa-Locka, and the installation in question had a military function.
On a smaller but nonetheless significant scale, the situation was similar in Western Europe.
In places such as Madrid and Paris, Cuban intelligence had no difficulty organizing the collection of information from people who were concerned to safeguard the Cuban Revolution.
The Egyptian Marxist intellectual Henri Curiel, for example, worked independently from a base in Paris, and with his associates provided first-class information on a variety of topics, including the activities of the United States military in Western Europe.
After Playa Girón, the Cuban military formulated a complementary plan for the rapid and complete destruction of the American base at Guantánamo Bay.
The Brazilian embassy had been conducting valuable intelligence work for the CIA prior to Playa Gir6n.
This operation was conducted by the Brazilian SNI (National Information Service) under the direction of General Garraztazu Medici.
We now know that the estimate of American military planners was considerably smaller.
In the spring of 1962, Khrushchev's son-in-law, Aleksei Adzhubei editor of Izvestiya visited Havana after talks in Washington with President Kennedy.
Adzhubei expressed to Castro his view that the United States was planning a major military attack.
Castro and his inner circle perceived this as a 'hard' intelligence confirmation.
It was consistent with what the KGB had been insisting, but it stood in direct opposition to Cuban intelligence information and assessments indicating week after week that nothing of that sort could be substantiated.
Soviet threat assessments also served Castro's broader agenda, which was to secure higher levels of economic and military aid.
Nevertheless, from April 1961 to Sept.62, Cuban intelligence could find no indication that an American attack was imminent.
Castro interpreted this message to mean that Kennedy was unaware of the deployment at the time.
Additionally, Cuban intelligence was instructed in June 1962 not to address in its assessments the topic of a Soviet deployment to Cuba.
This remark was significant because, in the privacy of his Moscow hotel room, Che had voiced his concern that Khrushchev lacked the personal courage to undertake serious defensive measures on Cuba's behalf.
Thus it was evident to the Cuban delegation that the Soviets were recording their private conversations.
Biryuzov, commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces, who traveled to Cuba under the cover of an agricultural mission to make their proposal.
It is interesting to note that when he first heard of it, Castro suspected that the Soviet deployment had ulterior geopolitical motives, but he did not find this disturbing in the least.
This was a confirmation of sorts; but still we were forbidden from using it in our estimates.
Gustavo Villoldo notes that CIA officials generally distrusted emigres, as well as their own agents of Cuban origin.
For a contrasting view, see the essay by Raymond Garthoff in this volume.
According to Gustavo Villoldo, the CIA had more than 4,000 men in South Florida operating against Cuba.
Beginning in Dec.61, monitoring the buildup of Soviet forces in Cuba became an intelligence priority for CIA informants and infiltration teams.
Beginning in summer 1962, monitoring the activities of Fidel Castro became an additional priority, especially in the provinces of Pinar del Rio and La Habana.
His weekend visits to La Deseada, where he would entertain Soviet generals, drew particular attention.
Some missions visually observed, or obtained photos of, support equipment associated with the missile deployment, especially in Mariel-Cabafias.
In early Sept., an agent by the name of Dionisio Pastrana obtained information that some in the CIA considered a hard confirmation of a nuclear deployment.
In response to a high volume of information suggesting the possible presence of Soviet missiles in Pinar del Rio province, several Cuban CIA agents Villoldo among them were infiltrated to reconnoiter and to prepare for a possible landing by the 82nd Airborne Division just east of Viñales Valley.
Generally, the CIA relied and acted upon information coming from its own agents and obtained through its own means, and discounted or ignored reports from the exile community — or even, in some cases, from its own infiltration teams manned by Cubans who were for the most part highly qualified, highly-motivated, and courageous.
One infiltration team led by Miguel Orozco with orders to sabotage a copper mine in Santa Lucia nearly stumbled onto a huge Soviet base that they simply did not know was there.
Cuban intelligence did not have information on the specifics of American contingency plans for military action against Cuba , but did assume that such plans existed.
Soviet advisers were overseeing the creation of entirely new armed forces, and the number of Soviet advisers in Cuba rose dramatically, especially after April 1962.
The air force was being expanded and its equipment upgraded; three independent armies were created with new corps, armored divisions, and artillery regiments.
Shipments of heavy military equipment and supplies increased dramatically, and in the main Cuban ports everyone could see the amount of hardware that was being landed.
Preparations in the Soviet Union must have begun long before the first missiles left Soviet ports for Cuba.
For the Soviet Union to move 45,000 men, including four reinforced regiments, various kinds of missiles, airplanes, and ships, and to replace them within the Soviet defense system must have required considerable time and must have greatly strained the Soviets' modest logistical capabilities.
Naval and air traffic to Cuba increased dramatically over the period in question.
Cuban seaports and airports were not equipped to handle discreetly the volume of shipments arriving from the Soviet Union.
Cuba had few roads suitable for the transportation of heavy equipment, and these could all be monitored relatively easily.
Tens of thousands of people would witness the transshipment of military equipment as a matter of course.,000 Soviet soldiers, though dressed in civilian clothing, wore crew-cuts, moved in groups in military trucks, marched in formation, and generally behaved like military personnel.
Cuba was unable to interdict infiltrations by the CIA's teams of Cuban agents because of insufficient naval resources and border controls.
People leaving Cuba for the United States, or communicating with friends and relatives by telephone or mail, routinely commented on the Soviet presence in Cuba, which might have alerted American intelligence.
U-2s flew over Cuba from west to east and back again with only one brief interruption in early Oct.
During part of this period, construction of bases and launching sites was in full swing.
The Cuban countryside was mostly flat and covered with a dense forest canopy.
Each base or launching site involved the construction of new buildings, roads, and infrastructure.
Whether this interpretation was accurate is something scholars of American intelligence will be better able to determine.
It would be an interesting coincidence, however, with Piñeiro's unwillingness to risk his position by submitting to the Cuban leadership reports and estimates that challenged their assumptions and views.
In 1963, Cuban intelligence received a Soviet report on the activities of Col.
Oleg Penkovsky, a high-ranking officer in Soviet military intelligence, who for some time had been working both for the CIA and for Britain's MI6.
According to that report, Penkovsky had given Western intelligence information that would have enabled it to anticipate and monitor the Soviet deployment, including information on the civilian shirts issued as disguises to specific units of the Strategic Rocket Forces being sent to Cuba.
Castro began lobbying to shoot down U-2s early in the deployment, because he feared the consequences of early detection.
He believed that the shoot-downs of U-2s over the Soviet Union , and later over the People's Republic of China , indicated that the United States would curtail U-2 flights if they encountered hostile fire.
After an eight-month siege, the city capitulated, bringing to an end all serious resistance to Rome in the region.
Moscow Radio carried the text of Khrushchev's 27 Oct. letter to Kennedy, in which he proposed a swap of Soviet missiles in Cuba for United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Prior to 26 Oct., Cuban security forces on external perimeter duty merely kept a casual eye on activities within.
Of particular interest to Castro were signs of tension between Soviet military forces in Cuba and political leaders in Moscow -g., delays in executing, or behavior inconsistent with, Khrushchev's orders to dismantle missile sites.
It is noteworthy that Castro shared the view of senior Soviet commanders that Soviet strategic nuclear capability provided an adequate deterrent against American attack.
He had been urging Soviet commanders to shoot down marauding American U-2s in part precisely to enhance the Cuban/Soviet bargaining position, and applauded the shoot-down of 27 Oct. accordingly.
Moreover, as a Soviet rather than Cuban action, it reduced the danger that the United States would seek retribution from Cuba.
Castro's best alternative contingency an attack against Guantanamo almost certainly would have frustrated a purely bilateral US-Soviet deal, but would have been highly provocative.
For this reason Castro eschewed it, even though it would have gratified his outrage.
While Castro was willing to take risks in pursuit of a more favorable resolution of the crisis, he was not entirely reckless.
It is worth noting that Castro's hard line against the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal, and his letter to Khrushchev of 26 Oct., reflected in part his belief that Khrushchev's domestic challenges, and Kennedy's apparent reluctance to use force during the acute phase of the crisis , opened up opportunities to secure an outcome to the crisis more favorable to Cuba's regional security needs and its international legitimacy.
The more pressure Castro put on both Kennedy and Khrushchev in the endgame of the crisis, Castro believed, the better would bo the result for Cuba.
For Emilio Aragonés's rather humorous account of the Mikoyan mission, see Allyn, Blight, and Welch, 'Essence of Revision' (note 2)l70n.l48.
The reluctance of Soviet commanders to comply with Khrushchev's order was reported to me by Raul Roa, who in turn had heard of it from Fidel Castro.
Beginning in May 1961, the Kennedy administration tacitly supported attempts by the Tractors for Freedom Committee, headed by Eleanor Roosevelt, to ransom the prisoners captured at Playa Giron.
But the group failed to raise the $28,000,000 needed for heavyconstruction equipment that Castro demanded as reparations.
Over the next several months Castro changed the conditions for ransom repeatedly.
Ultimately, Castro agreed to release the prisoners in exchange for $53,000,000 worth of food and medicines terms worked out with American negotiator James B Donovan.
The prisoners were returned to the United States between Dec.62 and July 1965.
The internal struggles connected with this topic are too complex to be dealt with in this essay.
Cuba's demarches finally came to an end when Johnson gave orders to cancel any further contacts in late 1964.
Liberation National was a department of DGI from 1961 to 1970, but Fidel Castro supervised it closely.
In summer 1970, when Piñeiro was forced out of MININT under pressure from Raul Castro, a compromise was arranged whereby Piñeiro took with him the whole of LN and established it as an autonomous organization reporting directly to Fidel.
Beginning in 1962, however, all operations against the United States were carried out on the direct order, and were the personal responsibility, of the Commander-in Chief.
In Nov., these were exchanged for 23 CIA agents previously captured by Cuban forces.
In addition, Cuba began coordinating with the Vietnamese government to provide military training for Latin American guerrillas in Vietnam after 1965.
In 1989, Raul Castro took over DSE and DGI, destroying much of its accumulated organization, expertise, agents, and leaders, replacing it with new structures, methods, and personnel.
