WN the world stood seemingly on the brink of ultimate disaster and nuclear war.
The crisis ended with Khrushchev surrendering to the demands of United States president John F Kennedy.
The Eisenhower administration was forced to own up to the mission, and Khrushchev canceled the Paris Summit.
As a result, The Cold War between the United States and the So ... an agreement to ban nuclear testing in the atmosphere.
The U-2 incident opened tension between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev saw the flying of the plane as an ""aggressive act"" and if repeated, ""it will be obliged t ... issile attack from Cuba would trigger an ""all-out"" attack on the Soviet Union.
The first time that Eisenhower and Khrushchev met was at the Four-Power Summit confer ... d that they could work with each other but it was still going to be a long hard road.
I don't think Khrushchev wanted to make it any harder than it had to be.
Khrushchev had made three attempts to ease the tension after the Hungarian revolution.
Firstly, in December 1957 Khrushchev proposed banning all nuclear missiles from Poland, Czechoslovakia and Germany.
Then on Ja ... osed banning all nuclear missiles from Poland, Czechoslovakia and Germany.
United States said to Cuba if the weapons were not dismantled and removed, that they would invade.
If control were defined as the ""ability to authorize, manage or direct"", the former time ... stern European communist countries were proven efficient as long as he was in power.
However, under Khrushchev, most of those binds the USSR had on its lackeys were broken.
Khrushchev was the leader of the Soviets after the death of Stalin and a short struggle for power wi ... owever the success of Sputnik made the Americans once again paranoid and afraid of the Soviets.
Although Khrushchev could not be consistent in all of his foreign policies during 1953 to 1960, his involveme ... ssian people and protection for the nation, both of which were essential to the country's survival.
Khrushchev did not inherit a Russia that was free from bondage, and thus he had to find a way to neg ... ation of the Soviet sphere.
Everyone hoped that Khrushchev would bring a period of ""thaw"" in the Cold War.
Although his intentions were noble the United States ... n the Cold War.
Although his intentions were noble the United States remained cautious about the Soviet Union.
Upon the death of Stalin in 1953, Khrushchev emerged as the Soviet Union's new political giant.
The dilemma that he faced was to eithe ... th the West to concentrate on the rebuilding of the USSR's war-torn economy, industries and cities.
Blockade, however there was also a very short period of détente after the Korean War such as Khrushchev's secret speech in 1955.
Actually before that, China and the Soviets already had some problems with each other.
In October of 1956, the Hungarian uprising occurred in Budapest, upon which Khrushchev sent in 30,000 Russian troops on November 4th and installed a new government in Hungary, ... s were lost.
The reason this whole situation happened was because the United States would not ... ing the public it makes the situation intensify and puts each leader under extreme pressure to act.
Khrushchev's strong backing of his ally was a direct result of the invasion.
Above all this, Mao made claims that China was ""having too much food"", promising Khrushchev unrestrained supplies of food for nuclear submarines.
Fidel Castro accepted the argument that Cubans needed to accept missiles for their self... ly 90 miles away from the United States and was of much greater importance than one half of Berlin.
