First, it should be noted that Waltz’ argument confuses correlation with causality.
It is true that we have not had a world war since nuclear weapons were developed in 1945, but it is equally true that we have not had a world war since the UN was initiated in 1945.
Secondly, even if nuclear weapons have played a role in preventing a third world war , we need to know how long we can expect that to last.
Five months later, BP’s Deepwater Horizon drilling rig exploded, killing 11 workers, creating an environmental catastrophe, and proving that 50 years of success was inadequate evidence for complacency.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 1 of 17 The Gulf of Mexico will eventually recover from the BP oil spill, but the same cannot be said for mistakenly extrapolating 67 years without a nuclear exchange into the indefinite future.
Where nuclear weapons are concerned, we cannot afford to wait for disaster to strike before realizing that complacency is unwarranted.
A temperamental nuclear coin Fortunately, an engineering discipline known as quantitative risk analysis or QRA 2 can illuminate the danger by gleaning more information from the available data than might first appear possible.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 2 of 17 at an extremely tense time, just two months after a Korean airliner had been shot down after it strayed into Soviet airspace, and less than eight months after President Ronald Reagan’s “Star Wars” speech.
The Soviets reasoned that the West would mask preparations for such an attack as a military exercise.
Fortunately Yeltsin made the right decision and this false alarm did not occur during a crisis, such as the 2008 Georgian War, when it would have been more likely to be mistaken for the real thing.
The danger is compounded because most Americans are unaware that Georgia fired the first shots and Russia is not solely to blame for that war.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 3 of 17 The majority of the above incidents occurred post-Cold War, challenging the widespread belief that the nuclear threat ended with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 4 of 17 These incidents show that the nuclear coin has teetered on edge far too often, yet society’s lack of concern and resultant inaction demonstrate that nuclear optimism is a widespread illusion.
Defusing the nuclear threat requires making society aware of the risk that it bears before catastrophe strikes.
The July 2000 crash of the Concorde supersonic transport, which killed everyone on board, provides a good example of the value of risk analysis.
Risk analysis breaks down a catastrophic failure into a sequence of smaller mistakes, known as a fault tree.
It then looks at how often the fault tree has been traversed and how close to catastrophe those excursions came.
The fatal Concorde accident sequence started with runway debris striking a tire, which caused the tire to blow out, which caused a fuel tank to rupture, which caused a fire, which led to loss of control of the aircraft and the fatal crash.
If more attention had been paid to these early warning signs, the fatal crash could probably have been averted.
In the same way, to date we have experienced no failures of nuclear deterrence, but need to look more carefully at nuclear near misses.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 5 of 17 Risk analysis decomposes a catastrophic failure into a sequence of partial failures diagram, but occasionally, events occur which increase the risk and move us closer to the nuclear threshold.
That threshold is crossed the first time a nuclear weapon is used in anger, leading to possible further escalation, including to the final state denoted WW3.
To correctly assess the level of risk, it is important to pay attention not just to the typical, safe states, but also to the rarely visited, dangerous ones.
The next section then identifies six recent mistakes that came close to repeating 1962’s errors, and that still retain that potential.
Fortunately, that view has been recorded by Fyodr Burlatsky, one of Khrushchev’s speechwriters, as well as a man who was in the forefront of the Soviet reform movement of the 1980s.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 6 of 17 insisting on getting its way on certain issues] was not only an example of Americans’ traditional strongarm policy, but also an underestimation of Soviet might.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 7 of 17 Our Turkish missiles had a similar purpose.
But that begs the question, addressed here, of how much risk is involved in threatening nuclear war over much more minor issues.
But those arguing in favor of invasion were ignorant of the fact, not learned in the West until many years later, that the Soviets had battlefield nuclear weapons on Cuba designed to repel just such an American invasion.
Also totally unknown to the American participants, a Soviet submarine which was “hunted” and forced to surface by American destroyers carried a nuclear torpedo, and its captain considered using it against his American attackers.
Because the 2008 Cuban Bomber Mini-Crisis stopped short of becoming a full-blown crisis, most people are unaware of it.
But, as shown below, we came within what might be characterized as “half a step” of once again staring at the nuclear abyss and wondering how we got there.
Step #1: conflict between America and Castro’s Cuba Cuba still is an emotional land mine for many Americans.
An additional irritant is the way D-Day ceremonies repeatedly give the impression that the West won World War II, overlooking the immense Soviet contribution in the victory over Nazism.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 9 of 17 of the Soviets and the American electorate.
While Georgia’s 2012 parliamentary elections brought in a government less confrontational to Russia, some risk still exists and a long-term view needs to consider the possibility of future elections reviving, or even increasing the risk.
The American deployment of ballistic missiles in Turkey The missile defense system President George W Bush planned for Eastern Europe, with American missiles in Poland, bears an ominous similarity to our deploying nuclear armed missiles in Turkey.
While President Obama’s September 2009 decision to emphasize options that are less threatening to the Russians partly defused the danger, basing part of the system in Romania leaves the issue far from resolved.
That was when Izvestia, a Russian newspaper often used for strategic governmental leaks, reported that, if the United States proceeded with its Eastern European missile defense system, then nuclear-armed Russian bombers would be deployed to Cuba.
While the Russian Foreign Ministry later claimed that Izvestia’s report was unfounded, some elements within the Russian Defense Ministry appear to be in a similar state of mind to the one that prompted Khrushchev to deploy his Cuban missiles.
Fortunately, that operation did not receive much public attention in the United States, and the crisis died down before reaching full blown proportions.
Both Kennedy and McNamara agreed that the Cuban missiles did not upset the strategic balance, but were heavily influenced by domestic politics – including the upcoming midterm elections.
In some ways, these incidents in July 2008 stopped half a step short of a full-blown crisis, which is little cause for comfort.
We were – and still are – at a very dangerous point in the process and need to recognize complacency as our true enemy.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 11 of 17 A Positive Role for Risk Analysis Thus far we have been applying risk analysis to illuminate the risk posed by our nuclear weapons strategy.
One approach is to revisit the modern day analogs of the six steps which led to the 1962 Cuban crisis and see what they might tell us.
In 1962, both Kennedy and Khrushchev were haunted by similar “red lines” they had drawn, but which were crossed.
They then faced the dilemma of either admitting that they had been bluffing, thereby losing all credibility in future nuclear standoffs, or following through with actions that would have risked hundreds of millions, or even billions of lives.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 12 of 17 a result.
Taking the August 2008 Georgian War as an example, it would reduce the risk if Americans were to recognize that Georgia fired the first shots and Russia is not solely to blame.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 13 of 17 This risk can be reduced by trying to put ourselves in the Russian’s shoes and see how our actions might make them respond.
Such thinking, however, did not block his administration’s movement toward an agreement with Turkey to take some Jupiter missiles.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 14 of 17 as well.
But, should we ever find ourselves this close to the nuclear threshold, we still can reduce the risk by responding more rationally.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2012-13, Page 15 of 17 ground-to-air missiles that took out our U-2 and added tremendous pressure on Kennedy to take military action against Cuba.
Given that Hillel had spent his whole life studying the Torah, asking him to condense the Torah into such a short summary was an insult.
Jews would be offended if the story were reversed, with a Jew asking a Christian saint to teach him the Gospels while he stood on one foot, and then being made to look like a fool.
