In order to treat them with the appropriate respect, my children and I took very seriously the decision to publish them now, in connection with the fiftieth anniversary of my father's presidency.
The moment seems right—enough time has passed so that they can be appreciated for their unique insight, yet the Kennedy presidency is still within living memory for many who will find her observations illuminating.
I hope too that younger generations who are just learning about the 1960s will find these reminiscences a useful introduction to how history is made, and will be inspired to give back to this country that has given us all so much.
When I was growing up, my mother spent much of her time meeting behind closed doors with members of my father's administration, planning his gravesite at Arlington National Cemetery, making sure that the John F Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts would reflect his commitment to our country's cultural heritage, executing his wishes for the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and the Institute of Politics, and making countless decisions on the disposition of my father's official papers, personal effects, mementos, and memorabilia.
She was determined that the Kennedy Library would be a living memorial, a place where students would be inspired to pursue careers in public service, where scholars would have access to the historical record, and where families could learn about the ideals that animated my father's career and his vision for America.
These meetings were somewhat mysterious, but my brother and I had a sense that nothing was more important than the ""oral history"" that we heard about from time to time.
To them, the past was not an academic concern, but a gathering of the most fascinating people you could ever hope to meet.
My mother thought there weren't enough women in American history to make it as interesting as reading novels and diaries from the courts of Europe.
She read War and Peace during the Wisconsin primary, and maintained that reading the Memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon about life at Versailles was the most valuable preparation she received for life in the White House.
After my father's death, my mother resolved to do everything she could to make sure that the record of his administration was preserved.
She had confidence that his decisions would stand the test of time and wanted future generations to learn what an extraordinary man he was.
She helped set in motion one of the most extensive oral history projects ever conducted up to that time, in which more than one thousand people were interviewed about their life and work with John F Kennedy.
Although it was painful for my mother to relive the life since shattered, she knew it was important that she participate.
She always told us that she chose to be interviewed by Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., the Pulitzer Prize-winning historian, former Harvard professor, and special assistant to President Kennedy, because she was doing this for future generations, and that was why she put the tapes in a vault to be sealed for fifty years.
I first read transcripts of these conversations a few weeks after my mother's death in 1994 when the vault was opened and her lawyer gave me a copy.
Everything about that time was overwhelming for me as I found myself faced with the same sorts of decisions about her possessions that she had made thirty years earlier.
Knowing her wishes for the oral history made it easy—I knew I was reading something that wasn't supposed to be seen yet—and although I found it fascinating, I put it back in the vault to await its time.
A few years ago, my family began thinking about how to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of my father's presidency.
We decided to concentrate our efforts on projects that would make his legacy accessible worldwide.
Working with the staff of the John F Kennedy Library and Foundation and generous private partners, my husband led the effort to create the largest existing digital archive of a presidency, as well as online curricula, downloadable exhibits, and a Web site—www.jfk50.org—intended to renew my father's call to service for today's generation.
The publication of these interviews is an important contribution to this commemorative effort, and one with its own story.
When the director of the Kennedy Library first approached me with the idea, I asked him to search the archives to confirm my mother's wishes regarding the date of publication.
Surprisingly, given the importance of the material, there was no deed of gift or transfer, nor a letter of intent regarding the date at which the interviews were to be opened.
By way of background, there are three significant interviews that my mother gave after my father's death.
The first was to Theodore H White in Hyannis Port on November 29, 1963, only a few days after my father's funeral.
In that interview, my mother famously told White that she and my father used to listen to the record of the Broadway musical Camelot in the evening before they went to bed, and looking back, ""that one brief shining moment"" reminded her of his presidency.
White's article was published a week later in Life magazine, but the notes of his interview were sealed until one year after my mother's death.
The second set of conversations was with William Manchester, who was writing a book called The Death of a President.
During the sessions my mother said more about my father's assassination than she had intended.
Subsequently, she became so upset at the thought of her personal memories becoming public that she sued the author and publisher to keep them out of the book.
By far the most important were these oral history conversations with Arthur Schlesinger in which my mother willingly recalled the span of her married life, and shared her insights into my father's private and public political personality.
The archivist's notation regarding the date of publication was not consistent with my memory, nor did it seem to reflect my mother's wishes.
I checked with former members of her staff in the White House and afterward, as well as other friends and attorneys.
No one had a recollection that differed from mine, and they were enthusiastic about the idea of publication.
So I was faced with a dilemma that I have confronted numerous times in connection with my mother's personal papers and correspondence.
On one hand, she was a famously private person who gave no on-the-record interviews (other than these three) about life in the White House, and requested in her will that my brother and I make every effort to prevent publication of her personal papers, letters, and writings.
However, she also saved every scrap of paper that came her way—every birthday card or telegram, every letter from her parents, every date book and diary, every draft letter or memo she ever wrote.
She knew that living in the White House was an enormous privilege and she was proud of the part she had played.
Early on, when she discovered that one of her secretaries was throwing Out notes and internal correspondence that chronicled both daily life and the official workings of the mansion, she wrote a steaming rebuke—directing everyone on her staff to save even the smallest scribbles.
Her deep immersion in memoirs of the past informed her belief that she had an obligation to preserve everything that happened during her time in the White House.
Few people have been written about more than my mother, and I grew up feeling I needed to protect her —just as she had protected us.
So at first I thought it best to leave these interviews sealed for another fifty years, rather than to expose her memory to one more round of gossip and speculation.
But I also understand that the continuing interest in her life is a tribute to the immense admiration and goodwill she still commands, and I believe that open access to government is an important American value.
Over the years, I have received multiple requests to publish my mother's memos and correspondence.
At times, it has been difficult to balance her wish for privacy against her public role and pay proper respect to both.
Although I agonize over each request, I know that my mother trusted my judgment and felt that I understood her outlook on life.
As the years pass, it has become less painful to share her with the world, and in fact, it is a privilege.
As her child, it has sometimes been hard for me to reconcile that most people can identify my mother instantly, but they really don't know her at all.
They may have a sense of her style and her dignified persona, but they don't always appreciate her intellectual curiosity, her sense of the ridiculous, her sense of adventure, or her unerring sense of what was right.
Over time, I have tried to draw the line between her public and private life much as I think she did—I try to accommodate requests that pertain to my father's career, life in the White House, historic events and historic preservation, while denying permission for publication of her writings as a private citizen—whether as a young woman or a working editor.
These conversations are not in the same category as her personal writings, because they were recorded with the intention that they would be made accessible one day.
So it was not a question of whether to publish but a question of when, and the decision was up to me.
My experience with other requests informed my decision that the time was right.
In reaching this conclusion, I found it helpful to remember the context in which the interviews were conducted, and the timing of when they occurred.
The goal was to create a record of my father's life and career from the memories of those who knew and worked with him.
Along the way, there are discussions that reveal much about the central characters and events of the time in both domestic politics and international affairs.
The decision was complicated by my conviction that if my mother had reviewed the transcripts, I have no doubt she would have made revisions.
The interviews were conducted only four months after she had lost her husband, her home, and her sense of purpose.
It isn't surprising that there are some statements she would later have considered too personal, and others too harsh.
There are things I am sure she would have added, and her views certainly evolved over time.
I struggled with the question of whether to delete remarks that might be taken out of context.
I was aware that my intentions might be misinterpreted, even if the edited version was a more ""accurate"" reflection of how she really felt.
After much deliberation, I decided to maintain the integrity of the audio interviews as a primary source while editing the text slightly for readability, not content, as has been done with other presidential transcripts and oral history interviews.
My reservations were mitigated by the remarkable immediacy and the informality of the conversations.
Knowing my mother so well, I can hear her voice in my mind when I read her words on a page.
I can tell when she is emotional, when she is enjoying herself, or is getting annoyed—though she is unfailingly polite.
Even though most of her answers are about my father, by listening to the audio, people will learn a great deal about the person that she was.
Much is revealed by her tone, and by her pauses as well as by her statements.
I trust that readers and listeners will place her views in context to build an accurate and composite portrait of a person and a moment in time, and that her devotion to her husband will come through to others as it does to me.
In addition to their passion for history, my parents shared a conviction that American civilization had come of age.
Today this seems an unremarkable proposition, but at the time the United States was just emerging as a global power, and people still looked to Europe for direction and leadership.
My parents believed America should lead with her ideals, not just with economic or military power, and they wanted to share our artistic and cultural achievements with the world.
She traveled with my father and on her own, often speaking the language of the countries she visited.
She also understood that the White House itself was a powerful symbol of our democracy, and wanted to make sure it projected the best of America to students and families who visited, as well as to foreign heads of state who were entertained there.
She worked hard—not to ""redecorate,"" a word she hated—but to ""restore"" the White House so that the legacy of John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Abraham Lincoln would be visible.
She recast the White House Library to showcase classic works of American history and literature.
She established the Fine Arts Committee and White House Historical Association to assemble a permanent collection of American paintings and decorative arts that would become one of the nation's finest.
She made the White House the world's greatest stage and invited the world's foremost artists to perform there.
She welcomed young musicians, emerging African-American opera singers, jazz musicians, and modern dancers—all to awaken and expand appreciation for American arts and culture.
She felt strongly that as our capital city, Washington, D.C., should reflect America's newly prominent place in the world.
She fought to preserve Lafayette Square, and launched the effort to rehabilitate Pennsylvania Avenue—an effort that has been sustained ever since.
My mother understood that the past was a source of pride for people around the world, just as it is in America, and convinced my father that the United States could build goodwill among countries like Egypt, with which we had political differences, by assisting in their historic preservation efforts.
Her persistence resulted in a generous United States contribution to the UNESCO rescue of the temples of Abu Simbel, which were threatened by the construction of the Aswan Dam, and favorably impressed the Nasser regime.
In another example of cultural diplomacy, my mother was responsible for the Mona Lisa's visit to the United States, the only time the painting has ever left the Louvre.
Most important, she believed her responsibility was to help my father in every way she could.
Although she became a diplomatic and even a political asset, she never thought she deserved the title ""First Lady,"" which she disliked anyway, claiming it sounded like the name of a racehorse.
But she was deeply patriotic and proud of what she accomplished, and my father was proud of her too.
Given the important role Jacqueline Kennedy played in the presidency of John F Kennedy and its aftermath, it seemed a disservice to let her perspective remain absent from the public and scholarly debate that would accompany the fiftieth anniversary of the Kennedy administration.
Fifty years seems a sufficient time for passions to have cooled, yet recent enough that the world described still has much to teach us.
The sense of time passing was made more acute by the loss of my uncle Teddy and my aunt Eunice in 2009, by Ted Sorensen in 2010, and my uncle Sarge in January 2011.
But, before making the final decision, I asked my children to read the transcripts and tell me what they thought.
They found the conversations dated in many ways—but fascinating in many more.
They loved the stories about their grandfather, and how insightful yet irreverent their grandmother was.
They were puzzled by some of Arthur Schlesinger's questions—personal rivalries he pursued and particular issues that have not stood the test of time.
But they came away with the same conclusions that I had reached—there was no significant reason to put off publication and no one speaks better for my mother than she does herself. —NEW YORK, 2011 INTRODUCTION by Michael Beschloss So now, at long last, it is her turn to speak.
If you pore through the thousands of books about John Fitzgerald Kennedy, you will find the voice of one crucial witness virtually absent.
Her suntanned, Yale-educated, French-American father, John V Bouvier III, had followed his forefathers to Wall Street; his career never recovered from the stock market crash of 1929.
From her Park Avenue and Long Island childhood, Jackie (she preferred Jacqueline, but friends and family rarely used her full given name) liked to ride horses, create whimsical drawings, and read books—especially art history, poetry, French history, and literature.
When she was twelve, her parents were bitterly divorced, and her mother wed Hugh D Auchincloss, Jr., a Standard Oil heir, who made Jackie and her younger sister, Lee, at home on his picturesque estates in McLean, Virginia, and Newport, Rhode Island.
As a student at Miss Porter's School in Connecticut, where she boarded her horse Danseuse, teachers found Jackie strong-willed, irreverent, and highly intelligent.
She declined it—to the relief of her mother, who was inclined to take her daughter's strong interest in France as an unwelcome sign of allegiance to Jack Bouvier.
Instead Jackie took a job as ""Inquiring Photographer"" for the Washington Times-Herald.
Finally in the spring of 1951, in Bartlett and his wife Martha's Georgetown dining room, Jack and Jackie had their official introduction.
After what she called ""a spasmodic courtship,"" the Francophile aesthete and the fast-ascending senator from Massachusetts married in Newport on September 12, 1953, launching the decade of their life that you will read about in this book.
During the months after John Kennedy's murder, his thirty-four-year-old widow found memories of their White House life, which she calls in this volume ""our happiest years,"" so traumatic that she asked her Secret Service drivers to please arrange her trips so that she would never accidentally glimpse the old mansion.
She intended to stay away from the White House for the rest of her life —and she did, with only one exception.
Kennedy feared that reminiscing at length about life with her husband would make her ""start to cry again,"" but she was determined to win Jack a fair hearing from historians.
Since JFK had been deprived of the chance afforded other presidents of defending their historical record in books, articles, and public comments, she felt an overwhelming obligation to do whatever she could.
To ensure that he was not forgotten, within days of Dallas, Jackie was already trying to imagine the architecture of a future Kennedy Library—planned for Harvard, on a Charles River site selected by the President just a month before he died.
At the start of December 1963, when the widow and her children had not yet departed their White House quarters, her husband's aide Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., amassed some of the most moving letters he had received about his late boss and sent them upstairs to the widow.
The bow-tied Schlesinger, known for ""his acid wit and a magnificent bounce to his step,"" was an ex—Harvard history professor, one of the nation's most respected scholars, author of award-winning books on the ""ages"" of Andrew Jackson and Franklin Roosevelt, and speechwriter during Adlai Stevenson's two campaigns for president.
He had known JFK since they were Harvard students together, but his friendship with Jackie had really begun during the 1960 presidential campaign, when her husband, wishing not to be seen encircled by liberal academics, had asked Schlesinger to send him tactical advice through her.
Now, in the wake of the assassination, the historian was already planning research for the book on the thirty-fifth presidency that JFK and his other aides had always presumed that Schlesinger would one day write.
As ""a matter of urgency,"" Schlesinger reminded Jacqueline that—in contrast to Presidents Truman and Eisenhower, who kept diaries and wrote surprisingly revealing letters—John Kennedy's leadership was often exercised on the telephone or in person, leaving no written record.t Without a ""crash"" oral history program, capturing memories from New Frontiersmen while still recent, much of the Kennedy history would disappear.
In January 1964, Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy approved a plan for scholars and members of the Kennedy circle to record the recollections of ""thousands"" of people who knew the President—telatives, friends, cabinet secretaries, Massachusetts pols, foreign leaders, and others who had enjoyed ""more than a perfunctory"" relationship with him.
Kennedy had bought this 1794 house, which stood across the street from what was once Robert Todd Lincoln's.
She was doing her best to provide a normal life for six-year-old Caroline and three-year-old John, which she saw as both her duty and her salvation.
Tourist buses stopped outside throughout the day , disgorging sightseers who littered her steps, pointed Instamatic cameras at her front windows, and called out her children's names, forcing her to keep the curtains in her freshly painted white living room closed.
Inside the house, passing through sliding doors, Schlesinger joined Jacqueline in the living room, whose bookshelves displayed artifacts from ancient Rome, Egypt, and Greece that President Kennedy had given her over the years.
Facing away from the front windows, she liked to sit on a crushed-velvet sofa.
Kennedy's right on a pale yellow chair he had seen upstairs at the White House.
During this and the next six sittings, Starting with a quavering voice that grew stronger with time, Jacqueline unburdened herself as the tape machine also picked up the sounds of her lighting cigarettes, of ice cubes in glasses, dogs barking in the distance, trucks rumbling down N Street, and jets roaring overhead.
PRESIDENT JOHN F KENNEDY WITH CAROLINE AND JOHN IN THE OVAL OFFICE Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston For anyone who doubts Jacqueline Kennedy's emotional self-discipline, note that during these months of her greatest despair, she could will herself to speak in such detail about her vanished former life.
In April 1964, she sat for hours at night in that same parlor to be questioned by William Manchester, who was researching his authorized book about the assassination.
Kennedy the agony of twice recounting those events, Schlesinger left the task to Manchester.
Nevertheless, on the June day after she completed her final interview with Schlesinger, she was forced to sit in that same room to be questioned by members of the Warren Commission about her husband's final motorcade.
Read after almost a half century, the interviews in this book revise scene after scene of the history of the 1950s and early 1960s that we thought we knew.
While no such work ever tells the entire story, this oral history constitutes a fresh internal narrative of John Kennedy's life as senator, candidate, and President, and his wife's experience of those years, providing new detail on what JFK and Jacqueline privately said to each other, her backstage role in his political life, diplomacy, and world crises, and her definite and consistently original views about the changing cast of characters who surrounded them both.
The close student of the Kennedy years knows how Jackie expanded her husband's range with her command of French and Spanish, her knowledge about the history of Europe and its colonies, her background in the arts.
But even today, many presume that she was relatively indifferent to political life.
This behavior was not surprising, because well-bred young women of Jacqueline's generation were not encouraged to sound like intellectuals.
Nor would it help her husband for her to vent her more caustic opinions around anyone but their most trusted friends.
But as this oral history confirms, she knew considerably more about John Kennedy's political life than she let on to outsiders, and her influence on his official relationships was substantial.
Jacqueline Kennedy would have been the last person—during these interviews or later—to suggest that she was some kind of hidden White House policy guru.
As she conveys in this volume, she considered it her role not to badger her husband about labor safety or international law, as Eleanor Roosevelt had with Franklin, but to provide JFK with a ""climate of affection,"" with intriguing dinner guests, appealing food, and ""the children in good moods,"" to help him escape the pressures of leading the Free World through one of the most dangerous periods of the Cold War.
To the surprise of both President and First Lady—as this oral history shows, they had both worried that voters would find her too effete—she became, with her beauty and star quality, a huge political asset.
Legions of American women wanted to walk, talk, dress, wear their hair, and furnish their homes like Jackie.
It was not casually that in the fall of 1963, the President lobbied her to join him on campaign trips to Texas and California.
Betty Friedan's pathbreaking The Feminine Mystique was published in 1963, but the full-fledged women's movement was almost a decade away.
Despite such utterances, no one can argue that this First Lady did not make her own strong-minded choices about her life and work.
Resisting those who counseled her to emulate her more conventional predecessors, she made it clear from the start that her supreme job was not to attend charity events or political banquets but to raise her children well amid the blast of attention around a president's family.
And other public projects she undertook at no one's behest but her own.
This is because Schlesinger's oral histories were intended to focus on her husband, and because, in 1964, even so knowing an historian as Schlesinger regarded a First Lady's story as a side event, which caused him to treat Jacqueline primarily as a source on her husband.
This is unfortunate because among the First Ladies of the twentieth century, probably only Eleanor Roosevelt had a greater impact on the Americans of her time.
One of Jacqueline Kennedy's contributions was to herald the importance of historical preservation.
The 1950s and 1960s were a period when American architects and city planners were eager to raze urban monuments and neighborhoods that seemed dated in order to make room for new highways, office buildings, stadiums, and public housing.
A plan was in fast motion to destroy almost all of the nineteenth-century houses and buildings on the east and west sides of Lafayette Park, including the mansion of Dolley Madison's widowhood and the 1861 building that had been the capital's first art museum.
In their place would go ""modern"" white marble federal office towers that would dwarf the White House.
Walking around the square, Jacqueline recalled learning while a student in Paris about how the French protected their vital buildings and places.
As she wrote in a letter, she could not sit still while America's monuments were ""ripped down and horrible things put up in their place.
Had someone else been First Lady, the vista seen from the Executive Mansion's north windows today might be very bleak.
Among other capital monuments she managed to protect was the old gray mansard-crowned Executive Office Building, built in the 1870s next to the White House, which had once housed the Departments of State, War, and Navy.
In January 1961, when the just-inaugurated President and his wife rode down Pennsylvania Avenue, they were newly reminded that L'Enfant's design for a grand ceremonial mile from Capitol to White House had given way to dilapidated tattoo parlors and souvenir stores.
The President established a commission for the boulevard's redevelopment and oversaw it closely with his wife.
Jacqueline recalled to Ted Kennedy that Pennsylvania Avenue was one of the last things ""I remember Jack speaking about with feeling"" before they left for Texas in November 1963.
She famously recast the White House as a treasure house of historic American furniture, painting, sculpture, and artifacts that would rival worldrenowned museums.
For the hundred and sixty years after Abigail and John Adams became its first residents, presidential families had restyled the mansion's public rooms at their whim.
The bad wallpaper and reproductions were ""early Statler,"" she said, almost devoid of American history.
She drafted a plan to persuade wealthy collectors to donate important American pieces; remake the public rooms, with careful research, into proper historical venues; and establish a White House Historical Association to keep some future president's wife whose aunt ""ran a curio shop"" from revamping those rooms to her own ahistorical taste.
Especially after Jacqueline's televised tour of the newly remade White House rooms in February 1962, which was seen by fifty-six million viewers, the project helped make Americans more aware of their traditions in the decorative arts.
Kennedy changed what she described as ""the setting in which the presidency is presented to the world,"" including the contours of state dinners and other presidential ceremonies.
Resolute desk, which has since been used by five of her husband's successors.
It was at Jacqueline's request that the industrial designer Raymond Loewy invented the sky-blue and white design of today's presidential air fleet.
Since her restoration of the White House, a venture she conceived and assigned to herself, every president's wife has felt compelled to focus on some important public project.
With that work ethic, it was natural that Jacqueline would take on the restoration project, although she knew it would prove exhausting.
She had had a full-time job after graduation from college, which was unusual in her social group, and later, in 1975, when her second husband, Aristotle Onassis, had died, and both of her children were away at school, she took on a real job as a book editor at Viking and Doubleday, with a reputation for quality volumes of art and history that benefited from her taste, life experience, and expertise.
Jackie's capacity for intellectual growth manifested itself in the 1970s with her embrace of the women's movement.
She told a friend she had come to realize that she could not expect to live primarily through a husband.
But in the early 1960s, all of this was in Jacqueline Kennedy's future.
Retrospectively she felt that of equal importance to her White House restoration were her far less well known efforts as First Lady to save Abu Simbel.
Alarmed to learn in 1962 that floods were threatening the exalted Egyptian monument, she wrote JFK, ""It is the major temple of the Nile—13th centuryc.
Despite JFK's insistence that congressmen would dismiss Abu Simbel as some ""Egyptian rocks,"" the First Lady's personal appeal to Capitol Hill won Egypt the necessary funds.
John Kennedy would have been quick to affirm that the cultural milestones of his presidency—Pablo Casals and the American Ballet Theatre in the East Room, the Mona Lisa displayed in America, the dinner for Nobel laureates, the efforts to develop a national theater (now the John F Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts), and others—would most likely have been absent had he not married Jacqueline Bouvier.
Both Kennedys insisted that the arts must be included in any definition of a full American life.
The affluent society of the early 1960s was a propitious moment for such a statement.
Many Americans, enjoying postwar prosperity, were pondering how to spend their newfound discretionary income in leisure hours that their struggling forebears could only have dreamt of.
Jacqueline Kennedy's acute sense of how symbols and ceremony could shape American history was never more evident than during the long nightmare weekend after her husband's assassination.
After Dallas, all of this helped Americans win back at least some portion of their self-respect.
From her new bedroom windows, she could see, across the street, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where, despite her preference for Washington, D.C., the Temple of Dendur was being installed, and at night, the floodlights bothered her.
Kennedy never again mused in public about her husband—not in 1965, when Queen Elizabeth II dedicated a memorial acre to him at the birthplace of the Magna Carta; not in 1979, when she witnessed the opening of the Kennedy Library; not ever.
John F Kennedy in the White House, and was upset to discover that the author had borrowed a number of items from their sealed conversations to describe the President's relationships with her and their children.
Schlesinger complied, and by the time A Thousand Days was published, their friendship was restored.
Despite her insistence on privacy, Jacqueline Kennedy never forgot her obligation to posterity.
She knew that when this oral history was published after her death, she would have what she expected to be the almost-final word on her life with her husband.
With the reminiscences in this book, Jacqueline Kennedy became the first American president's wife to submit to hours of intensive recorded questioning about her public and private life.
Now, after decades in which her history has been left to others, listen to what she has to say.
I think he was probably thinking about it for an awfully long time, long before I even knew, and I say this because I remember the first year we were married, I heard him at the Cape.
He was in a room with his father, talking, and I came in and they were talking about something—about the vice presidency.
But I think it was always—he never stopped at any plateau, he was always going on to something higher.
So, obviously after the vice presidential thing, well, then, he was definitely aiming for the presidency.
But I think it would have been—I don't know—maybe when he first ran for the Senate.
It was certainly before I knew him. ie y , 1 ad JOSEPH P KENNEDY, JR., JOSEPH P KENNEDY, SR., AND JOHN F KENNEDY ARRIVING IN SOUTHAMPTON, ENGLAND, JULY 1938 John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston I am sure it was always, in some sense, in his mind.
That's the sort of trite story that all these people who used to go interview Mr Kennedy—you get so tired of people asking for anecdotes, and he'd always produce this thing that Joe would have.
And, obviously, I suppose Joe would have run for politics, and then Jack, being so close to him, couldn't have run right on his heels in Massachusetts.
Joe was a classmate of mine at Harvard, but— I've got a feeling, from what I think of Joe and everything, that he would have been so unimaginative, compared to Jack.
He would never have—lI think he probably would have gotten to be a senator, and not much higher.
I don't know if that's prejudiced, but I don't think he had any of the sort of imagination that Jack did.
Well, certainly I knew him moderately well, and he did not have the imagination or the intellectual force or intellectual interest.
He was a most attractive, charming fellow and would have been, I think, very successful in politics, but I don't think he would ever have carried things to the point the President did.
Well, it's funny—they were talking about that in, I guess, around October— November 1953 at the Cape.
But yet I know the night that Jack ran for the vice presidency in Chicago, he didn't want to then at all.
And you know, it was just a last-minute thing when Stevenson threw the convention open, and, all that taught them so much of how to do things in California in 1960 because no one was prepared.
And I remember being in that office and Bobby trying to get someone to paint signs.
You know, he thought Stevenson would be defeated, and it would be because—and one of the reasons would be because he would have been a Catholic on the ticket with him, so it could only have been a hindrance to him.
But then when all that thing got thrown wide open, I don't know who said, ""Make a race for it,"" or what.
There must have been some sense in his mind, because I remember Ted Sorensen coming—or perhaps, at least, in Ted's mind—coming to see me on the Cape that summer, before the convention, and discussing this—and I telling Ted that I was for it and that I knew other people in the Stevenson circle were for it.
The funny thing with Jack that would make it very hard in these interviews for me to sound as if I make sense, is that he never spoke of his sort of secret objectives, or of plotting things.
I mean, people say he never talked about politics at home with me, but that's all that was talked about.
But he'd never sort of plot little goals and tell you when he was aiming for them then, and life with him was just so fast—that it isn't until you look back that you see what happened when.
Wales SENATOR JOHN F KENNEDY AT THE 1956 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION, CHICAGO John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston With people, life is not like that, anyway.
There are things organic in them which emerge as they continue living, and which are implanted and not sort of consciously striven for.
When people do that, you get a kind of Nixon business,2 which is unattractive, and the President lived so intensely from day to day that the thing that was rather implicit in his career in both the shape of his consciousness and destiny, rather than, I imagine, explicit in his mind, or anything that he ever would talk about.
Or— I was out at the convention then with him in Chicago, but I was having a baby, and so I stayed with Eunice,® and he lived in a hotel with Torb.
And I saw him —you'd see him in the day at the convention, you'd have dinner, but it was such —I can't tell you the confusion—you should talk to Torb about that.
And every day was different, so I think it was when— The worst fight in his life, which you should ask me about sometime, is when he got control of the Massachusetts legislature.
So that was the big thing of all the spring, I guess was, you know, to win that fight.
So, anyway, then he went out there as sort of an important person, and I guess he had rather an unsatisfactory couple of meetings with Stevenson, and suddenly there was that night.
And I remember I stayed up all night at the headquarters, and Bobby came running to me and said, ""We don't know anything.
And nobody ever thought I had any political relatives or anything, but this uncle was a great friend of Pat McCarran.
He's married to my stepfather's sister, Esther, who was, before that, married to Ogden Nash's brother.
Then she married Norman Biltz, I think, and lived in Reno for the rest of her life.
You know, but Pat McCarran and all these sort of types were all, I don't know, rather—I don't know if he's ""shady,"" because I love him, but he's certainly someone to know in Nevada.
And he said, ""All right,"" because Nevada hadn't been for Jack, and the next day, all Nevada's votes were for Jack.
And before—I suppose Torb could tell you that, because he was closeted in the room with him.
That's my memory, because I can remember Stevenson's decision to throw it open, and then again Ted or someone from the President's staff getting in touch with me about things, and I think, obviously it was in the mind of some people around—before, I think, it had become dormant and then it was suddenly revived.
Yes, and again, you'd have to tell me about it, and I could tell you things that rang bells, because it's— The great problem was the control of the Democratic state committee, and Burke had been— And Lynch there was— There was Lynch, who was our man— Yeah.
But I think that neither of them yet had come on the senator's staff— Senate staff.
I think Kenny told me about that just now—I mean, just a couple of weeks ago.
But—first, that Jack was traveling a lot then, but I can just remember every night talking.
I remember at Jean's wedding—he was so busy up in Massachusetts, and she came—she had a dinner the night before she got married.
Well, even Jack was going all around at that dinner, talking to his father, talking to Bobby, Torb, everyone.
Because it was going to be known—she was married on May 6—something like that—May 19 she was married, and, I guess, the vote or whatever it is was going to come up a few days later, and I remember thinking— the only time in my life I've ever thought that Jack was a little bit thoughtless.
But I didn't really think that, because you could see how worried he was, because all that night, when everyone should have been making little toasts to Jean and things—which they were, and he made a touching one—he was talking to everybody at the dinner about that fight.
I mean, it was just on his mind, and I've never seen him like that—in the first Cuba, the second Cuba,22 any election—I mean, the election—the presidential election, when I think of how calm he was that night—whether it would come out well or not, but still—but that was just all that spring.
And as I have—you know, you musn't think it bad that I don't have all of these political memories, because I was really living another side of life with him, but I just remember that was a terrible worry of all that spring.
I know Kenny's told me from time to time when we've been talking about people in politics, and he would say, ""So and so, he was for us in the Burke fight,"" which meant, we forgive him everything else.
And this became the standard of judgment, which, years later, in the presidential years, would still be very much in everyone's mind.
And I remember all the people—it fascinated me because when I came back from my honeymoon, I was taken immediately to Boston to be registered as a Democrat by Patsy Mulkern, who was called ""the China Doll,"" because he was a prize fighter once, and he took me all up and down that street, and told me that ""duking"" people means shaking hands, and things.
And then there was another man with ""Onions"" Burke, named ""Juicy"" Grenara.
You know, to sort of see that world, and then we'd go have dinner at the Ritz.
You know, we'd rent January until June, then we'd go live at my mother's house, which was in Virginia, for the summer, because we didn't have a child for four years.
So the summers we'd spend at her house, going up to the Cape when we could on weekends—and in the fall, we'd stay with his father— you know, living right with our in-laws.
And then we'd go away after Christmas or something for a few days to Jamaica or something.
Such a pace, when I think of how little we were alone, or always moving.
And then we got Hickory Hill, but that turned out to be a mistake because it was so far out of town.
Well, again we spent a lot of money to buy this house in Virginia, and I thought it would be a place where he could rest on weekends the year where he would be recovering from his back.
Again this shows you how he didn't sort of tell me what was ahead because once we got to the house, he was away every weekend, traveling.
And it was no good to him during the week—it was that much farther from his office.
And then, when I lost the baby —you know, that I had made nurseries and everything for there, I didn't want to live there anymore, so that's when we moved.
Some people have speculated, and I have written, that the operation and the sickness of the back was kind of a turning point.
I have never known whether there was anything—whether this was kind of a false knowledge of FDR and really whether there was anything in that.
You know, the winter of his back, which was awful, just to keep himself from going mad, lying there, aches and pains, and being moved over, side to side, every twenty minutes or something, or beginning to walk, and just as he was starting to walk on crutches, one of his crutches broke, so then he was back in.
And he'd always thought of writing an article or something on that, and then so that whole winter, he started to search out other people—enough to make a book.
He was just going through that winter like he did everything—getting through an awful winter of sickness and doing the book.
I mean, the year before we were married, when he'd take me out, half the time it was on crutches.
You know, when I went to watch him campaign, before we were married, he was on crutches.
And then, in our marriage, he'd be off it a lot, and then something would go wrong.
It was really —TI mean, the problem everyone found later—he didn't even need the operation.
It was that he'd had a bad back since college, and then the war, and he'd had a disk operation that he never needed, so all those muscles had gotten weak, had gone into spasm, and that was what was giving him pain—the muscles.
And so, then he'd go— I think if he went on crutches for four days, you know, he'd get everything better, but again that was only weakening it.
And it wasn't until after his back operation that the poor doctor who'd been his medical man, Ephraim Shorr, said to him, ""Now I think I am at liberty to tell you something which I wanted to tell you before, but I didn't think it was correct to do that to Dr.
This made me so mad how doctors just let people suffer, and don't say anything to hurt the other eminent physicians’ feelings.
Because, obviously, after a year of surgery and a year out, his back was weaker than ever.
But, you know, all those bone surgeons look at X-rays—you see, Jack was being driven so crazy by this pain.
I remember his father and I and he talking, and he said, ""I don't care.
It was, you know, one chance in a million, but he was going to take it.
Though later on, it was apparent that what he should be doing was build up his back with exercises.
She was very reluctant to let him leave her Novocain treatments, which by then were not doing any good.
He'd walk all around the Senate looking wonderful and tan in his gray suit, and then he'd come home and go ina hospital bed.
Because, you know, around the White House, occasionally one could tell when he started to reach for something and then would stop or pull himself short, or he didn't want to stand too much.
He was never—when you think how many people are hypochondriacs, or complain, he never liked you to ask him how he felt.
You could tell when he wasn't feeling well—you'd take care of him and put him to bed or something— but he was never irritable—he never liked to discuss it and he made a conscious effort to get his mind off it by having friends for dinner or talking about—you know, or going to see a movie, or—just to not let himself be sitting there having a pain.
And of course, this cut him off from sports, which must have been at one time— sailing— Except—it's funny—because the month before we were married, we both went bareback riding in a field in Newport on two unbroken work horses and galloped all around the golf course.
And then he played baseball all the time in Georgetown in the spring with the senators.
And he always would play touch football, but he couldn't run—I mean, he could run enough, but he could never be the one to run for the touchdown.
Now that you know it's a spasm, I suppose it probably could come when he's tired.
And some funny thing of dropping a pile of papers and stooping quickly to pick them up would set it off.
But he wasn't in any way—lI never think of being married to an invalid or a cripple, and I don't want it to look as if—because it hampered him so long.
That's the striking thing, because when I read that sentence of Bobby's—it is the last thing that one would think, having seen him off and on for many years, because he always seems to have had this extraordinary joy and vitality, and the fact that he had this, with this kind of business nagging at him—pain nagging at him—it was just a tremendous spiritual victory of some sort—a psychological victory.
And I thought that was such a touching thing to say because I always thought of him as this enormously glamorous figure whom I married when he was thirty-six.
I thought he'd had millions of gay trips to Europe, girls, dances, everything.
And, of course, and he had done a lot of that, but I suppose what he meant was that he had been in pain so much, and then hustling—vwell, then, those awful years campaigning, always with Frank Morrissey,2° living on a milkshake and a hot dog. [whispers about whether to discuss ""stomach""] He had also stomach trouble, which gave him a lot of pain sometimes, so it wasn't always his back.
During campaigns and so on, did these things continue, and he just— Oh, yeah.
It was so pathetic to see him go up the steps of a plane, or the steps to a stage or something on his crutches, you know, because then he looked so vulnerable.
And once he was up there and standing at the podium, then he looked so, you know, just in control of everything.
He enjoyed it the way he loves to hear Teddy tell stories about Honey Fitz.
When I think now that he's dead and the different people who come to me—you'd think he belonged to so many people, and each one thought they had him completely, and he loved each one just the way love is infinite of a mother for her children.
If you have eight children, it doesn't mean you love them any less than if you just have just two—that the love is diminished that much.
So he loved the Irish, he loved his family, he loved people like you and Ken Galbraith.
He loved me and my sister in the world that had nothing to do with politics, that he looked to for pleasure and a letdown.
He really kept his life so in compartments, and the wonderful thing is that everyone in every one of those compartments was ready to die for him.
And we all loved everyone else because they all liked me—because they knew I would.
It's just now that you see how Jack just knew in every side of his life what he wanted.
He never wanted to have the people in the evening that he worked with in the daytime.
But he never wanted to see Bobby, and Bobby didn't want to come either, because they'd worked all day.
It was sort of light—or I don't know—those parties that we used to have.
PRESIDENT KENNEDY AND DAVE POWERS, 1961 Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston THE KENNEDYS WITH BEN AND TONY BRADLEE IN THE WEST SITTING HALL OF THE WHITE HOUSE Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston Best parties I've ever attended.
And I worked so hard on those parties because I felt once we were in the White House, I felt that I could get out, and I just can't tell you how oppressive the strain of the White House can be.
And then he sent me to Greece, which was, you know, for a sad reason this year, but he thought I was getting depressed after losing Patrick.
You've heard of the Twist, or something—not that you care about nightclubs—and I don't want to go more than once a year— but Jack couldn't get out.
So then I used to try to make these parties to bring gay, and new people, and music, and make it happy nights.
Danced very rarely, but loved to— Just walked around, puffing his cigar.
He did have an extraordinary range of acquaintance and ability to enter in—to, sympathetically—to people of the whole range of the spectrum.
Yeah, that's so true, because the luckiest thing I used to think about him, you know, when we were early married and then later, was whatever you were interested in, Jack got interested in.
And I started to collect drawings, and then he wanted to know about them.
Or then, when I was reading all this eighteenth century, he'd snatch a book from me and read and know all of Louis XV's mistresses before I would.
So many of the senators, when we'd go out to dinner—senators and embassies this first year—all those men would ever talk to me about was themselves.
And he thought his best quality was Curiosity, which, I think he was right.
He thought his worst was irritability, but, I mean, he was never irritable with me.
You know, he didn't like to be bored, and if someone was boring, he'd pick up the newspaper, but he certainly wasn't irritable to live with. ‘id a if ""7 Ae Vs, WEDDING OF JOHN FITZGERALD KENNEDY AND JACQUELINE LEE BOUVIER, SEPTEMBER 12, 1953 John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston He was not irritable in the current White House sense.
No, I've just not seen anyone—from South Boston through Harvard to Palm Beach—he was at home in a greater variety of things and, as you say, made people from each of these kind of segments feel that he was with them.
It was an extraordinary— Yeah, then they'd all get interested in politics and things.
It doesn't mean absolutely anything, but in the Washington Post the other day, I read the theater page—and Alain Delon, who's this little French ""jeune premier"" young movie star now, came to Washington.
And so the drama critic went to interview him, and all he could talk about was Jack.
And say, you know, how ""all we young people""—well, I mean, there's a little sexy young French movie actor and he's so wounded by Jack.
It's because Jack was young, and loved—you know—everything—elegance, girls, you know, in all the best senses of the word.
It was like he had many things in common with that young man, the same way he'd have, you know, things in common with so many sides of you.
Before that, politics was just left to all the corny old people who shouted on the Fourth of July—and you know, all the things that made me so bored with politics.
He gave youth and intellect and taste a world voice, which was felt all around the world, and he had this extraordinary combination of idealism and realism, which— That's again—the Kennedys taught me all this—Jack, really—all this questioning, questioning.
You know, if you didn't get on the offensive, they'd have you on the defensive all night.
Then once somebody asked me about him, and I said that—I saw that attributed to myself.
The Symingtons, Smatherses, Coopers—they were always—funnily enough, John Sherman Cooper and Lorraine.
No, I never saw—the only ones I can remember having to dinner at our house the first year we lived on Dent Place—3327 Dent Place—we rented from the Childses*t—I can remember having the Symingtons, Smatherses, and Coopers for dinner and—those are the only senators I can think of—oh, and Mansfield“ sometimes.
The year before, 1960, then you'd have others—I remember we had McCarthy—Eugene McCarthy* and a couple of others, I can't remember.
You mentioned the Chicago convention—a couple of _ unsatisfactory conversations with Stevenson.
Of course, the Stevenson-Kennedy relationship has always been a puzzle and slightly a sadness to me, because I think if the President ever saw Stevenson in a genuinely relaxed mood, he would have quite liked him, because he can be awfully engaging.
But somehow, Stevenson would always freeze and become sort of prissy and so on with the President.
Well, this is all retrospect, but I always thought that every time Stevenson— Stevenson just let Jack down so many times.
So, you know, Jack really worked hard for him and everything, and he wasn't nice to him at that convention.
Then I think —TI don't know whether Stevenson—but I think this about so many people—Jack made them jealous.
I think eventually he made Stevenson deeply jealous because Stevenson saw the President taking away not only the nomination, but also many of his own supporters and doing really better than he had ever been able to, the kinds of things he most wanted to do.
Well, I see that with more people who were bitter about Jack while he was President.
And then there was also a jealousy of contemporaries, because someone who was just Jack's age, and sitting behind some little bank clerk's desk and hanging around the bar at Bailey's Beach®® would just feel that he was a nothing when he saw all that Jack was doing.
So he incited so many bitter jealousies, and they were the ones who'd say mean things about him.
And I thought Stevenson was really horrible to Jack at the convention in 1960.
But I talked to Stevenson a couple of times that winter and spring on the President's behalf—and Stevenson's answer was that he had told Lyndon Johnson in 1959 that he would remain neutral and would not come out for any candidate, and that he had to keep his word to Lyndon Johnson.
But then, I remember one night Jack coming home and rather—not rudely but with that sort of laugh he had, telling me that's what Stevenson had told him, and he thought that Stevenson was hoping to be named as running mate with Johnson.
And then he told me something so insulting that Johnson had said to him the day before about Stevenson.
But Jack knew then, I think—I mean, he knew that he was going to get the nomination.
I think Stevenson, although he would not admit it to himself or to anybody else, was holding out for a deadlock in which he would be the presidential candidate.
I doubt that he would have wanted to go on as a vice presidential candidate.
But he wouldn't admit this, and so we people who had been for him in '52 and '56, as I had, would ask him whether he was a candidate.
He would say he was not a candidate, and that released me, I felt, from any obligation.
But in all this period, you know, if you've won twice, you keep hoping.
I think Kennedy was a Greek and Stevenson was a, well— Kennedy was an Athenian and Stevenson from Thebes.
I mean, he was the first time anyone spoke anything in politics that you could listen—the first time anyone brought anything intellectual to politics.
He helped open up the situation, and the President came along as a kind of climax.
Where he couldn't make decisions, or he'd go over his little papers, or he'd carefully take something typewritten and copy it in longhand because he was so proud of everyone saying he wrote all his speeches—I don't know, poor man.
You know, Jack achieved all he dreamed of in his life, and it must be sad not to have.
After the convention in '56, the President was quite relieved, was he—in not having got—immediately so—I know later, he would say often how pleased he was.
I'd gone to get a Coca-Cola or something, down underneath all those seats, and as I was coming back, suddenly that race started, and all the blackboards, the numbers started changing.
I bumped into Michael Forrestal, and he grabbed me into a Westinghouse exhibit, and we watched the whole thing on television.
Then we flew back—I can't remember if it was that afternoon or the next day—and then he wasn't anymore —he was just exhausted.
It was in that little room, you know, right out in back, and there was someone else there too—I have to think who—I can't remember.
And then, after '56, by the time he ran for the Senate in '58, he was quite clearly going to try for the presidency in 1960.
Well, he never once said to me in all his life, before we started the primary year, ""I'm going to try for the presidency,"" or not.
But of course he was, because then he came back— After the convention, he flew to Europe to stay with his father and just rest a few days in the South of France.
Then we came down and lived at Hickory Hill that fall, while we were finding another house, but he was always on the move.
And so, obviously, all that speaking, speaking, speaking, yes, he was aiming— yeah, I guess he did decide then.
I remember suddenly realizing it when he was so determined to win the Massachusetts senatorial race in '58 by the largest possible margin.
It was perfectly clear he was going to win, and therefore it wasn't very necessary for him to campaign, but he worked so hard in that campaign.
Yeah, I remember when we came back on the boat from Europe, someone met us with a poll of how Foster Furcolo2® was doing.
Somehow that seems to me the hardest campaign of ever—that Senate campaign.
JOHN F KENNEDY CAMPAIGNING FOR REELECTION TO THE SENATE WITH JACQUELINE KENNEDY AND EDWARD M KENNEDY John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston You mean, just the extent of more— I mean just I never can remember sleeping at home for however many months it was.
Oh yeah, with Professor Burns,2/ and Jack telling him who to shake hands with on platforms, but all through the Berkshires, through Springfield, different hotels, you know.
You know, about the fifth day out, it's just sheer exhaustion, and then, you know—TI love it when it's going wonderfully—I love it when it's going wonderfully for Jack.
There's nothing more exciting than entering a crowded hall and watching the candidate come in, everyone going mad.
Yeah, well, all that part I loved, and towards the end, it was getting better and better.
The SECOND Conversation TUESDAY, MARCH 3 1964 We ended up, I think, last time talking about the Senate, in which the President was reelected by this great majority and which, for the first time, made him sort of nationally spoken of as a possible contender for 1960.
Well, it was never spoken of out loud, but after election night in Boston!—I think we went somewhere in the sun or sometime, but then he started speaking all the time.
Again, all those years before the White House—every weekend he was always traveling.
During these times when he was out, like the 1958 campaign and so on, how did —he kept up reading and so on.
I mean, I could never read unless I'd have a rainy afternoon or a long evening in bed, or something.
He'd read walking, he'd read at the table, at meals, he'd read after dinner, he'd read in the bathtub, he'd read—prop open a book on his desk—on his bureau—while he was doing his tie.
You know, he'd just read in little, he'd open some book I'd be reading, you know, just devour it.
You'd be sitting next to him on some platform, and suddenly out would come a sentence that two weeks ago in Georgetown he would have read out loud to you one night, just because it interested him.
He had the most fantastic and maddening memory for quotes, because—while he remembered the quotes, but he couldn't always remember where they were from.
His father had a whole shelf of books—The World's Great Orations or something that his father had given him and he'd read every single one of those books, and then I made—TI asked his father to give them to him for Christmas, which, of course, he was delighted to do.
That's it, and well, all things through there, you know, he just—of course, that was a different winter.
Then one year, he had some—either asthma or blood trouble—anemia or something, when he went out to Arizona.
Then there was another summer—you know, he'd always been reading— all these things—and he used to give me books when we were going out before we were married.
I remember the first one he gave me was Sam Houston by Marquis James—The Raven.
Listen, the only thrillers he ever read were about three Ian Fleming books.
Did he really like Ian Fleming much, or was that sort of a press— Oh, well, it was sort of a press thing, because when they asked him his ten favorite books, he sort of made up a list, and he put in one sort of novel.
You know, he liked Ian Fleming®—I mean, if you were in a plane or you're in a hotel room and there's three books on your bedside table—I mean, he'd sometimes grab something that way.
There was one book he gave me to read—something about ""time""—it was a novel where someone goes back in the eighteenth century and uncovers a mystery.
It was just a paperback book he'd found in some plane or something—the last two books he told me to read this fall—he was reading The Fall of the Dynasties® and— Edmond Taylor.
But you know, he was reading all that in the White House, and I was growing illiterate there.
It is a matter of constant mystery, because he was surrounded by all these academics who supposedly read books all the time.
None of us ever had time to read books, and he would say in a slightly accusatory way—ask us about books that had recently come out that none of us had read.
Every Sunday, he'd rip three pages out of the Times book section, with an ""x"" around what I was to get.
And you know, on the weekends all the time, he'd be reading— It would be fascinating.
What else would he— For instance, at Camp David sometimes, if it was a rainy day or something, he'd stay in bed in the afternoon.
Bobby came down with—Bobby had been over to Baltimore and gotten all this equipment with a little card you put in and the line runs down it.
You know, you're meant to speed up and answer questions about three crows— how many crows in the cabbage patch, or something.
I think we did it twice one Christmas vacation in Florida, and then stopped.
I think he was always looking for something in books—he was looking for something about history, or something for a quote, or what.
Oh, at Glen Ora, he was reading Mao Tse-tung, and he was quoting that to me.
Then we started to make up all these little parables like ""When an Army drinks, not it is thirsty,"" or something.
He was in Blenheim and everything, and I told Jack what General Taylor said about him.
I was halfway through that book, and Jack took it away from me, and read the whole thing.
You know, if I'd ever say anything interesting in a book I was reading, he'd take it away and read it.
He would rather go to a musical comedy or something than something heavy.
But we used to play—when you say poetry—he didn't really read poetry —well, he loved to read sometimes Byron, you know, whatever was around he'd pick and read—bits of Shakespeare.
But we had a John Gielgud record that we used to play over and over—""The Ages of Man""2 or something.
Yes, there was a lot of Civil War—was what interested him in American history.
Then I took a course on it one year by a fascinating man, who—I got to do some research for him later, Dr.
No, because he really spent very little time there, when you think he was finishing at Harvard, and he spent—what, maybe a summer, and his term or so at the London School of Economics.
You know, I keep saying Marlborough, but there were others which— well, I have all his books, that he always had, so when I get them out of crates, I just know—His mother can tell you some things about him—reading when he was six, asking some question—or seven, I guess.
So Churchill was always— at the end, a figure of meaning— I think Marlborough was more than Churchill.
I really don't think he admired—well, of course, he admired Churchill and he wanted to meet him.
We did meet him one summer in the South of France but the poor man was rather, you know, a little bit gone by then.
But he never had a hero worship of any contemporary—it was more in the past.
I'm not saying that he thought he was as great as Churchill, but he could see that he was up to coping with things and the failures of so many men who were alive now—and their shortcomings.
So, he was really looking for lessons in the past from history, but he did—no, you're right—he did admire Churchill's prose, and he read all those memoirs that came out.
I think he really sought—it was Churchill as a writer, more than—I mean, he admired Churchill as a statesman, but it was Churchill as a writer which really excited him and piqued his curiosity.
And I can remember him reading me out loud two things from that—the part where he describes the court of Charles II, which is wonderful sort of seraglio prose and everything—and then how he describes the civil war12 You know, he'd be reading, and he'd read aloud a lot.
Well, Jefferson, I guess, and the one letter he wanted to buy so badly, but it was too expensive, and I was going to try and find and give it to him last Christmas was a letter that came up of Jefferson's, where he'd asked for four more gardeners for Monticello, but he wanted to be sure they knew how to play the violin, so that he could have chamber music concerts in the evening.
That letter had come up at Parke-Bernet, and it would have been $6,000 or something, so he hadn't bid on it.
Oh, then he was reading a book about Theodore Roosevelt this summer or winter.
Yeah, and he was saying to me, ""Listen to how fatuous Teddy Roosevelt was,"" and he'd, ""Look how—"" and then he'd describe several—read me several things where Roosevelt describes what he does.
Always in a sort of throwaway way —""And then I marched up San Juan Hill and killed five natives"" —and rather apologetic about it.
Kennedy telling me that I should think of all the children in the cabinet, because how nice President Roosevelt and Mrs.
But I don't think he thought he was any—he often thought he was rather a—charlatan is an unfair word—you know what I mean—a bit of a poseur, rather cleverly.
I remember him telling me the time where Wilson had been wrong, or what their mistakes were, or how—but you know, all with hindsight.
He just seemed to devour all of them and then, I suppose, it sifted around and came out—he used them all.
Here are three men who lived about the same time—Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, and Joseph P Kennedy, of whom the first two were in one sense or another great men and the third was a very successful man, a very talented man, but not a great man.
And yet the children of Churchill and the children of Roosevelt have all been—in many cases, bright and talented, but somehow it all missed fire.
I really think you have to give a lot of that credit to Mr Kennedy, because Jack used to talk about that a lot.
When his children were doing something, he wrote them letters endlessly.
Whenever they were doing anything important at school, he'd be there for it.
If you just go on being a great man, and your children are sort of shunted aside, you know—he watched—I always thought he was the tiger mother.
Kennedy, poor little thing, was running around, trying to keep up with this demon of energy, seeing if she had enough placemats in Palm Beach, or should she send the ones from Bronxville, or had she put the London ones in storage.
He did all—he made this conscious effort about the family, and I don't think those other two men did.
Oh, one other thing Jack told me about Roosevelt was how his foreign policy had been wrong and how he hadn't been good there—the mistakes he'd made there.
I remember asking him once— AMBASSADOR KENNEDY WITH JOE, BOBBY, AND JACK, 1938 John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston In relation to the Soviet Union, I suppose.
And how he underestimated or misestimated—whatever the word is—you know, the men he was dealing with.
He had a great detachment about things because he had a great capacity to put himself in other people's positions and see what the problems were.
Maybe that's what makes some people —like Jim Burns, who never knew him, but said he was detached and wondered if he had a heart.
Because he could take any case—it could involve himself, or me or something, where you—with anyone else, your emotions would be so involved—and look at it from all sides.
I remember him speaking that way about General de Gaulle one time, when everyone was so mad at General de Gaulle last year.
PRESIDENT KENNEDY AND PRESIDENT CHARLES DE GAULLE, PARIS, 1961 John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston Well, that was the extraordinary thing.
There are those who always see other people's sides to such an extent that it severs the nerve of action for themselves.
He understood the political urgencies that drove other people doing mischievous things, but that—it never prevented him from reacting to it.
Yeah, I wish I'd given him a wristwatch with a tape recorder in it or something, because if you could hear him explaining de Gaulle to me—what de Gaulle's objectives were, and why he was so bitter.
I mean, his analysis of that man—de Gaulle was my hero when I married Jack, and he really sunk down.
He wasn't really my hero, but I sort of loved all that prose of some of his memoirs and thought this man who stayed away in the gloomy forest and came marching back, you know, being rather Francophile, just a vague sort of— I agree.
I thought, you know, at the funeral, that he was—in spite of all the mischief he has made—will make—an immensely touching and charming figure.
I think he just felt guilty—I don't know— You know, he realized who Jack was, and that's why he came to the funeral.
He had a certain—the thing about de Gaulle and Churchill and the President and a few other people is that they had a sense of history, which produces sort of magnanimity of judgment.
Although de Gaulle can be spiteful, he can also be very magnanimous and he recognized that the President— He saw him in the great stream of history, and that—of course, his memoirs are so marvelous in that respect because of the sense of the flow, the necessities which people have to respond to, and the wonderful prose.
Oh, yeah, when Jack made his announcement that he was going to run at the Senate—no, run for president—I'd been reading him the beginning things of de Gaulle's memoirs of how ""I've always had a certain image of France"" and he used part of that, paraphrased it for his own.
Another person he used to tell me a lot about was Randolph Churchill, Winston Churchill's father.
There was some minister who resigned when Randolph Churchill was in the government, because he thought he was—it was on some point.
He'd given information— Not Thorneycroft—anyway, some man resigned and was immediately replaced, and this man thought that he couldn't be replaced, and they'd have to come around to do what he wanted, and right away, they appointed someone named Goschen.
Well, I guess he had Hubert, and he had Lyndon and Stevenson in the wings.
You know, he liked Hubert before, but he always said when you get into a fight, it gets so bitter that you're just bound to sort of hate them at the end.
Well, Lyndon was so tricky and he'd come home and tell me things—when Lyndon made an announcement up at the Senate that he was fit to run—to all these reporters—that he could—TI don't know—play squash and have sexual intercourse once a week.
Lyndon—well, he'd just come over and—you know, he knew what he was dealing with there.
SENATOR LYNDON JOHNSON AND SENATOR KENNEDY IN HYANNIS PORT Fay Foto Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston He liked Lyndon.
Lyndon was sort of— He didn't particularly like him, but he could trade with him and not come off— It was sort of, when you saw them together, it was really like fencing, in political things.
And I always thought Lyndon was arguing with him or being rude, but Jack was sort of parrying with such amusement, and he always sort of bested him.
I think he always felt—that he was amused, rather delighted by Johnson as a kind of American phenomenon, and at the same time, often quite irritated by a particular thing he would do at any point.
You know, Lyndon—I mean he just—what were his things—of Lyndon— Lyndon was the majority leader and he did get the position he wanted in the Senate, but I know he had to trade or really pester hard for that—for Foreign Relations and Labor.
But in the primaries, it was more what you could do in Wisconsin, and who you could get to see, and then whether Hubert would go into West Virginia or not, more than the people.
He never thought any of them were better than him, but, I mean, he wasn't ever conceited.
I mean, if he could just get it—get over this Catholic hurdle and this youth hurdle and this rich —or whatever it was, you know, then everything would be fine.
At the end of '59, there is a—perhaps around Thanksgiving at Hyannis Port, there was sort of a meeting to plan strategy.
We had one house there, and everybody was closeted for two days in Ethel and Bobby's, and all these men came up—Kenny, Larry, Bobby, everyone, and huddled away and planned.
He'd come home, and then it would be fish chowder, or what would he like for dinner, or records, or then someone there to laugh.
So that's—I mean, I would have been a terrible wife if I tried to pick his brains about that.
I think in a way, the great difference between—it was also true between Roosevelt and Truman, being—Kennedy and Johnson—is that both Roosevelt and Kennedy were master politicians, but politics was one part of their lives.
But, you know, Jack—well, I mean—I think a woman always adapts, and especially if you're very young when you get married and, you know, are unformed, you really become the kind of wife you can see that your husband wants.
So, if he'd wanted—for instance, my sister's husband loves to bring his problems home, and they're all business, and Lee doesn't understand that.
But, you know, if Jack wanted to do that—and talk about things at home—then I'd be asking him questions.
But other things of his life—I mean, it was always, you'd have to read the papers and everything.
At this meeting, as I recall it, in Hyannis Port, was—the real thing, which kind of changed the whole place, in the sense that Ted,*4 who up to that time had been handling both, working both on the speeches and the political side—was taken out of the political side, and Bobby and Kenny and so on came in, and really took over the whole question of political— Oh, yes, and I remember there was a rather bitter feeling for a while—or at least in Wisconsin, I think.
Ted didn't like whatever slot he'd been put into, and deprived—you know, there was a bit of friction there.
Jack behaved like a great gentleman to Ted then, because Ted didn't behave very well that year.
I mean, I'm sure that's not why he gave Ted the speeches or something, but I must say, I couldn't look at Ted Sorensen for about two years after that.
Of course, the poor boy, he was just starting, he was new in Washington, but he used to really make a conscious effort to go around and take Jack pages, and things that he'd crossed out and added—you know, really to go out of his way to show them to people.
And then, when Drew Pearson said it, then there was the lawsuit where Clark Clifford came and defended him—and, luckily, Jack had saved all these pages of yellow legal pad that he'd written himself.
And, I guess, Jack loved Clark Clifford then, because when he asked Clark to defend him, I think Clark might have been under the impression that Ted really had written most of the book.
But he never asked that question, and then Jack got all those yellow pages and showed them to Clark, and Clark was just amazed and said, ""These are the most valuable things you have.
So, you know, Ted would send down fifty books on Lucius Lamar—and everyone else—from the Library of Congress—and Jack would sketch it through.
But you know, his life was all around himself, and, I think, just in the White House, he got to love one other person beside himself, which was Jack.
But then, as he had more to do, he didn't need to prove his little things.
And then Jack gave him—again, don't you think this is a nice thing?—Jack gave him all the money from Profiles in Courage, because he felt Ted worked so hard—and he would work and stay up at night.
As I said, he worked slowly—he always seemed to have to stay up until two or three in the morning to get something done.
But then it went zooming on to be a bestseller, bestseller, bestseller.
Ted's gotten every bit of money from that book until the memorial edition with Bobby's preface came out.
But you know, Jack wanted to give him something extra besides his salary because the boy did just live—and you know, and worked hard all night and everything—but Jack was such a gentleman.
Bobby was in Washington, in this period, all the time, but he really wasn't, until ‘59, sort of day-to-day involved.
Before we were matried, we always lived in Georgetown, we were at dinner with them once or twice a week.
And then Bobby—they'd talk about the McClellan committee, the McCarthy committee—you know, all the things that Bobby was on.
In '52, and Teddy, supposedly, in '58.28 But, you know, Bobby was always sort of—well, they were both so caring of what the other was doing.
But then I guess—I suppose, at that Thanksgiving meeting, Bobby just gave up everything else and did everything for Jack from then on.
I don't remember what Bobby was doing in '58 that he couldn't run the campaign.
My impression is that Teddy was nominally the campaign manager, but maybe not.
Well, that's a major thing, I remember, in Jack's life, but I can't remember what year it was.
But I can remember every morning for breakfast, Arthur Goldberg” would appear.
Or George Meany,*2 and everyone—that was the year '57 when we moved in our house, because the first breakfast, I bought these creaky old dining room chairs, and at one of the first breakfasts, Jack and George Meany and someone else all went crashing to the floor.
Because the summer—that was the summer before we were married—he gave me all these French books, and asked me to translate them.
And I was working for the TimesHerald,“ living alone at my mother's house in Virginia.
Yeah, he could read French, but you know, but not enough to trust himself for a lot of facts and things.
And then he would see—we were seeing a lot of French people then, and then they'd give some book.
The Algeria speech was particularly so, because the whole Council on Foreign Relations crowd in this country were all outraged by it.
I happened to be in Paris when the speech came out, and an old friend of mine, Jean-Jacques ServanSchreiber of L'Express, was absolutely delighted by the speech and ran the full text and claims to be the first magazine in the world which put the President on the cover.
Oh, yeah, I remember when he went to Poland, he wouldn't take me, because he thought it wasn't serious to travel with your wife.
But, you know, he was always more interested—well, so interested in foreign things.
But, just as an example of him having a heart—I can remember him being so disgusted, because once we had dinner with my mother and my stepfather, and there sat my stepfather putting a great slab of paté de foie gras on his toast and saying it was simply appalling to think that the minimum wage should be a dollar twenty-five.
So all those things show that he did have a heart, because he was really shocked by those things.
Oh, I think the most—of course, he had a heart and he had a—in fact, you know, it wasn't on his sleeve, and people had been so used to a certain sentimental style of expression of that kind of thing.
The fact that he was, is why someone like Hubert, whom I love, who is an admirable man—nonetheless can't connect with as many people as the President could, because Hubert is still—is in an earlier phase of reaction to this kind of thing.
You don't know the exhaustion of the primaries, and he often said that the four days we took in Jamaica between Wisconsin and West Virginia were what made it possible for him to be president.
Because he just worked himself into exhaustion, and then the second wind and the third wind, and when you get that tired, you don't enjoy them.
I suppose, when you stay that tired for that long—but then he'd lose his voice—I don't think anyone enjoys working out of sheer exhaustion.
And in Wisconsin, we'd go into a tencent store or something, three people in it.
Or little rallies in a town, where you'd have a band and everything there and nobody'd show up.
Yeah, and all that literature they were passing out about nuns and priests and everything.
Because the people are alone all winter long, and cold, and just with animals, and they're so suspicious.
I think that in Wisconsin, they're just suspicious of anyone sort of gregarious.
I mean, I don't think they like someone coming up, or a band, or anything.
Whereas in West Virginia, you know, they're a bit gayer, even though they're so poor.
But I loved —TI never met one person in West Virginia I didn't like, except for this strange man running around with his handbills wherever we spoke.
And I never met one person in Wisconsin I did like, except for the people who were working for Jack.
Oh, yeah, you'd stumble into some hotel bed and you'd get up at six in the moming.
He could have a day home and just sleep all through it, and you'd get all his laundry done or something in the daytime, and pack him at night, and off he'd go or off we'd both go.
Clem Norton®!—I don't know if you've heard the tape of his—said Teddy has a street personality, the President didn't have a street personality.
But Jack never—he never said, ""Hi, fella,"" or put his fat palm under your armpit, or, you know, any of that sort of business.
I mean, if you asked him his three favorite things he can do in a day, I don't think he'd say campaigning.
But when he got caught up in it, and when it was going well, then he really liked it and responded.
And the last— you know, as time went on, he was doing better and better.
And he loved the people who really were glad to see him—the little old ladies, or children, or what.
DURING THE NEW HAMPSHIRE PRIMARY CAMPAIGN John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston I always felt that when he went out as President on a trip and saw crowds, he'd really come back very refreshed.
Didn't you feel him filled with new energy and confidence— Yes, it was so good for him.
And he'd say how good it was to get out of Washington, where it's this little group that just writes—in and in and in—you know, little correspondents hashing others.
The THIRD Conversation WEDNESDAY, MARCH 4 1964 Last time, we started talking about the convention, and the months before the convention in 1960, and the President's view of his various opponents and problems, and one of the things that always surprised me was the way in which liberals—the arguments I used to have to have with some of the older liberals and academics and so on, about the President.
It sounds very odd now, because no one obviously has done more for intellectuals in the White House since Jefferson.
I suppose one of the big reasons for it was the whole McCarthy business.
He'd apparently been to the Cape once or twice and— Never when we were there.
I just went out of complete curiosity once to see those hearings, and saw that man, who was rather frightening.
I think that was part of it and also the fact that he didn't attack McCarthy, though, as a matter of fact, very few members of the Senate, including people like Hubert Humphrey and Paul Douglas, attacked McCarthy.
I think when the actual vote came, he was pretty sick and I don't think any statement was issued at that time.
He thought of McCarthy—well, you know, poor McC—I mean, if you saw McCarthy, then you'd see a man in his last—I remember, I think he was coming in and out of the elevator when I was standing there—well, the man was just gone.
Every single one of his voters in Boston—anyone whose name was McAnything they thought was wonderful.
Most of them or a lot of them thought McCarthy was probably a Democrat.
At one time he started an attack on Communists at Harvard, particularly on me.
And Jack was in town and went up and explained to him that I probably wasn't a Communist, and I shouldn't be attacked.
He was counsel for the Democrats on the committee but he had originally—he and Roy Cohn had worked with McCarthy and then he couldn't stand Cohn's methods—and then he was associated with Symington, Jackson, and the opponents.
So, I'm sure Mr Kennedy was rather conservative—you know, he might have just liked Joe McCarthy out of—this was before everything bad happened—because he was Irish, because he was Catholic, and because everyone else was down on him.
It was a messy situation Jack was in—putting out a censure and everything, and they hated it in Boston.
You know, the Senate wives have to go roll bandages every Tuesday and the vice president's wife is always the chairman of it.
Well, it's about 1960, the primaries, and you remember the Wisconsin primaries being the hardest.
Was he up and down or was it a fairly— Well, you just had to work so hard.
You know, when you're really in a campaign, you don't almost have time to think of the outcome, though he'd be going over polls and the this and the that district.
But I remember election—primary night in the Hotel Pfister in Milwaukee.
Well, it was just so awful because there everybody had put all they had into a fight and you were just left exhausted.
Oh, and I remember that awful man, Miles McMillin, who wrote for the paper in Madison, who is married to—the girl he's married to, Rockefeller, was married to Proxmire.
He came cruising through the apartment that night when we were all in there counting the returns and—oh, it was awful of me—I walked by him twice without saying hello—cutting him dead.
And you know, you went slugging along again, but—oh, and then there, for the first time, we separated, and I'd go off with someone on my own little tour—you know, in and out of little shops or a little bar or all those little mining towns.
You know, just tiny, littlh—never more than ten or twenty people. a a Lr ns 8 . me Ext ye) Tae at ¥; SENATOR KENNEDY TALKS TO COAL MINERS DURING THE WEST VIRGINIA PRIMARY Hank Walker, Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston Would you speak, or just— I'd just say hello to them all, and talk to them.
Then every night, we'd be at some big rally, where Franklin would talk.
But then, you see, in the middle of that campaign, I started to have John.
You know, they—they were always running around and busy and everything, but they'd always liked each other.
But you could always laugh with him and he—you know, he amused me and he and Jack amused each other.
We went all through one colored district together and all through supermarkets where no one looked up at us.
But West Virginia is where we saw the most of him and from then on, he was a very good friend.
The Humphrey people were saying the Kennedys were buying the election and the Kennedy people—Humphrey had not been—had any military service, and I forget what else it was.
So he came back to Washington and we went —we had dinner at home with the Bradlees and we went to a movie.
It was some awful, sordid thing about some murder in California—really, I mean, just morbid.
And then we came home to our house, terribly depressed by this movie, and waited for the phone to ring.
And they'd called Jack and it was, well, you know, just fantastic in West Virginia, so then we all got in a plane and flew down there, and got there in the middle of the night.
But you know, he was so nervous about it, he just didn't want to be there.
So we had this strange little evening of not wanting to be by the radio, the phone, anything.
Because then it was to really go around and talk to people, wasn't it, and keep speaking.
Well, that was May, and then in June there was President Truman's attack.
Did that upset him much or— Well, you know, it irri— I mean, it was just one more thing to, you know, swat down like a buzzing fly.
But I remember when he answered that, because that was on his way out to the convention.
It was earlier because the Democrats were out of office and then he came back and the special session began in August.
Then whenever he'd come up to the Cape for a weekend—oh, or a day—you should have seen our little house.
There'd be fifty Lithuanians arriving with folk dolls for Caroline or something at eleven in the morning, then they'd go.
And everyone on the street outside—I'd started to build a stockade at the convention, but I only had it half finished—that split fence.
You see, I was at home at the Cape with my mother and stepfather and Janet.
Well, Jack would always call me up, usually terribly late at night, or say something would be all right, or not to worry, or this or that.
But I guess they weren't as worried out there, because Bobby told me that once he got to the convention, he knew they'd get— you know, he'd get the nomination.
JACQUELINE BEING INTERVIEWED IN HYANNIS PORT, 1960 Fay Foto Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston So you missed, of course, the sort of business of the great Stevenson act—“ Yeah, I just saw it on television.
And Lyndon saying—you saw things like the debate between the President and Lyndon.
We were sort of sleeping in a single bed in this tiny littlke guest room.
And then we had to go over to Mr Kennedy's, which was where all the press would meet the next day, and Lyndon plunked himself down in Mr Kennedy's chair.
Yeah, well, you know, just—she always had these three green notebooks just filled with everything.
We talked about this the other day but it was not on the tape so you were—about the problem of Lyndon's going on the ticket.
You never thought he was any great statesman or anything, but he was just such a gentleman the way he did that.
And he wrote me back that he burned it—saying I wish he had been the vice president.
But I know Jack had to do it because—have Lyndon as his running mate—to annul him as majority leader because here this man with this enormous ego would have been just enraged and blocking Jack in every way and yes—you know, and keeping everything in.
Yeah, that was it, so Jack couldn't get out and campaign and do more things.
I mean, he'd done something before to really make things difficult for him.
Well, he certainly didn't make—If you'd had him up there with that enormous ego, and thwarted and bitter—so nobody was happy about it.
Phil Graham was a great go-between and told me—I have notes somewhere— that the Friday I went out and had dinner with Phil, he gave me a great account of his role as kingmaker-intermediary.
All I know is that a call was placed at something like eight o'clock in the morning and Lady Bird answered.
Lyndon said he'd come up but Jack said no, he'd go down to his apartment and Lyndon just accepted right away.
But I don't know what had gone back and forth, and they all were rather surprised.
Joe and Phil waited on Senator Kennedy on the Tuesday and said he had to put Johnson on the ticket.
Then later the thing seemed to get off the tracks and Phil was called in to kind of put it together.
And then I used to say to him sometimes—you know, it was so funny in politics—it was all everyone talked about, every night.
You know, if I saw him in the street I was going to make a point to just glare at him and cross over to avoid him and Jack would say, ""No, no, that was three weeks ago.
Now he's done x,"" You know, I mean, in politics things do change so quickly and Jack would never —he'd often say that—never get in anything so deep that you've lost all chance of conciliation.
Palmerston used to say there are no permanent friendships or alliances, there are only permanent interests.
Yeah, but he never got—I mean, I'd get terribly emotional about anyone, whether it was a politician or a newspaper person who would be unfair, but he always treated it so objectively, as if they were people on a chess board—which is right.
I mean, how could you if you—if he'd gotten so mad at all those people, then you may need to work with them again later.
So, it's the only way to be effective —which is one reason I think women should never be in politics.
He was a great realist in that way, because I remember in Los Angeles, everyone felt as soon as Lyndon attacked the ambassador, that this finished him.
Too many people had seen John Ford films, which I didn't—*2 John Connally was the one who was going around about saying Mr Ken—about Addison's disease too.
And then, you know, the day before Jack died in Texas, I said to him, ""I just can't stand Governor Connally.
He was so pleased with himself and he'd spend all our times in the car telling Jack, I guess, how far he'd run ahead of him in Texas.
And Jack said, ""Oh, well, he's been making up with a lot of businessmen down here and gotten a lot of support he didn't have before.
Nellie Connally was refusing to ride with Yarborough—everybody was refusing to ride with Yarborough—everybody was refusing to ride.
When you think that the top people on the Stevenson drive at Los Angeles were George Ball, Bill Wirtz, and Tom Finletter.
And he loved that, because I think it's hard for men to make up first in a family, in a rather intimate way.
But he did that same thing—I can't do it in my life outside marriage, but he did that same thing outside.
Oh, his temperament was terribly even, except when he'd be in pain for a long period of time—for instance, his back—and when he'd done the three or four usual things, which is go stay on crutches four days—if that doesn't work, go to bed for two days, or have a hot pack or something.
And if it just seemed to stay on and on, he couldn't shake it, then he'd get very low, but just because of that.
I guess, after the Senate thing, it didn't seem to be as much of a problem anymore.
When he got in the White House, he took this nap every day—it was just forty-five minutes.
He'd come—who could be bothered to get in your pajamas for forty-five minutes? —and he'd hit that pillow and go to sleep and wake up again.
I mean, I couldn't sleep—it would take me forty-five minutes to doze off, but it was so good for him.
Then all his back and his stomach and everything weren't always plaguing him.
And so he never was in better health or spirits than all his White House years.
Never—just always— Sometimes, in a campaign, he would take one tiny little sleeping pill.
If you got in late and you had to get up early and you were in some awful smelly hotel bedroom.
I remember once there was a whiskey bottle under the mattress because the American Legion had had a convention in that hotel there before and there were whiskey bottles under all our mattresses.
Well, you know, just to make sure he got to sleep so he'd be awake the next day.
I remember I tried not to take any, and you'd toss and turn, so then I'd borrow one of his sometimes.
You were in Hyannis Port all the summer of '60, during the special session.
The first debate I saw in my house in Hyannis and had people down from Boston.
And, you know, was so confident— no, not so confident—but you know, he wasn't moaning or groaning or worried or anything.
And then when he called me up at the one in Washington the minute it was over, that was—I guess maybe it was the second one in Washington— because he said on the phone they had the temperature here down to thirty degrees below zero, or something, because I guess Nixon had perspired in the first one—sort of laughing.
Jack always told me the thing that changed his '52 campaign—this was before we were married—was his appearance on Meet the Press with Lodge.
Well, that first debate was—lI always thought it—but I was so glad that it was just so obvious.
Because you could just see he'd won it, and hear it in the street and everywhere.
SENATOR KENNEDY IN THE FIRST DEBATE AGAINST VICE PRESIDENT RICHARD NIXON, SEPTEMBER 26, 1960 AP/John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston Was there any talk before that about the—I mean, the President obviously thought that the debate would be a great opportunity, if he could get it, but didn't suppose that Nixon would go along.
No, I don't know what made Nixon finally decide to— This was his great miscalculation.
And I think he did it because he'd been a champion debater at Whittier College and thought that he could win.
I'm sure there was no—I think he thought that this would make the experience for him, if he would get up there with this young kid.
But I remember the talk in evenings of which debate would be—wasn't one foreign policy, one domestic?—I remember all those evenings when they were hashing out—a lot of people would come and they'd decide how the debates would be made up.
I know you weren't, because of John, weren't around, along, all the time on the campaign.
Because whenever he was home you'd hear him calling and I mean, he'd be telling people what to do.
Didn't always take it, as in the case of Lyndon Johnson, but I think he always wanted to see what Bobby reacted —how Bobby would react.
Then his father was always—you know, I was so glad Mr Kennedy had a chance to do something.
But he'd talk to his father too, but more to hear what his father reported.
That's the first place we ever went when we were married, and Jack made a speech in Connecticut.
As far as whatever I saw, it seemed to me he was really running the whole show himself.
And everyone who had a fight or then somebody hated Ted Sorensen in some state, and somebody else—there'd be two chairmen and which one would be the one.
All those things Bobby would have to do, so that those people wouldn't get mad at Jack.
That's another reason—he got the sort of image of being someone people disliked, but he had to be so tough for Jack.
And Bobby said that to me the other day—you know, it's so nice to have someone for you who can fight your fight—I mean, be the one that people get mad at—not at you.
Just the way Frank Morrissey used to tell me that the candidate could never be the one to leave the room, so Frank Morrissey would have to haul him out.
Oh, no— You went to Boston— Yeah, we woke up in Boston so we must have slept there the night before.
And it's so funny, talking about the longest day, who should come running out from the garage in sort of a servant's part but Cornelius Ryan, who had written The Longest Day, with a print of a picture.
So then Jack started questioning him all about The Longest Day and the this and the that part of it.
And you should ask Ryan about that—and I guess he'd gotten in it through Pierre.
But I know we lay out on the porch with blankets on us, sort of in the afternoon in the sun.
Then he'd go over— Bobby's house had been turned into just a, you know, command post—I mean, radios, telephones, boards, workers.
He wouldn't speculate about things anymore— Oh, no, he wouldn't talk about it.
I mean, it was—you had what he loves—his fish chowder—and then he was picking Cornelius Ryan's brains about The Longest Day.
Then we'd take a little walk because you knew that the really bad part wasn't going to get until night.
And then—I forget which house we had dinner at, but afterwards we were all watching it in our house.
And I said to Jack, ""Oh, you know, now you're President now,"" and he said, ""No, no"" very quietly.
So I watched until, I guess, about 11:30 or twelve and then everyone knew that it would be an all-night thing.
And all the —it was so sweet—Jack came up and sort of kissed me goodnight—and then all the Kennedy girls came up, and one by one we just sort of hugged each other, and they were all going to wait up all night.
So when I woke up in the morning, I went flying into his room to see— just to hear the good news—to hear that he'd heard sometime while he'd been awake—and no, there wasn't anything.
Yes, he went to bed I think about four or something, and this was about a quarter of nine or eight thirty.
Then you'd get up and then everybody walked around—you've seen those pictures—in raincoats.
Then the press people were sort of gathering and I guess it was about noon or one o'clock that the word finally came.
Then we were all going to go down to the Armory and Mr Kennedy didn't want to come.
Well, I mean, he never missed church one Sunday that we were married or all that—but you could see partly—I often used to think whether it was superstition or not—I mean he wasn't quite sure, but if it was that way, he wanted to have that on his side.
I think you couldn't be brought up the way he was without just thinking— Well, obviously he accepted the religious sort of structure of existence and belief in a God and he believed that—he liked his children to be raised as good Catholics, and believed in Sunday Mass, and so on.
No, he did believe in God but he didn't—You know, like all of us, you don't really start to think about those things until something terrible happens to you.
Yeah, but he'd do it so quickly it was really a little ritualistic thing.
He'd come in and kneel on the edge of the bed—kneel on top of the bed and say them, you know.
But, you know, it was obviously—it was just like a little childish mannerism, I suppose like brushing your teeth or something.
I know Bishop Hannan he saw, but I guess that was more because of politics and everything down here—that's the one he always liked the most.
Oh, and then Father Cavanaugh was a great friend of his father's and, you know, was a rather liberal priest.
In the beginning when we got married, I know they were having a big fight, but by the time he was President he liked him.
What Cardinal Spellman did—you know, he was just so for Jack, and then he made all those speeches about—he really changed.
Yeah, and he said all the things—the right things—what a Catholic should be saying.
No, that was my impression because I significantly recall hearing him on Cardinal Spellman.
Yeah, and he's very funny—I mean, he's sort of Last Hurrah-ish and the crusty way he speaks.
But this came on along later, didn't it, because as you say at the beginning Cushing was not that way.
You know, he really was trying to just slit Jack's throat all the time and wouldn't be a help.
Put out a big—Cushing would make the right statement and answer to that, but Spellman never would.
So many of the Catholics were so to the right—to the right of Goldwater.
Oh, well, when Jack would go to confession, there'd be long lines at Christmas and Easter, and he'd have a Secret Service man go stand in line for him.
You'd have to stand about an hour, then he'd come over and just slip in the line, so nobody really knew who he was.
It would be at a little church in West Palm Beach—not the church that we usually went to on Sundays.
It's amazing how it was done without— Once he told me, as a joke, that sometimes priests would make you go to confession right before a communion breakfast, and he'd always say, ""I forgot my noon prayers,"" and ""I missed Mass on Wednesday,"" as his sins because—you wouldn't want some men in front of the whole room.
It always seemed to me that Bobby was more religious than the President.
The FOURTH Conversation MONDAY, MARCH 23 1964 I think we stopped last time at Hyannis Port on the day of the election.
I know Marian and I came down for luncheon on the Friday after the election.
I guess Jack went to Palm Beach and I went back to Washington because I was going to have John any minute.
So he must have gone to Florida for a couple of days for a rest, then he'd come back to Washington.
Yes, and then when he came back Thanksgiving—he was back and forth all the time—and then Thanksgiving he came back.
So then he came back that night —Jjust turned around his plane—and then he stayed at our house in Georgetown all the time, sort of forming his cabinet and everything and marching over to the hospital about three times a day.
The President was for a long time uncertain as between Rusk and Bill Fulbright.
Then that conference in Florida, where Caroline walked in with her shoes on.
THE CABINET IS SWORN IN BY CHIEF JUSTICE EARL WARREN, JANUARY 21, 1961 Hank Walker, Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston I think that Bobby was opposed to Fulbright on the ground that Fulbright, because of his position on segregation, wouldn't be, you know, hot for Africa.
You see, that's a time that I won't be very good on because I was really quite weak and we had one little bedroom in the back of the house—and then the Kennedys all came back and then it was just a madhouse.
So I'd really see Jack in our room and—I was really in bed most of the time.
Dean Rusk, you know, I thought he was—he seems to be a rather compassionate man.
When you meet him, you think much more of him than when you know things he could have done and isn't doing.
That's absolutely right because he gives the impression of great intelligence and he's always awfully good in defining a situation.
I can't remember, we did speak about that in the tape before— but how it used to drive Jack crazy in the White House—how he'd ask for some routine answer to something the Russians had done.
And Dean Rusk seemed to be overtaken by that apathy and fear of making the wrong decision that so many people in the State Department have.
But Jack—he was loyal and, you know, Jack just felt a terrible guilt—I mean, he wondered—I know I told you this before—of how he could get him out the next time without hurting him.
Well, he was always wondering who he could have as secretary of state the next time.
McNamara was one, but that wasn't really definite—Bundy?—but just someone strong there.
He didn't want to hurt the man, but he just knew something had to be done there.
And now I keep reading in the papers—lI don't know if it's true or not—that Lyndon loves Dean Rusk.
I think Johnson will find the same thing and that—the trouble is the contrast between Rusk and McNamara, because McNamara always has the capacity, first, to control his own department and then to make recommendations, and speak about things with clarity, come up with ideas and get things done.
He was going to get rid of J Edgar Hoover—who's just been signed up again.
And which again shows—that's why I told you I was so angry at Ted Sorensen—that just seed of doubt.
And then McNamara really had this worship for Jack, and then he said, well fine, that he'd love to be it.
I mean, he didn't like having to do it or anything, but he wasn't going to give him the State Department.
I remember the earliest times when we spoke of it, you knew that Governor Stevenson would get the UN and not State, which he wanted.
And I remember their conference on the doorstep was rather vague or Stevenson said he didn't have anything to say, or something funny.
Well, why should he give him—Stevenson had never lifted one finger to help him.
But yet, it wasn't just bitterness or that, because look at all the people Jack took who had been against him or for someone else.
He thought that man had a real disease of being unable to make up his mind and Stevenson irritated him.
I don't think he could have borne to have him around every day coming in complaining as secretary of state about something.
I mean, it would have been an awfully difficult relationship, and I think it would have just driven Jack crazy and—I really don't think Stevenson would have been as good as Fulbright.
I think also—I think one thing that was in his mind was the purpose of having people who'd be—who have strength on the Hill for the measures.
And I think that's one reason why Fulbright appealed to him because he thought the fact that the Senate knew Fulbright would mean that they'd have confidence.
If only he'd been picked—yeah, then Lyndon would like him and everything.
Though apparently at the second meeting he thought it might be all right, but you know, he sort of agreed at the end.
I mean, we'd been to their house for dinner a few times and I knew Phyllis Dillon.
So they were one of the few people whose house we went to dinner to—occasionally, as sort of a friend, but never terribly close.
And now I'd say of all the cabinet once we were in the White House, they were really our best friends.
The only ones we really saw in the evening or at our private parties were them and McNamara—the McNamaras.
But the Dillons were the only ones we ever had dinner with just the four of us.
The McNamaras and the Dillons would come to the private parties— those dances and things.
Did putting Bobby in the cabinet cause a lot of— Oh, that was awful because—I suppose that was Mr Kennedy completely.
Bobby told me that once, after November, the weeks before we left the White House.
He said it was Mr Kennedy who really did it—and he said Bobby didn't think it would be good for Jack and Jack could see the problems it presented, though he never would say that to Bobby.
And Bobby really went into this sort of slump that people say he was in since Jack's death.
He didn't know what he wanted to do and again he wanted to go away and teach.
He just didn't want it and finally—you know, he'd keep saying no or, he hadn't decided, or this or that, and finally one day Jack just called him in and said, ""Well, you have to,"" or something, and it was decided.
That shows you what Bobby is like and how he was just doing everything he could to get out of it, whereas Eunice was pestering Jack to death to make Sargent head of HEW because she wanted to be a cabinet wife.
You know, it shows you some people are ambitious for themselves and Bobby wasn't.
What do you think the President would have had in mind for Bobby, if not the Justice—bringing him into the White House in some way or— ATTORNEY GENERAL ROBERT KENNEDY AND PRESIDENT KENNEDY IN THE OVAL OFFICE, APRIL 1962 Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston I don't know.
But he was so used to working with Bobby and having him to sound out decisions with, so I suppose it might have been that domestic—sort of like Bundy, only not.
He was absolutely definite that he wanted Mac down with him and I think in the course of December down in Palm Beach he decided that he would be the man for that job.
And just the way he saw he needed to get General Taylor there after the Bay of Pigs.
Oh, one thing in Florida that I can remember about the interregnum that was rather a painful day.
You know, again Mr Kennedy's charm—oh, no, no, no, that was before West Virginia—sorry.
But, Franklin wanted to be secretary of the navy and McNamara said that he couldn't have him.
Franklin always thinks that Henry Ford told McNamara he couldn't have him—some convoluted reasoning there.
I do think it might have been—either Henry Ford or McNamara had a meeting with Franklin.
Franklin is bright and he's capable of hard work and I think he's been—all I hear of him is the good job in Commerce.
So, on the way home in the car, Jack was so happy to see—you know, at last there was something Franklin wanted.
Jack owed him a lot for Arizona, which he took away from Lyndon and brought to Jack.
And he was bright and he really was—I mean, Jack said he's one of the best secretaries of the interior.
When Jack interviewed him, I guess he just had no ideas or was just—I know Jack was really depressed after that.
Yeah, but I mean, I wonder why Jack just didn't make him that in the beginning.
Or to be secretary of the army, for some reason, and he just had a sense that the agricultural problem was insoluble and I think that was—my recollection is that, that was the last cabinet office filled.
I mean, a couple of people like Loveless and— I think yes—particularly Middle Westerners.
Well, I don't remember any problem or anyone else they were considering besides Hodges.
Nice old man, a southerner— A southerner business would trust, or something.
I can't remember any comments he ever made and what kind of secretary of commerce Hodges was.
I mean, I don't know about being postmaster general, but just corny and just—I don't know.
Now all the members of the cabinet, really the only ones whom the President knew moderately before, besides Bobby, were Douglas, and I guess, and Stewart Udall.
But Rusk and McNamara and Hodges and Day, of course, Arthur Goldberg, we forgot.
Yes, and he knew Goldberg—I mean, there was never any doubt in his mind that he wanted Arthur for that job.
And I remember how sad he was when the appointment came in the Supreme Court, though he thought Wirtz was wonderful—a wonderful man.
You know, he really hated to lose Arthur in Labor but he really cared about his appointments to the Supreme Court.
And now Arthur just thinks he's—I don't know—just the way all the Supreme Court justices get to think of themselves.
I was so amazed that Arthur would rule that way and—that thing they just passed, where you can write anything about people in public office.
When you think, ads like that in the paper was partly what killed Jack.
Has that always been so or is it— Well, in the early days when he used to come for breakfast all the time, for the labor bill—they were obviously talking about the labor bill.
But I really started to see much of Arthur Goldberg after the presidency.
Apart from Rusk and from Day, the President was fairly well satisfied with the cabinet.
Yeah, Day was just sort of a—I don't know—he was always being in little skits at the multiple sclerosis ball.
One of the interesting things is the President's instinct for people because his capacity to pick people whom he knew rather slightly—even Lovett and McCloy, for example.
He could tell so much by talking to them, though I guess, with Dean Rusk, he made a mistake, but as you say, Dean Rusk comes over so marvelously when you're talking to him.
He'd talk to them— that'd be the main thing, of course, then he'd get a lot of reports from Sarge.
He'd have all these reports and things, and things that other people would say about them and then they'd come.
It's like an interview if you're going to be accepted in a school or something.
I mean, he'd be in that living room with them for a couple of hours and they'd just talk.
And then when he'd come over to see me in the hospital, he would— Later I told you what he said about McNamara and I know how disillusioned he was with Loveless—just certain, who had no solution to the farm problem, and no original thoughts.
The others— I should have asked him all that, but when you live with a man who's so busy and everything, you don't want to just question him, question him, at the end of the day.
So you pick it up by what he's telling someone else or what he wants to tell you—though I might have been dying to know.
Now my mind has gone so blank about so many things that I know I remembered before.
So, Clark had been looking into it, you know, making great things, so that everybody who was appointed to something spent those months between November and January literally at the desk of the man they would succeed.
It'll be a goldfish bowl, the Secret Service, I'll never see my husband.
Then once Jack was nominated and everything, then you were so happy for him.
And then once you got in it, I mean, you were just so happy for him, then you found out that it was really the happiest time of my life.
It was when we were the closest—I didn't realize the physical closeness of having his office in the same building and seeing him so many times a day.
Then once we were in the White House, I used to worry all the time about getting out of it.
In the beginning, he used to sort of treat it as a joke and didn't like to talk about it, and he'll say, ""Oh, I'll be an ambassador to Italy,"" or something.
Once I told Bobby that I was so worried and that if only Jack could run for the Senate, you know, have Teddy's seat, because Jack said they wouldn't take two brothers from there.
So Bobby went and spoke to Teddy and came back and told me that Teddy said that he would not run when Johnny—that's what the brothers always called him—was out, which is so touching because that was the highest thing that I think Teddy could ever have hoped for.
And anyway, I told Jack that because I always remember him saying how John Quincy Adams— Yeah. —came back and was a congressman all his life, and I thought he could be a senator and have a base and do all his other things from there.
And he was touched that I cared so much to be so worried, but he said, ""No, I never, never would do that.
JACK, BOBBY, AND TEDDY, HYANNIS PORT, 1960 John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston Yes.
That each would—there is Bobby making Teddy give up his prize, which Teddy does gladly, and then Jack refusing.
And just towards the end, Jack was thinking about being either publisher of a great paper or—I don't know.
Bundy said to me the other night that he thought he might have ended up in television or something.
Sometimes he talked to Ben Bradlee about it—""Think we could buy the Washington Post?""— or something, rather jovially, but you could always tell when he was toying with an idea that pleased him in his mind.
I think he would have gone around the world, written a book, done something with his library, and then really entered into that.
Well, I just assumed we'd have lived in Cambridge, but maybe we wouldn't have.
Or then I thought we should still live in Washington, but now I know that would have been completely wrong.
It would be too hard for an ex-president to live in this city, which is so oriented to the new president.
So maybe we'd have lived in— He spoke to me about living in Cambridge part of the time.
The newspaper too he also— You know, that would have been— Considered as a possibility.
And Bundy said to me the other night—It just made me so sad, because Jack could have had his happiest years later.
And you know, anywhere he went, he would have been—and anything he said people would have listened to so.
And then Bundy said—I don't know if it's true or not—that after a while there would have been such a demand for him to come back that they might have had to do something about seeing if you could have a third term—you know, not in succession, but later.
And the president just has to be watching everyone, everywhere, which only someone young and brilliant like Jack can do.
So you'd have been just scared all the time, and knowing you had no power to do anything.
Then you could see that it really did—it is the burdens, the way you look at Lincoln's pictures, over the years, and how much tireder and older he got.
Though he never spoke about—he would sometimes speak of the cares of it, but he'd never, you know, moan or feel sorry for himself.
Yeah, I think once Jack was elected, or maybe whenever I thought I might be the president's wife.
And then in Florida, between Christmas and inauguration, I had them send me a lot of books and things from the Library of Congress.
And then once I was in there, I was in bed for about a week in the Queen's Room after inauguration, but I can remember seeing David Finley in bed and maybe John Walker,22 so it started right away.
Maybe just because I'd been to the White House obviously, for some congressional receptions, and my little tour around with Mrs.
Well, this might be rather interesting, but—I'd read in the paper that it was customary for the first lady to show the new one around.
And it was the last thing I wanted because, as I say, I was about to have this child.
But Tish knew her or somehow, so she used to meet Mary Jane, sneak away for lunch somewhere.
And Tish liked Mary Jane very much, and she'd tell her, you know, things that you ought to know.
Eisenhower that message, she hit the ceiling and said, ""This is my house, and nobody's going to see it""—and all of that.
So then I was in the hospital and I had John and it was all rather dramatic.
And I got out of the hospital about noon and we were to leave, I think, at two-thirty for Florida.
I'd never done anything but walk around the room and, just to be boring, after a caesarean it's very hard to walk and all that for a while.
And there was never any wheelchair and you just were dragged around every floor, and not even asked to sit down, and brought in and out of the—past all the press.
And when I got back, I really had a weeping fit and I couldn't stop crying for about two days.
It was something that takes away your last strength when you don't have any left.
And then, I guess, people used to say she'd go crazy when she'd hear all the things that we were doing.
I suppose it's never that nice to hear about a new first lady who's doing things that you should have done, or something.
I don't blame her for that, but you'd think she might have been a little sympathetic before.
PRESIDENT EISENHOWER MEETS WITH PRESIDENT-ELECT KENNEDY IN THE OVAL OFFICE Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston Yes.
How did the President and President Eisenhower— I guess President Eisenhower was fine when they went—the first meeting.
And he pressed a button and they were there in three minutes and we flew away.
You know, Jack saw that all that could have been done, I mean, how really he kept us standing still and gave away—lI don't think he thought much of him.
In the White House, in the door of Jack's—the sill to Jack's office in his bedroom—we thought there were termites.
I think that must have been when I was either in the hospital or— That must have been before, right after the election.
Nixon was and that she was just lying like a cadaver in, you know, this chair, just not moving, with this bitter, desperate face and how terribly bitter she was.
I mean, I remember him telling me about it, but now I can't remember what he said.
Kennedy told me to write everything down the first year I was married and I did, which is all just nothing—what Arthur Krock said to Dean Acheson, or something.
And all the years when I should have been writing things down, I wasn't.
Of the White House. rn i { LAN ol es Ded 5K “Wt oe 4 Fa , th. tee de ole ce wee We \ Case Creat rs wadha inad T JACQUELINE KENNEDY'S PRE-INAUGURAL NOTES ABOUT THE LINCOLN BEDROOM AND EAST HALL John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston He was interested in it.
He'd always get so interested in anything that I cared about, but then he was nervous about it.
I mean, he wanted to be sure it was done the right way, so he sent Clark Clifford to see me.
Everyone, America feels so strangely about it, and look at the Truman Balcony.
And I said, ""It won't be like the Truman Balcony,""22 and then I told him all about Harry du Pont2 and all the people we hoped to get.
You know, people weren't going to give up good pieces of furniture, or you'd have ninety-nine cups of tea with some old lady and she'd give you fifty dollars.
But then Jack McNally in Jack's—who was sort of this happy little Irishman who was in charge of taking people through the White House and the tours—said it would be an absolute outrage and desecrate our nation's—you know, the White House—to have money exchanging hands there and everything.
And oftentimes he—and then the guidebook was selling a lot—he'd always be teasing McNally about it.
I was so happy that I had—could do something that made him proud of me.
I was really—I was never any different once I was in the White House than I was before, but the press made you different.
Suddenly, everything that'd been a liability before— your hair, that you spoke French, that you didn't just adore to campaign, and you didn't bake bread with flour up to your arms—you know, everyone thought I was a snob and hated politics.
Well, Jack never made me feel that I was a liability to him, but I was.
And when we got in the White House all the things that I'd always done suddenly became wonderful because anything the First Lady does that's different, everyone seizes on—and I was so happy for Jack, especially now that it was only three years together that he could be proud of me then.
KENNEDY IN THE WHITE HOUSE Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston HEAD OF A YOUNG BOY AND A FIGURE OF HERAKLES—ROMAN SCULPTURES PURCHASED BY JOHN F KENNEDY DURING HIS VISIT TO ROME IN 1963 AS GIFTS FOR HIS WIFE John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston He was terribly proud.
He liked to sort of talk about furniture and paintings, which are things that he didn't—had not known a great deal about at one point in his life.
And then it was the first thing he saw that he really started to care about himself.
A thing about his taste—when Boudin, the French—much more than decorator—he's really a scholar, from Jansen would be around, so many things that he'd say how to arrange a room or hang pictures,“ I'd be in doubt about.
Then I'd ask Jack what he thought without telling him what Boudin thought.
And Jack, about five or six different times, which I have written down, would say the same as Boudin.
He just had taste in every facet of his character—for people, for books, for sculpture, for furniture, for rooms, for houses.
He bought our house in Georgetown because the doorknob was old, which he liked, and he liked the sort of old look of it.
They were all from Klejman, except for one—he knew I used to collect drawings so he had gotten a couple of drawings from Wildenstein.
And when I think that when we were first married, he always used to give me things he liked, like a letter of Byron or a letter of John Quincy Adams or something, which was fine.
And I could see the present that he wanted me to choose the most was this Alexandrian bracelet.
And it was the simplest thing of all and I could just see how he loved it.
So, you know, that was a special present and he wouldn't say which one he wanted to give me, but I could tell so I chose it.
He wouldn't— Oh, well, I think he had Klejman send him—he'd talk to him on the phone and had him send up a lot of things.
And then he had about fifty things up in his room because he'd been through—all through dinner, he was locked in his room.
And one of them was an Assyrian horse bit because it so fascinated him that—that had been used in the, I don't know, the wars against the Persians or something—Persian horse bit, maybe.
But he wanted to take it down and try it on Caroline's pony the next day to see if it really worked.
With Dr. —well, the next morning I was just laid out in the Queen's bed.
We were living at that end of the house then because our end was being painted.
And who burst in the door but Jack and President Truman, and poor President Truman just turned scarlet.
I don't think he'd ever seen a woman but his wife in bed in a nightgown before.
And then at night, we'd have supper always in the little Lincoln Sitting Room on trays.
I never heard him really read the whole thing until Inauguration Day, but each part I remember listening, knowing that I'd heard it before.
We had this small bedroom in Florida and there were so many people in the other part of the house—I was in bed most of the time.
And Jack would come in with his cigar, you know, puffing away, with a big pad of yellow pages and he'd be sitting—and he'd sit on the edge of my bed and he'd read me some things he'd written and then he'd flip them over, scribble something, and then he'd pile it on his desk, which was just overflowing with papers, and papers were just all around that room.
He was just so happy then—he looked so well, you know, they were such happy days for him.
No, what he was doing then is solving everything that was coming up, he was dealing with it.
But then at night, we'd get up for supper and then he might read some part in the library or ask his—the rest of his family or whoever was there.
There was always someone—then Sam Rayburn®® and Lyndon and Lady Bird came down once.
So then Jack would grab up those big pages and stuff them in his briefcase, I guess, when he went back to Washington.
He came back early that week, as I recall, and you came up on Wednesday, probably.
You know, it was such a festive evening and I thought that snow was so pretty.
He was telling all these horrible jokes about marriage—I mean, the wife is a shrew, and the—I just thought that's so sad when comedians do that.
Well, it was like children waiting for Christmas or something that night.
It was just such a night to share together because that night we were, you know, in the same bed.
Then the next morning getting up and getting dressed, and the snowstorm—all the excitement, leaving our house.
And then going to the White House, and we all had coffee in the Red Room before.
Eisenhower—it was very nice, you know, everybody was there drinking coffee and things.
And as we left, I rode with Styles Bridges22 and Mamie Eisenhower to the Capitol.
And as I was sitting in the car, President Eisenhower and Jack came out afterwards or something and she said, ""Look at Ike in his top hat.
I kept thinking how those people have been taken care of all their lives—but anyway.
Then, all the inauguration and Cardinal Cushing and the lectern burning, and then poor Robert Frost.
Well, you could see him, it was such a glare from the snow that he really couldn't see what was written on the paper.
And then Lyndon got up and held his hat over it, but the poor man still couldn't see.
And then I never had a chance—as I was sitting about three away and everyone says, ""Why didn't Jack kiss you after?""—which of course, he would never do there.
But you had to march out in such order that I was about eight behind him —with women, or something.
And I so badly wanted to see him before the lunch, just to see him alone.
I went to a room with all the ladies, where they had sherry and coffee, and he was with the men.
And I caught up to him in the Capitol and, oh, I was just so proud of him.
And there's a picture where I have my hand on his chin and he's just looking at me and there really were tears in his eyes.
I mean, that was so much more emotional than any kiss because his eyes really did fill with tears.
I remember everybody was sending their little menu card around to be autographed, it was very jolly.
Then we got in the car for that parade, sort of not quite knowing how to wave.
And then when we got to the White House, I guess we went in for a minute and walked out to the stand.
They had hot soup or something in that stand, and he wanted to see every single bit of that parade.
He was just so proud and he was—they'd keep telling us how it would be running late and I left after a couple of hours because again, I was really so tired that day.
And, but he stayed until just nightfall—I think he was the last person there, you know, and came in and there was a big reception downstairs.
And about 9 o'clock or something, when it was time to start getting dressed, again I couldn't get out of bed.
And she had two pills, a green one and an orange one, and she told me to take the orange one.
And then she told me it was Dexadrine, which I'd never taken in my life— and that I never have again.
But thank God, it really did its trick because then you could get dressed.
And then Jack came, and he came upstairs and he brought me down to the Red Room.
We all had a toast of champagne and he did—he liked how I looked and he said something so nice and we went off to that ball.
It was so funny with the aides, because the old aide, the head of the White House aides, kept trying to be with Jack all evening and the other three were jumping in and out.
Then we went to one at the Mayflower where Lyndon was right next to us at that one.
And then we went to a third one at the Wardman Park and just on the way, it was like Cinderella and the clock striking midnight, I guess that pill wore off because I just couldn't get out of the car.
And so Jack said, ""You go home now,"" and he sent me home with that aide.
And I guess he went on to all the other balls, and then to Joe Alsop's.
Paul Schutzer, Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images/John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston I was staying with Joe then.
Sometimes I thought later I wish I'd been able to sort of share all that night with him.
But he had such a wonderful time, and then he must have gotten home about three or four, but he came in and woke me up.
He slept in the Lincoln Room then, so that was his first night in Lincoln's bed.
Then the next morning when he woke up, very early, well, I was awake too, and so I went in that room and it's the sunniest room.
And he went off with that wonderful springing step to his office and then again, I told you, he'd come crashing back with Truman and Robert Frost.
Jack was so like his father in that he hated to leave his house, whether it was Georgetown, the Cape, whether we had my mother's house in Newport, and even in the White House, he hated to go out.
Yeah, his father loved to stay home and he thought he had the best food and everything that's best in your house.
So Jack was brought up—you know, as long as everything was nice at home.
You'd have the Bartletts, or David Gore, who was around just after inauguration.
Or if any of his family were down or— You went out more that first winter than later.
Once to Lorraine Cooper's because Jack—it was the first time we ever went out and Jack loved Cooper.
He didn't really want to go to that dinner because Lorraine's dinners were always so big.
Jock Whitney was at Rowlie's and everybody—they found out about that because the snowplows came and scraped off Rowlie's street before or something.
So, because those three things caused such commotion—you'd think we went out every night—those were the only three times.
Then we really stopped—oh, maybe once in the spring again, we went to Joe's.
But we hardly ever went out after—you know, it proved such a production and everything.
He'd always work very late and you'd always have to juggle the children's naps or something so they'd be there when he came home.
And, well, if you were going out and you want to take a bath and change and leave, it was just a nuisance.
Really, not very many because I can only think of about four or five that we saw the whole time there.
I remember the French—oh, The Last Year at Marienbad—oh, he hated that.
Yeah, or sometimes there'd be a USIA thing he'd want me to see or something, you know, something he'd done.
And then the children would come in and it was so incredible because they'd rush to tur on the television set and you'd hear this roar, full blast, of cartoons or that exercise man.
And Jack would be sitting there—he had breakfast in a chair with a tray in front of him, you know, reading the fifty morning papers or sheafs of all those briefing books to go over with Bundy, and this racket around.
And I always thought it was so funny for people who used his bathroom—guests—it was the bathroom that men could use after dinner.
Because all along his tub were all these little floating animals, ducks and pink pigs and things.
And then he'd always come in before he went over to the office— come into my room—lI mean, I'd only be half asleep or else I'd be having breakfast—and see me.
And he used to take Caroline over to the office with him every day— PRESIDENT KENNEDY PLAYING WITH CAROLINE AND JOHN ON HIS WAY TO THE OVAL OFFICE Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston That would be about 9:30.
He'd be, I guess, over an hour having breakfast, reading the papers and taking a bath.
And later on, it used to be John's treat to walk to the office with him every day.
Then he came back to us—he wasn't with us at Hickory Hill—he came back '57 and he was with us ever since.
But poor George, he really got the shakes—I mean, he couldn't—I asked him if he wanted to work here, but he's just too old, he dropped—and in the White House, all he'd do that used to amuse Jack so.
He'd open the door so that some other slave could carry in Jack's breakfast tray.
The only thing he did was pull open the curtains and then turn on the bath, and then he'd go up and all the little White House Mess boys were shining his shoes and everything.
Never, unless he had a business lunch, you know, in the family dining room downstairs.
He always kept our floor—we put in the dining room—he'd keep all his business lunches downstairs.
It's so different from now, where everyone gets the tour of the bathrooms and things.
It seemed to me that he was very—he much preferred to see people in his office rather than have luncheons.
And you're always awfully tired at the end of one of those White House mornings in your office and your nerves are on edge.
And then he'd come up afterwards and still try to take whatever little nap he could.
He never took a nap before, but in the White House, I think he made up his mind he would because it was so good for his health.
And he'd always said that Winston Churchill used to do it and he'd often say how much more, you know, staying power it gave him.
Well, it'd be forty-five minutes and he'd get completely undressed and into his pajamas and into bed and go to sleep and then wake up again.
It would take me forty-five minutes to just snuggle down and start to doze off.
I'd have lunch in there with him and then I'd close the curtains and open the window for his nap and then I'd wake him up from it.
It would just be like clockwork—forty-five minutes and he'd be back in his office.
Would he swim every day or was that only the later part after— He came to the White House in the best physical condition that he was ever in in his life.
He played golf, sort of eighteen holes— all these things he hadn't been able to do for a long time.
He didn't walk around the driveway, he didn't swim, and suddenly his back went bad.
And then for the first time in his life, he'd really had from election to inauguration a lot of it in Florida, to play golf—I don't know, twice a week or three times—to swim, to walk on the beach.
You know, it wasn't until the next October—I got so mad at her because then other doctors were trying to bring in Hans Kraus, who could build you up through exercises.
Well, all these doctors are so jealous of each other and she wouldn't let Kraus come in.
And finally, I'd sat by so many times while doctors did things to Jack— well, doctors just pushed Jack all over the place—that I really got mad and got in there and got the back surgeon and the other—everybody and just forced her to have—him to have Kraus.
And Kraus started these series of exercises which he did every evening with the navy chief.
You know, like lift—trying to touch your toes or lying on your stomach and trying to raise one leg.
And you could just see —TI mean, he still was in pain a lot that winter—oh, and it went out really badly, you remember, in May in Canada.
In other words, it wasn't the planting the tree in Canada which caused it all, it was really the lack of exercise that really did it.
Oh, well, these exercises with the chief would just take about fifteen minutes.
You know, sort of sitting-up exercises or then they'd hold your legs so you'd have to try to lift it up against it.
So, as I say, he wasn't a cripple—that sounds funny—he could do everything, but you'd just notice when you'd see him trying to reach for something he'd dropped on the floor, how stiff he was.
My Lord, at the end, in a couple of months, he could touch his toes, he could do all these things he'd never been able to do—knee bends— So then once Kraus started—then that was, you know, encouraging, because he'd get so discouraged.
Travell had given him the tenth treatment and before she always helped.
Your White House parties—the best parties I've ever gone to—were they— Well, I'll tell you why I thought of having them.
I mean, we were young and we were gay and you couldn't cut all that off from him and just leave his life full of worry.
So then he'd say, well, let's have—every now and then— I think we only had about five in all.
And, well, he just loved them because then he was—it's sort of a way to renew yourself.
Because you see, when we came in there, I was very weak and plus all the thing of the campaign, plus the baby, plus—and to hit that place running and start to do all the work of running the house, getting a chef, doing the food, the flowers, the reconstruction, restoration, whatever it is.
Sometimes at the end of the day you'd just feel one jump away from tears, but you wanted to be so cheerful for Jack when he came home, which I nearly always was, but he could see when it was getting to be a bit too much.
I always think our whole married life was renewals of love after, you know, brief separations.
GLEN ORA, MIDDLEBURG, VIRGINIA Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston JACQUELINE KENNEDY RIDING AT GLEN ORA WITH CAROLINE AND JOHN Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston We didn't use—it's funny, he never thought of using Camp David, either.
I'd sort of had this thing about having to get a house in the country, and he'd hated Camp David when he went there with Eisenhower.
He said, ""It's the most depressinglooking place""—which it is, from the outside.
Then Taz Shepard, his naval aide, kept pestering and pestering him to go there.
Then he got to rather love it because it is comfortable, so then we'd go there a bit, but go to Glen Ora®2 mostly on weekends, which he didn't like really, at all.
Well, in a way, the thing that that means is exercise and fresh air, which is true.
You make an extra effort every day to go out and play tennis, though I couldn't play it.
Because if you just stay indoors and smoke cigarettes and work at your desk and talk on the telephone until you know your throat is all tight, you can't be gay for anyone.
I think rarely he came Friday evening, he'd always come Saturday, sort of at lunchtime.
And then he'd sleep all Saturday afternoon and then he'd watch, all the afternoon, television or something from his bed.
And we'd always have a friend for the weekend, have dinner, go to bed early, church the next day, papers, another nap.
And then this fall, we did have two or three weekends at our new house in Virginia—and—4 He was off on trips a couple of times.
Bruce at the embassy there and then when I was in Rome, she was with Mrs.
But I remember just thinking, ""I can't go in there unless I have Tish,"" and calling her up right after Jack was nominated.
And, well, Tish is great and I love her but, so much of her energy was rather extra that I—now that I think of it, she really made me tireder than I'd had to be.
Because she'd send you so many extra things that you really didn't have to answer.
Or as I'd be sitting with Jack in the evening, some messenger would come flying in and throw a folder in my lap.
You know, it began to drive me crazy, and then Jack told me that I must stop using my desk in the East Hall—the West Hall, where we sat.
And it was so good because often, when we'd be alone in the evening, he'd be looking at a book or doing some of his papers, and I'd go grab a folder off my desk and try to check off all the little things I had to do.
But it would just put you in not the right atmosphere that you should be in when your husband comes home.
Nancy was my roommate and ever since she came, the difference that life was.
How much more time there was to be able to enjoy—to make yourself so that Jack would enjoy you more.
She used to tell me she loved to have lunch in the White House Mess so she could argue with men.
She's great, but she was so different from me and just exhausted me so.
Pam was fantastic because in the beginning I didn't think I'd need a press secretary and other people, the one person had done them both.
Tish had her own press conference before inauguration at the Sulgrave Club.
She was laughing and saying, ""Yes, we're going to hang pictures on all the walls upside down""—modern, this, that.
It was the first set of bad, sensational headlines, and Jack said, ""Not one of my cabinet officers has had an interview.
She just loved the press so that I saw that if I was to keep any privacy of our life— and she was always saying, ""We got to have Betty Beale to the first state dinner""—I must get someone who had the same reactions I did.
Jack had gotten three of them—Lizzie Condon, who's now in my office, Pam, and Nini2—jobs in the Senate one summer, and Pam had been in his office.
She was going over to work somewhere in the White House anyway, but I asked her if she'd be my press secretary and she was terrified and she didn't want to.
And I told her if she did a good job—if I thought she was doing a good job, the press would always think she was no good, and if they thought she was good, she wouldn't be helping me the way I wanted, so it was very difficult for her because she's very sensitive.
Pe le THE FIRST LADY THANKS SENATE MINORITY LEADER EVERETT DIRKSEN, VICE PRESIDENT JOHNSON, AND MAJORITY LEADER MIKE MANSFIELD FOR THEIR HELP IN SECURING A CHANDELIER FROM THE United States CAPITOL FOR THE TREATY ROOM, JUNE 28, 1962 Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston She's a great girl.
He was one of the people who contributed most to being happy in that place.
KENNEDY Robert Knudsen, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston Mrs.
Well, she couldn't have had better credentials as a curator— everything from Winterthur, and this bright, bright little girl, And Mr West explained to me what happened to her.
Because here, this young little girl came, and so excited about what she was doing, and suddenly she'd stop working and letters wouldn't be answered.
Someone would have given a fifty thousand dollars something, or someone would have written six months ago, or six weeks ago, not gotten an answer, and she was always having tea with other curators.
And Mr West said to me, ""There's something I think I ought to tell you, Mrs.
But there, in Jack's bedroom, in our private floor, on the floor, looking under his table or his bed.
Well, she'd get outraged and she'd say, unless she could have them inspect the marquetry or something, she was going to write to the President herself.
And she just got so grand that, after a while, she stopped being useful and you had to get rid of her.
So then the little timid-mouse registrar, Bill Elder,“ came as curator and he was very good as curator.
He never wanted any publicity, but he was also so in love with looking at the bottom of furniture and stuff that he never answered a letter or the telephone either.
But finally Lorraine, with me pressuring her, got things together and, I suppose, she and I wrote the guidebook.
She'd send a batch of illustrations and do part of the text and I'd pick all the ones I wanted in.
Tish loved to pick up the phone and have ""White House calling"" or ""Send all the White House china on the plane to Costa Rica"" or tell them that they had to fly string beans in to a state dinner.
You can see which of your friends it affects that suddenly start to treat you differently.
I used to think if I ever wrote a book, it would be called ""The Poison of the Presidency"" because it poisoned so many relationships with people outside.
Well, some people who don't see you as much as they'd like would say terrible things about you.
Or the other people who suddenly never spoke to you before, but start calling you up or trying to send you some marvelous present.
When Jack died, he came ten days later with a check for $250,000 for the library before we'd almost even said anything about it.
I'd just like to go down and have dinner with him and he said, ""You will see, when you leave the White House many people who you think were your friends will no longer be.
Everybody's still a friend, but you see the ones who get so excited about power and go over to the new, which is fine.
You see it in what some people write, well, you always know—Mr Kennedy always said you can always—if you can count your friends on five fingers of one hand, you're lucky.
I was having dinner with Mendes France, who was also staying at the Carlyle.
Until he loves you and then—and he loved and admired Jack so, without hardly ever knowing him.
He always said he was the only Dem—he said, ""I am so ashamed of my colleagues in Wall Street.
The PLP UH Conversation TUESDAY, MARCH 24 1964 Daring the campaign, Cuba emerged as an issue.
We knew Earl Smith then, who'd been Eisenhower's ambassador at the time.
Well, he was always saying his troubles with the State Department—I remember there was a man named Mr Rubottom he kept talking about.
And how hard it was—warning against Castro and how just it was like, I don't know, dropping pennies down an endless well.
And the President's view then was that, as you say, our policy was wrong in not letting it happen.
And then after the campaign—remember when Allen Dulles came to— Oh, Allen Dulles came to Hyannis after—yeah.
The stories began to appear in March saying that an invasion was likely, or something like that.
And then all the time at his press conferences, Jack would keep having to say United States troops won't be committed, sort of dodging everything that way.
But I just remember, well, it was like the second time, when Keating was going on every week about something that the missiles weren't out or there were more missiles there.
But the time I really remember well was the weekend before, which would be April 13 and 14.
We were down in Glen Ora with Jean and Steve Smith, and it was one afternoon— you'll know if it was Saturday or Sunday—about five o'clock in his bedroom, he got a call and he—I was in there and he was sitting in the edge of the bed, and he asked—it was from Dean Rusk—and it went on and on, and he looked so depressed when it was over.
I guess that was a decisive phone call .42 I think this was the phone call about the air strike.
So anyway— and then Jack just sat there on his bed and then he shook his head and just wandered around that room, really looking—in pain almost, and went downstairs, and you just knew he knew what had happened was wrong.
Usually, as I said, he made his decisions easily and would think about them before or once he'd made them, he was happy with them.
And that's the one time I just saw him, you know, terribly, really low.
I mean, the invasion in the beginning and then no air strike—half doing it and not doing it all the way, or should—TI don't know.
Just some awful thing that had been landed in his lap that there wasn't time to get out of.
And then later on, when Taylor was made chief of staff, he'd say, ""You know, at least I leave that to the next President""—or ""If Eisenhower had left me someone like that.
Him especially, I was on the lawn with the children and he especially came out with Dr.
Cardona back and took him in late Wednesday afternoon, and I think he brought him out and introduced him to you.
And then he'd keep shaking his head, and said Cardona had been wonderful.
But, if you want to go back over the chronology of Cuba, there was that awf—that weekend.
Then Tuesday we had the congressional reception, and Jack was called away in the middle of it, and went over to his office and didn't come back until I was in bed.
You know, it was funny, because the next year at a Congressional reception, he was called away for something else of a crisis.
But last year it just seemed those receptions were always nights something awful happened.
And I think it was Wednesday we had to have our pictures taken—or maybe it was Thursday.
It was with Mark Shaw and he just came up and sat down for about ten minutes— we didn't have any picture of the two of us together that you could mail out.
PORTRAIT OF JACQUELINE KENNEDY TAKEN DURING THE BAY OF PIGS DEBACLE ©2000 Mark Shaw/mptvimages.com It must have been unbearable to go to the Greek dinner in the midst of all this.
We'd had a lunch for them one of those days, either the day before or the day after.
But I remember so well when it happened, whatever day it was, it was in the morning —and he came back over to the White House to his bedroom and he started to cry, just with me.
You know, just for one—just put his head in his hands and sort of wept.
About twice, the winter he was sick in the hospital, you know, just out of sheer discouragement, he wouldn't weep but some tears would fill his eyes and roll down his cheek.
And then that time, and then when Patrick, this summer when he came back from Boston to me in the hospital and he walked in the morning about eight, in my room, and just sobbed and put his arms around me.
And it was so sad, because all his first hundred days and all his dreams, and then this awful thing to happen.
He didn't care about his hundred days, but all those poor men who you'd sent off with all their hopes high and promises that we'd back them and there they were, shot down like dogs or going to die in jail.
If I was going to take the children out—you know, in other words, don't leave anywhere.
Well, then I suppose he just thought politically that would be too— Too risky.
We could see if it's in Mao Tse-tung, because I told you he had an awful lot of Chinese proverbs.
How did he feel about—it was Lemnitzer, it was, I think, and the Joint Chiefs he held more responsible privately than anyone else, my impression.
Yes, you know, he never really spoke unkindly about them, but with sort of hopeless, wry laughter, he'd talk about Curtis LeMay.
I remember the time of the second Cuba, he got a picture of all our airplanes in Florida, or all over the country just standing on all the runways.
But, you know, there that man was shouting to go and bomb everything and have a little war and had left all our planes out.
But, it was the whole thing—the Joint Chiefs, and then, I guess, poor Allen Dulles.
I don't know if you should have— It seems to me if you're going to do it, you should have had air cover.
You know, Dean Rusk, being timid, but all of that—Jack coming in so late to something and everybody—I just wished if he had to do it, they'd let him alone.
He never liked that hundred-day business in the papers but it was obviously some little press thing—Roosevelt.
But you know, before they were even over—so you can see how early that was in the White House.
Well, he always liked Allen Dulles and, you know, he thought he was an honorable man, and Allen Dulles always had liked Jack.
Oh, because a while later he went out of his way to have him to dinner—or to make someone—I know what it was.
Yes, Charlie Wrightsman and Jayne were in Washington, and they were coming to the White House.
This was just a couple of weeks after Cuba, or a month—and always Allen Dulles had been their little lion.
And Charlie Wrightsman was there, and he said he wasn't going to see Allen Dulles—usually when he was—when in Washington, he did—because of the way Allen had bungled the Bay of Pigs.
And he made the special effort to come back from his office and sit around with Jayne and Charlie Wrightsman, just to show Charlie what he thought of Allen Dulles.
And then I guess right after that or Cuba, whenever, he got General Taylor.
Remember General Taylor and Bobby made a kind of inquiry into what happened.
General Taylor always used to be in his gray suit then, and sometimes Jack would say, when there'd be a meeting of the Joint Chiefs, you know, that you could just feel these waves going out from them wondering about what Taylor would be like and what a difficult situation it was for Taylor.
I suppose he'd met him a couple of times because he was always talking about his book.
And you know, and then he'd say, ""Imagine, can you imagine Eisenhower doing that?""—-whatever all the things were that made General Taylor leave.
We in the White House staff felt very badly, quite apart from the general horror of the thing, but we felt that we'd served the President badly, and some had thought—some had been for the project and others had been against it.
But all of us felt that we hadn't done the job that the White House staff ought to be doing in the way—that we'd been too intimidated by all these great figures and hadn't subjected the project to the kind of critical examination it was our job to do.
No, he never did—but, I mean, I don't think all of you should feel that way because look at what you did at the second Cuba.
The thing was you were all cutting your teeth in there and nobody had warned you about this thing.
And you hope to God that if the country's been run these past eight years and there'd been crises that those men would know something what they were talking about.
So he used to talk later, never about his staff, but, you know, about who he was left, who he inherited to turn to for advice.
And I remember—and setting Bobby up with that committee~/ and I think that's where Bobby and General Taylor's friendship started because I would say after Jack, General Taylor was the man in Washington that Bobby is the closest to, I think—I mean, besides his friends or people in the Justice Department.
KENNEDY SPEAKING WITH RETURNED MEMBERS OF THE CUBAN INVASION BRIGADE, MIAMI, 1962 Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston You said, in an earlier tape, that the times that you remembered the President being most depressed and under pressure really—the state committeeman fight in 1956 and the Cuban thing.
That was more nervous, apprehensive, he couldn't stop talking about it.
He wasn't running his own show as he was doing in the Massachusetts fight.
And then the awful depression when it ended and caring so about those people.
Probably it would be better if you could have, than people see that poor brigade staggering back and remind you all over—the whole country, all over again, of the big failure.
I have another—I just thought of something else about Bobby's compassion.
It must have—last winter—you can find out when it was—that best spy we had in Russia was caught.
Well, Bobby was coming out of a meeting in the White House, and he saw me in the garden, and he came over and sat down on a bench, just looking so sad.
Bobby was just so wounded by them—just treating that man like a cipher.
I guess he even thought John McCone was rather— Well, people get into a kind of professional sense about all this and they no longer see people as human beings.
And one of the most outrageous things was the attack on the tractor deal.
I mean, if there was anything that was something which this nation should have seen as its duty, it was to do everything possible to get those people out, and the attack on it was always a very bad thing to me.
Roosevelt and Walter Reuther and Milton Eisenhower formed a committee to do that.
Well, anyway I think one reason the President felt so strongly about Miro Cardona and the members of that committee is that three or four of them had sons.
You know, Oliva*2 and they all had these—they all showed us pictures of what they looked like before—they had in their wallets.
When they pulled pictures out of what they looked like before, they really looked sort of like fat members of Xavier Cugat's band.
And how they were with us— you know, there they were sitting with Jack—nothing bitter, just looking on him as their hero.
Then they came—since November—they must have—when I was in this house—they came in February especially up to Jack's grave to lay a wreath, and Bobby brought them—one of them around to see me.
And they all said that they were getting out of the army or everything—that now that Jack was dead, they had no more hope or idealism or anything.
They'd just all go out and try to get some jobs because it was he they were all looking to with hope.
All those people there, you know, crying and waving, and all the poor brigade sitting around with their bandages and everything.
I think he was carried away and said some things that weren't in the text of his speech.
You know, a wonderful man that you should speak to sometimes is Donald Barnes.
Poor Sedgwick, trying to say his sort of flowery eighteenth-century French, which no more sounded like a translation of Jack.
Jack said the two best interpreters he'd ever seen were Barnes and Adenauer's interpreter, who he used in Germany instead of our own.
I remember asking him this fall—oh, yes, that day that I told you about—it was one day in October, when he woke up from his nap and he looked very worried.
I said something and he said, ""This has been one of the worst days of my life.
Anyway, one I can remember was that some little raid on Cuba had failed.
He obviously didn't want to sit down with me and talk about Cuba because it was a worry to him.
Lincoln's office when Jean Daniel was brought in and being introduced to him first.
I can't remember what it said now, but it didn't sound—didn't ring true.
I always felt the President understood—had a certain sympathy with the frustrations— Yes, you know, and he never said anything awful about him.
Just, you know, that was one more worrying thing in a day when there'd be a blast from Miro Cardona.
The President had been interested in Latin America, particularly, because it became such a major interest in the administration.
But—but he was really quite young then and I don't think— I never remember him talking especially about Latin America before.
It was really when he got into the White House—well, we were there a very short time when he made his Alliance speech.
I went to an orphanage and there was a picture in the paper that evening.
And the headline was—you know, it was very complimentary, it said, ""We love Mrs.
And that just hurt Jack so for them and he said, you know, ""Look at those people.
Well, I didn't go to Berlin, you see, because I was having John—Patrick.
Well, Vienna“2 was incredible in that it was miles in from the airport and back, and it was a dark, gray day.
And just to see those crowds going on for twenty-five miles mostly weeping and waving handkerchiefs.
He had an extraordinary sympathy for Latin America, the problems of Latin America which was, which they had, which they got and it— And he liked the Latins, too.
He was this thoughtful—he almost seemed—not German, but Nordic in his sadness.
When he came here to the hospital and I went to see him, nothing was ever in the papers about it.
And he said yes, he's done all that, working for the Alliance, and he said he'd help again.
We should just—if de Gaulle and everyone want to have their own little thing—but really, we should turn to this hemisphere.
JACQUELINE KENNEDY VISITS MEXICO Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston I think one of the greatest things he did was to restore a sense of this being a common hemisphere, which had gone out of the United States entirely since Roosevelt and the Good Neighbor policy.
And it's so shocking—he noticed it in Mexico, and I noticed it again—I remembered it before.
When we say America there, meaning our country, but America to them means both continents.
And, you know, you have to bite your lip a couple of times when you're talking about America.
And, well— The Kennedy name means more—it's the best asset we have in Latin America at the moment.
I wish, you know, I wish the new administration, for example, would ask Bobby to go down to Venezuela— They want—Venezuela asked especially for Bobby, and Lyndon Johnson wouldn't send him.
Did this just happen, or wait—to go to—for—because you know, to mark Betancourt, the first president of Venezuela who had served out his term.
No, but it will remind them what America—what North America is capable of, which would mean a lot.
At the same time that all the Cuban things were going, there was this problem of Laos.
Well, it just seems always there was Laos, Cuba, South Vi—you know, I remember Laos so well—and Berlin, but I can't remember which month was which.
Yeah, that was next year, I think, the year after the crisis was sort of simmering.
You know, there was always something like that about to blow up, and always Jack living with that and the pressure of being in the White House, and yet trying to live in an ordinary way and be what you should be for him when he came home.
You know, hear what he had to say, but not ask too many questions about something painful.
Well, usually, I was so good about not asking questions, but then with all those flames and Diem and everything,2° the only time I really did, I asked him something and it was at the end of the day.
And he said, ""Oh, my God, kid""—which was—it sounds funny but I got used to it—it was a sort of a term of endearment that I suppose his family used.
But he could make this conscious effort to turn from worry to relative insouciance.
So I decided it was better to live—you get enough by osmosis and reading the papers, and not ask, and live in—TI always thought there was one thing merciful about the White House which made up for the goldfish bowl and the Secret Service and all that was that it was kind of—you were hermetically sealed or there was something protective against the outside world.
You didn't realize, you didn't hear mean things people were saying about you until a lot later.
Everyone should be trying to help Jack in whatever way they could, and that was the way I could do it the best—you know, by being not a distraction—by making it always a climate of affection and comfort and detente when he came home.
And the people around that he—I would try to have people who'd divert him.
I mean, there were always people from Washington or something, but who wouldn't be—right on the subject that he'd thrashed about all day, and good food, and the children in good moods, and if you ever knew of someone who was in town or could get someone interesting, you know, try to do that.
Yeah, and a lot of times if I couldn't think of someone, or something, I'd call up Mrs.
A couple of times, you'd arrange a little dinner of six people and it might be a night where he wanted to go to bed.
So, I must say our last year was just one or two people all the time and then he'd decide when with Mrs.
And Stas had just told us before that Nkrumah had bought the biggest yacht in the Mediterranean that belonged to some shifty Greek friend of Stas's—the Radiant.
Terribly agreeable, and he was so—you could see he was so delighted to be in the family apartments and I think he saw the children.
So, I wrote him in my own hand and to be nice I said, ""Would you send me a picture of yourself because you were our first visitor""—foreign visitor.
So about two weeks later, the Ghana Ambassador in all his robes came wading in and gave me the picture, but you know, in the beginning, I liked Nkrumah.
The only person I met who you knew was a bandit before he came and turned out to be all you expected was Sukarno.
I think he sort of had all these little ways of doing something a little bit extra for people.
So one thing was to come up and either have a drink before lunch or tea, whatever it was, with me, up there.
And so I'd gotten these State Department briefing papers on Sukarno and it said that Mao Tse-tung had published his art collection, which meant an enormous amount to him.
Well, they got there about twenty minutes before he did, and I hardly had time to flip through them.
So I said you know, ""Mr —whatever you call him, President or Prime Minister""—I forget, but I knew—""we have your art collection here,"" and we started to look at the volume together, it was enormous.
Sukarno was in the middle—all three of us on the sofa, and Jack and I on each side.
And, you know, you just couldn't believe it, and I caught Jack's eye and we were trying not to laugh at each other.
I mean, you know, trying—it was so awful, but Sukarno was terribly happy and he'd say, ""This is my second wife, and this was""—But he was sort of —I don't know, he had sort of a lecherous look.
Anyone else you didn't like among the— I didn't like Adzhubei and—I didn't like him.
Oh, all right, it was very good what Jack did with him and Pierre arranged that, and the interview and everything.
Maybe he's very sensitive underneath, but he came in the room, and John came in the living room—at the Cape—came running out of the dining room or something, having escaped from Miss Shaw as usual, and Adzhubei said, ""Ah, here is your son.
In a few years he and my son will be shooting each other in a war,"" or something.
I mean, he had that same heavy-handed humor Khrushchev had, but I thought much worse.
I didn't really like Madame Khrushchev too much, and I hated the daughter that Khrushchev had in Vienna.
Dobrynin—Dobrynin asked Jack specially if I'd have his wife to lunch alone, and I did—but both of them have this really gamesmanship thing.
You know, she'd make little jokes which—she was very shy, but she seemed sensitive.
Because if you notice in Bill Walton's report that he wrote about Russia when he went there after Jack was dead, Adzhubei was really impressed that a doll Khrushchev had given Caroline was in her bedroom.
It was one of those things she loved to take apart on a little table by her bed, also with the Virgin Mary and things.
I mean, I got sick of all that, those little digs all the time, though she was very shy at the palace in Vienna where we had lunch.
For some reason, I outranked her because Jack was President and Khrushchev was just chairman of the whatever it is—so she wouldn't leave the room before I did.
So obviously, they're all shy underneath—I mean, have their little chips.
It's like sitting next to Abbott and Costello, or something, to get through that dinner.
Yes, but it's better than, I don't know, sitting next to Kekkonen of Finland and asking him how long he walks every morning before breakfast.
But then, you know, they had this ballet and all these swooping ballerinas in Schénbrunn would come swooping towards Jack and Khrushchev and me and Madame Khrushchev, and I said, ""They're all dancing.
They're all throwing their flowers""—and he said, ""No, no, it is your husband they are paying attention to.
And all—and Jack always said, ""You mustn't talk to these great men'""—I mean, Mrs.
Well, I'd just read The Sabres of Paradise by Lesley Blanch, which is all about the Ukraine in the nineteenth century, and the wars and things, and the dance.
And I said, ""Oh, Mr Chairman President, don't bore me with that, I think the romantic side is so much""—and then he'd laugh.
So, God knows what we were probably talking about— the czar, I don't know.
Oh, and then I knew that one of those dogs that had puppies—one of those space dogs—I knew all the names of those dogs—Strelka and Belka and Laika.
So I said, ""I see where—I see one of your space dogs has just had puppies.
And by God, we were back in Washington about two months later, and two absolutely sweating, ashen-faced Russians come staggering into the Oval Room with the ambassador carrying this poor terrified puppy who'd obviously never been out of a laboratory, with needles in every vein.
Oh, well, that time in Vienna there was no—remember what he said at the end of that—their conversation.
And he said that in really scared—then I think you'd seen just naked, brutal, ruthless power and—you know, then Khrushchev thought that— saw that perhaps he could—thought he could do what he wanted with Jack.
Khrushchev could be jolly, but underneath there's a— He was very tough there.
I think he'd gone there expecting to be depressed, but I think it was so much worse than he thought.
I mean, he hadn't gone there with any lovely illusions they could all work together.
But then I used to tell him, for some strange reason, I liked Gromyko's face.
Because one day —it was the funniest thing—I came out for a walk and there were he and Gromyko sitting in the Rose Garden.
Before we'd done it over, there was a tiny, little bench that—you know, two lovers could barely squish on to it.
And he and Gromyko were sitting there on that little love seat, talking.
And Jack told me later he wanted to get him out of the office and talk alone, and I walked by, so Jack called me over.
People say he looked like Nixon, but he had a nice smile when he smiled.
But then, you know, all the things he said to Jack before the second Cuba.
See, I can't remember what year, why they were seeing each other then, but I know—I think Gromyko must have come three times.
And you'd have to think—later on they got much better—but in the early days, you'd have to do so many things, I mean, just like you would for a dinner in your house now if you didn't have any help.
You had to see about the table and the flowers—I mean, sometimes Bunny Mellon and I would be there before—just before it was time to get dressed for dinner, doing the flowers.
And the food, and then we had to work out a way that it wouldn't come always cold from the kitchen.
You know, there's no pantry in the White House, the kitchen is below, and there used to be these endless waits.
And then the entertainment you'd have to work on and get a stage but—it was a lot of strain anticipating them and—I'd say the only one that really was hard going was the Japanese—Ikeda, who was, you know, a very nice man but neither he nor hardly anyone in his party spoke a word of English.
But I liked them—I liked Abboud of the Sudan, I did like Karamanlis, Madame Karamanlis especially.
The—yes—Jack had met him, what, right after in Key West and then in—he met him in London after Vienna.
But I know they'd corresponded ever since Jack was first in the White House.
But, yes, then we had lunch, just Sissy and David@ and Macmillan and Jack and I, which was so nice, and they—but it was such a happy atmosphere and they would stay in and talk.
And, oh, well, if you could see their letters, and—I'll show them to you someday because I can't do them all on the tape.
And how Jack went out of his way to send him some telegram when he resigned and tell David that it could be in all the papers—of all that he'd done for the West.
Just his face had that sort of suppressed mirth and his funny clothes and things, but, oh no, he was a— He was a sharp old customer— Yeah.
And I think—I had the impression the President was particularly impressed by his strong feeling about nuclear—about getting the nuclear thing under control.
I know he used to write eloquent letters about the horror of nuclear war.
That was one of the things he said—what Macmillan had done for the—Jack said, he really cared about the Western Alliance.
Jack would tell me some of the things they said with the men at dinner—you know, after lunch, that I don't think I should say on a tape, even.
One thing was, oh, people say that the younger generation have lost all hope living with this nuclear something.
Look at them, they're perfectly fine, they're twisting and—but, I don't know, just funny things.
So then, we may—the one time I was ever together with them was that time at lunch in the White House.
Jack had this high sense of mischief and so did Macmillan, so I've never seen two people enjoy each other so.
Obviously all of the important things they were talking about alone, but when it ended up with Sissy and David and us and him—you know, or going down to Adele Astaire Douglass's—who'd been married to a Cavendish.
Talk about a lot of family things, I guess, but always this wonderful humor underneath it all.
I always thought it was really British history that he patterned himself on more than ours.
I mean, that he read, he was always—well, I told you all the speeches —Burke's ""To the Electors of Bristol"" and Warren Hastings and you know, Charles James Fox.
Mostly through being sick and having read the classics and then the English people—and then that made him pick out what he thought was best in American thought and oratory.
So he had such an admiration for all—the last time we were in London together, I guess was '58, maybe—and had a dinner of all his old friends.
David Gore was the only one who ever amounted to anything and he was—Jack always used to say he was one of the brightest men he'd ever met in his life—he and Bundy, he used to say.
But you know, the others were, well, kind of defeatist or turned into nothing or—he wasn't like Joe Alsop, who dearly loves the lord and just gets so excited at the mention of anyone English.
Of all those young men who'd been his friends in '38 and '39—Hugh Fraser, Tony Rosslyn—2 Well, he was in the government, but it's a disappointed life.
He'd liked Kick and he'd written—you know, he'd gone to prison because he wouldn't fire on civilians in a town and that's where he wrote Now Barabbas.
JOE, KATHLEEN, AND JACK, LONDON, 1939 John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston You played the reluctant prime minister—2 Prime minister.
Well, Poor William he has about four children to support and he has to write too quickly.
Well, he'd meant that Alec Douglas-Home, a Scotsman, was now prime minister.
Yes, he—not as prime minister, but he'd been over as foreign secretary—they met I think he did like him—I mean, I know he didn't dislike him.
But, the first time I ever saw Alec Home was at Jack's funeral, and I liked him.
And the Agnellis®* had asked—we were going over to have dinner with them and then they took us before dinner to Onassis's yacht to meet Churchill.
Well, the poor man was really quite ga-ga then and a lot—you know, we all came on the boat together and he didn't quite know which one Jack was.
He started to talk to one of the other men there, thinking he was Jack, and saying, ""I knew your father so well,"" and this and that, and that was cleared up.
But of course, you know, he'd read everything he— He really had read practically everything of Churchill's.
I felt so sorry for Jack that evening because he was meeting his hero, only he met him too late.
All—think of all he could have—he was so hungry to talk to Churchill at last, or meet him and he just met Churchill when Churchill couldn't really say anything.
He'd take one private home because his mother's had an appendix or something and they'd start another weeping round.
The only two ambassadors he really disliked were that one, Grewe, and the Pakistan ambassador—Ahmed.
Well, the new one's named Ahmed, so, this was the Ahmed before this one.
Well, the Germans wanted reassurance all the time and it got to be a pain in the neck.
I remember everything about it, you know, getting off—and Vanier, the Governor General, is the most marvelous looking old man—and Madame—you know, white mustache, sort of like C Aubrey Smith.
And I rode in from the airport with her —that must be about fifty miles from the airport to Ottawa.
I was still very tired then and so I had to leave the receiving line that night and halfway through, and Jack was so sweet, rather protective, getting me out of there.
So before we went to Europe, I took a whole week off in the country so that I'd sleep and build up my strength and it was all right.
But everyone was saying that Ottawa was so cold and never gave receptions to—nice ones to anyone, and I guess, especially to America, or something.
And they really were—well, they seemed like terribly enthusiastic crowds and everyone was flabbergasted.
But—oh, we had lunch at Diefenbaker's house and he insisted on telling all these Churchill stories in accent and calling him ""old Winston"" or ""the old boy,"" or something.
Jack was campaigning in the Oregon—out in Oregon and I just met him at a reception at the French embassy and I guess I talked to him for about ten minutes.
I suppose he wasn't—I just—I told him how much Jack admired him and made up some completely— But I thought he was easy to talk to when we were in France.
Because I'd ask him things of history—or all the things I wanted to know, like who did Louis XVI's daughter marry, the Duke of Angouléme, did she have any children, and this or that.
Then he leaned across the table to Jack at lunch and said in French, ""Mrs.
But then you could ask de Gaulle so many things, again, not talking about the obvious.
I mean, I know he was interested in me and everything and impressed by Jack.
And I said, ""Head of the National Security Council""—I don't know if he knew what that meant—and I said he was the most brilliant young head of Harvard, so he leaned across and said something about Harvard in very halting French—you know, slow French, that you would say to someone who might not speak it.
You know, it was strike one for our side or—yeah—or first run for our side.
You know, he'd had all the gold, there was Napoleon's inkwell or something was in front of us and the tablecloth was—it had a lot of gold embroidery on it.
You know, in all the foreign state visits, it's different than here, the two men sit next to each other.
In other words, the head of state sits next to the other head of state.
Yeah, so it would go, from right to left, Madame de Gaulle, Jack, de Gaulle, and me.
And whenever you'd go to their dinners here, it would be done that way most of the time.
He knew de Gaulle had this thing about the West, so I guess there wasn't anything then—problem, but I think Jack knew it would come.
Oh, he asked de Gaulle about his relations with Churchill and Roosevelt.
And de Gaulle said—oh, gosh, will I get it?—'With Churchill we were—I was always in disagreement but we always reached an accord.
Or that's the gist of it—he said it so much better—and again, I didn't write that down.
No, I'd always—Nicole Alphand asked me what would I like to do in the French visit and you could see that anything you said, they'd turn the place upside down.
And you see how really protocol and ruthless the French are because, of course, about four days before we got there, both his sons were killed in an automobile crash.
And at the first reception that first night—at the Elysée—suddenly the doors open and these two black crows come in, their faces just all white and puffy from crying through the receiving—and all Malraux's tics going at once.
And I think it gave him, in a way—I don't know, I suppose it's good to have something to do after something like that happens.
They couldn't have that much time to see each other, but when Malraux came over here, they really did, and then they came out to the country, you know, for lunch.
And then Malraux came back for the Mona Lisa and again we had another evening of just us and then the Alphands.
But you know, it's funny, as we were walking from the dinner at Versailles to the theater I was first with de Gaulle, and Jack was behind with Madame de Gaulle and Malraux.
Or else he repeats—it's like being taken over this incredible obstacle course at ninety miles an hour.
But again, he's rather disillusioning because he sort of admires the simplest things.
I mean, that dinner at the White House, he—well, his most impressive moment was when they took the color—you know the color flags—the Honor Guard—downstairs.
Oh, Irwin Shaw told me his greatest moment in life was when he was head of a brigade or something, in the Maquis.
And he worships de Gaulle like, I don't know, some cocker spaniel adores its master.
I mean, he seems to have this incredible intellect and then certain sort of blind spots.
No, I didn't see them together very much, but you know, he was de Gaulle's lieutenant all through those years.
Oh, de Gaulle—well, de Gaulle was rather grand with him, especially as I wanted to talk to him—he was always sort of leading you away.
You know, in public he's very—he treats him like some servant, like Nehru treats the man who sleeps outside his door, or something.
I know the President wanted to do something for Jim, who certainly is a fine man.
Yeah, he thought they'd like him because of the war, but then I know he was rather disappointed when Gavin's cables would come back.
This is the same sort of thing that he did about Allen Dulles and the Wrightsmans.
She could only have a hundred and two and I think she was up to ninety-nine or something—Jack put Dick Goodwin on the list because he wanted to show how much he thought of him.
He said, ""But there was Gavin, who was the most pro—de Gaulle ambassador they ever had.
And then— amused and sort of irritated the way, you know, Hervé has that phobia about protocol.
And every time we'd see David Gore or Caroline would go to play with Alice Ormsby-Gore, or something, you'd hear Hervé moaning all around Washington.
That he was a Gemini and Jack—it was just after Jack's birthday—and Jack was a Gemini.
The whole Berlin business, of course, involved constant relations with the Germans.
As I said before, he tried so hard not to bring problems that irritated him all day home.
For himself really more than me, but that was one thing that he—that just irritated him so and he'd say, ""What do you have to do to show the Germans that you care?""—that we would defend Berlin.
And then it would always—it just seemed the least tiny thing could happen—some colonel drop his hat on the Autobahn and it would give—Adenauer would start flaming up all over again, and saying that we were going to pull out, and the ambassador here, Grewe, would come running in.
That because we jumped in to take care of Cuba, it showed we only were interested in the things nearer our shores and not over there.
Well, when you think of it, it wasn't until after his visit to Berlin in June '63 that he finally did convince them.
The Germans were always doing that, leaking to the press both in Germany and in Washington, little things of lack of confidence.
But I can remember the Berlin crisis, just sort of coming all through that—I guess was it the— It was constant really from the middle of—summer of 1962 until the Cuban crisis.
It began the summer of Vienna and it went from there until the Cuban crisis, really, in November '62.
He made the speech calling for an enlargement of the military, of the defense budget.
But you could see after that Khrushchev meeting, I mean, he was really in a gloom, which he wouldn't talk about, but you could just tell by a sort of—a certain quietness and lowness.
And so this mounting thing—and then, when he was going to go on television to speak of Berlin, all the tension and everything around the White House.
And I can remember again him march—and scribbling on the pages and, you know, for a few days before.
But then I thought, ""No, that might make him more nervous,"" or ""People would start taking pictures, or something.
And, well, that was one of the grimmest speeches I've ever seen him make.
And you just couldn't believe that you were sitting there thinking that, well, you really might have to go to war.
And then— Grimmest speech except, of course, for the Cuban Missile speech.
That was sort of the first one, so it almost frightened me more because by the time of the missile crisis—of course, you were scared all through it, but, you know, Berlin was the first one and then it did turn out all right.
Yes, Berlin was the—really the big thing in the summer and fall of '61, and then as a result of our reaction, you remember, Khrushchev then extended the deadline and so— That's right.
No, it's—is it ""You don't have friends or allies, you have colleagues""—well, you can look it up.
So, you know, his relationships always changed and he never made it hard for anyone to come back and be forgiven or, you know, go on in a new relationship with him.
And somehow, that was the quality which we should all be the most grateful for.
Yes, it was a marvelous thing this—to leave a way for your opponent to retreat and preserve his dignity.
And if you wanted lots of popularity in the newspapers or something, you'd go around shouting things about ""No one's going to tell him to say this to America,"" and then you'd just be, everybody'd be shooting before you knew it.
So, it's that side of him which—it was always so easy when you were married.
I mean, a little tiny thing might come up that would cloud—but you never really had a fight, but I might say something that would sort of hurt his feelings and there'd be a certain quietness that day.
He never would hold, or make you really—that just ran all through his personality.
And you know, Bobby's getting it—and it was a side of Bobby that's lacking a bit which he's developing much more now and which since November he's spoken to me so much about Jack, the side that he admired in him so much.
It was really easier for Jack to be that way when he had Bobby doing a lot of the things.
As the Berlin thing was dying down in November, Nehru came and made his visit Yes, and—that was a rather nerve-wracking visit.
And Galbraith kept saying Nehru wanted no fuss, and everything private.
So Jack sort of was wondering whether Galbraith's advice was quite right because he thought Nehru would like a lot more pomp.
Well, Hyannis just seemed a little too depressing, so we went to Newport and we met him at—whatever that air force base is there.
And Jack had had a most unsatisfactory time with Nehru when he'd been a congressman in India.
And Jack said he'd been there about ten minutes when Nehru started to look up at the ceiling.
So, anyway, they came and it was decided the men would eat in the dining room.
Gandhiand I would have a little ladies' lunch in the living room—and Lem Billings was with us.
And Jack brought Nehru back on the Honey Fitz and Caroline and I were waiting for him at the front door, which she'd picked a little flower for him and made a curtsey.
And then we went and had a drink before lunch and Nehru never said one word.
Just that real Hindu thing—you learn it in India, that they don't look on social gatherings as a time to speak.
I don't know if they're contemplating—but I also say it's just damned spoiled brattishness because you should make an effort when other people are trying.
So anyway, they had their lunch, and I don't know what they talked about.
And then we all went back in the helicopter, Nehru in the best seat, Caroline on Jack's lap next to him, back to Washington.
And I think it was when—anyway, it was the first dinner of that fall in the White House.
And of course, somebody hadn't opened the flue of the fireplace, so when we came back in that room the smoke was just so thick and everyone's eyes were pouring.
And it was meant to be, as you remember, a rather small dinner, but yet it wasn't quite small enough or big enough because we were in the State Dining Room, and just enough of us so that it was rather like sitting in a church with not enough people there.
My sister was there and I so badly wanted her to sit next to Nehru, who should have sat next to Lady Bird.
Which just shows one more thoughtfulness that Jack always had for his vice president.
Well, Nehru does sort of like pretty women in the most unlecherous way.
But it's just the only—he sort of talked between Lee and I, and you could get him to say something about something and make a little joke.
Well, we got sort of, to be a little bit friends in Newport, and then the helicopter and the plane.
So they'd obviously cared about the trip and had this chip on their shoulder, I don't know.
And then the next night there was a big dinner at the Indian embassy and again I sat next to Nehru.
I found him very easy and charming, you know, and he seemed to so like to have someone make a—you know, I always felt that he liked me.
I think the meetings got absolutely nowhere and there was an awful lot of tapping the fingers and looking up at the ceiling.
Well, it was just someone so different than— THE KENNEDYS AND PRIME MINISTER JAWAHARLAL NEHRU AT THE INDIAN EMBASSY, NOVEMBER 9, 1961 Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston I think the generational thing played its part here.
I think he must—I'm sure he— infinitely—was infinitely pleased that a man like Jack Kennedy was President of the United States, but on the other hand, a young, brilliant man half his age was bound to make him feel uncomfortable.
Gandhi, his daughter, who's one of those women who when marriage and love and all those things don't turn out right, it's as if something— It all goes back inside you and the poison works inside like an ulcer, so she's a truly bitter woman.
You can name so many violently liberal women in politics who were always suspicious of Jack.
And I thought one reason— this is just my own sort of psychology—but that Jack so obviously demanded from a woman—a relationship between a man and a woman where a man would be the leader and a woman would be his wife and look up to him as a man.
With Adlai you could have another relationship where—you know, he'd sort of be sweet and you could talk, but you wouldn't ever—wouldn't ever come down to a definite thing.
I always thought women who were scared of sex loved Adlai— because there would never be the— The challenge wasn't there at all.
Not that there'd be the challenge with Jack but it was a different kind of man.
So, you know, all these sort of twisted, poor little women whose lives hadn't worked out could find a balm in Adlai.
He was very upset—when you came out for him, then a day or so later Marian came out for Adlai Stevenson—and he couldn't understand why because he'd—I think he'd just been down to lunch the day or so before, or a week before, and had a very nice time.
And then later on when we were all in the White House together, then he—loved her and saw that she didn't really dislike him.
And I could never conceive of not voting for whoever my husband was for.
So that was just so strange because that was—I mean, it was really a rather terribly Victorian or Asiatic relationship which we had, which I had— Yeah, a Japanese wife.
Hutheesing—I guess she's the rather right-wing one who lives in Bombay, but she's great fun.
So that visit—I mean, nothing profound was talked about or even that we were going to Pakistan next, but, you know, it was a relaxation for him—the kind of thing I'd try to bring into Jack's life in our evenings at home.
He wouldn't have this kind of vacant, passive— Well, never lively, but sort of gentle and he would talk and he has those great brown eyes.
I'd read all his autobiography and I'd ask him about some of those, you know, times—and he talked.
About his own past and— Well, I asked him about the times in prison, and everything—his life.
He always was so—lI've written it all down somewhere, everything we talked about, so maybe I can find it.
I can remember him being so worried at the time about our resuming, and how long you should—you could possibly put it off and then everyone—I mean, that was a terrible time for him.
There was nothing that worried him more through—would it be '61 and '62?—than all this testing.
Because I can remember when David Gore came to Hyannis the fall we were married—would be October or November 1953—and he was doing something at the UN on disarmament and he and Jack were talking.
And you know, it was the first time I'd ever heard—it seemed so extraordinary—you never saw it in newspapers here.
And I remember then—from then on, Jack started to say in his speeches that it was a disgrace that there were less than a hundred people working on disarmament in Washington—or less than ten, maybe.
But he said that in all—and I think he said it all through his Senate campaign.
And in a way, then David Gore came back again—in maybe '58 or—yes, or '57 —TI don't know what year he and Sissy came to the Cape.
But he said this nuclear disarmament thing—he just cared about that for so long.
So that's what I tried—and then he sent him this touching telegram and I remember poor Macmillan then.
And that's what I tried to put in when I talked to him on Telstar22 just last week on Jack's—what would have been his forty-seventh birthday.
I have the impression that we would not have had a test ban treaty if both the President and the prime minister had not been so deeply committed and forced the issue so constantly on their advisers.
I know that's true, and I also think having David Gore here at the time made it— Indispensable, yes.
Sometimes—well, we can go into that relationship at another time, but so many things happened.
He would come for dinner, and something awful would be going wrong in British Guiana or somewhere, and he would—all the time of Skybolt he was with us—and he would call and everything would be kept smooth.
But what I just wanted to say about—I was thinking when I thought of Jack and Macmillan really making this test ban thing possible—of just how outrageous of de Gaulle.
Of the one thing that really matters and that egomaniac not to be associated with that when that's going to be the one thing that matters in this whole century.
And then Graham Sutherland, who's a painter, who I saw a couple of weeks ago about doing a picture of Jack—but he said something to me so interesting.
He said, ""The extraordinary thing about President Kennedy was that power made him a better man,"" and he said it made so many people worse men.
He said Winston, you know, became less nice—and of course, it made Adenauer meaner.
Well, it made—Jack a chance to work for good and I really think Harold Macmillan too.
This again was one of those prolonged things that kept dragging on for a long time.
I remember I used to feel sorry for him—just sitting in Geneva all his life— because I'd been in that depressing city.
But I don't remember hearing him say he was disappointed with anyone or—I remember him saying wonderful things about Harriman— Yes.
When Harriman came in at the end it was a—I think the Russians feel that when Harriman is sent to negotiate that the United States means business, and that that was absolutely necessary to—*2 And it was very touching, Jack's relationship with Harriman, because, of course there were all these young men around, and here was this man who went back so many administrations.
And there'd been something in Teddy White's book, a little footnote, about Averell Harriman, saying that he had done all these extraordinary things in foreign policy, but that domestically everything he'd done was disastrous.
And I remember Jack feeling sort of sorry for him when he read that part of the book and feeling so happy that this crowning thing came at the end for Averell Harriman.
In— I gave him a copy of the test ban treaty which the Archives° did especially for me—you can't tell it from the original—when we left his house after he lent it to us after November.
It was in that winter that—in that fall and winter—that Hickory Hill began and in the winter of '62, there was a meeting at the White House which David Donald, who is a professor at Princeton, spoke about the Civil War22 I wasn't there, but the President mentioned it to me later.
Yes, those seminars that Bobby did—vwell, Jack always wanted to go to them but he just wanted to go to hear you.
I mean, would he be judged as great—because he would have had this almost insoluble problem of the Reconstruction, which, you know, either way you did it would have dissatisfied so many people.
And Donald, really by going round and round, had agreed with him that Lincoln, you know, it was better—was better for Lincoln that he died when he did.
I mean, it's so strange, these things that come back, because he saw then that he would be—you know, he said, it will never top this.
The first year I was married, I took a course in American history at the Georgetown School of Foreign Service from Professor Jules Davids, who was this brilliant man.
And I'd never taken American history and I used to come home full of these things and I was so excited—Thaddeus Stevens and the radical Republicans, I can remember.
And then when he was doing Profiles in Courage, I told him how great Davids was, and he had him do some research on it.
So at that time, we would talk a lot about Lincoln and the Reconstruction, and, you know, if he lived and that—and that was back when we were mairied was '53, '54, and then his book was '54—'55—so we talked about it years before.
There was another Hickory Hill meeting at the White House—Isaiah Berlin.
Yeah, well, Jack loved that and he loved to just listen to Isaiah Berlin.
I mean, that was the side—you should read this article in Show magazine now, which I think is quite unfair in its judgment of Jack but it starts from the premise that Melbourne was his favorite book and says what he really was most like were these great Whig houses and Whig liberal families who, you know, had everything and lived a stimulating life, yet cared.
He used to tell me about going to Emerald Cunard's*2 when he was a boy in London with his father to listen.
When we were in London together, we'd go to the old Duchess of Devonshire's for lunch and she'd have a couple of people around.
I have the impression he talked with greater—more intimately with David than with any member of the— Yeah. —of his own cabinet.
And if I could think of anyone now who could save the Western world, it would be David Gore.
But—well, they started as friends obviously in London, and Kathleen, who was Jack's favorite sister, was Sissy's best friend.
I mean, so many of them ended up with rather sad lives, or this or that.
Hugh Fraser was sort of a friend, but not very bright, and you'd always wonder if Hugh would get a job in some government and he never did, or it was a pathetic one.
But whenever David was here, we'd see him and Jack used to say that David Gore was the brightest man he'd ever met.
But he'd say that David more so than Bundy because Bundy's intelligence is almost so—it's so highly tuned that he couldn't often see the larger thing around him.
David has more wisdom, I think, than—Mac is a brilliantly intelligent man but David's judgment is more— And David has also the conciliatory sort of side that Jack did.
You know, Bundy can get mad and then sort of arrogant and then make conciliation impossible.
And Bundy in the missile crisis, when you think of that great mind, in the beginning he wanted to go in and bomb Cuba.
They would stay with us, usually on vacations, or they'd come for a weekend to Camp David, or the country, or the Cape.
We used to do it rather spontaneously, and of course they'd be involved in something official and then they'd get out of it, so I thought I just can't do that to them.
And David would tell you sometimes of the extraordinary places he'd been when he was ferreted out to talk to Jack.
And then this Skybolt thing—after Nassau,“2 David came back to Florida with us and, of course, the next day the whole thing blew up.
And they called Gilpatric, and McNamara was away and then David went into another room and called Harold Macmillan.
But you know, that closeness kept—well, I mean, everything could have blown apart between England and America then.
So many of the others I can't bear to see because I miss—Jack's lacking.
Anyway— Well, David is one of the—sort of intellectually and emotionally he's a rich person, and a generous one, and— And he's not—ambitious.
I always kept hoping he'd give up his title and be prime minister one day, but I think he'll be foreign secretary.
Well, I've been after him too to try to get him to give up his title, but it's clear that he's probably not—not going to do it.
He thinks if he does this it will signal the fact that he wants to be prime minister, which he thinks is an absurd thing for him to want to be.
I mean, he was really—what Roger Blough did to him He felt that Roger Blough had double-crossed him.
Bobby said to me later that if we'd known the people like André Meyer or something, or had more friends in that community, perhaps it could have all been arranged with less bitterness.
But then I can remember that it was back and forth between his office and the White House and calling everyone and getting—Clark Clifford was the one person they found who they thought the others would trust—and sending him up to negotiate and which person would back out.
Or whichever company first broke, and he was at the Library dinner for Jack.
Oh, and then I remember Bobby saying to me later, November, that—Remember how it said in the press that the FBI got sent into everybody's home at night or something—the reporters— Woke up reporters at two in the morning.
Bobby was talking about how awful J Edgar Hoover's been since Jack died and the way he curries favor with Lyndon Johnson by sending him all these awful reports about everyone.
Bobby said that he'd always, you know, tried to deal so nicely with Hoover and whenever anything—anything the FBI ever did well, it was fine with him if Hoover took credit for it and anything the FBI ever did badly, you know, Bobby would take credit for it.
Sort of sounds like— I mean, I can't remember who they wrote up, or what reporter they would be waking up right now.
Arthur Goldberg played an active role in this steel thing and Ted Sorensen, I suppose, I imagine.
But the President was really— It seems to me mostly Jack on the phone and Clark Clifford.
I think just after Roger Blough came in his office and told him that—you know, a flare.
And as I say, the second closest thing I've seen to it is sometimes after the Germans have done one more damn irritating but relatively minor thing.
And then it changed from madness—I mean, all the time he was acting in the crisis, he wasn't acting out of madness and temper.
Then it was just trying to see how you could—then he was working it like a chess board.
Was he mad then or was he more— I suppose he was less—he felt betrayed by Blough.
He had no reason, I guess, to expect Barnett to act differently from the way he did.
You wouldn't realize what it had been like and I guess when, you know, the tear gas started to run out and the troops that were meant to get there in an hour were still four hours away.
Did he ever mention— Well, I don't think—I don't know what he—well, I do know what he thought of him later.
Well, he said what an incredible speaker he was during that freedom march thing and—and he acknowledged that having made that call during the campaign got them—Then he told me of a tape that the FBI had of Martin Luther King when he was here for the freedom march.
And he said this with no bitterness or anything, how he was calling up all these girls and arranging for a party of men and women, I mean, sort of an orgy in the hotel, and everything.
At first he said, oh, well, you know—and I said, ""Oh, but Jack, that's so terrible.
No, this wasn't— this was when it was just one girl, they had the conversation.
And Jack said, ""Oh, well""—you know, he would never judge anyone in any sort of way—oh, well, you know—he never really said anything against Martin Luther King.
Since then, Bobby's told me of the tapes of these orgies they have and how Martin Luther King made fun of Jack's funeral.
And things about they almost dropped the coffin and—well, I mean Martin Luther King is really a tricky person.
But I wouldn't know—he never said anything against Martin Luther King to me, so I don't know.
Bobby would be the one to find out what he ever really thought of him in that way.
I just can't see a picture of Martin Luther King without thinking, you know, that man's terrible.
That he'd done something down there and made some speech which had just caused infinitely more trouble, and then got all the South mad or something and then Lyndon was trying to make the—I don't know who —like him.
I can't remember if people knew about missiles when Jack went away on that speaking trip.
He went over the—the news arrived on a Tuesday and then the small—very small group knew.
And he went away, remember, on the Thursday or Friday—on the Friday—and then came back on the Saturday, and then gave his speech on the Monday following.
And you'd just sort of gotten there, and I was lying in the sun and it was so nice to be there, and this call came through from Jack and he said, ""I'm coming back to Washington this afternoon.
But there was just something funny in his voice and he never asked me to do—I mean, he knew that those weekends—and away from the tension of the White House—were so good for me, and he'd encourage you to do it.
It was just so unlike him, having known you'd just gotten down there with two rather whiny children, who you'd have to wake up from their naps and get back.
But I could tell from his voice something was wrong, so I didn't even ask.
So you woke them up from their naps and we got back there, I suppose, around six or something.
But I just knew, whenever he asks, or I thought whenever you're married to someone and they ask something—yeah, that's the whole point of being married—you just must sense trouble in their voice and mustn't ask why.
But from then on, it seemed there was no waking or sleeping, and I just don't know which day was which.
But I know that Jack—oh, he'd said something—I know he told me right away and some people had said for their wives to go away and Mrs.
Phyllis Dillon told me later that Douglas had taken her for a walk and told her what was happening, and suggested she go to Hobe Sound or somewhere.
And I remember saying—well, I knew if anything happened, we'd all be evacuated to Camp David or something.
I don't think he—but I said, ""Please don't send me away to Camp David""—you know, me and the children.
And, you know—and I said, ""Even if there's not room in the bomb shelter in the White House""—which I'd seen.
It was so much going on and then the thing—and then as the time went on, it turned out—well, you know—oh, the awful fluke of a couple of days.
And then McCone, when—McCone had just gotten married again and had gone off on a honeymoon.
Then he'd stopped—all—there was something rather tricky there that, him being out of town on his honeymoon, didn't order another flight or didn't something, so you would have known a couple of days sooner.
There's something there where McCone, who was—I don't know whether to blame McCone—I mean, he could have postponed his honeymoon a bit, or whether it was just a hapless accident, but that was responsible for a delay.
Well then, as I say, there was no day or night because I can remember one night, Jack was lying on his bed in his room, and it was really late, and I came in in my nightgown.
And suddenly, I saw him waving me away —Get out, get out!—I'd already run over to his bed, and it was because Bundy was in the room.
Well, then I got out of the room and waited for Jack in my room, and whether he came to bed at two, three, four, I don't know.
And then another night, I remember Bundy at the foot of both of our beds, you know, waking Jack up for something.
And Jack would go into his own room and then talk on the phone maybe until, say, from five to six to seven.
And then he might come back and sleep for two hours and go to his office, or—as I say, there was no day or night.
And, well, that's the time I've been the closest to him, and I never left the house or saw the children, and when he came home, if it was for sleep or for a nap, I would sleep with him.
And I'd walk by his office all the time, and sometimes he would take me out—it was funny—for a walk around the lawn, a couple of times.
And then I remember another morning—it must have been a weekend morning—when all—there was a meeting in the Oval Room and everybody had come in one car so that the press wouldn't get suspicious.
And so, you know, and I was there—so—and then I went in the Treaty Room, where I—well, just to fiddle through some mail or something, but I could hear them talking through the door.
No—McNamara summing up something and then Gilpatric giving some summary and then a lot of ques—and then I thought, well, I mustn't listen, and I went away.
I mean, you mentioned Mac Bundy's— Well, that I all knew later and that was never told to me until much, much later.
And the thing was—no, at the time, you know, at the time he—well, it was just so—he really wasn't sort of asking me.
But then I remember he did tell me about this crazy telegram that came through from Khrushchev one night.
I guess he'd sent the nice one first where he looked like he would—Khrushchev had—where he might dismantle, and then this crazy one came through in the middle of the night.
Well, I remember Jack being really upset about that and telling me and then deciding that they would just answer the first, and being in on that.
How he'd seen Gromyko and he talked to him and everything they'd said and that he really wanted to put Gromyko on the line of just lying to him and never giving anything away.
Oh, my God, you know, then the Russians might have thought we were sending it in, and that could have just been awful.
And then I remember when the blockade— oh, and then I remember hearing how Anderson at the Pentagon was mad at McNamara, wouldn't let—I don't know if that was afterwards or before—but all that thing.
The only thing I can think of what it was like, it was like an election night waiting, but much worse.
But one ship was coming and some big fat freighter had turned back, but it didn't have anything but oil on it anyway—and all these ships cruising forward.
And I can't remember—the day finally when it was over and saying to me—and Bundy saying to me either then or later, that if it had just gone on maybe two more days, everybody really would have cracked, because all those men had been awake night and day.
And you just thought—and then I wrote a letter to McNamara afterwards, which I showed to Jack.
But he always—you didn't worry about him and fatigue because you'd seen him driving himself so much all his life—I mean, through some awful campaign and the day that you're bone tired, getting up at five to be at a factory gate and still—So you knew he always would have some hidden reserve to draw on.
But, oh, boy, toward the end—you always think—I always think that if you're told how much longer you have to go on, you can always make it.
And finally, when it was over, I mean, I don't know how many days or weeks later it was, but he thought of giving that calendar to everyone.
HE PRESENTED HIS WIFE WITH THIS CALENDAR, SEEN HERE ON HER DESK IN THE WHITE HOUSE FAMILY QUARTERS Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston What about— And then it was a surprise.
I didn't—I was so surprised when I got one because he told me he wanted to do it so he said, you know, ""Ask Tish or Tiffany,"" or something.
So I told her and then when they came, I was so surprised that I had one and I burst out crying.
I just remember when the article by Charlie Bartlett or something came out later.
I think he came either to the one at the end or the one at the beginning.
If he came at the one at the beginning, he didn't want to get involved with everything that was going on, or what I think is more like it, he came at the one at the end and didn't want to give any opinion.
And he could have come to all those meetings too, and he didn't come to one.
And Bobby said—I remember the first one, Bobby said to him— No, Chester wasn't in India but he wasn't involved in this.
And where he was going to say that he didn't disagree—that he didn't agree, and Bobby said, ""Everyone who leaves this room agrees,"" or something.
I mean, everybody had taken a whole series of positions on this and various people at various times had taken various positions and various things had been suggested that, as you mention the case of Mac, who was both— you know, one time he was a hawk and another time he was a dove.
And the thing was, there—two viewpoints existed, but I think, at one time or another, nearly everyone around that table had—took one or another of the viewpoints.
It much oversimplified the— Well, anyway, I mean, Jack was just upset over the flak of the article.
And Clayton® had told me that it would be so nice if we would ask Adlai to some of our private parties, that that could really make things up.
Well, anyway, that really made an awful difference to Adlai when I went to lunch at the UN and I gave him a little watercolor that I'd done.
I'd done it—Jack and I were just sitting there one night—of a Sphinx I have, and I just had it in my briefcase.
I mean, you had to do things to sort of soothe his feelings because he—but that did smooth over very nicely, finally.
The difference between Jack and Lyndon Johnson, and where it's really going to make a difference in this country, is now there's a terrible crisis going on in Laos but nobody really knows it, except in the papers.
He's running all around Texas, getting high school and college degrees.
Dave Powers” says he can't bear to go to Camp David or anyplace he's alone, that now he has beach chairs around the pool, and on weekends, he likes to sit in the pool and they have drinks there —and all his cronies.
But he can't bear ever to be alone and face something awful, or discuss with these people.
And that man came in—there wasn't a problem for seven months, which Jack had made possible.
And I guess it's very good for the country that he could go around and make this air of good feeling and lull so many people into this sense of security, which they wanted after all the tragedy of November.
But you know, a president has to be—I mean, that's where the terrible things are going to happen, because every little group is off, you know, having their own different meetings on Laos and they're not think—on Vietnam—and they're not thinking of—I mean, Jack always said the political thing there was more important than the military and nobody's thinking of that.
It was just in front of—this is off the track, talking about Lyndon, and people will think I'm bitter, but I'm not so bitter now.
But I just wanted it to be put in context the kind of president Jack was and the kind Lyndon is.
Stupid old Harold Stassen2 said last weekend—and then if only someone else had said it, because it's rather a true thought—that Johnson would be like Harding, and it would be another era of good feeling, and business liked Harding and the senators liked Harding, and he didn't keep too much sort of tabs on the people who worked under him, so they could sort of be a bit corrupt here and there, which again— and then look what happened.
Lyndon can ride on some of the great things Jack did, and a lot of them will go forward because they can't be stopped—civil rights, the tax bill, the gold drain stuff.
And maybe you'll do something more about the Alliance and everything, but when something really crisis happens, that's when they're going to miss Jack.
It was so funny because Jack, thinking of being vice president and how awful it would be, gave Lyndon so many things to do.
I mean, he could have made his council on human rights4 or whatever it was into some— you know, gone ahead with it—equal opportunity, whatever it was.
He just never wanted to make any decision or do anything that would put him in any position.
And he never liked—Jack would say you could never get an opinion out of Lyndon at any cabinet or national security meeting.
He'd just say, you know, that he agreed with them—with everyone—or just keep really quiet.
Or then he'd ask to go to Finland or something, and that would be fine.
And he'd bring back a lot of little glass birds with ""Lyndon"" written all over that he'd give out.
I mean, I think it's so pathetic when all you can find to do with a President who's dying to give you a lot to do, is take a state trip to Luxembourg and Belgium.
And I know in Greece, they told us after his visit there that you just wouldn't believe the confusion and the frenzy and what was demanded of people and how there had to be masseurs, and the pandemonium, and it was so much more than any presidential visit those people had ever seen.
Godfrey McHugh had tried in the beginning to make Jack order four new Air Force Ones—707s—because we needed the one that could be the fastest.
And Jack wasn't going to spend that much money for four new planes, and Lyndon kept pushing him to do that.
You know, Lyndon wanted a big—and then when Jack did get Air Force One, I think—I don't know if Lyndon had an Air Force One just like it or one of the older planes, but he always kept pushing for a bigger plane.
And—or for more—all the kind of things like that he wanted, the panoply that goes with power, but none of the responsibility.
Once we were in Florida in the middle of his rest and vacation, and if Lyndon would've come to report, it would have to be in the middle of the night, which wasn't great for Jack, and he thought it would be awful for Lyndon.
But he'd say, ""Find out if he'd like to or not,"" and Lyndon would always like to.
So he'd always be flown down in a special jet and the press would all be alerted.
And he'd come over, and of course, there'd be absolutely nothing to talk about, but it would look as if, you know— So that's the kind of vice president he was.
No, Jack used to say— Then once he wasn't majority leader anymore, he'd either think—either Jack thought this or Lyndon thought this—but he wouldn't do anything with Congress.
And Jack used to say more times, just amused—I told you, to Ben Bradlee—""My God, Mansfield gets more accomplished""—and you know, it was really Larry O'Brien and Mansfield.
And he said, ""He's done more,"" and he said—The thing is, Lyndon snowed everyone so much.
And then Ben was needling him, saying, ""But you're not going to get the tax bill by and the civil rights bill by this year, as you've said.
And the civil rights he predicted exactly—everything that would happen as the date.
And Mansfield, he just thought, was extraordinary and that nobody recognized it because the man played quietly.
The story has been printed to the effect that there was some consideration of dropping Johnson in '64.
I mean, stories would come out about '64, but I don't see how you could drop him in '64.
Well, first place, I thought Lyndon would be too old then to run for president.
I mean, he didn't like that idea that Lyndon would go on and be president because he was wotried for the country.
Of course, it was so dominated by the—overshadowed by the Cuban crisis.
At the beginning, he planned a rather short campaign and then made a longer one.
And sometimes, I'd wander out of my room in my dressing gown and all those men would come out in clouds of smoke.
Sometimes they'd be, and then later on they were in the Family Dining Room.
The first one, all the antique chairs that Harry du Pont had, broke one by one.
What did he say about— Well, he loved Mansfield and Dirksen was always very nice with him.
I don't know, I guess he was really, was very sad when Sam Rayburn died.
One of the great mysteries around the White House was the— I know one thing about the legislative breakfasts that Larry O'Brien told me.
Larry couldn't stand Ted Sorensen, so one night he was telling me—well, they were obviously—the Irishmen would be jealous of the Sorensens—but he said so many times Larry would have prepared an agenda for the breakfasts and just before they were about to start Ted would ask to see it and take it.
And he'd just change one or two sentences and then initial it ""TCS"" and pass it all around that way.
I told you about the Profiles in Courage thing, and well, I mean, he was doing it to Larry O'Brien, everyone.
To— Someone said he loved himself and finally he loved one other person, which was Jack.
I can remember when he first started to try to speak like him or dare to call him Jack, and he'd sort of blush.
The sort of civilized side of Jack, or be easy at dinners or if girls like you, and men.
Because he knew he wasn't quite that way in the beginning, it almost went into a sort of a resentment.
I mean, it was very mixed-up in his own inferior—he had a big inferiority complex, so you can see the thing sort of all working back and forth, but—and I never saw him very much in the White House.
But that wouldn't have been—I mean, as he and Ted had the problems all day, that would be the last person you would invite at night.
One thing that mystified people over in the West Wing was the way George Smathers survived.
His friendship with Smathers was before the Senate, really, and before he was—I mean, in the Senate and before he was married.
And I guess they'd see each other a bit, off and on in the summer or in—you know, Stockdale was a friend of Smathers.
And it was really a friend of one side of Jack—a rather, I always thought, sort of a crude side.
I mean, not that Jack had the crude side, but you could laugh or hear a story—you know, the kind of stories sort of Smathers tells—I don't know, but he didn't want to stick it to someone who'd once been a friend.
And he knew when Smathers was hurting him, and he knew Smathers— Kenny hated Smathers.
And he was hurt by him and he wouldn't—he didn't see him as much and everything personally but he just wouldn't ever—finally say, ""O.K.—you're out—now we're enemies,"" because he was just too kind.
Joe Kraft said that someone who had been at that house got so frightened and was so, you know, rocked by seeing Johnson in his cups at four in the morning, saying he doubted if he had the equipment to be a president.
And the—he didn't have that funny, sort of droopy look he used to have.
He looked very—when I saw him—he looked very sort of spruce and chipper.
And he looked like he'd just come in from the country and he looked— Well, I hope things are looking up for him because he really— Well, he intervened in a by-election at Devizes and gave a speech and the Tories held that—astonishing—and he felt, I think, very cheerful about that, as if, politically— You know, in the Cuban crisis—I didn't say it in the tape, but I was so surprised that all these people that did go away whose husbands were working in it.
Was there a—it seems to me that your reaction is sort of the reaction you'd have to have.
The SEVENTH Conversation WEDNESDAY, JUNE 3 1964 We ended up last time talking about the Cuban crisis, and the next event of great interest was the problem with the British over Skybolt.
No, I don't think Macmillan did— Oh, David Ormsby-Gore came back and Randolph Churchill, but not Macmillan.
That was at Nassau. ww oe PRESIDENT KENNEDY AND PRIME MINISTER MACMILLAN IN NASSAU, DECEMBER 1962 Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston The—the meeting was at Nassau.
First, they met in Nassau because Jack told David to tell Macmillan he wouldn't meet in Bermuda again because there was no—in the governor general's house there was no hot water for the bath.
And then he got on the phone and tracked everyone down and Gilpatric said he didn't know, and McNamara was away.
Oh, he was just crushed because Nassau had gone so beautifully and Macmillan had—Macmillan was really in trouble at home, I guess, and whatever they'd worked out was Polaris—hadn't been quite what he wanted but together they'd both done the best they could to get something that would be all right for them.
And as he said, it's always some third person down the line somewhere whose fault it is.
It turns out on that thing, which he just explained to me briefly, it's Thorneycroft, who Jack always did think was stupid, doing some little thing and someone not being there when someone called, I don't know.
Yes, and concern, because it did weaken Macmillan's political position.
And I think the actual solution was worked out by the President and Mac Bundy and David on the plane down to Nassau.
And I remember Jack being really mad, either talking to me on the phone from Nassau or telling me before.
He hated Diefenbaker, and Diefenbaker had made some snotty condition that he had to come down there and have lunch with him one day, or something.
But, you know, they had a good time, always, he and Macmillan—I mean, sort of it was rather wry laughter.
You know, they always managed to have their jokes, even though they were tinged with despair a bit.
But Labour didn't want Skybolt either, so they weren't in a position to exploit it for themselves.
And then I remember Randolph Churchill, when Jack went to Washington, came over.
Yes, he came to Washington thereafter, and was very proud of the fact that he'd written the one pro-Nassau piece to appear in the British press.
Well, of course, he was always interested in him, but really it was more Churchill.
You know, that that man was just consumed really with grudges, and he'd explain of how he'd never forgotten the slights of the last world war, or practically, that we didn't come earlier into the first world war.
When everybody that he was dealing with then is dead, and everything, and he just—he was nice about it.
But he just seemed to have such distaste for someone who was so spiteful.
I remember he asked him, in Paris and he was very interested, who he got along with best—Churchill or Roosevelt.
And de Gaulle said, ""With Churchill I was always in disagreement but we always reached an accord.
With Roosevelt I was always in agreement but we never had an accord""—or some lovely little French wordplay—but, you know, so when de Gaulle did that, well, I wouldn't be surprised if Jack almost expected it.
He came for dinner one night alone, afterwards, and Jack said he purposely wasn't going to talk to him about all this—you know, France and England and everything, the kind of thing that Hervé was always so frantic about.
But—and later on that spring I had to answer a letter—or else it was about coming back from Morocco, when I'd said I wouldn't land in Paris, or something.
Don't you see you're the one avenue that's open, and they think I'm a so-and-so but they think you're nice because you like France.
And you must always leave an avenue open and you mustn't—"" Again that thing of conciliation always.
But he was just so—it was just so un-Christian of de Gaulle, and Jack gave so much and that spiteful man gave so little.
And I think he sort of saw that in the long run, de Gaulle would do all of this work for ""/a Gloire"" and everything, and he'd really be remembered as —well, the man who, with Castro and Red China, didn't sign the test ban treaty.
And, you know, Nehru's image really did change a lot in his last years because Nehru got to be awfully sanctimonious—I mean, the difference between Hungary and Goa and all of that.
You asked me about him and Nehru the other day—he had that sort of feeling about him.
So he thought that that was de Gaulle's horrible failure, and I don't think he did think much of him.
But no, you know, basically he didn't like the French, and I loathe the French.
There's not one French person I can think of except—maybe two very simple people.
Well, Malraux would talk brilliantly and so would Jack, and Bundy would always be there.
So, you know, it was a wonderful exchange, but Malraux sort of off in a marvelous fog or— It was very interesting and they never, you know, really got into policy or all that.
There was no point giving really Malraux any messages, but— But he wasn't astonished by de Gaulle then.
He rather expected that de Gaulle would have a headstrong— Well, maybe he was a little astonished in the beginning because he really tried hard and went over backwards.
But, well, maybe he was a little astonished, but then he got to see that it was this classic pattern and it just wasn't going to get any better.
And he was really irritated, I told you before, at what de Gaulle said after Cuba2 And that's another time that I think there was some sincere irritation that that proved we'd never defend Europe.
Yes, or it was going to be January, even, and it was going to be at Hyannis.
And Hervé always said, if only they could talk and meet the way Macmillan and Jack met—anywhere, you know, halfway, this and that, but do it a lot.
But for de Gaulle—he would want it to be some momentous meeting, and I think that meeting would have had terrific results in a way, or some results, and for finally de Gaulle to agree and all that— The President had some expectations a meeting with de Gaulle might ease things.
You know, de Gaulle respected Jack and the whole way his opinion changed of him in Paris.
And, you know, the way he'd speak to me of him during the endless dinners—we sat next to each—you could just see that he was—or, what he told me about him after his funeral, upstairs.
THE BURIAL OF PRESIDENT JOHN F KENNEDY Abbie Rowe, National Park Service/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston Well, I mean, that he just was one of these—you know, so impressive.
And maybe de Gaulle didn't like it sometimes, but he really looked up to him.
And then, apparently—Bobby told me this later—Bohlen4 or someone—tried to say that Johnson would be all right, he was the one Kennedy had chosen as vice president—you know, reassure him in the first days.
So he wouldn't have dared to—he never would have recognized Red China, I'm sure, if Jack had been alive.
Well, he always, in the very beginning, thought of Jean Monnet one of the first for the Medal of Freedom, and you know, so he thought he was a most wonderful man and that all that he worked and believed in, and everything.
He was very much for it but he was much less interested than a lot of the people in the State Department about the questions of structure and all this kind of thing.
And I think quite rightly so, because he knew if it came, it would come in its own way and you could get obsessed with the sort of tactical questions about it.
Yeah, he never seemed to be pressing it, or anything, but— I think he saw it as a historic inevitability.
Oh, if he'd only written these things down because I've forgotten them.
But what made de Gaulle veto the Common Market and what Macmillan had told him and how Macmillan had been out at Rambouillet about two weeks before.
And everything seemed to be fine and then there was some little thing here or there, some typically French thing of—like Hervé always being mad when he's not given precedence.
Well, something that some country or person did that irritated him and bang-o, he turned around and did the other.
Yeah, that he—that— That Macmillan told him at Nassau about Rambouillet.
Yes, but Macmillan at Rambouillet had not said anything to de Gaulle about the Nassau agreement, and de Gaulle believed—did not understand that the Nassau agreement was drawn up—that the Nassau plan was drawn up on the plane down to Nassau—and supposed that Macmillan had already known about it then, was holding out on him.
Because I heard somewhat that sort of thing from the French here—that Macmillan came to Rambouillet and held out on de Gaulle and, therefore, de Gaulle regarded that as a personal betrayal.
And that's why he suddenly did the Common Market, though at Rambouillet it had all looked wonderful.
I think that, in any case, he might have done it but not in that kind of contemptuous way that he —that he did it.
In fact, when I saw Fanfani, he reminded me that he first met the President at the Chicago convention in 1956.14 Well, he liked Fanfani.
You know, that was sort of the opening to the left and everything, I suppose—they got on well and—but I mean, he wasn't just, you know, inspired beyond belief by him.
I wasn't—Tito had a violent temperature when he saw him, so that was difficult.
I was still so terribly tired after John and I didn't really want to go on that trip.
So, once it was delayed, you just weren't up to it, or something was happening—I forget what.
And you wrote back and forth, and you tried to change it and he—and Ken would keep saying that the children at Mysore were weaving garlands, and this and that.
So finally, we cut it, with a map, to very small—you know, just mostly Rajasthan and around India.
And it was—we were in Florida, either Washington's Birthday, or Easter or something, I forget when we went—and Jack got through to Ken Galbraith, and Ken was really protesting on the phone, and he spent the whole last day of his little holiday there, shouting to Ken on a bad connection—you know, saying, ""It's too much for her,"" and, ""Ken, I don't care.
You know, I guess he—it was wonderful to go to India, and he didn't really care if I went or not, but I guess he thought it would be nice.
KENNEDY BEING PRESENTED WITH A HORSE BY PRESIDENT AYUB KHAN OF PAKISTAN Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston I think he was very pleased with it and very proud of the success and I think he thought that—well, as you mentioned yourself in connection with France, that quite apart from it's nice for you to get a holiday and get out of Washington, I think he helped—think it helped the country and it helped him in important respects.
You know, it was so funny, the difference between India and Pakistan, because India was really just getting to know Nehru, who did like Lee and I—Lee and me.
And when we got to Pakistan—of course, I basically like the Paks more than the Indians.
They're sort of more manly, and Ayub never stopped talking politics or how he hated Nehru or couldn't stand him.
And I did get a message from the State Department from Ken to make sure that it looked like McConaughy was an old friend of Jack's.
So the first thing I did when McConaughy and Ayub—McConaughy got there the day I did—the day before, as the ambassador.
So, I tried to sort of say—set it up that they'd known each other from when and everything.
And McConaughy said, ""Oh, no""—that's right in front of Ayub—""That's not true at all, Mrs.
The first time I ever met the President was two weeks ago when I gave —"" And the only time I ever wrote Jack a letter, which I wrote coming down from the Khyber Pass and gave him when I got home, was what a hopeless ambassador McConaughy was for Pakistan, and all the reasons and all the things I thought the ambassador there should be, which was a gentleman, a soldier, and a friend of the President's.
And that night McConaughy said to Ayub Khan, ""Mr President, I was so interested to hear all that French at the airport today.
And our trip was so exhausting that all through Pakistan, Lee and I were having nosebleeds every day and night.
Well, Ed Gullion, he'd always had a special feeling for, because when he was doing his Indochina speech, which was the year before we were married, because I'd had to type it all up from that summer —TI mean, translate all these French books and everything—Ed Gullion was the only person in the State Department who would sort of talk to Jack, and who would really say how awful Indochina was and the way it was going.
And I guess he got fired because of that, or—or else he got—no, he got put in some— He got shifted out of that area and given other things.
We always used to see him all the time and, well then, I think Jack named him to the Congo, just showed what he thought of him.
In 1963, one of the big things on the President's mind was, of course, Vietnam and Diem and Madame Nhu, and all that.
Yes, well, you know, obviously it was trouble for so long and you didn't ask Jack about it when he came home, and everything.
But I know once—I forget how long Lodge was out there before things really got bad.
He was out about, I guess, about three months before Diem was thrown out.
Well, I know that he started acting rather strangely, and he said he wouldn't answer their cables and you couldn't get through or—anyway, as if he was kind of taking it into his own hands, or something.
I know he'd done something to try and stop— Lodge had started something and they'd stopped.
All of this you can learn from other people because a lot of it I learned later.
But anyway, when Diem was murdered, Jack was—oh, he just had that awful look that he had at the time of the Bay of Pigs.
And he said Diem fought Communism for twenty years and everything, and it shouldn't have ended like this.
Madame Nhu tearing all around, saying things about him—lI suppose she was more of an irritant.
She was everything that Jack found unattractive—that I found unattractive in a woman.
Yeah, but Clare Luce had come to lunch with Jack once in the White House when Tish was still there.
And I remember—oh, she so badly wanted to come to see him as a man would.
Anyway, a sort of a male lunch was arranged, and Tish told me she was so nervous before, she'd had about three martinis.
And I was so mad at her that I stood—I managed to be just outside our dining room, standing there, pretending to shuffle through my desk, and I just really cut her dead, so that when Jack introduced us and I just stood with my hands at my side and finally walked over.
He said to me later, ""You know,"" he said, ""if you're going to cut someone dead, dear""—you know, he was sort of touched at my loyalty because it could only make Mrs.
Luce hurt me more,” but he really wasn't very pleased at my doing that.
Luce, who I guess was a bit loaded, just went on and lit into him and told him all these things.
And finally—he was always, you know, so courteous to women—he said, ""Well, I'm sorry, Mrs.
And the sad thing about that is they'd been friends and she'd been a friend of Mr Kennedy's and he'd helped her so.
So for her to turn on him like that—well again, this resentment of men.
Well, I know Jack saw him a couple of times and, you know, it was all right—I mean, he might blow up at him for certain things, but they would— it never got bitter that way.
Oh, that was Mr Kennedy, because Jack had gotten Arthur Krock to do it.
And then Mr Kennedy thought that it might look as if Arthur Krock had written the book or something, because he'd been an old friend of the family—and that it would be better if Henry Luce did it.
So it was sort of changed midstream, and that's one thing Arthur Krock never forgave Jack for.
And you know, so that's where this queer enmity that Krock had for him, who, after all, he'd known as a young boy and known me and he'd sort of been his mentor—not exactly mentor, but you know, seen him and everything.
I can remember in the first winter, the dinner at the White House, when the Krocks were there, so there was still a slight relationship then, but then Krock became absolutely hopeless.
You see, he'd been a friend of me growing up, gotten me my job in the Times-Herald, always a friend of my grandfather's—we used to write poems to each other, for both of us.
And you try, over and over, to do something about the relationship, and each time you just get slapped in the face with a wet fish, and finally you gave up.
He was too bitter, and he couldn't bear to see someone young coming on.
And we went out of our way to be nice, and we even went to their house for dinner—as President.
On Vietnam, it was rather interesting that the President should send Cabot Lodge, whom he had defeated in the Senate in 1952 and who ran on the opposite ticket in 1960.
No, the only time I can remember, we asked Lodge to the dinner for Abboud of the Sudan.
I mean, I think Jack had always thought of him as rather arrogant and everything.
Once he was President, he did these extraordinary sort of thoughtful things, to go out of his way.
I think Rusk suggested it, and I think the President was attracted to it partly for that reason, and partly because Lodge had served as liaison officer with the French army in the Second World War and spoke excellent French.
I think Latin America was something the President cared about a great deal, obviously.
And you mentioned earlier about his admiration for Betancourt and for Lleras Camargo.
So I think everyone had thought quite a lot of Quadros before, hadn't they?—and pinned a lot of hopes on him.
And Jack was—well, not horrified, because that's—too strong a word—but that just wasn't in his way of doing things.
I mean, when he took on something—just the way he was always prepared to lose this election—I don't think he would have, but he would be talking about it—on civil rights.
Sometimes when things were bad, and he'd say, ""Well, maybe""—but you know it was something that had to be done.
You could never really be a great president unless you were prepared to be hated or to lose on something that counted.
And I think he thought Goulart was sort of a shifty character and—you know, I mean, well, I mean, you know— Goulart was really messing everything up, wasn't he?—in the economy and the Communists.
I thought—I think he thought he was a faker and a robber and a— but I don't know what he exactly thought.
But anyway, when he was overthrown, it reminds me so now of everyone saying that the United States recognized the junta in Brazil too quickly, because we held off recognition or something.
And later on Pat's—Rosita Prado, who Pat24 went to school with, wrote Jack a letter saying, ""You saved my father's life""—because they were going to execute Prado and, I guess, his wife.
And because of what we did and everything, they let him get out and get to Paris and all that.
Finally, it made it better in the long run, instead of just saying, ""Hooray, hooray, they've overthrown""—and I guess— no— No, you're absolutely right.
What we did was we suspended and said, we will resume if you agree to do certain things like give parties political freedom, restore freedom of the press, agree to hold elections.
They finally agreed to do these things, and then we resumed relations, and it made a great difference.
And in Brazil, the minute the junta took over this time, everyone just had cheers.
He said all—half of Congress, or Parliament, whatever it is, all the great writers, everyone has their civil liberties taken away from them.
And that was one of the most despairing things in Latin America—the difference between Kennedy and Johnson.
Charlie Bartlett played a role in working out the conditions with the new government in Peru.
Well, he just said how insurmountable Bosch's problems were going to be.
You know, he had such high hopes for Rusk in the beginning, when you read his dossier of what the man was.
I mean, you could never say Dean Rusk is mean, or anything, but he saw him get to sort of be the tool, really, and he saw that that man was so—well, could never dare to make a decision or any —he never would make a decision.
I remember once they'd— they'd asked for some message to be drafted to Russia, a very unimportant one— something like wishing Khrushchev happy birthday—maybe a little more important—and either six or eleven weeks went by and nothing had come.
And then—this is another very late example—when I came back from Morocco, I told him of this brilliant, young, very low man in our embassy there, who'd been attached to the Secret Service, who learned all the Berber languages and everything—had been there two years and he was going to be transferred to the Caribbean or something, and he wanted so to go to that part of the world— Algeria or something.
Well, when I told Jack that, he was really mad because he said, ""I wrote Rusk a memo about that six months ago, that you shouldn't have this policy of moving everyone every two years.
That it's so much better to let them build up some knowledge,"" or something.
And I think he was sort of toying with the idea of putting McNamara in there, but it really wasn't firmed up because I don't know if he thought exactly McNamara would be right for foreign policy.
But he wanted someone in there, you know, almost like McNamara or Bobby, who could just flush out all those— And it was so funny, one day three ambassadors came in to say goodbye to him, and he said they all had on striped shirts with the white collar and cuffs—you know, very English, with umbrellas on their arms—and two of them had on what he called slave bracelets.
And one was going to Africa, and one was going to the Near East—I don't know, Lebanon or Turkey or somewhere.
And these sort of precious flits came in his office and he was just so—you know, it was the wrong idea of the kind of people he wanted to be sent out there anyway.
He wasn't in on either part of the missile crisis or something terribly important because he'd have to go to a— Nassau— Oh, Nassau— He did not go to Nassau because he had to go to a dinner for the foreign ambassadors—the annual diplomatic dinner for the foreign ambassadors in Washington.
Yeah, well, little things like that, I mean, he turned into—I mean, Jack said one terrific thing about Angie Duke, who he was so proud of in a way, because Angie does have the most beautiful manners in the world and did so much helping all that way.
But Angie wanted to get out of being chief of protocol, and Jack was so surprised where Angie wanted to go.
Yeah, that he was—sort of wanted to be a Bill Blair, going to eternal parties.
He never called anyone by their first names until he really knew them well.
And Dean Rusk was the one member of his cabinet—probably because he was older and he hadn't known him before—who he called ""Mr Rusk,"" right up until the last year.
He never liked it if anyone called you ""Jack,"" or me ""Jackie,"" or— except in the campaign, when they yell it.
And he never would call anyone— He always called my mother and stepfather ""Mr and Mrs.
He called my mother ""Mummy,"" because he thought it was such a funny name— as sort of a joke.
Chester Bowles would give some endless talk in a meeting about we should enslave—take the mud huts out of enslavement and raise the standard of the, blah—you know, go on with these rolling phrases for hours, and then Jack would say, ""Yes, Chester, but I'm not asking you that.
Walt Rostow*2—it was funny, one night I was at a seminar at the Dillons.
Because he really thought Walt Rostow went on and on, and was hard to listen to.
Every time the door would be open, Wiesner's head would peek in and out, and it would finally drive him so crazy he'd say, ""All right, come in or else go away,"" and it was usually something unimportant.
On this—when it came to appointing ambassadors, there was always the—the State Department always wanted to appoint a Foreign Service officer, and the White House people always wanted to send some non—Foreign Service officer— someone like Bill Attwood, or someone like that.
Well, just as I said, that the Foreign Service ambassadors were usually so awful.
Then he went over there to give a talk to them once and to tell them—and he really prepared that talk.
They get sort of trained not to take a position one way or the other, but by the time they get way up—and he said younger people should get up quicker—they just can't give you any answer but the answer that's no answer—safe on both sides.
And so the whole point of the speech that he gave to them was that you must, you know, be prepared to take an answer one way or the other, and you must be prepared to go to Congress, or—I don't know.
Just that their training was wrong, and they were brainwashed by the time they got there, and, mostly too effete to do any good, which was sort of the standard the people at the State Department admired.
And just to say something rather interesting and unfair about someone who was a friend, which Jack never said to me but I saw this later, this winter when he came to see me—it's Chip Bohlen.
And sometimes I used to tease Chip Bohlen, and say that he was too stuffy or State Department-—ish.
But he was appointed ambassador to Paris just about the time of the missile crisis— That's right.
And Bobby asked him to stay, and I think Jack asked him, but sort of vaguely, but Chip Bohlen couldn't wait to get on that boat.
And Bobby told me the reason he wanted Chip Bohlen to stay so much was that he'd been their Russian adviser for so long and Llewellyn Thompson had just sort of come in and they didn't really know Thompson that well.
And the thing is that even Chip Bohlen was so imbued —who is a brilliant man—by that State Department thinking, that the one thing that mattered to him most—he'd finally been made ambassador to Paris, where, he said, he hoped and assumed he would stay, he told me—this is under Johnson.
But once that happened, he didn't care what was happening, he was going to get there.
But then he loved the President and said one marvelous thing about him.
Oh, then another thing that disappointed me about him—he named—he was there at the ceremonies where they named a street after Jack in Paris and he sent me his speech.
Well, one line of it was, though there was ""a certain sadness about this day,"" the naming of this street shows that Franco-American relations —is a great step forward for Franco-American relations, or something.
So, Bohlen had so much but he didn't—I don't know, a little extra thing.
He's the best of the Foreign Service officers, but even he has been deformed in some way by that— And, for instance, if he, who's brilliant, could have been made secretary of state, it wouldn't have done any good because he would protect his own, and that was just what Jack wanted to get out of there—the people who would protect their own.
I don't really know what he thought about what Walter Heller did or everything.
He didn't have the same personality as Walter Heller, so whereas Galbraith and everyone you would have home or for dinner, we never saw Walter Heller.
I always thought Walter Heller was sort of a— well, a jerk when you meet him.
So, I never heard him—but I mean, we didn't—Jack and I didn't really talk economics, so—I guess he thought he was fine.
He felt Dave was the only man who could straighten out the AID situation.
It looked as if he'd been fired for incompetency or something, and he —Jack so badly wanted to have it come that he was being promoted by being ambassador to Greece.
The President made two appointments to the Supreme Court, you remember.
Did he talk much about the Court or about Well, I remember he was really happy that he'd have two appointments to make and I think he thought both his appointments were good.
He was—he went to call on Frankfurter a couple of times and again once—brought him to his office.
He used to be—he and Bill Douglas used to be—at least, Bill Douglas—was a great friend of Mr, Kennedy.
Arthur Goldberg used to be around our house in Georgetown a lot for the time of the labor bill, but that was always for breakfast.
I'm not sure Jack didn't make a mistake putting him on the Supreme Court because that just seems to make people think they're more and more special.
And as they're out of the newspapers, they feel they have to make up for that by talking more about— And the decision that I thought this winter—you know, that was made after Jack's death, this case where it's all right to print anything, even libel, about someone in the press.
But that seemed such an awful thing to do—and Goldberg was the one who held out and said that it could even be malicious and completely untrue.
So Arthur Goldberg's head's going to be even more swelled in a few more years.
So, I guess, Jack always said he was the most brilliant labor lawyer that ever was.
What about the President and the press—apart from Charlie Bartlett and Ben Bradlee, who were— I suppose so many of our friends before the White House were in the press.
I always thought in Washington, politics and the press—you're both sort of involved in doing something.
And then—people always used to say that he was so thin-skinned by the press, but that really wasn't true.
And it was so funny, because one night Ben Bradlee was taunting him—or, no, he was saying to Ben Bradlee something that was written was untrue.
And Ben Bradlee came one night for dinner in an absolute rage because some tiny little Republican newsletter that his John Birch mother-in-law subscribed to had had a paragraph written by—not Tony Lewis but Tony someone who wrote for Nixon— Ralph de Toledano.
I guess the one thing he admitted was a mistake was canceling the Herald Tribune.
You know, he just accepted it as part of the—you know, when there was something good, I mean, he wouldn't mention it.
And, I think, Lippmann and Reston—Reston was awfully sanctimonious and sort of—so they were never close.
And, of course, they had this kind of jealousy or resentment of Jack because for the first time there was a president who probably was brighter than they were, who was younger, who was— Lippmann had two things against Jack, partly his father and partly being Catholic, strangely enough.
And you hear this in conversations with other people but he could never sort of purge from this— Yeah.
She was brought up and went to a convent and broke with it and I think that had some— Well, I remember when— Though, remember in 1960 that Lippmann wrote marvelous columns.
I can't really remember what they wrote and what they didn't, sometimes.
But you don't feel that he was unduly sensitive— Unh-unh . —to the press.
One thing a lot of people have written about the administration is that no administration was more interested in its own image, to use that odious word, and so on.
Well, that to me, it's like reading about someone—you know, it's so untrue.
And then they'd all talk about the public relations setup that we had going before the —during—before the campaign, and the this and the that, and our image.
But he used to say to Charlie, ""You know, I have so many—much against me.
The only one—and in a certain position that mightn't be the best way to get what I'm aiming for—the nomination.
So many public relations things were that when they asked for interviews, and he would do them.
But he never had anyone advising him and he never thought about our image.
In fact, our image—when you think of something so incredible about me, I was always a liability to him until we got to the White House.
Everyone thought I was a snob from Newport, who had bouffant hair and had French clothes and hated politics.
And then because I was off and having these babies, I wasn't able to campaign, you know, and be around with him as much as I could have.
So, he never asked me—there I was the worst liability and there were Lee— Princess Radziwill and everything.
And—and I was so happy, I remember thinking, once you got in the White House—it's really true of any president's wife.
So whereas, then that you have decent French food is a plus instead of a minus— that you don't like, stay in a kitchen all day making Irish stew.
They all said in the West Wing that it would be awful to have money change hands in the White House.
But then he was proud of me, and I was so happy that at last I'd been able to be something that he could be proud of.
But, I mean, that shows you he wasn't thinking of his image or he would have made me get a little frizzy permanent and be like Pat Nixon.
You know, ""Pat and Dick,"" and he never—he never would hold hands in public or put his arm around me, or— because that was naturally just distasteful to him, as I think it is for any married — So he didn't do anything for his image.
And he used to tell me—sometimes he'd tell me I should wear hats instead of sc2°—oh, and all these letters about my skirts too short.
And I think he liked that I was—I mean, he knew I was being myself and that I did like to stay in the background.
And he married me, really, for the things I was, but then when they didn't work out politically, he was never going to ask me to change, which I just think was so nice about him.
Because he wouldn't be fake in any way, and he wouldn't be fake about his children and he wouldn't kiss babies, and so all that was really written by people who just didn't understand him.
The one thing he was, which people can't understand and which was—where I felt so sorry for poor Nixon, who had such a disadvantage—Jack was the most unself-conscious person I've ever seen.
If it fell off or something, you know, he'd put it on again, but— So many people are worried or nervous in public, or public appearances.
So the people who weren't sort of sure of themselves, or had that wonderful ease of Jack, were in a way jealous and you know, attributed all these funny things to him, which weren't true.
I used to get so mad at Pierre because he did have a certain hamming-up thing that really didn't help protect my children much.
You can really say the most terrible things to him, which I did sometimes, and he never bore a grudge.
And when I look at it now, without Jack, you see that his White House staff is the most extraordinary collection of people, who are so different—who now, a lot of them, dislike each other.
There were the professors—you know, there was you, there was Bundy, Ralph Dungan, Mike Feldman.
And all adoring Jack and knowing—and then, there was me and our private life and friends.
All kept together because they knew he thought highly of each of them, and that their contribution was to their utmost.
And Jack held together this motley band, who now—from some of them, at least from the Irish—are just so bitter about everyone else in there.
And you know, everyone warned me, before joining it, that there would be feuds and knives out, and so on.
I had no—I just thought it was the best possible experience of dealing with—of the people around the President because of the way he, you know, managed everybody.
And I often thought it was—well, not exactly, but you know, you hear it said that mother love is infinite and it isn't that you can love two children—and then, if you have nine, that means you love them just that much less.
No one ever thought Jack had a favorite— That's right. —unless it was Dave Powers, who was a favorite for what everyone hoped he would have a favorite for—someone to relax him, you know.
And as Kenny said—he didn't put Kenny in the position of being the only man you could get to see the President through.
Lincoln's door, or Tish would manage to—you know, there were so many ways.
Of how in the morning George Thomas would rap on our bedroom door about quarter of eight, and he would go into his room, and the children would come in.
And they'd either turn on the television, going absolutely full blast, and he'd have his breakfast, sitting in a chair, on a tray, doing all his—reading the morning papers, going through all his briefing books or, you know, those sheets of typewritten— his agenda for the day.
And on the television—gosh, sometimes it was loud because I'd often come in because it—sometimes I'd like to just, sort of, stay in bed until about nine.
But there'd be cartoons, and there was this awful exercise man, Jack La— LaLanne, yes.
So Jack would lower—and there'd be Jack LaLanne, and he'd be telling Caroline and John to do what they were doing, so they'd be lying on the floor.
He loved those children tumbling around him in this sort of—sensual is the only way I can think of it.
And then he'd always come out in the garden during their recess in the morning and clap his hands, and all the little things from school would come running.
The teachers—he used to call out his two favorites, Caroline and Mary Warner.
She told Caroline she could only get candy if there would be some for the entire class.
Then they'd come over in the evening, just as he was finishing up for the day, and just play around his office.
One of the last days I remember—well, you know, there's that wonderful picture of them all talking about Berlin and Jack—which was an awful, sort of a crisis—and John tumbling out from under his desk.
But, oh, and then one of the last days, Charlie the dog came in and bit John on the nose, and Bundy had to get Dr.
You know the children were never bratty but he liked to have them underfoot, and then he'd take them swimming and—or else, if it didn't work out quite that way when he'd come upstairs before dinner, no matter who we had for dinner, they'd come in.
He'd always say—or even when it was a state lunch or just a man's lunch.
And, of course, they'd always be in their naps in their underwear or something, and I'd have to bring them out in their underwear because he'd never give you warning before.
He made her swim the length of the pool in Florida, the last Christmas she was there.
He'd make up ""The White Shark and the Black Shark,"" and ""Bobo the Lobo,"" and ""Maybelle""— some little girl who hid in the woods.
And then he would make some race and he would always let Caroline win the race.
And then he had a— oh, Miss Shaw was in a lot of them, rather ludicrously—and Mrs.
And how Caroline went hunting—the Orange County hounds and then White Star and Black Star—she went in the Grand National and beat every—you know, little things that had to do with their world, where they did absolutely extraordinarily.
What—when you went to Hyannis Port or Newport or Palm Beach, where he'd have more time with the children.
THE FIRST FAMILY, HYANNIS PORT, 1963 Cecil Stoughton, White House/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston He'd get on the floor, then he could really roll around with them.
And he used to —he could lift Caroline up and—at least, a littlke—he used to throw her around an awful lot before we got to the White House.
But, well, they'd be in our room in the morning, and then he'd swim with them for about an hour, and then he always wanted them to come out on the boat with us.
But he always wanted them to come, so you'd put them to bed inside for half an hour or something, and maybe they would get whiny, but he always wanted them there.
Or, at Camp David and things, you'd sort of sit out and have supper with them or you'd run on the lawn, and everything.
Before he was President, it was to go out on his father's boat, the Marlin—and then the Honey Fitz.
You know, calls would come, or else he'd be getting ten people on the phone.
So, there, I mean, rain or shine—I can remember him taking Adlai Stevenson out on the Honey Fitz one day in late October in Newport—hurricane season.
And Jack was sitting in the back in a black sweater, the hair—the wind blowing his hair, blissfully happy with fish chowder.
He just thought everyone would love that boat because that was his away from care.
It was for him what getting out on a horse was for me—in the air, no phone.
And you know, friends there—you always had friends there that—he never used the boat for working— but whoever you want to relax with.
I listened to one side, and then I threw it away because I didn't want my children to see it.
You know, I thought it was so unfair that he didn't —I guess he just accepted it.
I mean, he obviously didn't like it, but I was the one who got much more worked up about those things.
I didn't care if they made fun of me or anything, but when they made fun of little children— And the first year he was President, I went to the Women's Press Club dinner.
It was hard enough protecting them in the Kennedy family, where some of the cousins, especially, Eunice's children, are—were so conscious of the position, and would always wear Kennedy buttons and would play that record, ""My Daddy Is President, What Does Your Daddy Do?,""© or The First Family.
And I hid all those things from my children and always taught them that the White House was sort of temporary.
But that it was while Daddy was President, and presidents had lived in it before.
I'd tell them little stories about other presidents, and then there would be a president after Daddy, and then we would be living in Hyannis.
And, you know, so they never got to think that all this was going to be forever in this power, which the others were awful about.
So I'd get upset about those skits, but he didn't like to see me get upset.
And because it was such a different and young family, there was so much more to make skits about with us, which he said, sort of wryly, to me once.
I know he was going to get rid of J Edgar Hoover, the minute—and he always said that those were the two things he did first—you know, Hoover and Allen Dulles, which I guess he had to do at the time.
No, he didn't say who he'd make, and then Bobby was going to leave the Justice Department.
And I know he really cared about—Kentucky was the place he spoke to me about and we were going to go to Kentucky sometime, and I mean I know it was mentioned.
Sometime in the second term we were going to go to Russia and that would have just been so incredible.
I guess, I always thought he was going to go in December, but then as he wasn't talking about it, I guess, with Indonesia and everything, it was sort of— Yeah, but I think it was—I think he was planning to go in April—in the spring, to the Far East.
And it would have been so incredible for him to go to Japan, when you think Eisenhower couldn't go there,®2 and the crowds and everything you would have gotten.
If all this had to happen, I just wish he could have seen some more good things come in, that he worked so hard for.
You know, think of all those businessmen who still say awful things about him, and suddenly the gold flow is absolutely stopped, the gross national product has never been so high.
If he could have just won, and he was so praying it would be Goldwater that he'd have to run against.
Did he think Goldwater was going to get it, or was that— Oh, it was just too much to hope for.
In the beginning, quite a while ago, he thought Romney would, and he was nervous about Romney because he said he'd be sort of hard.
But either he was—had cold feet or was nervous about not going into New Hampshire and all that.
Oh, the President did feel that if Rockefeller had gotten the nomination in 1960, he would have been elected.
And he said, you know, he just didn't have the—I don't know whether it was gumption or judgment or just timid soul, or something.
And of course, now the poor man's doing it all with completely the wrong sense of timing.
And, I don't think he thought very much of Rockefeller, but he didn't really say anything mean against him.
You know, he was sort of coming up, and I suppose he thought he might have had it.
It wouldn't be those awful things of plodding through Wisconsin, forcing somebody to shake hands with you.
I mean, he really looked forward to it, and then to winning and then to just sort of solidifying.
I mean, it would have been Latin America and with Russia and de Gaulle never would have recognized Red China, and all of that—if he'd stayed alive.
Did he—was it just Moscow or would it— I think it was just a Russian trip.
When things got nicer about Khrushchev, you know, after the détente2 and everything, he always used to say—well, remember what he said after Vienna, that he really is a gangster, and so everybody mustn't get deluded.
But he never wanted people to think that now Khrushchev is the sweet, benign, undangerous person.
Bundy did, and for a couple of months there, Bundy was sending me all the intelligence—top briefings and everything.
And then finally, I got so bored—no, not bored, discouraged—reading them.
And when I'd read those things which Jack had to flip through every day, I didn't see how he could be so cheerful at night, or have a drink or go out on the Honey Fitz.
And I remember we gave a little dinner—farewell, for Ros Gilpatric, and Mrs.
And so, that's how I sensed what he wanted me to be, and that's really when I stopped reading all those briefings and things, because I didn't want to have to worry about anything.
I wanted to, sort of, take your cue from him and— One of the greatest gifts was his capacity to switch from one thing to another and not be nagged at by problems, to put them aside knowing that he can't do anything more at that moment about them and not let them worry him.
Well, I used to have my desk in the West Sitting Hall, where we always sat, and it would be piled high—and especially when Tish was always sending in those damn folders.
But he could always go to sleep, too, which I thought was so important.
And I always thought one thing, and I think it's true of Lyndon Johnson, and I think it might have been true of Adlai Stevenson.
That these things get on you and on you and there's indecision or something—and you can't sleep.
You really become—I always thought any president would become an insomniac.
But Jack had this built-in thing that Ted Reardon told me about before—like soldiers in a foxhole.
Z THE PRESIDENT AND FIRST LADY, WASHINGTON, D.C., MAY 3, 1961 Stanley Tretick/BettmannCORBIS/John F Kennedy Library and Museum, Boston NOTES INTRODUCTION 1.
But with the exception of dictating an occasional memo for the record, Kennedy had declined.
Schlesinger did not learn until 1982 that, in the summer of 1962, JFK had started discreetly taping hundreds of hours of his White House meetings and telephone calls.
Even this collection covered only a small fraction of the conversations in which the President did business.
For her family's flight to England for the Queen's ceremony in 1965, President Johnson offered a presidential aircraft.
Though afflicted until the end of her life by such painful sensitivities, Jacqueline was blessed with loving and protective children.
ADLAI EWING STEVENSON was governor of Illinois from 1949 to 1953 and Democratic presidential nominee in 1952 and 1956.
At the 1956 Democratic convention in Chicago, Stevenson unexpectedly broke tradition by allowing the delegates to decide themselves who should be vice president.
In the ensuing contest, JFK lost to Tennessee senator Estes Kefauver by a hairbreadth.
JOSEPH PATRICK KENNEDY was a financier, first chairman of the Securities Exchange Commission, pre-World War II ambassador to the Court of St.
James's under President Franklin Roosevelt, and the father of nine children, including the thirty-fifth president of the United States.
Jacqueline's comment refers to the senior Kennedy's insistence to several reporters in the late 1950s that he had originally decided that his first son, Joseph, Jr. , should one day be president, and that when Joe, Jr., was killed in World War II, he turned to Jack.
ROBERT FRANCIS KENNEDY was the fifth of Joseph and Rose Kennedy's nine children, a lawyer, Senate committee counsel, and manager of his brother's 1960 campaign, after which the Presidentelect made him attorney general.
Despite his formal mandate to run the Justice Department, as his brother's presidency unfolded, RFK served as his chief adviser and enforcer on virtually all matters that faced him.
Four years later, he was assassinated while running for the Democratic presidential nomination.
THEODORE SORENSEN was the son of Nebraska's progressive Danish-American attorney general and his Russian Jewish wife.
Ted Sorensen joined JFK's staff in 1953 and, as a speechwriter, helped give the senator his voice, with the staccato phrases, contrapuntal phrasing, soaring rhetoric, and historical references so widely praised.
Later, at the White House, Sorensen served as special counsel to the President.
In the spring of 1956, Kennedy had him draft and circulate a memorandum that showed how many votes a Catholic running mate might bring to a Democratic ticket in 1956.
Kennedy is correct that her husband did not overtly press Stevenson to put him on the ticket.
When the Illinoisan made his unusual, surprise decision to throw open the nomination, and Kennedy made his hasty effort to win the prize, Joseph Kennedy, vacationing in Cap d'Antibes, was furious that his son would try something so ill planned.
JFK later said he was glad that he lost, because when Stevenson was defeated by Dwight Eisenhower that fall, some Democrats might have pointed at his Catholic running mate.
RICHARD MILHOUS NIXON had served from 1947 to 1951 with JFK in the House, where they were cordial colleagues.
Nixon was a senator from California when chosen by Dwight Eisenhower for the 1952 Republican ticket.
On November 7, 1960, Vice President Nixon lost the presidency to Kennedy by the tiny margin of 112,827 popular votes.
In 1956, she was living in Chicago with her husband, Sargent Shriver, president of the city's Board of Education.
Before her marriage, she had shared a townhouse with her brother in the Georgetown section of Washington.
Shriver did pathbreaking work to bring the intellectually disabled into the mainstream and was always prodding Jack to do more to help the cause.
JFK indeed established the first presidential commission on mental retardation.
Joseph Kennedy once said that had Eunice been a man, she might have been president.
TORBERT MACDONALD was a Kennedy chum, captain of the Harvard football team, and one of JFK's roommates at Harvard, who was married to Phyllis Brooks, a B-movie actress of the 1930s.
He served as a Democratic member of Congress, representing Malden, Massachusetts, from 1954 until his death.
In 1956, the chairman of the state Democratic party was a loud conservative named William ""Onions"" Burke , an onion and tobacco farmer and barkeeper from Hatfield, Massachusetts.
McCormack was delighted, but JFK considered the move a slap in his face.
Kennedy wished to avoid putting an illiberal face on the Massachusetts party, and he feared looking powerless in his home state in case Stevenson considered him for vice president.
In May 1956, he launched a major effort to depose Burke in favor of the former mayor of Somerville, Pat Lynch.
Since Kennedy's first election to the House in 1946, McCormack had viewed the young tiger as a threat to his dominance, and now his dread had come to pass.
Burke was ousted, and JFK assumed effective control of his party in Massachusetts.
The Kennedy-McCormack schism divided the state's Democrats until 1962, when Edward Kennedy defeated then Speaker McCormack's nephew Edward to win the party's nomination for JFK's old Senate seat.
PATRICK MCCARRAN was a Democratic senator from Nevada from 1933 until his death in 1954.
Scourge of potential Communists in government, admirer of the Spanish dictator Francisco Franco, he commanded influence in his state far beyond that suggested by his job title.
A Republican with many Democratic cronies, he was one of the most powerful tycoons and largest landowners in the state.
KENNETH O'DONNELL , son of the Holy Cross football coach, had been a Harvard roommate and football teammate of Robert Kennedy's and World War II bombardier in England.
Since JFK's 1952 Senate campaign, he had been a key member of the circle of Kennedy aides known as the ""Irish Mafia,"" serving as appointments secretary in the Kennedy White House.
Lawrence O'Brien of Springfield, Massachusetts, labored on JFK's campaigns for the Senate and presidency, then as the President's liaison to Congress.
Her husband, Stephen Edward Smith , shrewdly managed the Kennedy family finances and served all three Kennedy brothers as political strategist and behind-the-scenes troubleshooter.
This McLean, Virginia, estate was briefly occupied by Union Army General George McClellan during the Civil War.
Jacqueline and her husband sold it to Robert and Ethel Kennedy in 1956 for $125,000, the same price they had paid for it.
Especially compared to Georgetown, driving from the house to Capitol Hill took considerable time in traffic.
On August 23, 1956, Jacqueline gave birth to her first baby, a daughter, who was stillborn.
Her husband wanted a large family, and her difficulty producing children, especially in contrast to Kennedy sisters and wives who did so with little apparent effort, led to frustrations that inevitably affected her morale, her marriage, and her ability to make frequent trips with her husband during the 1960 presidential campaign and as First Lady.
This made the stillbirth of their first child, three years into their marriage, and the death of the premature Patrick Bouvier Kennedy two days after his birth on August 7, 1963, all the harder for both Kennedys to bear.
The Kennedys bought the three-story Federal redbrick edifice at 3307 N Street in Georgetown (of which she said, ""My sweet little house leans slightly to one side"") and stayed there until they left for the White House.
EDMUND G ROSS , Republican senator from Kansas, won his place in Profiles in Courage by casting the decisive vote in 1868 against President Andrew Johnson's impeachment, which cost Ross reelection.
Philip Wilson was chief surgeon at the city's Hospital for Special Surgery, where the operation was performed, and a Harvard classmate of JFK's father.
JANET TRAVELL later became JFK's White House physician, the first woman to serve in that role.
That August, he had been warned by Lahey Clinic physicians that without such an operation, he might lose the use of his legs— and that for an Addison's disease patient like JFK, the surgery might produce an infection that could kill him.
When the doctors operated, the latter occurred, leaving the senator in a coma.
The following February, when doctors feared that the plate was infected and recommended another operation to remove it and perform a bone graft on his spinal column, Jackie wanted a second opinion, but doctors persuaded her not to seek it.
The second surgery threw her husband into three months of agony and depression while recuperating in Palm Beach; she wished she had fought the doctors.
After JFK's first operation, when he was on the brink of death, she had heard him calling for her but was barred from the room.
Therefore on November 22, 1963, in Dallas, when a Parkland Hospital nurse tried to prevent her from entering the chamber where her husband was receiving desperate measures, Jackie told her, ""I'm going to get in that room,"" and she did, which enabled her to be with him when he died.
The Carroll Arms Hotel was across the street from the Old Senate Office Building, in which JFK had his office.
RFK wrote the foreword to a memorial edition of his brother's book, which was published in 1964.
FRANCIS X MORRISSEY of Charlestown, Massachusetts, a dockworker's son who put himself through night law school, worked in JFK's campaigns for the House and Senate, and won appointment as a Boston municipal judge.
The Last Hurrah by the Boston novelist and newspaperman Edwin O'Connor re-created the old, dying Irish-American politics of his city and was made into a 1958 feature film starring Spencer Tracy.
On the night in 1946 when JFK was elected to the House, ""Honey Fitz"" performed an Irish jig and forecast that his grandson would someday be President.
DAVID POWERS was another Irish-American from Charlestown, jovial and unflappable, who started with JFK during that first House campaign and stayed with him for the rest of Kennedy's life, as friend, raconteur, traveling companion, and man-of-all-work.
The three-story Boston apartment houses known for housing newly arrived immigrants and factory workers and their descendants, especially Irish-American ones, such as Morrissey and Powers.
JOHN KENNETH GALBRAITH , bom in Ontario, was a Harvard economist and liberal activist, best known in the late 1950s for his book The Affluent Society.
CHARLES BARTLETT was a Washington columnist for the Chattanooga Times, later nationally syndicated, who, with his wife Martha, introduced JFK to Jacqueline in 1951 and remained a close friend of the President's.
He and his then wife Tony were Kennedy neighbors in Georgetown, became fast friends, and spent considerable leisure time with the Kennedys in the White House and other venues.
Two months after losing her prematurely born second son in August 1963, Jacqueline and her sister Lee Radziwill sailed with Franklin Roosevelt, Jr., and his wife on the Aegean as guests of the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis.
JOSEPH ALSOP was a Washington political columnist, Anglophile, Roosevelt cousin, and esteemed Georgetown host.
Alsop and his new wife Susan Mary, a descendant of John Jay, entertained a diverse mixture of guests during the Kennedy years, and theirs was one of the few private homes at which the President and First Lady dined while in the White House, which began with Kennedy's impromptu visit to Alsop late on his inaugural night.
STUART SYMINGTON was an Eastern-born patrician businessman, the first secretary of the air force, under Truman, and senator from Missouri from 1953 to 1976.
Symington and his wife Evelyn lived four doors down from the Kennedys on N Street.
John Sherman Cooper was a Republican senator from Kentucky and had been Symington's classmate at Yale.
Before both couples were married, Jacqueline and Jack had more than once gone out with the courtly Cooper and his wife Lorraine.
John and Lorraine Cooper were also guests at the first dinner the Kennedys had at home after their honeymoon.
George Smathers was a conservative Democratic senator from Florida from 1951 to 1969.
HUBERT HUMPHREY , liberal senator from Minnesota, ran against JFK in the Wisconsin and West Virginia primaries of 1960 but pulled out after losing both.
During the latter effort, he publicly carped about his campaign's relative poverty in contrast to what he thought to be the free-spending ways of Kennedy's side.
MIKE MANSFIELD became Democratic senator from Montana in 1953, and served as majority leader from 1961 until 1977.
The quiet, upright Mansfield had played softball with JFK and other senators in the early 1950s.
One reason why Kennedy was glad to have Lyndon Johnson as vice president was that his Senate leader would not be the brash Texan but the loyal Mansfield.
Honoring Mansfield's expertise on Asia, two presidents later made him ambassador to Japan.
He resented JFK, whom he considered his intellectual inferior, and, at the 1960 convention, gave an impassioned nominating speech for Stevenson.
Kennedy suspected that McCarthy's real purpose was to stop his bandwagon so that Lyndon Johnson could win the prize.
LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON served as congressman, senator from Texas, and Senate majority leader before Kennedy placed him on his ticket in Los Angeles in 1960.
On November 22, 1963, after President Kennedy's assassination, Johnson became the thirty-sixth president of the United States.
DEAN ACHESON was Harry Truman's secretary of state, a towering figure in that era and a skeptic about JFK, sharing Truman's view that he was too callow and inexperienced to be president.
An exclusive Newport club, frequented by Jacqueline's mother and stepfather, which now represented to her a cloistered social world she had outgrown.
Hoping to be drafted for president at the 1960 convention, Stevenson had refused to say he would decline the nomination, if offered.
In the spring of 1964, Jackie was reading and much influenced by Edith Hamilton's popular The Greek Way.
During those years, Stevenson was able to build a decent rapport with the First Lady, which he never managed with the President, whom he resented for denying him what he considered his political birthright, starting with the presidency and the State Department.
But by now, Jacqueline has adopted her husband's disdain for Stevenson.
This traditional Chicago convention hotel was actually called the Stockyard Inn, and stood across the street from the International Amphitheatre, where the delegates were meeting.
Jacqueline's mother and stepfather spent summers at Hammersmith Farm in Newport.
The Kennedys sometimes used the place, which was near a naval station and quieter than the Kennedy houses at Hyannis Port, as a summer White House.
He was eager to win by a margin so impressive that it would give him a running start for the 1960 presidential race.
FOSTER FURCOLO was the Democratic governor of Massachusetts from 1957 to 1961.
Kennedy thought so little of him that if Furcolo should win the Democratic nomination against Republican senator Leverett Saltonstall in 1960 , JFK planned to cast a quiet vote for the Republican.
Some of the reasons Kennedy's poll ratings were down were his support for the St.
Lawrence Seaway, which diverted jobs and commerce from Massachusetts; his work on labor reform, which outraged Teamsters and their allies; residual antagonisms from the ""Onions"" Burke fight; and political quarrels with the Italian-American Furcolo, which, Republicans vainly hoped, might cause an Italian-American stampede toward Kennedy's little-known opponent, Vincent Celeste.
JAMES MACGREGOR BURNS was a Williams College political scientist, biographer of Franklin Roosevelt, and Democratic liberal activist who in 1958 ran unsuccessfully for the United States House from western Massachusetts.
JFK's Senate reelection victory of 1958, winning 73 percent of the vote.
In 1704, in the War of the Spanish Succession, Marlborough and his regiments defeated the French at Blenheim on the Danube, thwarting Louis XIV's campaign against Austria.
JFK's lifelong interest in the book and its protagonist suggests one source of affinity with his wife, who used Churchillian language in a 1978 letter describing the ""treasured friends, noble figures, shared moments, great endeavors"" of her husband's presidency.
JFK had to leave Princeton at Christmas 1935, during his freshman year, to be hospitalized for chronic abdominal problems and a worrisome white blood cell count.
On his release, he recuperated in Palm Beach, worked the summer of 1936 at an Arizona cattle ranch, and restarted his college career at Harvard that fall.
JOHN BUCHAN was the first Baron Tweedsmuir, a prolific author of both fiction and nonfiction, and governor general of Canada from 1935 until his death.
IAN FLEMING was the author of the thrillers starring James Bond, the British secret agent.
The President enjoyed From Russia with Love in the White House theater shortly before his death.
The Daughter of Time by Josephine Tey has a Scotland Yard official investigating whether Richard III had killed the princes in the Tower of London.
Patriotic Gore, the book on the Civil War by the critic Edmund Wilson, whom the Kennedys once invited to a White House dinner.
While a senator, JFK had accompanied his brother several times to a speed-reading course in Baltimore but dropped out.
After he became President, press accounts exaggerated the importance of this minor episode.
The writings of the Chinese Communist leader would have been of particular interest to JFK in the spring of 1961, when, with considerable foresight, he was considering how much effort, if any, he should make to seek a rapprochement with China (he pragmatically decided that was a project for a second term)—and when he was preparing for a summit with the man who had, until the recent schism between Moscow and Beijing, been Mao's chief world ally—the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
And indeed during his private conversations with Khrushchev in June 1961, Kennedy quoted Mao's aphorism that power comes out the end of a rifle.
MAURICE DE SAXE , born a German, was a French marshal general and hero of the Battle of Fontenoy in 1745.
He wrote a classic treatise, Reveries on the Art of War, that was posthumously published in 1757.
MAXWELL TAYLOR was World War II commander of the 101st Airborne division and the first general of the Allied forces to ascend the French beaches on D-day.
In 1959, he retired as President Eisenhower's army chief of staff, inveighing against what he thought to be Ike's overreliance on nuclear weapons—a complaint that he published in a book called The Uncertain Trumpet.
Asked by JFK to investigate the Bay of Pigs failure, Taylor impressed him with his willingness to buck conventional wisdom.
The President made Taylor his chief military adviser and then chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
One of the presidential yachts, which JFK had renamed for his grandfather.
The Whig party of the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries epitomized the British style of wealthy aristocrats standing for political office.
The Whigs resisted a strong monarchy, just as their nineteenthcentury American namesake party opposed powerful presidents such as their hated Andrew Jackson.
DANIEL WEBSTER , senator from Massachusetts, had his own chapter in Profiles in Courage for supporting the Compromise of 1850.
ALICE ROOSEVELT LONGWORTH , herself a landmark of Washington social life for most of the twentieth century, was Theodore Roosevelt's daughter by his first wife.
This was in the 1930s, while Joseph Kennedy served FDR as chairman of the Securities Exchange Commission and ambassador to the Court of St.
JFK's private coolness toward Franklin Roosevelt was almost unique among Democratic leaders of the 1960s, who usually regarded him as a household saint.
It reflected Joseph Kennedy's painful break with FDR in 1941 over intervention in Europe, JFK's lingering resentment over Eleanor Roosevelt's hostility toward him before the 1960 Democratic convention, and his own lifelong aversion to almost all hero worship.
Like many others, JFK was critical of what he considered to be FDR's overtolerance of Soviet military power in Europe at the end of World War II, leaving the West at a military disadvantage in Berlin and the rest of Europe, which proved to be one of Kennedy's biggest troubles as President.
Still JFK was not unwilling to recognize Roosevelt's qualities of greatness, especially in domestic affairs.
He asked Schlesinger to find out exactly how many such chats Roosevelt had during twelve years as president to counter the popular impression that they were almost weekly.
By contrast, President Kennedy had a press conference roughly every two weeks.
At this point, she had an affectionate but somewhat distant relationship with her mother-in-law, especially in comparison to the instant connection she had felt on first meeting Joseph Kennedy.
A Political Profile, written with JFK's cooperation, which, while praising the Senator's talent and energy, questioned his emotional commitment to political goals.
Anyone sees he has the intelligence—magnetism and drive it takes to succeed in politics.
CHARLES-ANDRE-MARIE DE GAULLE , the Free French leader of World War II, served as French president from 1959 to 1969.
As an ardent Francophile in art, architecture, literature, history, and couture, she was all the more vexed, as the Kennedy years unfolded, by de Gaulle's willingness to poison his relations with JFK and the United States, as well as the rest of the Western alliance, by upholding his extreme standard of French pride and independence.
The more recent example she is thinking of was probably Peter Thorneycroft, who resigned in 1958 as chancellor of the Exchequer, along with two lesser officials, to protest increased public spending.
Dismissing the resignations as ""little local difficulties,"" Prime Minister Harold Macmillan quickly replaced them all.
JFK hoped that his victory in heavily Protestant West Virginia would quash the Catholic issue for good, but it remained virulent enough that in September 1960, he felt compelled to appear before a group of Protestant ministers in Houston and reaffirm his strong support for separation of church from state, saying, ""I am not the Catholic candidate for president.
In the most acute eruption of the youth issue all year, on July 2, 1960, appearing at the Truman Library in Independence, Missouri, former President Truman asked JFK, the front-runner for the Democratic nomination, to step aside on grounds that he was too young and inexperienced, and that the convention had been ""rigged"" in advance.
After making this statement, he flew to Los Angeles for his party's convention.
To Johnson, a reliable friend was someone ""you would go to the well with"" in order to draw water, referring to the days when American Indians threatened settlers of European origin.
CAROLINE LEE BOUVIER CANFIELD RADZIWILL was Jacqueline's younger sister.
Louis lawyer who was counsel and close adviser to President Harry Truman before starting a lucrative Washington law practice and earning a reputation as one of the ""wise men"" of Washington.
In 1957, Pearson charged on ABC that Profiles in Courage had actually been written by Sorensen.
During the 1960 campaign, Kennedy asked Clifford to start preparing for a potential transition to the White House.
Through JFK's presidency, Clifford continued to advise both Kennedys on various matters private and public.
At the time of these oral history interviews, both men were rushing to complete rival books on President Kennedy, which for a time frayed their relations.
Sorensen writes that in 1953, he and JFK agreed that on any outside published work on which they collaborated, Sorensen would receive at least half the fees or royalties.
He adds that when Profiles became a major bestseller, generating royalties ""far in excess of anything either of us had ever contemplated,"" JFK ""unexpectedly and generously"" gave him ""a sum to be spread over several years, that I regarded as more than fair,"" and which, by 1961, still exceeded half the book's earnings.
RFK had served as assistant counsel of Senator Joseph McCarthy's Subcommittee on Permanent Investigations before finally resigning in protest over McCarthy's excesses.
From 1957 to 1959, he served as chief counsel for Senator John McClellan's committee on labor racketeering, a perch from which he relentlessly pursued Teamsters president James Hoffa.
In 1962, Ted won his brother's old Senate seat and occupied it until his death.
ARTHUR GOLDBERG of Chicago, son of Jewish immigrants from Poland and Ukraine, was general counsel to the AFL-CIO and United Steelworkers before JFK appointed him as labor secretary and then, in September 1962, to the Supreme Court.
The Landrum-Griffin labor reform act of 1959 sought to regulate union practices to avoid the excesses that the Kennedy brothers had uncovered in their hearings.
JFK wished to ensure that it did not also restrict honest union activity.
JFK gave a controversial speech denouncing French dominion over Algeria, taking the then-bold view that it was in the American interest to side with anticolonial movements, both because it was right and because it would help the United States attract newly independent nations in which such movements had succeeded.
In 1954, the French withdrew from Vietnam after an embarrassing defeat at Dien Bien Phu, and the United States was under severe pressure to replace them and pick up the struggle to keep the North Vietnamese leader, Ho Chi Minh , from seizing the entire country.
With her excellent command of French, Jacqueline translated books for him on the history and politics of French colonies in North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia and other subjects.
Georges d'Argenlieu was French colonial administrator in Indochina from 1945 to 1947.
By voting for construction of the seaway, which would expand United States commerce at the expense of jobs in Massachusetts, Kennedy outraged many of his constituents, who complained that he was more concerned about the rest of the country than his own state.
Kennedy's meeting with Eisenhower was actually in April 1961, after the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion.
This refers to the effort to build a National Cultural Center in Washington (later renamed the John F Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts), finally opened in 1971.
Norton had been superintendent of Commonwealth Pier and, campaigning from his own oneman sound truck, a perennial loser for mayor of Boston.
In June 1963, during a trip to Europe, JFK viewed the Berlin Wall and then gave a rousing speech (in what is now John F Kennedy Platz) assuring free West Berliners that he would support them against Soviet threats to drive them from the city.
By contrast, Robert Kennedy was shocked in 1964 when LBJ told him that of all the things in life, he liked campaigning the best.
When JFK entered the Senate in 1953, his Republican colleague Joseph McCarthy was using the Senate's Subcommittee on Permanent Investigations to pursue supposed hidden Communists in the United States government, damaging innocent lives in the process.
Caught between the many Massachusetts voters who loved McCarthy and the liberal Democrats who abhorred him, Kennedy was criticized by some for failing to publicly denounce the Wisconsin demagogue.
In December 1954, when the Senate voted to censure McCarthy, JFK was recovering from his near fatal back operation and was the only Democratic member not to participate.
Fox made the paper shrill and McCarthyite, and deployed it in strong support of ""Onions"" Burke in the spring of 1956.
In January 1953, Robert Kennedy started work for McCarthy's committee as an assistant counsel under McCarthy's abrasive and unscrupulous counsel, Roy Cohn.
The animosity between the two men over matters great and small at one point almost led to a fistfight.
By the summer, Robert had moved to the Democratic side of the committee staff, then quit altogether.
HENRY ""SCOOP"" JACKSON was a Democratic senator from Washington whom JFK seriously considered for vice president in 1960.
MILES MCMILLIN was a reporter and later publisher of the Capital Times of Madison, Wisconsin.
His wife Elsie Rockefeller McMillin had been married to the state's new senator, William Proxmire.
Kennedy still thought of liberals as people who gave Jack trouble—as did, on occasion, her husband.
Members of the group that JFK called ""professional liberals"" had mistrusted him since he first ran for the House in 1946 because of his conservative father.
Once he was President, they charged that he was a militant Cold Warrior and too intimidated by conservative southern Democratic congressional committee chairmen to vigorously pursue the liberal agenda on civil rights, education, labor, health, poverty, and other domestic issues.
Kennedy especially valued his endorsement in 1960 because it offset the pre-convention opposition of his mother, Eleanor, who much preferred her close friend Stevenson.
After failing to find him a suitable position in his government (he asked McNamara to appoint him secretary or assistant secretary of the navy, as his father had been under Wilson, but the new Pentagon chief refused), the President made him undersecretary of commerce in 1963.
In fact, the Minnesotan had tried to enter the wartime military but was rejected because of a hernia.
This melodrama was Private Property, by director Leslie Stevens, so low budget that it was filmed in Stevens's Hollywood Hills home, starring his wife, Kate Manx.
It portrays a housewife taking up with hoodlums, with scenes of rape and murder.
By Bradlee's recollection, JFK speculated that Private Property was on the Catholic Church's index of prohibited films, and joked that it would have helped him with some of West Virginia's Catholic-hating voters, had they known he would be watching it.
TOM MBOYA was a young Kenyan nationalist leader who, during their July 26, 1960, meeting in Hyannis Port, convinced JFK, chairman of the Senate subcommittee on Africa, to have the Kennedy family foundation support the effort by Mboya's Airlift Africa to place Kenyan students in American universities.
One young Kenyan studying in America was Barack Obama, Sr., an Mboya friend and supporter who had arrived in 1959.
STANISLAS ALBERT RADZIWILL , known as Stas, was an exiled Polish prince and London real estate investor who was the second husband of Jacqueline's sister Lee.
He campaigned among Polish voters for JFK in 1960 and was John's godfather.
She had been asked by doctors to stay as quiet as possible until the expected birth in December.
Referring to the Illinoisan's encouragement of a Stevenson draft movement in Los Angeles.
Before the convention in Los Angeles, operatives for Lyndon Johnson had cast grim forebodings about Senator Kennedy's health.
In Los Angeles, LBJ had castigated Joseph Kennedy (with whom he had previously been quite amicable and who had quietly urged him to run for president in 1956 with Jack as running mate) for his pessimism before World War II about Britain's chances against Nazi Germany.
Johnson replied that she had been sending notes to all those people who had been so kind to her husband in Los Angeles.
On the day of his nomination, Kennedy had told Symington's close Missouri friend Clark Clifford that he intended to make Symington—who had run his own desultory presidential campaign, hoping to be chosen after a convention deadlock—his running mate.
Jacqueline had always liked Johnson—he felt she was ""nicer"" to him than anyone else in the Kennedy entourage, but this passage suggests some disenchantment with the new president.
Two days before Christmas 1963, LBJ demonstrated his tendency to overreach.
And Robert Kennedy, who detested Johnson, had regaled her with such tales as LBJ's hasty request of JFK's personal secretary on the morning after the assassination to vacate her West Wing office ""so I can get my girls in"" and his reversal of various Kennedy appointments, policies, and intentions.
But, although unsettled by Johnson's periodic gaucheries and his negation of a number of JFK policies, Mrs.
Kennedy liked LBJ and had great fondness and admiration for Lady Bird, who had often filled in for her as First Lady.
Jacqueline was also grateful to her successor for pledging to complete her White House restoration designs and to preserve the White House Historical Association and her other improvements intended to ensure that the mansion would remain a museum-quality showcase of American history and culture.
PHILIP GRAHAM was publisher of the Washington Post and a close Johnson ally who, in the habit of many newspaper proprietors of the time, liked to be involved in politics behind the scenes.
But in his posthumously published memorandum on his role in LBJ's selection, he in no way suggests that he was anything close to a kingmaker.
By Graham's account, his own role was limited to urging both men to run together and then—after JFK went down to Johnson's Biltmore Hotel suite and made the deal with him—encouraging LBJ not to bolt the ticket when angry liberals threatened a floor fight.
RFK, who even in 1960 disliked the Texan, much later insisted that his brother's offer of the vice presidency had been merely pro forma, and that Johnson had ""grabbed"" it.
Graham, Alsop, and others insisted that JFK had planned in advance of his nomination to make a serious offer to Johnson in order to carry important southern states and thus win the presidency.
There is unlikely to ever be a definitive verdict on how much Kennedy really wanted Johnson on his ticket.
Referring to the director, who made pictures such as The Informer , about an Irish rebel who betrays a comrade.
At a press conference before the balloting in Los Angeles in 1960, Connally had demanded a medical evaluation of whether Kennedy was healthy enough to serve as president.
Elected governor of his state in 1962, Connally and his wife Nellie rode with the Kennedys through four Texas cities on November 21 and 22, 1963.
During the Dallas motorcade, in the last words they spoke, Connally, a conservative Democrat, told the President of a soon-to-be-published poll that showed him running ahead of JFK in Texas in 1964.
One of the purposes of the Texas trip of November 1963 was to resolve an intra-party feud in that state which pitted Johnson and Connally against their political nemesis, Texas senator Ralph Yarborough.
Connally refused to ride in the presidential motorcades with Yarborough.
The other politician with the same name was liberal Don Yarborough , who had almost defeated Connally for the Democratic nomination for governor of Texas in 1962.
WILLARD WIRTZ was Kennedy's undersecretary of labor before moving to the top spot in 1962.
HENRY CABOT LODGE, JR. was a Republican senator from Massachusetts and namesake grandson of the Brahmin senator who killed Woodrow Wilson's dream of American membership in the post-World War I League of Nations.
Appearing alongside the well-respected Lodge gave JFK a boost similar to that of appearing with the vice president of the United States in debate.
After losing to Kennedy, Lodge served as Eisenhower's ambassador to the United Nations before joining Richard Nixon's losing ticket in 1960.
WILLIAM GREEN was a congressman from Philadelphia and the city's Democratic chairman.
Jacqueline's description here of Joseph Kennedy's efforts for his son's campaign is minimalist.
JOHN BAILEY was chief of Connecticut Democrats and an early Kennedy supporter whom the President appointed as Democratic national chairman.
The modest apartment some distance beyond the gold-domed Boston State House that JFK had taken in 1946 to establish residency for his first campaign for Congress, which by 1960 served as his and Jackie's voting address.
The Convair plane bought by the Kennedy family for JFK to use in the 1960 campaign.
June 6, 1944, a 1959 bestseller made into a feature film by Darryl F Zanuck at Twentieth Century Fox.
The seventeenth-century philosopher Blaise Pascal argued that even though God's existence could not be proven by reason, one should behave as if He did exist because there was nothing to lose by living in a God-fearing manner—and potentially everything to gain.
PHILIP HANNAN was auxiliary bishop of Washington, a World War II Army chaplain who parachuted into the Ardennes and helped to liberate a concentration camp, with whom JFK had maintained an unpublicized, quiet running conversation about religion and politics during his presidency, and who officiated at his funeral.
John Cavanaugh was a priest who was president of Notre Dame from 1946 to 1952.
Although he had officiated at the weddings of Robert and Edward Kennedy, he strongly supported Richard Nixon in 1960, disdaining JFK's opposition—in his ardor to demonstrate fealty to the separation of church and state—to federal money for parochial schools and to the appointment of a United States ambassador to the Vatican.
In 1945, Spellman launched the annual white-tie Alfred E Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner, a fund-raiser for Catholic charities which, in presidential election years, usually features jocular speeches by both candidates, as it did in 1960.
RICHARD CARDINAL CUSHING was archbishop of Boston from 1944 until the year of his death.
Son of an Irish immigrant blacksmith, the gravel-voiced Cushing, who had originally wished to be a politician, was a Kennedy family intimate who presided over JFK's wedding to Jackie, prayed at both JFK's inauguration and funeral, and strongly supported the widow when she was remarried in 1968 to Aristotle Onassis.
In October 1960, three Catholic bishops in Puerto Rico declared it a sin for Catholics to vote for any candidate opposed by the Church, which gave ammunition to those charging that no Catholic should be elected president.
Delighted to do damage to JFK just before the balloting, Cardinal Spellman publicly endorsed the bishops' edict.
Spellman found himself on the losing side of the debate over the progressive reforms initiated by Pope John XXIII at the Second Vatican Council in 1962.
She refers to the Catholic custom of prayer and Holy Communion on the first Friday of nine successive months.
They were looking for a weekend place that would allow their family to escape the city and Jacqueline to go riding and fox hunting.
ROBERT MCNAMARA , born in San Francisco, son of a shoe store manager, was a Harvard Business School professor with a devout faith in the value of statistical analysis.
After World War II, during which he analyzed the effectiveness of United States bombing forays in Asia, he rose through the ranks of the Ford Motor Company, becoming president in 1960, two days after JFK's election.
Eager for at least one big business Republican in his cabinet, Kennedy met him at his Georgetown home and offered Treasury or Defense.
McNamara accepted the latter, provided that he could appoint his own people.
Later McNamara was the architect of President Johnson's escalation in Vietnam, until his resignation in 1968.
DEAN RUSK of Cherokee County, Georgia, was a Rhodes Scholar who had been Truman's assistant secretary of state for the Far East, and then president of the Rockefeller Foundation.
When other possibilities for the State Department did not pan out, Kennedy turned to the mild but tenacious Rusk, whom he had not known, consoling himself with the notion that he planned to be his own secretary of state anyway.
J WILLIAM FULBRIGHT was a Rhodes Scholar who was Democratic senator from Arkansas from 1945 to 1975.
As a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which Fulbright chaired, JFK had admired his allergy to conventional wisdom, but knew that as secretary of state, the Arkansan would have been doomed by his opposition to civil rights and his outspoken support for the Arab states, which would have hampered his ability to deal with African countries and Israel, not to mention alienating African-American and Jewish voters at home.
The two men had only met once, briefly at the Capitol in September 1959, when JFK was a senator and Khrushchev had come to the United States to meet with President Eisenhower at Camp David.
Now that Kennedy was in power, each wanted to take the other's measure.
Kennedy hoped that behind closed doors, without the need to posture for the public, he and Khrushchev could reach some kind of worldly modus vivendi about Berlin, Cuba, Southeast Asia, and other Cold War powder kegs.
Khrushchev, who had risen to power under Stalin, interpreted Kennedy's private willingness to deal as political weakness.
His underestimation of the President in Vienna was one factor in his decision to challenge Kennedy in 1962 by slipping offensive missiles into Cuba.
Fluent in French, he collaborated at age twenty-six on the memoirs of his father's friend Henry Stimson, FDR's wartime secretary of war, and became the youngest dean of the faculty ever appointed by Harvard.
JFK appointed him as national security adviser, which until that time had been something of a clerk's position.
After the Bay of Pigs, with his shrewd and gentlemanly instinct for power, Bundy convinced Kennedy that it should be much enhanced, so that the President would have a full-time in-house counselor to protect him against future bad cabinet advice—a redefinition of the job that has prevailed ever since.
He also felt such an affinity with the President that he changed his registration to Democratic.
J EDGAR HOOVER was the first director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which he helped to create, and its predecessor agency, from 1924 until his death.
His detractors noted Hoover's metastasizing hatreds (for example, Martin Luther King and the few journalists and politicians who dared to criticize him), eccentricities (after an automobile mishap while making a left turn, he ordered his driver to abjure all future left turns), abuse of civil liberties, and Napoleonic tendencies.
All agreed that Hoover spent his FBI years amassing unprecedented and largely unaccountable power, with his files of potentially damaging information on those who might stop him.
In 1960, the newly elected JFK felt that, especially with his narrow margin, he had little choice but to immediately reappoint Hoover.
But unlike his predecessors, Kennedy required the old man to deal with the President through the attorney general—in this case, Robert Kennedy, whom Hoover predictably detested—and hoped that resounding reelection to a second term would allow him to fire the FBI director and replace him with someone more cognizant of civil liberties.
By contrast, President Lyndon Johnson made Hoover virtually director-for-life.
ROBERT LOVETT was a Wall Street investment banker and Truman's final secretary of defense.
JFK was eager to show continuity with the previous Democratic government by appointing a wellrespected figure, but Lovett declined any appointment for reasons of health.
After their meeting, on his doorstep in the cold, Kennedy told reporters that he had asked Stevenson to go to the UN and the Illinoisan declared that he would have to think about it.
Stevenson's diffidence was understandable, but at a time when others were happily accepting presidential appointments, Kennedy was annoyed to be so publicly rebuffed.
Stevenson's friends persuaded him that if he turned down the UN, Americans would forget about him.
In April 1961, JFK approved a revised version of an existing secret plan left by Eisenhower to launch CIA-backed Cuban exiles in an invasion of Cuba to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro.
When the landing, on Cuba's Bay of Pigs, failed, causing the President a mammoth embarrassment less than three months into his term, Kennedy publicly took responsibility.
C DOUGLAS DILLON was a Republican investment banking heir who served as Eisenhower's ambassador to France and undersecretary of state before JFK appointed him as his treasury secretary.
ROBERT SARGENT SHRIVER was working for Joseph Kennedy at the family-owned Merchandise Mart in Chicago when he met his boss's daughter Eunice and married her in 1953.
During the interregnum, he served as the President-elect's highly effective chief talent scout.
Later Shriver commanded President Johnson's War on Poverty, served as United States ambassador to France, and ran as Democratic nominee for vice president in 1972.
JFK gave FDR, Jr., substantial credit for helping him win the pivotal West Virginia primary, reassuring many voters who worried about his Catholicism but who venerated President Roosevelt for saving their homes and jobs during the Great Depression.
STEWART UDALL was a Democratic congressman from Arizona when JFK made him secretary of the interior.
ORVILLE FREEMAN was governor of Minnesota before he became Kennedy's secretary of agriculture.
LUTHER HODGES was a one-term North Carolina governor who had swung his state to JFK for vice president in 1956.
The President-elect, who needed at least one southerner in his cabinet, made him secretary of commerce.
J EDWARD DAY had been Illinois insurance commissioner under Governor Adlai Stevenson before serving as an insurance executive in California.
ROSWELL GILPATRIC was a Wall Street lawyer who served under McNamara as undersecretary of defense.
This ruling granted new license for publication of vicious comments about presidents and other public figures.
Goldberg felt it would never be possible to firmly establish a defendant's motive, so he preferred a wider berth for the press.
Sargent Shriver, who was performing reconnaissance on potential appointees.
After the election, JFK found that the prospect so depressed his wife that he asked FDR, Jr., to reassure her.
In June 1962, Jacqueline wrote her friend William Walton, ""My life here which I dreaded & which at first overwhelmed me—is now under control and the happiest time I have ever known—not for the position —but for the closeness of one's family.
In 1962, the United States abruptly cancelled its program to build Skybolt missiles, including some promised to British prime minister Harold Macmillan as an incentive to shut down his own surface-to-air missile program.
Washington's seemingly cavalier treatment of its British ally nicked Macmillan's prestige in his own country.
DAVID FINLEY was the first director of the National Gallery of Art; first chairman of the White House Historical Association, founded by Mrs.
Kennedy; member of her White House Fine Arts Committee ; and, from 1950 to 1963, chair of the United States Commission of Fine Arts, which oversaw the design of federal buildings and monuments in the capital.
John Walker IIT was director of the National Gallery from 1956 to 1969.
After the inauguration, she was still recovering from John's traumatic birth.
LETITIA BALDRIGE , tall, energetic, and intense, had preceded Jacqueline at Farmington and Vassar and was a family friend of the Auchinclosses.
When Baldrige left her job in the spring of 1963, JFK told her she was the most ""emotional"" woman he had ever met.
She was later informed that Mamie Eisenhower had told her staff to keep a wheelchair behind an ornamental screen but only bring it out if Mrs.
After flying to Palm Beach, Jacqueline spent the next fortnight in bed.
J BERNARD WEST , who served as chief usher from 1957 to 1969, directing the household staff of the White House, had a close and productive relationship with Mrs.
He welcomed and provided crucial aid to her efforts to restore the White House.
President Truman had been denounced in 1947 for his apostasy in adding a second-floor balcony to the mansion's south front.
Replying to Finley's notice that he would leave the Fine Arts Commission that year, Mrs.
HENRY DU PONT , the Republican heir to a famous fortune, was a well-respected expert on American art, furniture, and horticulture, and had done much to reshape Winterthur, his family's old 900acre Delaware estate, opened to the public in 1951, with period rooms and gardens.
Kennedy's bipartisan Fine Arts Committee of prominent Americans advising her on the White House restoration.
As an Americanist, du Pont was sometimes distressed by the French-inspired improvisations of Stéphane Boudin.
On some of his visits, du Pont would rearrange White House furniture, after which Jacqueline would discreetly have it moved back.
An Historic Guide, and books on presidents, first ladies, and the White House gardens, all launched by Jacqueline Kennedy.
The guidebook was purchased by a half million readers during its first six months, swelling the coffers of the new association.
Resolute that became famous in JFK's Oval Office and has been used by every president but one since Gerald Ford.
In February 1962, Jacqueline's hour-long tour of the White House restoration was seen by 56 million television viewers and won her an honorary Emmy.
From the time of their grand trip to Paris of May 1961 and, especially, her vastly popular televised tour of the White House, she was not only no longer a political liability but would have been a major asset to the President when he ran for reelection in 1964.
Knowing this, JFK used strong persuasion to have her agree to accompany him on planned trips to Texas and California that were to be the forerunner of that campaign.
In her presence at the Rice Hotel in Houston on their final evening together, the President asked Dave Powers to compare the crowd that had greeted them that day to the one when he had come to Houston alone the previous year.
STéPHANE BOUDIN , president of the Paris design firm Maison Jansen, who had advised on restoration at Versailles, Malmaison, Leeds Castle, and other historical monuments, was quietly secured by Mrs.
To avoid public controversy about employing a non-American, her staff took pains, with Boudin's consent, to keep him in the background.
But privately Jacqueline thought it completely appropriate that she consult a Frenchman, because of French contributions to the American Revolution, the French talent for using architecture and the arts to convey national glory, and because, as she considered how the White House should look, she was captivated by the sensibilities of Presidents Jefferson and Monroe, both former ambassadors to Paris, who adorned the mansion with French and French-inspired artifacts, painting, and furniture.
She feared a public outcry against the room's new design, which was no longer dominated by blue.
SYLVIA WHITEHOUSE BLAKE had been Jacqueline's Vassar classmate and one of her bridesmaids.
In the ground-floor corner bedroom of his parents’ house in Palm Beach.
SAMUEL RAYBURN was speaker of the house until 1961 and a mentor to the young congressman Lyndon Johnson.
PIERRE SALINGER of San Francisco, bon vivant, former journalist and aide to Robert Kennedy, served as press secretary during the 1960 campaign and White House years.
FRANK SINATRA , singer and JFK friend, had organized a pre-inaugural gala featuring Hollywood performers such as singer Nat King Cole and comedian Alan King.
STYLES BRIDGES was a Republican New Hampshire senator and one of those responsible for inaugural arrangements.
Eisenhower could have made sitting beside the wife of the man who was now the nation's most prominent Irish-American.
EARL WARREN was the governor of California whom Eisenhower had appointed as chief justice in 1953.
Although a Republican, Warren had been glad to swear in Kennedy, rather than Nixon, who was a political enemy.
EDWARD FOLEY was a well-known Washington lawyer, former undersecretary of the treasury under Truman, and chairman of JFK's inaugural committee.
GEORGE THOMAS was an African-American from Berryville, Virginia, who was JFK's longtime valet and lived on the third floor of the White House.
Krock had once been a close friend of Joseph Kennedy's and adviser to Jack while writing Why England Slept, but had broken with them in 1960 over JFK's growing liberalism while seeking the presidency.
An old friend of Jacqueline's grandfather, John V Bouvier, Jr., and her stepfather, Hugh Auchincloss, Krock had helped her get her job on the Washington Times-Herald.
Referring to the exuberant tours of the White House given by Lyndon Johnson since becoming president.
HANS KRAUS , an Austrian-born mountain climber, was an orthopedic expert who extolled exercise as a remedy for back injuries.
When JFK's back problems grew worse in 1961, he consulted Kraus, who agreed to take on the case as long as Dr.
Travell was removed from the President's case and that Kraus would be able to reach Kennedy at any time by direct telephone.
Aghast that Travell had simply cured the President's pain with Novocain and let the President's chest, abdominal, and back muscles atrophy, Dr.
Kraus warned him that he would soon need a wheelchair unless he began a strict regimen.
Under Kraus's care, JFK was telling friends by 1963 that he had never felt better and felt hearty enough to resume golf.
Travell, who was well-known to the public as the first female White House doctor, was allowed to keep her title and observe at least the fiction that she was still caring for the President.
An estate in Middleburg, Virginia, which the Kennedys rented in 1961 and 1962.
Campaigns, travels, and pregnancy had kept Jacqueline from riding regularly since her marriage in 1953.
JOHN VERNOU BOUVIER III was the debonair father whom Jacqueline adored.
In 1963, the Kennedys built a seven-bedroom yellow ochre stucco and fieldstone house, with a breathtaking view of the Blue Ridge Mountains, on thirty-nine acres in Atoka, Virginia.
JFK spent the long weekend before Texas in Tampa and Miami, where he made speeches, and Palm Beach, where he stayed at his father's house with his Harvard friend Torbert Macdonald and watched televised football.
Having lost substantial support in most of the Deep South states he had won in 1960 over his stand for civil rights, he considered it essential to his reelection to carry Florida in 1964.
EVANGELINE BELL BRUCE was the second wife of David Bruce , who was JFK's ambassador in London after occupying the same job in Paris and Bonn.
Clare Boothe Luce was the second wife of Henry Luce , founder of what was probably the most powerful single print influence on American public opinion of those years, the Time-Life organization.
But when Kennedy became President, his more doctrinaire wife, a former Connecticut congresswoman and ambassador to Italy, tended to lecture him as if he were still the student he was when they had first met.
Used by presidents from Andrew Johnson to Theodore Roosevelt as a Cabinet Room, it was restyled by Mrs.
Kennedy as a dark green Victorian chamber featuring Ulysses Grant's omate cabinet table, other late-nineteenth-century furniture and fixtures, and framed facsimiles of agreements signed in the room, such as William McKinley's peace treaty ending the SpanishAmerican War.
Kennedy planned to be ""taking the veil"" and winding down her public commitments from the brisk regimen pressed on her by Tish Baldrige.
ELIZABETH VIRGINIA BEALE was an extroverted and widely read Washington social columnist.
LORRAINE WAXMAN PEARCE , the first White House curator, was an alumna of the Winterthur graduate program and a specialist in the French impact on decorative arts in America.
Kennedy was displeased by what she saw as Pearce's desire for the limelight.
For her part, with no political experience, the young Pearce felt baffled by the complex interplay among the First Lady, her Fine Arts Committee, the White House Historical Association, du Pont, and Boudin.
After a year, Jacqueline had her reassigned to oversee the new White House guidebook.
In September 1962, the First Lady wrote du Pont, ""Why are some people so avid for publicity— when it poisons everything.
ANDRé MEYER was a French Jewish refugee who headed American operations for the Paris investment bank Lazard Freres.
He first met the First Lady when he contributed the Aubusson rug for the French Empire—inspired Red Room.
After President Kennedy's death, Meyer became one of Jacqueline's closest friends.
FIDEL CASTRO RUZ and his guerrilla army entered Havana in triumph in January 1959, having overthrown the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista.
That April, he visited Washington, D.C., at the invitation of the National Press Club and was refused an audience by President Eisenhower.
The following year, Castro began importing Soviet oil and expropriating American firms.
His wife, Florence Pritchett Smith , had been a friend of President Kennedy's since school days.
Smith's 1962 book The Fourth Floor lambasted Assistant Secretary of State Roy Rubottom and other Eisenhower officials for being too relaxed about letting Castro seize power in Cuba.
ALLEN DULLES was a Wall Street lawyer and brother of Eisenhower's secretary of state who served as director of Central Intelligence from 1953 to 1961.
Along with J Edgar Hoover, he was JFK's first reappointment as President-elect—and, like Hoover, in the name of continuity.
On July 23, 1960, Dulles came to Hyannis Port to brief the newly minted Democratic nominee on national security.
Nixon complained that JFK had abused this access to classified information in October 1960 to criticize Eisenhower's government for failing to help ""fighters for freedom"" eager to overthrow Castro.
In Nixon's telling, in order to preserve the operation's secrecy, he felt compelled during the debates with Kennedy to argue the other side, although in secret he had actually been a champion of CIA plans to upend Castro.
The Agency had given Kennedy to believe that if the exiles, after landing, managed to establish a beachhead in Cuba, public dissatisfaction with Castro might generate a national uprising that would topple the dictator and put the exiles in power—and that if they failed, they could ""melt into the mountains” of Cuba as guerrillas.
None of these assurances proved accurate, which inflicted a severe blow to Kennedy's prestige.
The CIA and its partisans blamed Kennedy for refusing to suspend his order that United States military forces stay out of the battle.
This was weeks before the CIA provided President Kennedy with the first hard evidence, gathered from U-2 photographs, of the missiles on the island.
By that Sunday afternoon, April 16, 1961, six American B-26s painted with Cuban insignia had already destroyed almost half of Castro's air force.
CIA officials had presumed that, once the invasion was under way, JFK would be willing to discard his public pledge not to invade Cuba and authorize United States military forces to openly support the freedom-fighters then landing on Cuban beaches.
Rusk's call warned the President of the importance of concealing any American role in the invasion.
Kennedy thus witheld United States air power until the exiles were established on Cuba, at which time such a strike might be plausibly explained as coming from Cuban soil.
At that moment, a ban on American air strikes was likely to doom the invasion, and Kennedy knew it.
LYMAN LEMNITZER had been appointed by Eisenhower in 1960 as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
In March 1962, Lemnitzer approved a highly classified plan, called Operation Northwoods, for the United States government to commit acts of terrorism in Miami and other American cities and blame them on Castro as a pretext for a full American invasion of Cuba.
The plan even had suggested that if a United States astronaut perished during a mission, the finger should be pointed at Castro.
Appalled by Lemnitzer's proposal and still fuming over the general's ham-handed advice during the Bay of Pigs, JFK denied him a second term that fall as chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
JOSE MIRO CARDONA was a Havana lawyer, professor, and prominent Batista critic who, after the revolution, was briefly Castro's prime minister before he broke with him and fled to Florida.
Before the Bay of Pigs, Cardona was leader of the committee of anti-Castro Cubans who were quietly cooperating with the CIA and the tiny group of Kennedy officials involved in the forthcoming invasion.
Had the Cuban exiles managed to seize a substantial portion of their island, they would have declared Cardona provisional president of Cuba.
ADOLF BERLE was a law professor, economic theorist, and FDR-era diplomat who was assisting the State Department on Latin America.
On Tuesday evening, April 18, JFK was summoned from the annual White House reception for Congress to the Cabinet Room, where a Caribbean map with tiny magnetic ships had been set up.
MARK SHAW was one of the most well-known fashion and celebrity photographers of the time.
By Wednesday evening, when the Kennedys attended a Greek embassy dinner hosted by Karamanlis, the President knew that the invasion was an inescapable failure.
JOHN MCCONE was a California businessman, chairman of Eisenhower's Atomic Energy Commission, and Nixon supporter in 1960, whom JFK appointed to succeed Allen Dulles, after firing the latter in the wake of the Bay of Pigs disaster.
Americans rallied to him and gave him the highest Gallup Poll approval ratings of his presidency—81 percent.
CURTIS LEMAY was the truculent Air Force chief of staff, known for his leadership of World War II strategic bombing and the postwar Strategic Air Command.
Since the sunburst of recovery programs created by FDR to fight the Great Depression during the first hundred days of his presidency, this metric has been used by the press ever since to issue wildly premature assessments of new presidents.
CHARLES WRIGHTSMAN was an Oklahoma oil tycoon and social friend of the Kennedys, along with his wife, Jayne Larkin Wrightsman , who was a close friend to Jacqueline and who served on her Fine Arts Committee to supervise and raise funds for the White House restoration.
JOZSEF CARDINAL MINDSZENTY of Budapest was sentenced, after a 1949 show trial, to life imprisonment for ""treason"" against the Soviet-dominated government of Hungary.
JAMES GAVIN , fabled commander of the 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment on D-day, was JFK's first ambassador to Paris.
Like Maxwell Taylor, General Gavin had quit Eisenhower's Pentagon over defense strategy and published a book explaining why.
It was after the Bay of Pigs that JFK convinced his brother to expand his portfolio and become his confidential adviser and troubleshooter on foreign, defense, and intelligence policy—especially toward Cuba and the Soviet Union.
President Kennedy asked Taylor to head a committee to conduct a postmortem on the Bay of Pigs failure.
Other panel members were Robert Kennedy, Allen Dulles, and Admiral Arleigh Burke.
The evidence was his willingness to brave domestic political criticism by encouraging a public campaign, including a ""Tractors for Freedom"" committee, headed by eminent Americans, to meet Castro's ransom demands for about $60 million worth of tractors, drugs, baby food, and medical equipment in exchange for their freedom.
In December 1962, the Kennedys welcomed the liberated Cubans at a raucous rally in Miami's Orange Bowl, where Jacqueline told the ex-prisoners in Spanish that she hoped John would grow up to be as brave as they were.
OLEG PENKOVSKY was a valuable secret agent for Western intelligence in Moscow when he was exposed, arrested, tried, and executed.
To avoid disrupting the Joseph Kennedy household in Palm Beach, the President and First Lady leased the neighboring home of Mr and Mrs.
ERNEIDO OLIVA GONZALEZ was deputy commander of invasion Brigade 2506 and had just been released from Castro's prison.
The following year, he and some of his comrades received United States Army commissions.
XAVIER CUGAT was a popular Spanish-born bandleader who had spent his childhood in Cuba.
A large reason that Oliva and his comrades were so disillusioned was that President Johnson had just shut down the considerable program of covert action against Cuba that had been quietly supervised by the Kennedy brothers.
DONALD BARNES was the government's senior Spanish interpreter, and was duly interviewed for the Kennedy Library's oral history program.
Raids from the sea were part of the United States covert action waged against Castro's Cuba.
Before his departure for Havana, his friend Ben Bradlee arranged for him to see President Kennedy in the Oval Office.
EVELYN NORTON LINCOLN was JFK's personal secretary from 1953 until his death.
Kennedy's Alliance for Progress was designed to increase economic cooperation with Latin American countries and position the United States as the friend and champion of reform, not dictatorship.
In June 1962, they visited Mexico City, riding through ebullient crowds, as guests of President Adolfo Lépez Mateos , president of Mexico from 1958 to 1964, whom both Kennedys liked and admired for his social reforms.
She refers to their arrival for JFK's meeting with Khrushchev in June 1961.
HAROLD MACMILLAN , the Conservative British prime minister from 1957 to 1963, made his visit to Kennedy in April 1961.
They were related through the marriage of Kennedy's late sister Kathleen , known as ""Kick,"" to William Cavendish, Marquess of Hartington, nephew of Macmillan's wife, Lady Dorothy.
Alberto Lleras Camargo was a former journalist and the Colombian president from 1958 to 1962.
Kennedy a tour of his presidential palace, a glittering museum of Colombian history, which she later considered to be an inspiration for her restoration of the White House.
In 1961, Kennedy resisted pressures to deploy the United States military against pro-Communist forces in Laos.
Instead he authorized negotiation, which resulted, the following year, in the country's neutrality.
At the end of World War II, when the Allies drew up plans for postwar Germany, they left Berlin deep within the Soviet zone of occupation.
The city itself was effectively divided into two sectors—East Berlin for the Soviets, West Berlin for the Americans, British, and French.
By the late 1950s, Soviet-backed East Germany was an economic ruin, in contrast to the ""miracle"" of West Germany.
To stop this refugee flow and score points against the Free World, Khrushchev demanded that the city be unified, which, because of its geographical position, would make it subject to Soviet whims and effectively force the West out of the German capital.
The Western allies had committed themselves to preserve their rights in Berlin, if necessary, by going to war.
When Kennedy left Khrushchev after their harsh Vienna encounter in June 1961, the Berlin Crisis was on, with the President calling up American reservists.
Then suddenly in August, the Soviets and East Germans built a hideous wall around West Berlin to stop the ""brain drain"" to the West.
Although Kennedy opposed the wall politically, he privately realized that the Soviet leader was providing himself a face-saving means to wind down the Berlin Crisis.
NGO DINH DIEM was president of South Vietnam from the French withdrawal in 1955 until his death in a military coup.
Jacqueline refers to protests like that of the Buddhist priest who burned himself to death in Saigon in the summer of 1963 to protest Diem's repressive policies.
Both Kennedys were engaged by the literary quality and humor of the cables from JFK's ambassador to India.
During times of stress, Jacqueline would cheer the President up by leaving him hand-drawn cartoons and limericks, bringing the children to his office, and having him served some of his most preferred foods, such as from Joe's Stone Crab from Miami.
In private, she also performed uncanny impersonations of some of the people with whom JFK had to deal.
She could imitate the French ambassador doing his own impersonation of de Gaulle.
WILLIAM WALTON , journalist, novelist, painter, and soldier, had been dropped into France at the start of the D-day invasion.
A close friend of both Kennedys (he hung paintings in JFK's Oval Office after the inauguration), Walton accepted Jackie's appeal to serve as chair of the United States Commission of Fine Arts, which oversaw the aesthetic design of federal buildings and monuments.
KWAME NKRUMAH became the first president of an independent Ghana in 1960.
Soon Nkrumah was busy amassing a corrupt fortune, placing restrictions on his people's freedoms, and flirting with the Soviet Union.
HAILE SELASSIE was the Ethiopian emperor, known as the ""Lion of Judah,"" and by tradition descended from King Solomon.
SUKARNO , after leading Indonesia to independence from the Dutch, was its first president from 1945 to 1967 and widely known for both lust and corruption.
ALBERTO VARGAS was a Peruvian-born painter who created pinups of beautiful women, both nude and clothed, which appeared in Esquire and Playboy.
GEORGE PETTY painted female subjects in poses similar to those of Vargas.
JFK received him in November 1961 at Hyannis Port for an interview that was published in both of their countries.
Kennedy presumably refers to the daughter-in-law who accompanied the Khrushchevs to Vienna.
ANATOLY DOBRYNIN , a lifelong professional diplomat, came to Washington as Soviet ambassador in 1962.
Walton called on Soviet officials in Moscow on a trip arranged before the President's death to meet Soviet artists.
After the two leaders' first day of talks, the Kennedys and Khrushchevs were feted with a dinner and performance at Schonbrunn Palace.
As Khrushchev loved to boast, the Soviet Union's space program in 1961 was ahead of America's.
ANDREI GROMYKO , the severe Soviet foreign minister, fouled his relationship with JFK in October 1962 by denying to his face in the Oval Office that the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba.
This was in October 1961, during a conversation in the White House family quarters, in which JFK deflected Gromyko's bargaining attempts on West Berlin by saying, ""You're offering to trade us an apple for an orchard.
RACHEL ""BUNNY"" MELLON , a pharmaceuticals heiress and second wife of the philanthropist and arts patron Paul Mellon , was Jacqueline's close friend.
Mellon served on her Fine Arts Committee and advised her on the restoration, the remaking of the White House gardens—she and JFK collaborated on the transformation of the Rose Garden into a tree-edged setting for outdoor ceremonies—and, ultimately, President Kennedy's Arlington gravesite.
The British prime minister made his first White House visit to Kennedy in April 1961.
DAVID ORMSBY-GORE was British ambassador to Washington during the Kennedy years.
A descendant of the Tory hero and British prime minister Lord Salisbury , he had known JFK since before World War II, when Joseph Kennedy served in prewar London.
As a Conservative member of Parliament, Ormsby-Gore had sporadically discussed disarmament with JFK throughout the 1950s.
Both he and Macmillan pushed the President to fight hard for a comprehensive test ban treaty that would reduce the harshness of the Cold War arms race.
In October 1963, suffering from a prostate ailment, Macmillan resigned.
His defense minister, John Profumo, had recently been embroiled in a sex and espionage scandal that tarnished the Macmillan government's reputation.
Friends speculated that the ordeal might have led to Macmillan's malady, or that he was grateful to use the excuse of ill health to resign a job that had abruptly became unpleasant for him.
HUGH GAITSKELL and Harold Wilson were leaders of the Labour party opposition to Macmillan.
Kennedy's official visit to India, accompanied by her sister, in March 1962.
Charles James Fox was a Whig political leader and the scourge of King George III, whom he considered a tyrant, which led Fox to support the American Revolution against him.
Clair-Erskine, 6th Earl of Rosslyn , both served as postwar members of Parliament.
WILLIAM DOUGLAS-HOME was a playwright who ran unsuccessfully for Parliament during World War II, stating his opposition to Winston Churchill's insistence that the struggle be fought until Germany surrendered unconditionally.
His brother Alec , who was Macmillan's foreign secretary, succeeded him as prime minister in October 1963.
Douglas-Home had written the plays The Reluctant Debutante and The Reluctant Peer.
ARISTOTLE ONASSIS based his family, business, and yacht Christina in Monaco in the late 1950s and was frequently host to the aged Churchill and his wife Clementine.
The Kennedys actually met Churchill aboard Onassis's yacht during both the summers of 1955 and 1959.
KONRAD ADENAUER was the first chancellor of postwar West Germany, retiring in 1963.
JFK's admiration for Adenauer's role in building German democracy was tempered by his annoyance at Adenauer's ceaseless demands that the United States demonstrate its commitment to defend West Berlin from Communist threat.
JOHN DIEFENBAKER was the Conservative prime minister of Canada when the Kennedys made their first official foreign visit there in May 1961.
During their talks, the prime minister could not disguise his low opinion of the informal, young new President.
Allegedly one of the Americans accidentally left behind a document, written by Kennedy's aide Walt Rostow, on which the President had casually scribbled his view that the fusty Diefenbaker was an ""S.O.B.,"" and which urged an effort to ""push"" the Canadians on various subjects.
The following year, JFK further antagonized Diefenbaker by inviting the leader of his opposition, the Liberal party's Lester Pearson, whom Kennedy had known during his tenure as ambassador in Washington, to a White House dinner and seeing Pearson privately for a half hour.
While campaigning for reelection, Diefenbaker tried to shake the Americans' obvious preference for Pearson's party by threatening to release the offending memorandum of 1961, warning that ""all Canadians"" would resent the evidence of American lordliness.
CHARLES AUBREY SMITH was a British actor and stereotypical Englishman, who looked like Georges Vanier.
This was in May 1960, when de Gaulle came to Washington as Eisenhower's guest.
Referring to the Kennedys' triumphal reception in France when they were received by de Gaulle for a state visit in May 1961, before the Vienna summit with Khrushchev.
De Gaulle's efforts to distance France from NATO and the United States in order to demonstrate French singularity and grandeur.
ANDRé MALRAUX , art historian, novelist, and brave hero of the French Resistance during World War II, was de Gaulle's minister of culture.
His 1938 novel L'Espoir was based on his experience fighting alongside anti-fascist forces during the Spanish Civil War.
She asked to meet Malraux during the state visit to Paris and hear him speak about some of the paintings she most admired.
Jacqueline had sent word that in his grief, Malraux need not bother with her, but he insisted on keeping his commitment to be her host, which touched her deeply.
At the Galerie Nationale du Jeu de Paume, the great French museum, Malraux stood before canvases by Manet, Renoir, and Cézanne and reacted to them.
He had also had Bouguereau's The Birth of Venus moved beside Manet's Olympia so that Mrs.
During their visit to the Chateau de Malmaison, which had been restored by Napoleon's Empress Josephine and served as the seat of French government from 1800 to 1802, he lectured her about the turbulent Bonaparte marriage.
After touring the house and its famous rose garden, she felt newly inspired in her efforts to improve the White House and its grounds, which benefited from her knowledge of French literature, history, and art.
Her instant intellectual communion with Malraux led to a correspondence by diplomatic pouch.
In April 1962, she happily showed him through the National Gallery in Washington and, along with the President, honored him at a dinner for the Western Hemisphere's Nobel laureates, which JFK, in his toast, pronounced the most extraordinary White House gathering of talent since Jefferson had dined there alone.
During the gallery tour, Jacqueline suggested an American visit by the Mona Lisa, which rarely left the Louvre.
With the assent of de Gaulle, who was willing to make a friendly gesture toward Kennedy if it required no relinquishment of French political power, Malraux defied the Paris arts bureaucracy and arranged ""a personal loan"" of the Mona Lisa to the President and Jacqueline.
In January 1963, the Kennedys welcomed Malraux and his wife to the National Gallery for the unveiling.
When Malraux published his autobiography, Anti-Memoirs, in 1968, he dedicated it to Jacqueline.
Referring to Glen Ora, where the Kennedys gave Malraux and his wife a Sunday champagne brunch.
The Madquis were guerrillas of the French Resistance, mainly in the countryside.
RICHARD GOODWIN , a former law clerk under Justice Felix Frankfurter, had worked for JFK since 1959 as campaign speechwriter, assistant special counsel, and diplomat, and was slated in November 1963 to replace August Heckscher as the President's chief adviser on the arts.
While in Paris, Jacqueline had consulted Malraux about the possibility of creating an American counterpart to Malraux's culture ministry and ""what was realistic"" to expect.
Since 1958, Khrushchev had been issuing deadlines and using other tactics in an effort to force the United States and other Western powers out of West Berlin.
JFK's television speech from the Oval Office on the Berlin crisis of July 25, 1961, in which he announced a defense budget increase and call-ups of American reservists.
Notably after the missile crisis, when Kennedy ordered his aides not to crow about the apparent American victory, explaining that if Khrushchev felt embarrassed, the Russian might feel compelled to launch some other gambit that might take the world to the edge of destruction.
The President also knew that his private settlement with Khrushchev was less clear-cut than the public impression that he had managed to win the Soviet leader's unconditional surrender.
In fact, Khrushchev had made a tacit deal with Kennedy to remove the missiles if the President would force the withdrawal of NATO missiles from Turkey and (on condition that Castro would permit on-site inspections of his military installations, which he never did) pledge never to authorize a United States invasion of Cuba.
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU , the Indian prime minister and Gandhi lieutenant who had been imprisoned during his country's independence struggle, came to the United States in November 1961.
From the Newport naval station, the Kennedys took Nehru to the Auchincloss estate, Hammersmith Farm.
During his visit to Southeast Asia, Kennedy greatly annoyed the commander of French forces in Indochina, Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, by asking why the Vietnamese should want to give their lives merely so that their country would remain a French possession.
ANGIER BIDDLE DUKE was a tobacco heir and diplomat who served as JFK's chief of protocol.
Meaning the Yellow Oval Room in the family quarters, which Jacqueline was transforming into an elegant parlor.
VENGALIL KRISHNAN KRISHNA MENON was Nehru's defense minister and an impassioned critic of United States foreign policy.
MARIAN CANNON SCHLESINGER was the painter daughter of a Harvard physiology teacher, who indeed endorsed Stevenson in 1960.
When Schlesinger announced his support of JFK before the 1960 convention, some old friends and Stevenson backers denounced him as a Benedict Arnold.
Kennedy's official visit to India of March 1962, which she diplomatically balanced afterward with a stopover in the country's rival, Pakistan.
KRISHNA NEHRU HUTHEESING , a writer, was the prime minister's youngest sister.
In the fall of 1961, after the Vienna summit, the Berlin Crisis, and the building of the Berlin Wall, Khrushchev tried to demonstrate Soviet might by ordering the largest nuclear test explosions ever.
BERTRAND RUSSELL was a British pacifist, philosopher, and Nobel laureate in literature.
DAVID LAWRENCE was a conservative journalist and founder of United States News & World Report.
Kennedy did not know Macmillan remotely as well as the President had, but after Kennedy's death, she achieved a moving kind of intimacy with her husband's British friend by letter.
On June 1, 1964, the day before this oral history interview, Jacqueline reported to Macmillan that she was feeling better now and the worst had passed.
Later she wrote him that she was trying to raise her children as Jack would have wished—and that if she prevailed, then that would be her vengeance against the world.
Launched in 1962, Telstar was the first communications satellite to allow television images to be beamed across the Atlantic.
On the President's forty-seventh birthday, Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy appeared from Hyannis Port in an international tribute that included Macmillan, Berlin mayor Willy Brandt, and other foreign leaders.
In August 1963, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Macmillan consented to a treaty to ban nuclear tests in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water.
De Gaulle, eager to build his own French nuclear deterrent, refused to sign it.
Despite Kennedy's large efforts, the document did not preclude underground testing, but it represented the first serious mutual effort by Americans and Soviets to control the Cold War nuclear arms competition that threatened the planet from 1949 until 1991.
Especially after the almostapocalypse of the missile crisis, Kennedy considered it his proudest achievement.
He signed it on October 7, 1963, in the Victorian splendor of Jacqueline's new Treaty Room.
ARTHUR DEAN , William Foster , and John McCloy had all been asked by JFK to help to negotiate a test ban treaty with the Soviets.
W AVERELL HARRIMAN was the son and heir of one of the late nineteenth century's most famous railroad barons.
The President sent Harriman to Moscow to demonstrate the seriousness of his commitment to achieving a treaty and was impressed by Harriman's brilliant success.
Kennedy for her family to use as they waited to move into their new home.
THEODORE WHITE , a friend of JFK's who had overlapped with him at Harvard and wrote the landmark book on presidential politics, The Making of the President, 1960.
In that volume, White wrote that ""no man proved more capable of exercising the end form of American power around the globe"" than Harriman, but that ""no man proved more incapable of understanding American domestic politics"" than Harriman.
He soldiered on as a senior diplomat for the two Democratic presidents who followed John Kennedy.
Eminent officials of the Kennedy government attended what came to be called ""Hickory Hill seminars"" , which were held in various of their homes.
Organized by Schlesinger, an academic would lecture and take questions on his own expertise.
The evening with the Lincoln historian David Herbert Donald took place in the Yellow Oval Room.
After Khrushchev promised to withdraw his missiles from Cuba, JFK ruminated to Robert Kennedy that it might be the night to go to the theater, referring to Lincoln's assassination in Ford's Theatre at the zenith of his political reputation.
MAUD ALICE BURKE , known as Lady Emerald Cunard, born in America, was a famous pre—World War II London hostess.
The French ambassador was intensely jealous of Ormsby-Gore's extraordinary relationship with the Kennedys.
The President and First Lady placed some distance between themselves and the Alphands also because of de Gaulle's growing resistance to JFK's overtures and efforts to keep France firmly in the Western Alliance.
U THANT was a Burmese diplomat who served as secretary-general of the UN from 1961 to 1971.
Kennedy met with Macmillan for three days at the Lyford Cay Club in the Bahamas in December 1962.
Before the meeting, the United States, citing technical problems, had cancelled its program to build Skybolt missiles, which had been promised to the U.K. for its nuclear deterrent force.
When this was announced by the British defense minister, Peter Thorneycroft, Macmillan suffered political embarrassment—especially with Parliament critics who complained that he was too close and subservient to Kennedy.
At Nassau, the President tried to bolster Macmillan by offering him Polaris missiles in return for lease of a submarine base near Glasgow.
There General Godfrey McHugh , the President's air force aide, made his inopportune report that whatever technical difficulties Skybolt had suffered, they had evidently vanished.
Mortified to have injured Macmillan, JFK asked the Columbia political scientist Richard Neustadt to investigate the gaffe.
Studying Neustadt's report with fascination in November 1963, Kennedy urged Jackie to read it.
ROGER BLOUGH was board chairman of United States Steel from 1955 to 1969.
In March 1962, the Kennedy Administration brokered an agreement with the Steelworkers Union and industry chieftains to hold down wage and price increases that were potentially inflationary.
But in April 1962 Blough told JFK that United States Steel was raising prices by 3. percent, thereby violating the deal.
He had a grand jury consider antitrust indictments, and ordered the FBI to ""interview them all—march into their offices the next day"" and, with the benefit of subpoena, to examine the moguls' expense accounts and other personal records for evidence of unlawful collusion.
Clark Clifford and other administration officials badgered the steel men to rescind their price increases.
Kennedy had to send the army to put down the resulting riots, which left two people dead.
GEORGE WALLACE served the first of his four terms as governor of Alabama from 1963 until 1967.
Deputy Attorney General Katzenbach, backed by a federalized Alabama National Guard, asked the governor to step aside, which he did.
She refers to the storm surrounding President Eisenhower's use of the United States Army's 101st Airborne Division to compel the integration of Little Rock Central High School in Arkansas in 1957.
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. was the best-known leader of the American civil rights movement when he delivered his ""I Have a Dream"" address at the March on Washington (which Jacqueline calls the ""freedom march"") of August 1963.
Kennedy refers was of King and his colleagues relaxing at the Willard Hotel after the march.
Hectored by J Edgar Hoover with charges that the civil rights leader was influenced by Communists in his entourage, Robert Kennedy grudgingly authorized Hoover to tap King's telephone calls and bug his rooms, which in time produced transcripts of derogatory private comments made by King while watching President Kennedy's Capitol Rotunda and funeral ceremonies.
Hoover was only too eager to share them with the attorney general, and the shocked brother of the late President conveyed their essence to Jacqueline.
A PHILIP RANDOLPH was chief of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters and one of the organizers of the March on Washington.
In May 1963, on the hundredth anniversary of Gettysburg, LBJ had delivered a civil rights speech at the battlefield that went beyond anything the President had theretofore said about the issue in public.
In private, the vice president stridently complained to Sorensen that the President wasn't doing enough about civil rights, either in Congress or in his efforts to change public opinion.
On Tuesday morning, October 16, 1962, Bundy told the President in his White House bedroom that U-2 photography by the CIA had revealed the Soviets installing offensive missiles in Cuba—an eventuality that JFK had assured the public the previous month that he would never accept.
Anxious to keep the missile problem secret from Americans until he and his advisers agreed on a strategy, Kennedy tried to maintain his normal schedule, flying to Chicago for a campaign address, before returning to Washington on the pretext that he was suffering from a cold.
On Monday evening, October 22, JFK gave his television speech announcing that his ""initial step"" would be to throw a naval blockade around Cuba and demand the missiles’ removal.
This has echoes of the British royal family's determination in 1940 to remain in London through the dangers of the German Blitz.
Kennedy, even had the U-2 photographed Cuba a few days earlier, it would probably have given the Americans little advantage in trying to have the missiles withdrawn.
On the final weekend of the crisis came two messages from Khrushchev—the first conciliatory, the second fire and brimstone.
In what scholars later called the ""Trollope ploy"" (in Anthony Trollope's fiction, a woman hastens to interpret a friendly gesture as a marriage proposal) the Kennedy brothers opted to treat the first one as the definitive Soviet message, which helped save the situation.
At the height of the crisis, an American U-2 accidentally flew into Soviet airspace—legally an act of war that might have inspired retaliation that could have spiraled into nuclear conflict.
By coincidence, the United States destroyer Joseph P Kennedy, Jr. was one of the ships blockading Cuba.
Each was a little silver Tiffany calendar for October 1962, with the fateful thirteen days highlighted in bold, and engraved with ""J.F.K."" and the recipient's initials.
CHESTER BOWLES was an advertising executive, governor of Connecticut, and Dean Rusk's number two before succeeding Galbraith as ambassador to India.
After the Bay of Pigs, when Bowles let it be known around Washington that he had opposed the venture, an indignant RFK poked his finger at Bowles's chest and told him that his position had henceforth better be that he was for the invasion.
Because Bartlett was known to be close to the President, members of the Washington cognoscenti mistakenly took the piece as a signal that Kennedy wanted his UN envoy out.
CLAYTON FRITCHEY was an ex-journalist and Stevenson aide who was a social friend of the Kennedys.
During the missile crisis, the vice president attended only one meeting of ""Ex Comm,"" the ad hoc presidential panel quickly formed by JFK to fashion a solution to the problem by meeting around the clock.
Other members were Rusk, McNamara, Dillon, RFK, Bundy, McCone, and Taylor.
The reference to Laos is the covert efforts by both North Vietnam and America to undermine the 1962 agreement at Geneva to preserve the country's neutrality and independence.
Powers and O'Donnell had agreed to stay on with Johnson for a transitional period.
Kennedy was eerily prescient about the problem that would doom America's involvement in Vietnam.
In other words, even if the President orders the invasion halted, proceed anyway.
HAROLD E STASSEN , the onetime Republican ""boy governor"" of Minnesota, had once been a serious presidential contender and later ran for the job so many times and so long after he had any remote chance of election that he became a minor national joke.
JFK had had to deal with a worrisome drain of gold reserves to Western Europe.
By now, Jacqueline's once-benign attitude toward Johnson as leader has hardened, along with Robert Kennedy's.
He grew more and more concerned about what would happen if LBJ ever became president.
In later years, however, time, distance, the end of Robert Kennedy's rivalry with Johnson, the death of LBJ, and her cordial relationship with Lady Bird softened Jacqueline's attitude toward her late husband's successor.
She distinguished her objections to certain Johnson policies—especially the Vietnam War escalation, which she insisted Jack would never have countenanced—from her personal fondness for both Lyndon and Lady Bird, whom she made an effort to see during the 1980s and early 1990s when both former first ladies summered on Martha's Vineyard.
In a 1974 oral history about Johnson for the Johnson Library, Jacqueline said that after the assassination, LBJ ""was extraordinary.
JFK had appointed Johnson to chair the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunities, as well as his space council.
In Johnson's defense, Kennedy was eager to give his vice president dignity, but—knowing his tendency to overreach if given the chance—not a great deal to do.
He sent Johnson on so many trips in order to distract him from his boredom and powerlessness.
As Johnson's aide and friend Jack Valenti later described LBJ as vice president, ""this great, proud vessel was just simply unable to move.
In the spring of 1963, during a meeting when JFK was debating whether to send a civil rights bill to Congress, he asked Johnson for his opinion, and the vice president acidly said he could not respond because no one had given him enough information to have a judgment.
During a 1961 trip to Pakistan, LBJ invited a camel driver named Bashir Ahmed to see him in the United States.
To his surprise, Ahmed took him up on his offer, and Johnson hosted him for a wellpublicized visit to his Texas ranch.
Before the inauguration, Johnson had made a misguided attempt to persuade Democratic members of the Senate to allow him to continue to lead their caucus.
Other sources have it that the President was vaguely pondering the liberal North Carolina governor Terry Sanford as a possible 1964 running mate, if necessary, or as the 1968 presidential nominee.
EVERETT DIRKSEN was senator from Illinois and leader of Senate Republicans from 1959 until his death.
Although Dirksen's nineteenth-century style was so different from the President's, JFK had long had an excellent relationship with him.
Not so with House Speaker McCormack, who still resented the meteoric political ascent that had enabled Kennedy to best him for control of Massachusetts Democrats.
Increasing McCormack's ill humor toward the President was Edward Kennedy's victory over the Speaker's nephew Edward in 1962 for the state's Democratic Senate nomination.
EDWARD STOCKDALE was a real estate speculator and Smathers aide who served as JFK's first ambassador to Ireland.
Reportedly grief-stricken over the President's assassination, Stockdale fell to his death from a Miami office tower in December 1963.
Kenneth O'Donnell gauged senators in terms of their support for Kennedy measures.
HALE BOGGS was Democratic congressman from Louisiana and House majority leader.
Randolph Churchill was the journalist son of the ex—prime minister and a Kennedy family friend.
As JFK was preparing to leave Nassau, Canadian prime minister John Diefenbaker, whom he so disliked, arrived for his own meeting with Macmillan, compelling the President to lunch with Diefenbaker as well as the British prime minister.
During the meal, JFK and Macmillan diplomatically pretended that they liked Diefenbaker, and the Canadian pretended to believe it.
The force de frappe refers to the independent nuclear deterrent that de Gaulle was trying to create.
Irritated by de Gaulle's rebuffs of her husband's efforts to improve French-American relations, as well as her own, she balked at a stop in Paris on the way home.
In December 1961, the sanctimonious Nehru ordered his troops to seize Portugal's colony of Goa, which lay on India's west coast, surrounded by Indian territory.
The Indian prime minister labored to explain how this differed from the Soviet invasion of Hungary.
The cigar-chomping John ""Muggsy"" O'Leary was JFK's driver during the Senate years, then an agent for the Secret Service.
De Gaulle said that the missile crisis had shown that when the crunch came, the United States was willing to act on its own, and therefore might not reliably fulfill its commitments to defend Western Europe.
When President Johnson's diplomats tried to make good on de Gaulle's promise, the French president refused to schedule a visit to America, insisting that his attendance at Kennedy's funeral had already fulfilled his pledge.
De Gaulle allowed that President Kennedy had had great influence around the world.
With her insistence that every nuance be right, at six that morning, before walking to the service in St.
During the missile crisis, when Dean Acheson offered to show the French president photographic evidence proving that Soviet missiles were in Cuba, de Gaulle replied that Kennedy's word was good enough for him.
CHARLES ""CHIP"" BOHLEN was an old Soviet hand who became JFK's second ambassador to France.
JEAN MONNET was considered the architect of an integrated post-World War II Europe.
Upset that there was no proper award for civilian achievement, only military, President Kennedy had established the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963, but did not live to present it to its first recipients, including Monnet, in December 1963.
De Gaulle hosted Macmillan at the French diplomatic retreat Chateau Rambouillet in December 1962.
AMINTORE FANFANI was Italian prime minister for most of the Kennedy years, the third of his five tours of duty in that job.
As leader of his Christian Democratic party, he had attended the Democratic convention of 1956 as an observer.
JOSIP BROZ TITO , the unifying founder and strongman president of Yugoslavia, was given a luncheon by JFK at the White House in October 1963.
VIJAYA LAKSHMI PANDIT was sent by her brother, Prime Minister Nehru, to London, Moscow, and Washington as his ambassador.
MOHAMMAD AYUB KHAN , president of Pakistan from 1958 to 1969, was the leader for whom the Kennedys had arranged their glittering dinner at Mount Vernon in 1961.
WALTER MCCONAUGHY was a career Foreign Service officer who had previously served in Burma and South Korea, and was the American ambassador to Pakistan from 1962 to 1966.
The State Department wished to suggest that, as with New Delhi, the President had sent an old friend to Islamabad.
WILLIAM MCCORMICK BLAIR was an investment banking heir and close Stevenson aide who became Kennedy's ambassador to Denmark.
William Battle , who had helped to rescue JFK in the South Pacific during World War II, was his ambassador to Australia.
The postcolonial Republic of the Congo suffered domestic upheavals during the Kennedy years.
Edmund Gullion and William Attwood were JFK's ambassadors to the Congo and Guinea, respectively.
In 1963, Kennedy considered Gullion for ambassador to South Vietnam before choosing Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., whom he had defeated to enter the United States Senate in 1952.
In the summer of 1963, President Diem was cracking down on critics, especially Buddhists.
That summer and fall, the President was forced to think seriously about how much he wished to use American military force to support a South Vietnamese leadership that, although anti-Communist, was growing more erratic, autocratic, and corrupt.
He approved a coup d'état by South Vietnamese military officers against the Diem brothers, which went out of control and culminated in their assassination.
Madame Nhu blamed Kennedy for the deaths of her husband and brother-in-law.
In ironic retrospect, this historical moment was like the one Kennedy had asked Professor Donald about.
For Lincoln, it was what decisions he would have made about Reconstruction, had he lived, and whether they would have changed history.
Luce grandly told him that every president could be described ""in one sentence,"" and that she had been wondering what his sentence would be.
She had not looked forward to watching her former boss do battle with her current boss over this luncheon.
WAYNE MORSE was a Democratic senator from Oregon and JFK colleague on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
In the face of outrage from other senators, she refused to retract her insult and asked Ike to withdraw her nomination.
JANIO QUADROS was Brazilian president from January 1961 until he quit in August of that year.
JFK was not delighted by Goulart's inclusion of Communist sympathizers in his government, his opposition to American sanctions against Castro, and his efforts to improve relations with Soviet-bloc countries.
JOHN BARTLOW MARTIN was a journalist and onetime Stevenson aide who was JFK's ambassador to the Dominican Republic, which was led for seven months in 1963 by Juan Bosch Gavifio , the country's first legitimately elected president, who was deposed by a military coup.
In his 1991 memoirs, Rusk insisted that he and JFK had had a private understanding from the start that he could only afford to serve one term at State.
But if this was true, it was obviously unknown to Jacqueline, and Rusk clearly changed his mind, since he continued for five more years in the job under President Johnson.
Nigerian slave brokers once used Portuguese coins to create ornamental ""slave bracelets""—not the most helpful image for a United States diplomat at a time of tumult in his country over civil rights.
The orotund Chester Bowles was Kennedy's first undersecretary of state, George Ball the second.
WALT ROSTOW was a development economist at MIT, then Bundy's deputy before going to State as director of policy planning.
JEROME WIESNER had been MIT's president when JFK appointed him as his science adviser.
LLEWELLYN ""TOMMY"" THOMPSON , son of Colorado sheep ranchers, joined the United States Foreign Service in 1929 and came to specialize in the Soviet Union, serving as ambassador to Moscow from 1957 to 1962.
At the start of the missile crisis, JFK had wanted Bohlen to delay his departure.
He knew Bohlen well and that, as ambassador to Moscow from 1953 to 1957, Bohlen had developed a sophisticated understanding of Khrushchev and his circle.
Although the President had been little acquainted with him, as it turned out, the self-effacing Thompson was in a position to provide insights on the Soviet leadership that were of more recent vintage than Bohlen's.
In November 1961, JFK had created the Agency for International Development, which dispensed foreign aid and was suffering growing pains.
HENRY LABOUISSE , known as ""Harry,"" a social friend of the Kennedys, had been chief of AID's forerunner agency and became JFK's ambassador to Greece in 1962.
By coincidence, he was one of the naval intelligence officers who wrote reports on Kennedy's heroism commanding the PT-109.
White joined the Supreme Court in April 1962 and proved more conservative than Kennedy and his people had expected.
PAUL FREUND , a Harvard Law School professor and giant of constitutional law, turned down President Kennedy's invitation to be solicitor general.
JFK also considered him for the high court before choosing Arthur Goldberg.
WILLIAM O DOUGLAS , liberal, civil libertarian, and environmentalist, had been a close Kennedy family friend since his work with Joseph Kennedy on the Securities Exchange Commission in the 1930s.
RALPH de TOLEDANO was a founder of the conservative William F Buckley's National Review who was close to Nixon.
As a girl touring the White House in 1940, Jackie was disappointed that there was no guidebook available.
Eager to preserve her children's privacy, Jacqueline was horrified when Salinger once told a reporter about one of their pets, a beer-loving rabbit called Zsa Zsa.
She refers here especially to the turf-conscious Ken O'Donnell, who disliked Sorensen and Schlesinger.
One sign of JFK's ability to keep all of these disparate factions working together is the fact that he never had a chief of staff.
Always wary of finding himself on the ""leading strings"" of an aide, he had all top members of his staff report directly to him.
While living in the White House, Caroline attended a school established by her mother in the White House solarium.
GEORGE BURKLEY was a navy admiral and served as the President's primary physician after Dr.
Travell was removed from his case , although Travell publicly retained her official title.
After damaging his back in the Ottawa tree planting, JFK once privately forecast that John would be able to lift him before he could ever expect to lift his son.
The First Family by the nightclub comedian Vaughn Meader was the fastest-selling record in history, selling an astonishing 7. million copies.
In 1962, My Daddy Is President, by the seven-year-old ""Little Jo Ann"" Morse, sung in baby talk with a bossa nova beat, was a 45-rpm jukebox favorite.
NICHOLAS KATZENBACH , who was imprisoned by the Italians and Germans as a prisoner of war for two years during World War II, served as RFK's deputy, and under President Johnson, as his successor.
It was ultimately LBJ who established ""Volunteers in Service to America"" in 1964 as part of his ""War on Poverty""—another program that adapted some of the ideas JFK was considering at the time of his death.
Worried that his proposed tax cuts would do little to help the jobless and poor, Kennedy had wanted to help poor families like those who had so affected him while campaigning in West Virginia in 1960.
Told about this, the new President Johnson seized the notion with both hands.
And in 1964, President Johnson was the one who posed for pictures with poor families in Appalachia.
A planned trip to Japan by Eisenhower in June 1960 was cancelled just before his planned arrival because of anti-American riots.
BARRY GOLDWATER was Republican senator from Arizona and the most prominent conservative of the day.
JFK had met Goldwater before World War II when he went to an outdoor work camp near Phoenix, and they remained warm and jocular friends for the rest of their lives.
Goldwater later insisted that JFK had agreed, if they should be the two presidential candidates in 1964, to fly around the country and debate together, almost like Lincoln and Stephen Douglas in 1858.
There is no doubt that when Goldwater raised the idea, the President responded pleasantly, but it does not seem likely that in 1964, the competitive JFK, eager for the biggest victory possible, would have so gingerly offered so weak a challenger as Goldwater the benefit of being seen all over the country arguing with the President as an equal.
Kennedy had, however, committed himself to face his 1964 opponent in televised debates like those of 1960 with Nixon.
GEORGE ROMNEY was president of American Motors before his election as Republican governor of Michigan in 1962.
Two years later, he seriously considered challenging Nixon, whom he loathed, in the 1960 Republican primaries but decided to stay out.
JFK had worried that Rockefeller might be a strong opponent when he ran for reelection; however, he divorced his wife and in May 1963 remarried a younger woman, which at the time was a mortal sin in presidential politics.
WILLIAM SCRANTON was a moderate Republican congressman when elected Pennsylvania governor in 1962.
Referring to the relaxation between Washington and Moscow that began after the missile crisis and ripened with the test ban treaty of the summer of 1963.
In 1963, the Senate Permanent Investigations Committee examined the award to General Dynamics of a $6. billion contract, the most lucrative such mandate in American history, to build a new TFX fighter plane.
Before his appointment as McNamara's deputy, Gilpatric had been counsel to General Dynamics and was criticized for participating in the TFX decision.
Although in March 1963 Gilpatric had announced his return to the law, he remained at the Pentagon until January 1964 in an effort to clear his name.
TIMOTHY REARDON was JFK's administrative assistant in the House and Senate and a special assistant in the White House.
Inpex The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which it was created.
To locate a specific entry, please use the search feature of your ebook reader.
JBK to Bernard Boutin, March 6, 1962. xxvii ""practically nothing"": White House History, #13, 2004. xxvii ""Hold your breath"": JBK to David Finley, April 18, 1962. xxvii ""may be the only monument"": Time, November 20, 1964. xxviii ""would walk halfway"": JBK to Edward Kennedy, September 17, 1970. xxviii ""early Statler"": Mary Van Rensselaer Thayer, Jacqueline Kennedy: The White House Years , 93.
Ted Sorensen, Kennedy (Harper and Row, 1965), 80. 10 ""a stormy meeting"": Ibid.
William Manchester, The Death of a President , 186. 25 ""as if Jack were President of FRANCE"": Oleg Cassini, A Thousand Days of Magic , 29. 27 ""a Stevenson with balls"": Dallek, 259.
JBK to James MacGregor Burns, handwritten, undated, 1959. 55 ""forgot Goschen"": Winston Churchill, Lord Randolph Churchill , 647. 61 ""that I had privately boasted"": Sorensen, Counselor, 150.
Edward Kennedy, True Compass , 24. 64 ""could see around corners"": Anthony, As We Remember Her, 60.
Lyndon Johnson to JBK, December 23, 1963, transcription of recording of telephone call, in Beschloss, Reaching for Glory, 18.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS There are many people whose support and encouragement have helped immensely during the preparation of this project.
First, foremost, and always to my husband and children for their love, integrity, and interest.
I would like to thank the family of Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., especially Alexandra Schlesinger, for her gracious enthusiasm; and Bill van den Heuvel for the same wise counsel and joyful outlook that made him such a beloved friend to my mother.
I couldn't have completed this project without the help of Lauren Lipani, who read, listened to, and checked every detail along the way.
I am grateful to Tom Putnam, the director of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, as well as to the Library's dedicated archivists, Karen Adler Abramson, Jaimie Quaglino, Maura Porter, and Jenny Beaton.
The unusual and unfamiliar photos that add so much to this book result from the efforts and expertise of Laurie Austin and Maryrose Grossman.
Thanks also to Sharon Kelly, Jane Silva, and Stephen Plotkin for additional research assistance.
I am also grateful to Tom McNaught, the director of the John F Kennedy Library Foundation; Rachel Day, for coordinating requests and new technology in connection with this book; and to all the Foundation staff for their commitment to excellence in all they do to strengthen the legacy of my parents.
For their legal and publishing advice and expertise, I would like to thank Bob Barnett, Deneen Howell, Jim Fuller, Tom Hentoff, and Esther Newberg.
People always did their best for my mother, and this project was no exception.
She would have been especially pleased that the talented team at Hyperion are all women, including Sharon Kitter, Linda Prather, Kristin Kiser, Jill Sansone, Marie Coolman, SallyAnne McCartin, and Ellen Archer.
For their work on the audio restoration and production, I am grateful to Marcos Sueiro Bal, as well as Paul Fowlie and Karen Dziekonski.
I wish my mother could have had the good fortune to work with Gretchen Young, who is exactly the kind of editor she was herself; with Shubhani Sarkar, who has brought creativity and insight to this design; and with Navorn Johnson, who managed this project from beginning to end.
For their ongoing wisdom and wise counsel, I would like to thank Ranny Cooper and Stephanie Cutter, and for bringing their expertise and skill to this project, Debra Reed and Amy Weiss.
Finally, I am indebted to Michael Beschloss for his illuminating Introduction and comprehensive annotations, which benefit this book tremendously. —CAROLINE KENNEDY CREDITS Senator John F Kennedy Courtesy of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Campaigning Courtesy of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum The Election Courtesy of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Inauguration Courtesy of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Travel Abroad Courtesy of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum JFK quip in Paris.
Author of more than twenty-five books, he was twice awarded the Pulitzer Prize.
The eloquence, insight, and power that characterized his style continue to influence the generations of historians who follow him.
Arthur Schlesinger was the author of major biographies of Andrew Jackson and Franklin Delano Roosevelt as well as John and Robert Kennedy, books that significantly defined the modern presidency.
He served as Special Assistant to the President during the Administration of John F Kennedy.
Caroline Kennedy is the author/editor of eight bestselling books on constitutional law, American history, politics, and poetry.
Michael Beschloss has been called “the nation’s leading Presidential historian” by Newsweek.
He is the author of nine books, including, most recently, The Conquerors and Presidential Courage and two volumes on Lyndon Johnson’s presidential tapes.
He is a graduate of Williams College and the Harvard Business School and holds five honorary degrees, as well as an Emmy award.
In order to make the transcript as comprehensible for the reader as possible, and in the style of other published oral histories, we have deleted some interjections and broken phrases where they interrupted the flow of the conversation, but only where such changes would not alter the meaning.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.
