The following is an outline of how I have used it as the basis for a quasi-simulation that can be run in as little as one hour and as long as several days, depending on how much preparation you want students to have as they play their roles.
The outline could repeat or elaborate the summary overview on the next page.
It is important to help students appreciate the tensions during the Cold War, and the anti-communism in the United States.
As the students discuss their answers within the groups, you can visit each group and help the students formulate their responses, and understand how the country they represent might have been thinking about the situation.
Each group answers the first question in turn, then the second question, and then the third.
As one group answers, students from the other two groups can interrupt by challenging the logic or validity of the claims a group is making.
Three Perspectives The Basic Scenario On October 16, 1962 President John F Kennedy was informed that the Soviet Union was building launching sites in Cuba for ballistic missiles with a range of 1000 miles.
The missiles could have carried warheads 60 times more powerful than the atomic bomb that destroyed Hiroshima.
Kennedy called together a group of advisors who weighed several strategies for responding to the presence of missiles in Cuba.
On October 22, Kennedy announced to the world that the United States was imposing a naval blockade around the island of Cuba -to prevent the further shipment of missiles and of parts for the completion of the launch sites -and he demanded that the Soviets pull out all of their offensive weapons from Cuba.
During the next five days, tension ran quite high, particularly when a Soviet boat came to the point of crossing the blockade line.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev responded to Kennedy's demands on October 26 with an impassioned letter in which he proposed that the Soviet Union would withdraw the missiles if the United States promised not to invade Cuba.
October 27 was a day that was particularly anxiety-filled, because in the morning a United States surveillance plane was shot down by a Soviet surface-to-air missile.
Similar surveillance flights had flown over Cuba at least twice daily without interruption since October 14.
Sensing trouble, the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that the President order an invasion of Cuba.
In addition to ballistic missiles, the Soviets had placed “tactical” nuclear missiles in Cuba, which would have been used to stop an invasion force.
The United States was poised to invade Cuba with 180,000 troops on October 29.
If United States forces were hit with tactical nuclear weapons, Kennedy was sure to launch a retaliatory nuclear strike.
The Soviet leader saw that the Soviet Union and the United States were headed toward nuclear war.
The public announcement would follow the lines of Khrushchev’s first letter.
Khrushchev accepted this offer, and on the morning of October 28 he announced that the Soviet Union was withdrawing its missiles from Cuba in return for a United States promise not to invade the island.
Decisions based on inaccurate information could have been catastrophic.
For this reason, many observers have said that during the Cuban missile crisis the world came closer to the brink of nuclear war than at any other time.
United States In October 1962, the Soviet Union had fewer than 50 ballistic missiles capable of hitting the United States.
The lack of Soviet strategic capability gave the United States significant power in the world.
By placing missiles in Cuba, the Soviet Union enhanced its capability of striking the United States.
This suggested to the EX COMM policymakers a strategic analysis and a psychological analysis.
The one that most concerned the EX COMM was West Berlin, where the Soviet Union had built a wall one year earlier.
The EX COMM believed that Khrushchev thought Kennedy was a weak person, and that Kennedy had not been firm enough with the Soviet leader in their 1961 summit meeting in Vienna.
Backing down on the missiles would add to Khrushchev's sense of a weak Kennedy.
The basic assumption of both analyses was that the Soviet Union was acting aggressively and the United States had to act swiftly, decisively, and forcefully to defend itself against this Soviet aggression.
Therefore the United States must maintain military superiority over the Soviet Union.
This interest can transcend their particular ideologies and differences, and enable the two superpowers to negotiate arms control agreements which might reduce the chance of war.
John F Kennedy had campaigned against Vice President Richard Nixon by charging that there was a ""missile gap"" that favored the Soviet Union and that the Eisenhower-Nixon Administration was wrong not to support the overthrow of the Castro regime in Cuba.
By the end of 1962, the United States had ten times more missiles and warheads than the Soviet Union. c) Soviet analysts believed the United States military buildup was the preparation for a nuclear attack against the Soviet Union, and at least an effort to intimidate the Soviet Union.
The attacks, and the suspension of Cuba from the Organization of American States, appeared to be forewarning of such an invasion.
Cuba The 1959 Cuban revolution occurred without any Soviet support, and it was more than a year before the Soviet Union even began to trade with Cuba.
Castro declared that the Cuban revolution was ""socialist"" for the first time during the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion.
But Cuba believed the United States was intent on destroying the Cuban revolution whether or not it was linked to the Soviet Union.
This led Cuba to fear a United States invasion and to seek ways to defend itself.
The CIA also tried to assassinate Castro. c) Cuba assumed correctly that these efforts were preparations for a United States invasion that would involve United States military forces.
The planned United States invasion was based on an estimate of only 100,000 armed Cubans. c) Cuba wanted to retain old Soviet bombers after the crisis as a continued defense against future United States attacks, because Castro did not trust JFK's no-invasion pledge.
But the United States included these on the list of “offensive” weapons to be withdrawn.
Despite Soviet promises not to take back the bombers, Khrushchev agreed to Kennedy’s demands.
This convinced Cuba that it could no longer trust the Soviets, which led to six years of tension between the two countries, and Cuba’s active support for revolutionary movements in Africa and Latin America. d) Fidel Castro has said that that crisis was not resolved.
Peace was achieved, but from Cuba’s viewpoint, the cause of the crisis–US aims to destroy the Cuban Revolution—continued.
Its strategy was to support revolutionary movements throughout Asia, Africa, and Latin America, to develop a coalition of like-minded Third World nations.
Great powers must learn to respect the sovereignty of small countries, and to avoid intimidation.
