The Crisis had its origins in the Cold War, the struggle between Western and Eastern powers that dominated the second half of the 20th Century.
To counter the spread of Communism, the United States joined with countries of Western Europe to form the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The Soviet Union was the prime mover in the Communist sphere, also having a controlling interest in most nations in Eastern Europe.
In response to the formation of NATO, the U.S.S.R. and its Eastern European allies formed a similar mutual support strategy called the Warsaw Pact.
The Cold War played out largely far from the United States until Fidel Castro became the leader of Cuba, an island nation 90 miles off the coast of Florida.
He made no secret of his distaste for the United States and its leaders, and the two countries became locked into a trade dispute.
Among the particulars of this trade dispute were a refusal of American markets to buy Cuban sugar and a refusal of American suppliers to sell oil to Cuba.
Castro's purchase of military equipment and weapons from Eastern European nations didn't endear him to Western leaders, either.
American leaders, including newly elected President John F Kennedy, made no secret of their dislike of Castro, especially his preference for Communism.
Castro became an ally of the Soviet Union, and the Cold War came closer to the United States mainland.
In early 1961, the American Central Intelligence Agency trained a group of Cuban exiles with the express purpose of invading Cuba and overthrowing Castro.
In 1961, the Cuban military easily repelled the invasion, which came to be known as the Bay of Pigs invasion because of its location.
The United States government could claim that it did not participate directly in the invasion attempt, but the Cuban exiles weren't given much training or support in the end, and so the island remained firmly in Castro's hands.
Later that year, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev hinted at a takeover of West Berlin, which was the only part of the former German capital city not occupied by Communist forces.
More broadly, Khrushchev made it known that he intended for Soviet forces to permanently occupy East Berlin.
At a meeting in Vienna, Kennedy ostensibly agreed to the permanent occupation but made it clear that Western nations would continue to assert their right to occupy West Berlin.
On August 13, 1961, fortifications divided the city, creating two cities and a long-term division between East and West.
The combination of the U.S.'s poorly supported invasion at the Bay of Pigs and Kennedy's refusal to insist on a full-throated defense of Berlin emboldened Khrushchev to support Castro more militarily.
Thinking that Kennedy wouldn't object, Khrushchev convinced Castro to allow Soviet missiles onto Cuban soil.
In September, Soviet ships carrying nuclear missiles began arriving in Cuba.
Placing IRBMs in Cuba would enable the Soviet Union to target the entirety of the United States with nuclear warheads.
American U-2 spy planes had flown secret missions over Cuba and had taken pictures that confirmed the existence of surface-to-air missiles at eight locations in Cuba.
Soviet officials, when confronted with intelligence to this effect, insisted that the missiles were for defensive purposes only.
Further investigation of the photos convinced American intelligence and military experts that the missiles were, in fact, nuclear in nature.
