And if Kennedy had known that Khrushchev had all but lied on Oct., the hawks in Washington might have won their push for an all-out United States invasion of the island.
Instead, Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan, sensing that the “hothead” Castro could not be trusted with any nuclear weapons, got them out of Cuba after telling him that Soviet law did not permit the transfer of nuclear weapons to other countries.
Castro asked Mikoyan during a tense meeting on Nov., 1962, according to a new book by his son, Sergo Mikoyan, and researcher Svetlana Savranskaya.
Research in recent years has shown the crisis impacted a broader swath of the world than previously known, said James Hershberg, editor of the book series published by the Cold War International History Project at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington.
Moscow’s concessions to Kennedy likely pushed North Korea to launch its own search for nuclear weapons, one study showed.
Another argued that it led North Vietnam to step up its armed campaign against the south.
The book includes 50 Soviet government and Mikoyan family documents, including official notes from the Mikoyan-Castro talks.
The tale essentially starts after Khrushchev tells Kennedy Oct. that he will withdraw from Cuba the “weapons which you call offensive” — Soviet R-14 and R-12 missiles with nuclear warheads and ranges of up to 1,550 miles, and medium-range IL-28 bombers, aged but still capable of carrying nuclear bombs.
What Khrushchev did not reveal was that 98 tactical nuclear warheads also had been deployed in Cuba for the Luna and FKR-1 missiles, both coastal defense weapons deployed essentially to destroy a possible United States invasion armada.
In the weeks leading up to the Missile Crisis there had been conversations between United States and Soviet officials about the Soviet Union sending Cuba weapons so that it could defend itself, according to documents released Thursday from the archives of Robert F Kennedy, then the attorney general and an advisor to his brother.
But with the United States apparently unaware such weapons had nuclear capabilities, the tense exchanges between the two Cold War powers centered on the removal of weapons “capable of offensive war,’’ not the weapons that could be used to repel a possible United States invasion.
On Oct., 1962, a surprise United States air strike to take out the strategic missiles — an option that some advisors thought would ultimately lead to a full-scale invasion — was still under discussion, according to the RFK papers.
But President Kennedy had reservations about the potential loss of thousands of lives — including those at United States missile sites in Turkey and Italy if the Soviets chose to retaliate, and an Oct. memo about the drawbacks of a surprise air strike also noted it might be perceived “as a Pearl Harbor in reverse” and spark retaliatory strikes by local “Soviet” commanders of the Cuban missiles.
Assure Castro that JFK had promised he would not invade Cuba; Smooth his anger over Moscow’s failure to consult him on the negotiations with JFK; Push him to accept inspections to confirm the removal of the strategic weapons; Urge him not to shoot at United States spy planes overflying the island; Settle the issue of the tactical warheads; What’s more, the Soviet-Cuba oral agreement in the summer of 1962 for the deployment of all the nuclear weapons to the Caribbean island had included a promise that Cuban troops would control the tactical warheads after receiving training.
Moscow’s withdrawal of its missiles would leave him without any real deterrence against a United States attack, just 18 months after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion and amid at least one confirmed CIA plot to assassinate him.
And when Mikoyan pushed too hard on one issue, Castro shot back, “What do you think we are.
Initially, Mikoyan and the Soviet military favored allowing Castro to keep the tactical nukes for self-defense, according to the younger Mikoyan.
But on Oct., Castro sent Khrushchev a cable all but urging a preemptive nuclear strike on United States targets.
And on Nov. he ordered his United Nations ambassador, Carlo Lechuga, to announce that the tactical warheads were in Cuba.
The issue of the tactical warheads came to a boil on the night of Nov., when Mikoyan met for more than three hours with Castro, Ernesto “Che” Guevara and three other senior Cuban government officials at the Presidential Palace in Havana.
Castro is quoted as asking Mikoyan in notes of the meeting taken by the Soviet delegation.
Mikoyan replies that Moscow “has not given any promise regarding the removal” of the tactical weapons.
Mikoyan replies that there is “a law prohibiting the transfer of any nuclear weapons, including the tactical ones, to anybody.
Sergo Mikoyan, who accompanied his father during the first few days of the Cuba mission, wrote in the book that it’s not clear whether such a law really existed.
Perhaps it was a secret policy of the Soviet leadership, perhaps a convenient lie.
The younger Mikoyan argues that the “old men” who ruled the Kremlin in the early 1960s essentially saw in Cuba a young and virile socialist revolution that needed Moscow’s support.
The “romantic” Khrushchev sent nuclear weapons to defend Havana from United States attacks and did not fully realize the risks, he noted.
Moscow’s military was more pragmatic, and the Cuba deployment doubled the number of Soviet missiles that could hit United States territory.
A few days later, Mikoyan met with presidential advisor John J McCloy, United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson and Charles W Yost, Stevenson’s deputy, to discuss the details of the agreement ending the Missile Crisis.
Sergo Mikoyan, who served as personal secretary to his father, was one of Moscow’s top Latin America specialists and served as editor of the journal Latin America, published by the Soviet Academy of Sciences.
That’s when Soviet General Anatoly Gribkov, army chief of operations during the missile crisis, revealed that Moscow had deployed nine nuclear tipped Luna in Cuba to be used against any United States invasion force.
In fact, there were 80 nuclear tipped FKR-1 cruise missiles, 12 nuclear warheads of the Lunas, also known as FROG missiles, and six nuclear bombs for the IL-28s.
Sergo Mikoyan wrote that all the tactical warheads left Cuba Dec., 1962,on the cargo ship Arkhangelsk and arrived Dec. in the Soviet port of Severomorsk.
