Two days later, alleged assassin Lee Harvey Oswald is shot by small-time hustler Jack Ruby.John F Kennedy’s majestic Nov. funeral, planned in detail by wife Jacqueline, provides no closure.
Oswald’s televised murder precludes a trial, and greatly encourages conspiracy theories.Fascination with and controversy about President Kennedy continues.
In 2013, there were floods of books, articles and commentaries marking the half-century since his death.Kennedy’s legacy is complex, including highly publicized shortcomings.
Eric Sevareid of CBS noted that the main legacy might be “an attitude,” a spirit that all things are possible for Americans.In fact, JFK had major achievements.
Nonetheless, Sevareid was perceptive in emphasizing the emotional dimensions of political leadership.The early disastrous invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs undercut Kennedy, and provided Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev strong incentive to deploy nuclear missiles on the island.
President Kennedy, a World War II combat veteran, resisted powerful pressure to invade Cuba.
The missiles were removed following a blockade and overt invasion preparations, combined with a secret Cuba-Turkey missile trade.
Kennedy’s restraint and imagination are extremely impressive.In the aftermath of the missile crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev achieved a treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, a breakthrough.
JFK had other success with Congress, including negotiation authority key to the 1967 Kennedy Round trade agreement, and successor Tokyo and Uruguay accords.Two prominent domestic issues were civil rights and organized crime, the latter an obsession of driven Attorney General Robert F Kennedy.
JFK was cautious on race relations, addressing the subject actively only when pressed by a massive march on Washington.RFK was relentless in pursuit of the mafia, while simultaneously gangsters and mercenaries were recruited to kill Castro.
Regarding organized crime, 6 years passed before the Nixon administration re-energized prosecution.People around Robert Kennedy were puzzled by his marked disinterest in possible assassination conspiracy.
In hindsight, RFK no doubt avoided that dark tangled path because he might come face-to-face with himself.Then-Senator John Kennedy’s book “Profiles in Courage,” about United States Senators who put principle above political expediency, received the Pulitzer Prize.
While critics cracked President Kennedy should show less profile and more courage, he actually demonstrated considerable personal strength.Professor Herbert Parmet has documented extraordinary health problems that plagued JFK from birth.
He nearly died in infancy, and received Catholic last rites at least three times.
Yet he managed to enlist in the United States Navy, then volunteered for hazardous PT boat duty, where he demonstrated truly exceptional courage.Sevareid’s observation applies tangibly to the American space program.
Associated technological innovations include electronics miniaturization.
Today’s computers, cell phones and a range of other products reflect this.In the mid-1970s, revelations about JFK’s personal behavior along with the Castro plots startled people.
Understanding human complexity involves growing up, more achievable in our democracy than in a dictatorship.
