A Personal and Professional Remembrance Print By Sheldon M Stern For those who lived through it, the 1962 missile crisis was surely the most terrifying event of the Cold War.
After President Kennedy’s sober revelation on the evening of October 22, I was so unsettled that I took a long walk through the streets of Cambridge, Massachusetts.
I thought it might be my last, or at least my last with the city’s infrastructure intact.
All the while I glanced skyward, believing—incorrectly—that I would be able to see incoming, nuclear-tipped Soviet missiles before they detonated.
The mere existence of surreptitious Kennedy tapes was not publicly known until 1973, when the revelations about Nixon’s White House taping system forced open the issue of whether other post-war presidents had also secretly taped conversations.
Once I began listening to the ExComm tapes, it quickly became evident that they would alter many presumptions about the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War.
At that point, I had already gleaned enough from the tapes to know he was dead wrong, but was, of course, prohibited by law from speaking or writing about still-classified material.
I simply replied that he might be in for some big surprises once the tapes were released—a slow process which began in 1983 and concluded early in 1997.
These new primary sources predictably resulted in valuable additions to, and corrections of, the historical record, which previously had a decided Washington tilt to it.
For the first quarter century after the missile crisis, essentially the only primary evidence had come from American sources.
The tapes are the closest thing imaginable to a verbatim record of the crisis.
In the famous formulation of Leopold van Ranke, the 19th century historian, the tapes promise the tantalizing prospect of history “wie as eigentlich gewesen ist”—as it really was.
Because the Kennedy brothers were the only ExComm participants who knew the meetings were being recorded, it has been charged that JFK and RFK manipulated the discussions to make themselves look good to future historians.
This intellectual red herring, like the proverbial bad penny, turns up quite regularly.
The ExComm tapes, Safire insisted, “do not present pure, raw history” since JFK knew the tape was rolling and could “turn the meetings into a charade of entrapment—half history-in-the-making, half-image-in-the-manipulating.
Perhaps in a recorded phone conversation between two people, it might be possible to manipulate a discussion somewhat to shape its outcome, or otherwise permit a false representation to be made.
But in a meeting of some 15 people, operating under enormous stress, tension, and uncertainty, it would be tactically and physically impossible.
JFK could turn the tape machine on and off in the Cabinet Room—the switch was under the table in front of his chair—but he did not have access to the fast-forward, rewind, play, or record buttons, or the real-time timer that he would need for selective recording.
It is also manifestly clear that JFK did not, in his wildest imagination, ever conceive of permitting the public to hear these tapes.
Given the law in 1962, he quite correctly thought of them as his private property.
Undoubtedly, it was Kennedy’s intention to cherry-pick from the tapes when he wrote his memoirs , ignoring references to classified information and eliding personal and/or political remarks that might be, in retrospect, embarrassing.
The same logic, of course, explains why Richard Nixon—the president Safire worked for—repeatedly incriminated himself despite knowing that his words were being recorded.
Well into the FBI’s Watergate investigation, and even as the Senate was beginning its inquiry, Nixon did not attempt to tailor his remarks for the tapes, with one notable exception.
Obviously, Nixon never thought he would or could be compelled to release these personal records.
If he had believed so early enough, he could easily have destroyed the tapes and in all likelihood saved his presidency.
However, the most important proof of the tapes’ validity is that JFK and the other ExComm participants did not know the outcome of the crisis when they were in the middle of dealing with it.
Historians today would be listening to the same tapes , but with a radically different outlook.
The same tapes, in other words, could now be interpreted to make Kennedy look appallingly weak and negligent rather than diplomatically reasonable, if the outcome had been different.
Robert Kennedy’s posture, as revealed by the tapes, further highlights that the participants could not know what position would seem “right” in the 20/20 vision of hindsight.
RFK knew about the taping system, but he regularly took a hawkish, even reckless, stance during the meetings, pushing for a tough strategy that would remove Fidel Castro and demonstrate American resolve to the Soviets.
Yet by early December, when The Saturday Evening Post published an “exclusive” article on the behind-the-scenes decision-making, RFK suddenly metamorphosed into a “leading dove” all along.
And, when Robert Kennedy decided to run for president in 1968, he again downplayed his aggressiveness and painted himself as a dove and conciliator in Thirteen Days, the book that was likely to function as his presidential campaign book.
RFK knew only after the crisis had been resolved that a dovish position was “better” politically, and that having pursued a peaceful solution in 1962 would, in 1968, appeal to a nation divided bitterly by the Vietnam War.
He could not manipulate his image on the tapes any more than his brother, since neither of them knew what was going to happen the next day or even the next hour.
In fact, in and of itself, Thirteen Days is an enormous, if inadvertent, testament to the validity of the secret tapes as an objective source.
Thirteen Days has never been out of print in the nearly 40 years since it was published and has undoubtedly been the most influential book on the missile crisis.
Derived from RFK’s diary of those 13 days, and edited by Theodore Sorensen, the book has been the template for several television and film dramatizations of the crisis.
The tapes, however, contradict the book in several fundamental ways and tell a very different story—one that is much more complex, interesting, and subtle.
Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that the tapes actually expose Thirteen Days as not just selective or slanted history, which is the common affliction of personal diaries and memoirs, but rather as the capstone of an effort to embellish, if not manipulate, the history of the missile crisis to Robert Kennedy’s perceived advantage.
For the listener with a discerning ear, there was too much that could not be captured or rendered in a transcript, even the most accurate one.
In JFK’s case, for example, the nuances of his voice and temperament, his impatience, his Cold War convictions, his blind spots, his doubts, his political instincts, his quick mind, his dispassionate self-control, his persistence, his caution, his skepticism about military solutions to political problems, and his ironic sense of humor, can only be rendered in narrative form.
Indeed, JFK worked secretly with Rusk to create a fallback plan that would utilize the UN secretary general to broker a settlement in case Moscow hardliners rejected the terms reached late on October 27 by RFK and Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
There is nothing on the tapes to suggest that Rusk was indecisive, reluctant to make tough decisions, or “had a virtually complete breakdown, mentally and physically” during the missile crisis, as Schlesinger wrote.
On the final day of crisis meetings, October 27, RFK strenuously opposed any linkage between the Soviet missiles in Cuba and the United States missiles in Turkey.
He was the first to propose a trade of the Cuban and Turkish missiles, and stood his ground against harsh criticism from ExComm’s hawkish majority.
It is ironic, of course, that the proposal Stevenson advanced on October 26 was nearly identical to the one JFK secretly adopted the very next day.
But, the former Harvard dean was brilliant, abrasive, arrogant, and sometimes seemed to forget that he himself was not the president.
On October 22, JFK had just reiterated that all the missile bases could not destroyed by air strikes.
On Saturday morning, October 27, the ExComm had just received Khrushchev’s public letter which offered to trade Soviet missiles in Cuba for United States missiles in Turkey.
This proposal flatly contradicted Khrushchev’s secret Friday evening offer to remove the Cuban missiles in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
Against almost unanimous ExComm opposition, JFK insisted that “most people will regard this as not an unreasonable proposal.
Apart from these insights into the personalities involved, the deconstruction of the “Trollope ploy” is perhaps the most striking revelation on the tapes.
This missile crisis myth, like so many others celebrated by gullible historians, missile crisis participants, and film makers, originated in Alsop and Bartlett’s Saturday Evening Post article, and was later given much greater credence in Thirteen Days.
The allegedly brilliant tactic dubbed the “Trollope ploy” took its name from a plot device frequently employed by Anthony Trollope, a 19th century British author.
Trollope’s novels invariably contained a scene in which a marriage-hungry maiden seized upon a man’s casual romantic gesture, choosing to interpret it as a proposal.
In the context of the missile crisis, the notion of borrowing from Trollope was supposedly first suggested by Robert Kennedy.
The attorney general allegedly proposed that President Kennedy respond to Khrushchev’s two separate offers of October 26 and 27 by accepting the earlier message, while ignoring the second.
But the secret tapes demonstrate conclusively that the “Trollope ploy” was a cover story from the start, a plausible explanation meant to mask the real terms of the settlement.
JFK repeatedly predicted that the Soviet leader would inevitably “come back” to his public offer on the Turkish missiles; therefore it was foolish and impossible to ignore it.
After considerable haggling over the terms, JFK’s eventual message to Khrushchev did not “ignore” the Soviet premier’s Saturday proposal on Turkey, but deliberately left the door open to settling broader international issues once the immediate danger in Cuba had been neutralized.
Named after Andrew Cordier, who was to be the secret intermediary between Washington and Secretary General U Thant, this ploy was real.
U Thant was to propose, ostensibly spontaneously and of his own accord, that the UN oversee the swap of the offensive missiles in Cuba for the United States missiles in Turkey.
Given the stakes, Kennedy reasoned, the Soviets might accept this neutral third-party, face-saving solution if all else failed.
Simply put, JFK was determined not to allow any reasonable chance for an accommodation to slip away if the probable alternative was war, and possibly a catastrophic nuclear one.
What is surprising, now that the truth is knowable, is how the “Trollope ploy” legend lives on.
It has become an unshakable fixture in the lore about the missile crisis, even though it never happened.
A year after the publication of Averting ‘The Final Failure,’ I was contacted by a production company working on a television documentary about presidential correspondence.
The producers were interested in having me discuss Kennedy’s letters during the missile crisis.
Instead, I persuaded them that it would be much more interesting to expose the “Trollope ploy” myth.
The producers, excited about having something genuinely “new” in their program, enthusiastically agreed and interviewed me for some 30 minutes.
When the program aired, my wife and I waited expectantly, and finally, with less than 10 minutes to go in the program, I appeared on screen for about 4 seconds, as the talking head who introduced the Trollope ploy.
I was immediately followed by actor Martin Sheen, who had played RFK in a 1974 dramatization of the missile crisis.
It’s not just television “documentaries” that perpetuate this kind of fiction.
Talbot claimed that RFK “matured from a knee-jerk hawk to a wise and restrained diplomat” during the ExComm meetings.
In fact, Robert Kennedy, along with McNamara, consistently opposed any terms involving the United States missiles in Turkey well into the final hours of “Black Saturday,” so-called because if a deal failed to materialize, a superpower clash seemed imminent and unavoidable.
Although he has, at least, shied away from writing a self-serving memoir about the missile crisis, in Errol Morris’s 2004 Academy Award winning film, The Fog of War, McNamara promoted the false notion that he had been, all along, in the front ranks of those promoting a peaceful resolution of the missile crisis, even if it involved a missile swap.
It’s incredible that McNamara even invoked the “Trollope ploy” in Morris’s documentary.
Either the aging former secretary of defense could not genuinely remember what had happened, or the persistent repetition of the legend had actually displaced the truth in his own mind.
Before listening to the ExComm tapes, I had taken for granted that John Kennedy was a tough and relentless Cold Warrior.
And, without question, JFK and his administration bear significant responsibility for precipitating the missile crisis.
Kennedy had approved the Bay of Pigs operation in early 1961 and later aroused Khrushchev’s ire by activating the Jupiter missiles in Turkey, raising the prospect of a nuclear attack on Moscow within minutes.
And, of course, the president had also sanctioned Operation MONGOOSE, which RFK directly oversaw, to sabotage the Cuban economy and overthrow Fidel Castro.
The ExComm tapes, nonetheless, prove conclusively that President Kennedy consistently dug in his heels despite the pressure exerted on him to use force.
Often, Kennedy stood virtually alone against war-like counsel from the ExComm, the Joint Chiefs, and the leaders of Congress during those historic 13 days.
In the private councils of government, in other words, JFK consistently rose above the simplistic, black-and-white Cold War rhetoric he had employed in his October 22 address announcing the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba—the very speech that prompted me to take a last walk around Cambridge.
And, to a remarkable degree, President Kennedy succeeded—although not without some “help” from Khrushchev and some genuine luck.
Of course, Kennedy never abandoned his commitment, even after the missile crisis, to undermine the Cuban regime and get rid of Fidel Castro.
Sheldon M Stern, a member of the editorial board of Washington Decoded, served as historian at the John F Kennedy Library from 1977 through 1999.
We sometimes had lunch together at the Kennedy Library, and he often complained about how hard it was to decipher the tapes; he was especially irritated because he could not identify the voices of several former colleagues.
Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr. reflected the reaction of many former Kennedy administration officials to the news about the Nixon tapes by flatly dismissing the possibility that JFK had secretly taped meetings and telephone conversations.
Crafting a New Historical Genre,” History News Network, 21 February 2005.
Historians, for example, learned that Nikita Khrushchev had secretly sent more than 40,000 Soviet combat troops to Cuba.
The issue of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons on the island also took on renewed importance, although this was not quite the sensational revelation that it initially appeared to be.
Owing to the oddity and manipulativeness of some of Nixon’s remarks, then-counsel John Dean came to believe in early 1973—and so testified before the Senate—that the president might be secretly tape-recording their meetings at the White House.
The Nixon tapes would reveal that the president believed, ironically, that Dean was also secretly tape-recording their meetings.
The White House Years , 269, 331; Samuel Dash, Chief Counsel: Inside the Ervin Committee—The Untold Story of Watergate , 159.
Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett, “In Time of Crisis,” Saturday Evening Post, 8 December 1962, 20.
One of the most oft-repeated ExComm anecdotes in the first wave of histories depicted Robert Kennedy as bravely rebutting Dean Acheson on October 17, after the former secretary of state argued persuasively in favor of an immediate air attack.
An account of the Acheson-Kennedy face-off, or variations of it, initially appeared in the article by Alsop and Bartlett; Theodore Sorensen’s 1965 book about President Kennedy; Elie Abel’s 1966 history of the missile crisis ; and then in Thirteen Days.
Just how reckless RFK was in October 1962 is underscored by a revelation contained in Don Bohning’s 2005 book about United States policy toward Cuba.
Bohning, the former Latin American editor for The Miami Herald, interviewed Rafael Quintero, a leader among the Cuban exiles opposed to Castro.
According to Quintero, he and Roberto San Roman went up to Washington at RFK’s behest after the United States blockade of the island had been imposed.
Thus, at a time when President Kennedy was doing everything in his power to avoid a military confrontation, RFK was still trying to provoke an armed clash.
The fact that Robert Kennedy made no effort to alter or destroy the tapes—even though they contradicted his dovish self-portrait in Thirteen Days—further underscores the fact that the tapes were considered private property that the owners never thought would be made public.
Stevenson had first proposed a Cuba-Turkey missile swap in a note to the president on October 17 and repeated it at the unrecorded 2:30 P.M. meeting on October 20.
The UN ambassador surely sensed that the ExComm was stacked against him.
Bundy, C Douglas Dillon, John McCloy, and John McCone were Republicans.
RFK had worked in Stevenson’s 1956 presidential campaign, but concluded that the candidate was weak and indecisive and voted for Eisenhower.
And, JFK himself had never forgiven Stevenson’s quixotic effort to win a third presidential nomination in 1960.
The antagonism in the room directed toward Stevenson was almost palpable.
Stevenson later left the meeting to take a call from the UN in the Oval Office.
He must have experienced mixed emotions as he talked alone in the Oval Office, possibly from the president’s desk.
There is abundant evidence of the less than cordial feelings between JFK and his UN ambassador and it must have been very difficult for the twice-defeated presidential candidate to sit alone in the office he clearly felt he deserved to occupy.
What’s True and What’s a Lie in The Fog of War,” Slate, 19 December 2003.
As Dean Rusk repeatedly stated at the ExComm meetings, Havana’s acceptance of offensive nuclear missiles, especially covertly, furthered Soviet strategic interests but actually threatened the survival of the Cuban revolution.
I would greatly appreciate the opportunity to discuss this important event in American history with you.
Comments are moderated and will not appear until approved by the author.
Post another comment The letters and numbers you entered did not match the image.
As a final step before posting your comment, enter the letters and numbers you see in the image below.
Sign Out Your Information Name is required to post a comment Please enter a valid email address Invalid URL document.write; Please enable JavaScript if you would like to comment on this blog.
Please try again.<\/p>\t \t \n\t <p>As a final step before posting your comment, enter the letters and numbers you see in the image below.
