In the summer of 1962, the Soviet Union dispatched a fleet of commercial cargo ships filled with nuclear missiles, launchers and anti-aircraft guns--all under false manifests--across the Atlantic Ocean to Fidel Castro's Cuba.
Forty thousand Soviet soldiers and technicians began clandestinely erecting an extensive array of armed missile sites, and aiming their nuclear-tipped medium range ballistic missiles at the United States.
Nikita Khruschev and his key military advisors thought that the missiles would remain unnoticed until November, and then he planned to suddenly reveal them to the United States as a fait accompli.
But in mid-October, with the Soviet tankers still enroute, American U-2 spy planes and CIA photo analysts detected several Medium Range Ballistic Missiles on Cuban soil, their sites still under construction.
In the weeks that followed, both nations stood at the brink of nuclear holocaust.
Never before in history has the world come closer to a general nuclear war.
Several years ago, I had the opportunity to sit down over dinner with Ted Sorenson, one of President Kennedy's closest advisors.
This seminal event in our nation's history continues to be studied at all of our nation's war colleges.
And I'm humbled--there are so many supremely talented lensmasters with superb lenses on Squidoo.
The United States ends all exports to Cuba except nonsubsidized foodstuffs, medicines, and medical supplies.
The Soviet Defense Ministry formally decides to send nuclear missiles to Cuba.
United States Surveillance of heavy volume of Russian shipping bound for Cuba.
He increases U-2 overflights, concerned that the Soviets might introduce offensive weapons into Cuba.
The first photographic proof of surface-to-air missile deployments in Cuba was obtained on August 29, 1962.
Also confirms seven KOMAR guided-missile patrol boats in the naval port of Mariel, twenty-seven miles west-southwest of Havana.
Reveals a cruise-missile launch site that could be launched against invading forces.
Republican Senator Kenneth Keating warns of possible Soviet ""Rocket installations in Cuba"" and urges President Kennedy to act.
This sentiment echoes in Congress through the first three weeks of October.
The SS-4 Sandal MRBM could launch a three-megaton warhead to an estimated range of 1,020 nautical miles that could reach targets as far away as Washington, D.C., Dallas, or the Panama Canal.
