The blog name is also intended as a good-humored gesture of admiration for distinguished Chicago School economists and fellow travelers.
Last year I read Rockets and People, the totally fascinating memoir of Soviet rocket developer Boris Chertok, which I’m still hoping to get around to reviewing one of these days.
Chertok’s career encompassed both military and space-exploration projects, and in late October 1962 he was focused on preparations for launching a Mars probe.
At the gatehouse, there was usually a lone soldier on duty who would give my pass a cursory glance.
Now suddenly I saw a group of soldiers wielding sub-machine guns, and they thoroughly scrutinized my pass.
Other groups of soldiers in full combat gear, even wearing gas masks, were running about the periphery of the secure area.
When I stopped in at the MIK, I immediately saw that the “duty” R-7A combat missile, which had always been covered and standing up against the wall, which we had always ignored, was uncovered.
Chertok was greeted by his friend Colonel Kirillov, who was in charge of this launch facility.
The chiefs of the directorates and commanders of the troop units were gathered there.
We were told that the firing range must be brought into a state of battle readiness immediately.
Due to the events in Cuba, air attacks, bombardment, and even United States airborne assaults are possible.
All Air Defense Troops assets have already been put into combat readiness.
All facilities and launch sites have been put under heightened security.
But most important—I received the order to open an envelope that has been stored in a special safe and to act in accordance with its contents.
According to the order, I must immediately prepare the duty combat missile at the engineering facility and mate the warhead located in a special depot, roll the missile out to the launch site, position it, test it, fuel it, aim it, and wait for a special launch command.
Therefore, the crews have been removed from the Mars shot and shifted over to preparation of the combat missile.
Chertok, who at this point was apparently viewing the Cuban affair as a flash in the pan that would be resolved short of war, was concerned that moving the Mars rocket would cause them to miss their October 29 launch date, and suggested that the swap of the rockets be delayed for a few hours.
Kirillov told him that this was impossible, and that he should go to the “Marshal’s cottage,” where some of his associates wanted to see him.
At the cottage, four men were seated at a table playing cards while a fifth was trying to glean the latest news from a radio and Lena, the housekeeper, was in the kitchen drying wine glasses.
It was suggested that since Chertok didn’t like playing cards, he should help Lena fix the drinks.
I took the enormous watermelon and two bottles of cognac out of the fridge.
When everything was ready, we heard a report that United Nations Secretary General U Thant had sent personal messages to Khrushchev and Kennedy.
This time we all drank down our toast in silence and very solemnly, realizing how close we now were to a situation in which this cognac and this watermelon could be our last.
Still hoping to avoid the cancellation of the Mars mission, Chertok went to another cottage and, with considerable difficulty, made a forbidden call to S P Korolev, overall head of the Soviet rocket program, who was then in Moscow.
Korolev told him that things were being taken care of and not to worry.
While everyone excitedly discussed the historic significance of the “All clear” command, Lena brought out a bottle of “three star” cognac from some secret stash.
Few had been aware of the actual threat of a potential nuclear missile war at that time.
In any event, one did not see the usual lines for salt, matches, and kerosene that form during the threat of war.
When the world really was on the verge of a nuclear catastrophe, only a very small number of people in the USSR and the United States realized it.
Khrushchev and Kennedy exercised restraint and did not give in to their emotions.
Moreover, the military leaders of both sides did not display any independent initiative nor did they deviate at all from the orders of their respective heads of state.
He knew that the United States nuclear arsenal was many times greater than ours.
The Cubans did not know this and viewed Moscow’s order to call off missile preparation and dismantle the launch sites as a betrayal of Cuba’s interests.
President Kennedy had no doubt as to the United States’ nuclear supremacy.
I did not have a high opinion of Kennedy and my family was outraged when they learned I had voted for Nixon in 1960.
Michael Hiteshew October 19, 2013 at 1:18 pm I recently read Disinformation and the author made a plausible case, almost in passing, that he believed Kennedy was killed by Khrushchev, via the KGB using Oswald as their tool, for that humiliation.
It fit into the wider theme of his discussion of the disinformation forces of the USSR, and how they soon afterwards had had everyone pointing at the CIA, LBJ, the mafia, everyone but the obvious culprits.
His impressive point was that most people around the world now believe, on no evidence, that the CIA killed Kennedy, yet dismiss Oswald’s obvious connections to the CPUSA and the USSR’s reasons to have Kennedy killed.
As well as a mini history of the use of disinformation by Russia and the USSR – I hadn’t realized that the disinformation forces employed by the USSR were greater in number than the armed forces – he describes how they long ago infiltrated, co-opted, then took command of the western left’s media and propaganda arms.
That one finds similar themes and approaches in Soviet propaganda, Hollywood movies, the NYT and government schools is not a coincidence nor an accident.
MikeK October 19, 2013 at 4:07 pm Epstein’s two books , The JFK Assassination Diary, and his book about Oswald, Legend are both excellent and suggest that Oswald may have had KGB ties but that the Cubans, if anyone, were more likely behind it.
David Foster October 19, 2013 at 4:15 pm From what I have read, Castro was extremely bitter about the resolution of the crisis, which he viewed as a betrayal by the Russians.
Had he had control over the missiles, he would very likely have launched them.
Jonathan October 19, 2013 at 5:46 pm It’s remarkable how many people outside of Cuba still give Castro the benefit of doubt despite all evidence of his wickedness.
They’re why he’ll probably die in his bed and millions of Cubans will cry as if they’d lost their father.
Andrew X October 20, 2013 at 5:45 am Yeah, I don’t think it was the Sovs.
In the US/USSR game, offing each others leaders was pretty much out of bounds.
You know that if we seriously went after a Soviet Premier, they would consider it active war.
If either side were to get credible info that such a thing did occur, things could get extremely ugly, even out of political control ugly, real fast.
Surely they would hide their hand better than that, a la Mehemt Agca and JP-II, as, given what I said, the ramifications of getting discovered would be enormous.
And he reported quite clearly that the Soviets were horrified by the event, frightened in no small measure, and basically flipped out when they heard it was Oswald and knew who he was.
This was duly reported back to DC, and history records that, even with Oswald having defected to the Soviet Union at one point, the United States goverment never really thought the Soviets had a hand in it.
Odds on favortite is that Oswald were just two nuts, with guns and well-placed.
The Mafia underworld, furious at Bobby even more than Jack, over what they saw as a betrayal after helping put them in office, only to see RFK’s Justice Dept go literally gangbusters against them.
But I just think to much adds up against Soviet involvement…. political reasons, not moral ones.
MikeK October 20, 2013 at 10:01 am If anybody had a hand in Oswald’s actions, it was Cuba.
Also, it was later found that there were nuclear tactical warheads in Cuba so a 1962 invasion was probably not a good idea.
Gringo October 20, 2013 at 11:40 am I was all set to post about Morris Childs and Operation SOLO, but Andrew X beat me to it, and did a better job of explaining it than I did.
A further point in support of what Morris Childs reported about the Soviet role in the JFK assassination is that Morris Childs understood Russian, courtesy of his immigrant parents, but never let on to the Soviets that he understood Russian.
So he would hear the Russians speak among themselves before he heard the translation.
And this time at least, what they discussed among themselves was what the translator told Morris Childs.
I also suspect that Castro could have had something to do with the JFK assassination.
In September 1963, Oswald went to Mexico City in an unsuccessful attempt to get a visa for Cuba.
In the process of applying for a visa, Oswald must have given enough life history information to entice the Cubans.
When Oswald was back in Dallas, it wouldn’t have been difficult for the Cubans to get in touch.
As MikeK points out, the Cuban role could have been as simple as one of encouragement.
I doubt that Oswald,a hothead who had already taken a potshot at right-wing General Walker, would have needed much encouragement.
A good investment. slumlord October 20, 2013 at 2:21 pm People tend to get caught up in the detail and tend to forget the bigger picture with regard to the Crisis.
The Soviet Unions ballistic missile capability was woefully inadequate at the time, both in quality and quantity.
The Sov’s were particularly alarmed when the United States placed missile bases in Turkey and wanted them removed.
LeMay knew the poor bargaining position that they were in and wanted to call their bluff, Kennedy thought LeMay mad.
In the end the Sov’s got the missiles out of Turkey by getting the United States to back down.
The way the Kennedy administration put the spin on it was by painting as the Soviets backing down as a response of the blockade and the threat of war.
In reality, the Sov’s backed down after the United States agreed to pull the missiles out of Turkey.
Not because he won, but because as a group they were more concerned with their own survival and the survival of Communism.
They knew that they had come close, and saw Krushev’s “adventurism” as something that was too risky for their liking.
MikeK October 20, 2013 at 2:28 pm Khrushchev also became convinced that Kennedy was weak during the Vienna summit.
We are seeing a parallel situation now which may well blow up the middle east.
Ray Rust October 21, 2013 at 7:34 pm Interesting discussion but I take a different view.
From my reading about Krushev he thought Kennedy was a light weight and someone he could bully.
Counterfactual history, if Nixon would have won the Presidency in 1960 I don’t think Krushev would have challenged Nixon,e. the famous Kitchen debates, etc.
On conspiracy, please read Vincent Buglosi’s 1600 page book on the Kennedy assassination where he refutes all these half-baked theories.
The only true conspiracy in the assassination of a President was the Lincoln assassination.
Proven with real evidence Gringo October 21, 2013 at 10:49 pm Ray Rust Counterfactual history, if Nixon would have won the Presidency in 1960 I don’t think Krushev would have challenged Nixon,e. the famous Kitchen debates, etc.
Bradley Thompson Cafe Hayek Calculated Risk Camp Of The Saints Captain's Journal Caroline Glick Carpe Diem Cato Downsizing Blog Cato@Liberty CDR Salamander Celia Hayes's Amazon Author Page Center for Prosecutor Integrity Chet Richards Chicago Contrarian Chicago Thinker Churchill Society Citizen Intelligence Clausewitz.com Clayton Cramer Climate Etc.
Quillette Quodlibeta Rantburg Rare Historical Photos Razib Khan RealClearHistory RealClearMarkets RealClearPolitics RealClearWorld Red Team Journal RedState Reid Hoffman Retraction Watch Richard Hanania Ricochet.com Right Coast Rubin Report Samizdata Scholar's Stage Scott Adams Secular Right Seeking Alpha Sense of Events Sepia Mutiny Seraphic Secret Shadow Govt.
Statistics Shall Not Be Questioned Shorpy Shot In The Dark ShrinkWrapped Simple Justice Skeptical Doctor Slate Star Codex Small Dead Animals Small Wars Journal Smallest Minority Social Pathologist Spectator Spengler Spiked Spitalfields Life St.
All original content on the Chicago Boyz web site is copyright © 2001-2022 by Chicago Boyz Media, LLC or the Chicago Boyz contributor who posted it.
