Reading the Lessons Correctly RICHARD NED LEBOW The ""lessons"" of the Cuban missile crisis occupy a central place s theory.
For both in United States foreign policy and in international relation akers, the crisis confirm ed a number of tenets about the utility of power policym in which relation s with the Soviet Union should in a nuclear world and the ways be manage Theoret icians have thoroug hly examin ed the case for generalibest role of nuclear zations about crisis decision-making, bargaining theory, and the weapons in foreign policy.
Unforvoking a confron al and thus of little analytic al tunately, most of this literature is highly polemic importa nt excepti ons, among them an article by James value.
The literature has also created dogma or confirmed it when such im confirmation may have been unwarranted based on the evidence.
Two striking Al examples of this are the deeply entrenched and related beliefs in the efficacy of pr deterrence and in the ability of political leaders to steer their states through the tr( shoals of nuclear crisis.
Soviet policy before the missil es were discovered has ac been interpreted as consistent with the former belief, while the success of KenSo nedy and Nikita Khrushchev in resolving the confro ntation is often offered in D( support of the latter.
President Kennedy's warnings were also communicat car ed to Moscow through private channels in order to reinforce their salience and 13, to dissuade the Soviets from interpreting them as mere campaign rhetoric.
The Soviets gave every indication of sensitivity both to American strategic interests and to the president's political needs.
Shortly thereafter, Georgi Bolshakov, a Soviet official in Washington used by Khrushchev as his personal courier to the White House, conveyed a message directly from Khrushchev and Foreign Minister Anastas Mikoian.
The Soviet statements, both public and private, appeared to indicate Soviet fwi recognition of the nature and the gravity of the American warning.
This would ofi also seem to be a model case of communication, or signalling, between the superpo wers.
All reres sponses indicated that the Soviets understood the signal and accepted the message."" ass In retrospect, it is evident that Moscow had decided someti do me in June to put ) missiles in Cuba.
Remarkably, practically all of these explan to ations start with the premise that Khruschev behaved rationally.
Simple deduct hoN ive logic suggests four generic explanations for Soviet policy that are congru gen ent with rational decision-making.
These assume that the gains justified the fur. risks; that the gains justified the costs; that Khrushchev was deliberately misled acts by Kennedy; and that Khrushchev was inadvertently misled by Kennedy.
IS in Conflict, Cuba, 1962,"" tion Canadian Journal of Political Science 14 :83-105.
To sustain the thesis that expected gains balanced expected risks, he must f ac postulate a potpourri of incentives that strain the reader's credulity, with regard tar both to their realism and to the likelihood that Soviet leaders would consider cid them as a coordinated package.
For this very reason one must question the fundamental po assumption on which his entire argument rests. nit Ur silo Gains that Justify the Costs rai The Soviet decision to put missiles into Cuba could also be considered rational mi if Moscow acted in full knowledge or expectation of the consequences.
This Pa would mean that the actual outcome of the crisis more or less represented the tr( objective that Moscow sought from the outset.
He insisted his government had information that the United States sh was preparing another assault on Cuba and sent in missiles in order to extract a no-invasion pledge from President Kennedy.
It was clear at a very early date to most sensitive observers that Khrushchev's motc tives were more or less precisely as he describes them.
In the West too much was made nI of his humiliation in being forced to withdraw his ai missiles.
Arnold Horelick has face in the aftermath of a crushing foreign-pol the Cuban missile crisis as cointartly observed that ""to regard the outcome of or interests is to mistake salciding in any substantial way with Soviet intentions vage of a shipwreck for brillia nt navig ation ."""" of telling arguments in supHorelick and others have put forward a number obvio us discre pancy between the magport of their view.
The Soviet nitude of the means and ers and an equal number of misUnion sent Cuba at least 42 Ilyushin-28 bomb of them for mediumbuilt nine missi le sites, six siles.
The latter fuelin g, and coniated storag e, pads for four missiles together with their assoc to believ e that 's expla nation find it diffic ult trol facilities.
The MRB een them, they could target almost any important the IRBMs, twice that.
If a pledge not Unite d States population center or military installation in the strate gic force— hchev 's goal, a less formi dable to invade Cuba was truly Khrus one capab le of hittin g Miam i or even parts of the southeastern for example, every respect.
The Soviets could United States—would have been preferable in capab ility with a limite d numb er of MRBMs, which were have attained this vulne rable than IRBMs and easier to semimobile missiles that were both less deploy without detec tion.
Despite Khrushchev's efforts Finally, there is the question of political cost. thing of a Sovie t victo ry, other world leaders— to portray the crisis as some wise.
The Chinese, Albanians, notably communist leaders — concluded other point ed out the utter meaninglessness of verbal and, of course, the Cubans also criticized Khrushchev for assurances given by capitalist adversaries.
In all likelihood, the missile crisis was one of the contributing causes of Bt his subsequent downfall.
Although Khrushchev could not have been expected ca to foresee with precision all of these costs, it is difficult to believe that he and other members of the Kremlin inner circle could have been completely blind to de them.
In this regard it is important to remember that Kennedy made every effort th to allow Khrushchev to save what face he could—something that could not have TI been predicted with any degree of confidence in advance.
Had Kennedy chosen cc instead to seek Khrushchev's humiliation, the embarrassment and loss of presre tige suffered by the Soviet leader and his country would have been greater still.
The price of Soviet withdrawal of their missiles from Cuba was simply too th great for Khrushchev knowingly and willingly to have accepted it in advance. ar For this reason, some analysts have suggested as Khrushchev's objective a more A far-reaching trade-off.
Speculation has centered on missile trade involving Cuba lif and Turkey, an American withdrawal from other foreign military bases ui threatening to the Soviet Union, and even an American capitulation in Berlin."" el While these trade-offs would have resulted in a more favorable payoff for the K Soviet Union, they are still open to the criticism that the means were either disbo proportionate or inappropriate to the ends.
Leaving the Cuba-Turkey deal aside, there is no evidence that the Russians ever considered any of these K exchanges as their objective.
Even the Cuba-Turkey trade, which was mooted k; by Khrushchev and other officials during the crisis, seems more a belated effort to make the best possible bargain in a bad situation.
Kennedy's personality; his esrecord in office; and the peculiar characteristics of American electoral politics. ill.
This seems attributable in part to their belief that the personality and character of the president have a decisive influence on national policy. ire Americans naturally assume that others view their political system in a similar ba light.
For a number of American analysts, therefore, a natural starting point for ies understanding the events that led to the crisis is examining the personality and . 27 character of John F Kennedy.
There is a surprising consensus among American students of the crisis that :se Khrushchev underestimated Kennedy and that he believed the president was the ed kind of man who would shy away from hard decisions.
It is often remarked that Khrushchev viewed Kennedy as weak, inexperienced, and irresolute— a judgment seemingly derived from, or fortified by, the President's comparative youth, his handling of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, and his performance in Vienna oin June 1961.
Nearly everyone who has examined the Cuban missile crisis argues that lithe Soviets were operating on an incorrect image of their opponent and were genuinely Ys surprised when Kennedy reacted as firmly as he did.
While officially supporting the president during the crisis, the French hit leader hinted that immaturity had led him to overreact to the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev himself seemed concerned that Kennedy would on underestimate him because of his advanced age.
Reston had the opportunity to observe Kennedy ten minutes after his final sestal sion with Khrushchev.
Three and a half years later, he described his recollection del of this encounter.
We will have to know much more about that confrontation between Kennedy and DX' Cos off cha 33 Abel, Missile Crisis, 37.
James Reston, adon mittedly on the basis of no evidence, also speculated that Khrushchev might have been influenced of I by Kennedy's age.
The communist decision to put ing offensive missiles into Cuba was the final gamble of this assumption.° lers ictClearly, Reston was careful to describe his analysis as unconfirmed speculamd tion.
Once again, Abel's judgment seems questionable. 'jet Reston's account of the Vienna summit is the only one that suggests weakness lid on Kennedy's part.
On the secon d day, the more confrontational of ng the two, Kennedy was impressed by Khru shchev's vitality, debating skill, and wt candor but dismayed by his dogmatic appro ach.
Schlesinger reported that afterwards the president asked Ambassador Llew ellyn Thompson if it was always re like this.
Kenn edy told journalists of Khrushchev's tn demands and of his own determination not to give in.
Reston-Abel thesis is also questioned by Pachter, Collision Course, 64.
He argued that Khrushchev would not have conducted offens ive in Berlin so cautiously if he had under his subsequent estimated Kennedy at Vienna.
Not only do his descriptions of the Vienna talks mesh nicely with the portrayals of Schlesinger, Sorensen, and Salinger, but so do his recollections of r Kennedy's performance.
In this regard, he found h Kennedy a refreshing change from Dwight D Eisenhower, even though their policy positions, especially on Germany and Berlin, were barely distinguishable.
Kennedy, he reported, wanted him to agree to respect the politica l status quo in the Third World, something Khrushchev insisted flew in the face of reality a and was in any case unacceptable to a good communist.
Be that as it may, they and Khrushchev are p still in complete agreement that Kennedy, although taken aback by Khrushchev's vehemence, tt parried the chairman's verbal thrusts with skill and conviction and conveyed the impression of being a firm but thoughtful leader. p The third and most common charge raised against Kennedy is ‘4, that his refusal to commit American troops to the faltering Bay of Pigs invasio n undermined b his credibility in Khrushchev's eyes.
The ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion attempt of April 1961, while it may have demonstrated the depths of United States hostility toward Castro, may also have suggested to Soviet leaders that United States reluctance to engage its own forces directly in military action against thi sic "" Quoted in ibid., 550.
Kennedy was, of course, aware of the political dangers posed by Cuba and for this reason sought to counter the charges of Senator Kenneth Keating and others that Soviet surface-to-surface missiles had been introduced on the island.
While denying that elections n made any real difference in policy, he acknowledged that public opinion is critical to their outcome.
Concerning the 1960 election, Khrushchev reported e that he knew perfectly well that any endorsement from the Soviet Union would y serve as a disadvantage for a candidate.
This fact did not stop the Americans e from trying to use the Soviets to affect the election's outcome.
He told of being asked by the White House to release U-2 pilot Gary Francis Powers just before e election day.
If we give the slightest boost to Nixon it will be interpreted as an expression of our e willingness to see him in the White House.
Khrushchev's obvious concern for the differences between the candidates as revealed by their speeches casts doubt on the hypothesis that he would have dismissed Kennedy's highly specific warnings as mere political rhetoric.
The marginal appeal to American analysts of cultural and political explanations for Soviet miscalculation is both striking and significant.
It almost certain1 ly reflects the American precreliction, already noted, to explain policy decisions in terms of the personalities involved.
However, the avowed goals of the analysts are to put themselves in Khrushchev's shoes and to see the world through his eyes.
Here were the leaders of the the world's most powerful nation, a nation that had faced down the Chinese in Korea and the Soviets in Berlin and was spending huge sums on a new generazhev tion of strategic weapons, fearful that their adversary had no respect for their t the resolve.
The ostensible causes for their concern was Kennedy's failure at the Bay :uba of Pigs and his acceptance of the Berlin Wall.
Elie Abel has relayed the opinions of John McCone, a Kennedy intimate. and issile . . . the United States led the Russians into that frame of mind d do by a whole series of things it had done—or failed to do.
Kennedy, for example, let arid, them get away with building the Berlin Wall.
McCone blames not only the Kennedy Administration but also the Eisenhower Administration before it for creating a ""climate of inaction."""" the Clearly, it would have required a strange cast of mind —and a certain arrogance rage as well—for the Kennedy administration to see the Berlin Wall as a test of ernUnited States resolve rather than a desperate measure to stop the exodus of has millions of people from East Germany.
Granted, there had been some major Soviet initiatives, like the Hungarian invasion and the Berlin Wall, that the United States felt constrained to tolerate, and even some outright policy lean failures, like the Bay of Pigs operation.
But there was also a series of foreign icing policy successes in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia that stretched back to i use too the opening days of the cold war.
During the course of the Berlin campaign and probably by the end of 1961, the Soviet leaders became f the "" Sorensen, Kennedy, 724. e' Ibid.
Berlin crisis and Kennedy and most of his foreign policy advisers ignored the that Ameri can resolve during the episod e might have made on the impression been one failure after another bethe Soviet Union.
So, for that matter , have most tween the Bay of admin istratio n, they arbitrarily analysts.
They cite this overlook the success of Berlin e"" and Kenne dy's allege d weakn ess in Vienn a—the latter based on ""failur gamble as reasonReston's unsubstantiated surmise—to justify Khrushchev's ably conceived. "" thesis is the The most disturbing aspect of this ""courage and commitment ation.
Accor ding to the thesis, Kennedy, a tautological nature of its confirm gly consum ed with the ideal of courag e and deeply affected by his man seemin his own feelings of humiliation at the Bay of Pigs, appears to have projected the nation' s bargain ing reputat ion.
Khrush chev's missile ploy, inadequacy onto etation s, was then taken by him which was open to a variety of possible interpr of his worst forebo dings.
Kenne dy's view of the matter as a clear confirmation d it in their analys is of the spread to the journalists around him, who adopte to in turn accept ed it uncriti cally becaus e it helped crisis.
Academic analysts behavi or that otherw ise would have appear ed irration al. explain ge and commitWithout a shred of hard evidence to back it up, the ""coura has becom e one of the most entren ched shibbo leths of the conment"" thesis endured the justific ation for the most frontation.
This that unques tioned resolve deters resolve invites challenge is the belief subseq uent policym akers to view every foreign upheav al as a belief encouraged ant strategic inpossible test of American will.
It provided the most import in Vietna m and the willing ness of more recent American centive for intervention and the Persian Gulf.
AMU E CRIS OF BRINKMANSHIP AN ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATION here maintain that Soviet leaders All the theories about Soviet policy examined s, they acted in accord with either Soviet nabehaved rationally.
Starttional interests, their own political interests, rate one of four generic explanations coning from this premise, they elabo Khrushchev and those around him gruent with this assumption to explain why g Soviet missiles into Cuba.
None accepted the risks associated with introducin ly conv incin Their failure is certainly not of these explanations is particular diligence on the part of the analysts; attributable to any lack of imagination or many of their efforts to reconstruct a raindeed both characteristics typify so em lies instead with the assumption tionale for Khrushchev's behavior.
Such an approach immediately ment to keep offensive weapons out of Cuba of trying to explain away the credisuggests a different line of analysis.
The origins of thirteen ""brinkman t of an adversary in the expectation a state challenges an important commitmen studied to determine why policythat the adversary will back down—were d war.
The finding was that almost without makers pursued policies that riske ily be traced to grave foreign and exception, these crises could most read could only be overcome through an agdomestic threats that leaders believed gressive foreign policy. expectation of a dramatic shift The most important external threat was the n of the thirte en cases, brinkmanship was in the balance of power.
In seve among policymakers that a dramatic, preceded by the widely shared perception powe r was imminent.
In four of the cases—Korea , Bosnia speci , July , and Arab-Israeli — domestic political instability or tives the frangibility of the state itself appeared instrumental in convincing leaders to Tt provoke a confrontation.
They resorted to the time-honored technique of atSino tempting to offset discontent at home by diplomatic success abroad. pelle The political weakness of leaders as distinct from the instability of the politipolit cal system as a whole provided a third incentive for brinkmanship, as individual obje, leaders sought success abroad in order to buttress their domestic positions.
Powere litical weakness can also lead to confrontations because leaders feel too insecure to d( to oppose policies they know to be highly risky or otherwise ill-conceived.
One victc or the other of these manifestations of political weakness appears to have played Go a role in the origins of ten of the brinkmanship challenges. desp A fourth incentive for brinkmanship is associated with intraelite competition rescr for power.
This was a primary cause of three brinkmanship crisis and probably term a secondary cause of several others.
A bureaucratic subunit or political coalition deni can engineer a confrontation with a foreign power in the expectation that it will that enhance its domestic influence or undermine those of its adversaries.
Intraelite Neh competition can also induce actors to pursue policies calculated to advance their that domestic interests even though these policies have the side effect of provoking tion a crisis with another state.
The Fashoda crisis is an example of the former diss( and the Russo-Japanese crisis in Korea of the latter. lead In practice, the expectation that an adversary would back down when chalof tI lenged has often proved unwarranted.
The cases revealed that most brinkmanthat ship challenges were initiated without any good evidence that the adversaries in least question lacked the resolve to defend their commitment; on the contrary, availT able indications most often pointed to the opposite conclusion.
In only five cases —First Morocco , Bosnia , had Rhineland , Munich , and Berlin —did the leaders of the state bell challenging a commitment have compelling reasons to suspect that their Stat adversaries would back down.
Even so, in two of these cases states had to drop vult their challenge because of the opposition they encountered.
In every other case, for the initiators had to back down or face war. pen These findings indicate that a vulnerable commitment is not a precondition T for brinkmanship.
What counts is the initiator's perception—often faulty—that part a vulnerable commitment exists.
When policymakers became convinced of the necessity of achieving snia specific foreign policy objectives, they became predisposed to see these objecy or tives as attainable. s to The study documented this assertion in the July , Korea , and atSino-Indian crises.
In all three confrontations, political leaders felt compelled to pursue aggressive foreign policies in response to strategic and domestic liti political imperatives.
They convinced themselves that they could achieve their lual objectives without provoking war.
Because they knew the extent to which they Powere powerless to back down, they expected that their adversaries would have :ure to do so.
Some leaders also took comfort in the illusion that they would emerge )ne victorious at little cost to themselves if war developed. yed German, American, and Indian policymakers maintained these beliefs, despite much evidence to the contrary both before and during the crisis.
They ion resorted to elaborate personal and institutional defenses to avoid coming to ibly terms with this information.
Kaiser Wilhelm H and those around him used denial to discredit reports will that Britain would intervene in a continental war.
Dean Acheson, Jawaharlal .lite Nehru, and their respective advisers resorted to denial to discount the possibility teir that their policies would provoke Chinese military responses.
On an instituing tional level, denial took the form of structuring feedback channels to filter out ner dissonant information and to reinforce the preconceived notions of political leaders.
In such a closed environment, events did little to disabuse policymakers talof their unrealistic expectations.
These cases point to the pessimistic hypothesis anthat policymakers with the greatest need to learn from external reality are the in least likely to do so. ailThe Cuban missile crisis appears to conform, at least in part, to this pattern.
By all American accounts, Soviet leaders had strong—even compelling — incented tives to put missiles into Cuba.
As is well known, the Kennedy administration decided in the eir autumn of 1961 to tell the Soviets that it knew that their first-generation ICBM 6), had proven a failure.
This was done in the hope of moderating Khrushchev's ate bellicosity over Berlin.
However, it put the Soviets on notice that the United eir States, through its satellite reconnaissance, realized the full extent of Soviet op vulnerability to a first strike.
Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba are therese, fore said by many analysts to have been conceived of as a ""quick fix"" to compensate in the short term for Soviet strategic inferiority. on The other cases of brinkmanship revealed a multiplicity of motives on the tat part of the initiator.
Joseph de Rivera, The of Foreign Policy , 146; Irving Psychological Dimensions and L Janis and Leon Mann, Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict, Choice, Commitment , 56.
If word of the fiasco leaked out, as it almost certainly would have, the Soviet Union would have also with China, which had already charged Moscow with undue timidity.
Graham Kennedy's warnings came after the Soviet commitment may have had some effect on Soviet perception of them.
Although it was beyond the scope of this article to do so, it would have been exrelatively easy to demonstrate that American analysts' lack of knowledge tends to just about every other aspect of Soviet decision-making in the Cuban missle crisis.
In effect, imaginative analysts can readily devise an explanation consonant with their own intelt lectual or ideological orientation.
When these interpretations gain sufficien acceptance, they are used to validate academi c dogmas or actual foreign policies.
Such a process occurred with Kennedy's ""courage and commitment"" 's thesis.
It may be happening again with regard to interpretations of Moscow projection of influence into Africa and its invasion of Afghanistan.
Those, like on Zbigniew Brzezinski and Richard Pipes, who recommended policies based these developm ents ""reveal"" about Soviet goals and risk taking, ought to what show more respect for the tenuous nature of the West's understa nding of Soviet foreign policy.
Put simply, deterrence consists of manipulating other actors' assessment of their interests and seeks to prevent a specified action by convincing the actor who might contemplate it that its costs exceed its rewards.
DeThere is another explanation worth cons y bulwark against nuclear war.
It terrence is the major intellectual and polic nuclear adversaries are so horrified is based on the comforting assumption that ar war that they will behave prudently by the devastating consequences of nucle n, the defin ition and communication of truly toward one another.
For this reaso function as a reasonably efficacious vital commitments can be expected to nize that the one acute thermonuclear strategy of conflict avoidance.
To recog t by the irres ponsible and irrational judgments crisis to date was brought abou perhaps by the entire inner circle of its of the leader of a nuclear superpower — ould call into question the most fundamental foreign policymaking elite—w this is why so many investigators have assumption of deterrence.
It may be that ev's miscalculation at Kennedy's feet by sought to lay the onus for Khrushch the credibility of his commitment.
By arguing that Kennedy's actions undercut rve intact the theory of deterrence and doing so, analysts have attempted to prese with it their emotional composure. exaggerated Kennedy's skill in The way in which students of the crisis have corro bora tion of the suspicion that Cuba has stab managing the crisis offers some against nuclear war.
As this author wes been used to shore up emotional defenses analy sts have studiously ignored the ""group cha, has tried to demonstrate elsewhere, ion-making"" that in fact characterargi think"" and other deviations from ""open decis conf ronta tion.
The real the of miscalculations that were both unde stat ted, was that ""each side in short tended to proproblem, the Wohlstetters insis cier s about the behavior of the other."""" ject its own psychology or certain stereotype sugg ests that this is even truer of the analysts; The review of the literature here this least as much about themselves as they their interpretations of the crisis tell us at edy.
Unfortunately, the to them say a lot about their anxiety conc Or stron g strain of irrationality that runs attempt by the analysts to deny the y decisions will not make such a war through even the most momentous polic M/ ten any less likely. me 05.
