During the Kennedy and part of the Johnson administrations, he was the member of the Policy Planning Council responsible for North Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia.
President Barack Obama talks with Ukraine's Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk at the conclusion of their bilateral meeting in the Oval Office.
In a rather ghastly 19th century experiment, a biologist by the name of Heinzmann found that if he placed a frog in boiling water, the frog immediately leapt out but that if he placed the frog in tepid water and then gradually heated it, the frog stayed put until he was scalded to death.
I see disturbing elements of that process today as we watch events unfold in the Ukraine confrontation.
They profoundly frighten me and I believe they should frighten everyone.
But they are so gradual that we do not see a specific moment in which we must jump or perish.
I was one of three members of the ""Crisis Management Committee"" that oversaw the unfolding events.
On the Monday of the week of October 22, I sat with Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Under Secretary George Ball, Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council Walt Rostow and Under Secretary for Political Affairs U Alexis Johnson and listened to President Kennedy's speech to which we all had contributed.
The account Kennedy laid out was literally terrifying to those who understood what a nuclear confrontation meant.
And we each knew what our government was seeking -getting the Russian missiles out of Cuba.
Finally, we were poised to do that by force if the Russians did not remove them.
Previous to that day, I had urged that we remove our ""Jupiter"" missiles from Turkey.
This was important, I argued, because they were ""offensive"" rather than ""defensive"" weapons.
The reason for this distinction was that they were obsolescent, liquid-fired rockets that required a relatively long time to fire; thus, they could only be used for a first strike.
Getting them out enabled Chairman Nikita Khrushchev to remove the Russian missiles without suffering an unacceptable degree of humiliation and risking a coup dՎtat.
Then, following the end of the crisis, I wrote the ""talking paper"" for a review of the crisis, held at the Council on Foreign Relations, with all the involved senior United States officials in which we carefully reviewed the ""lessons"" of the crisis.
What I write below in part derives from our consideration in that meeting.
That is, it is essentially the consensus of those who were most deeply involved in the crisis.
Shortly thereafter, I participated in a Top Secret Department of Defense war game, designed by Professor Thomas Schelling of MIT in which he set out a scenario of a sequence of events -ironically placed near the Ukraine - to show that the USSR would accept an American nuclear attack without responding.
It was, as he said, in our ""post mortem"" discussion of the game, a vindication of an extension of the theory of deterrence.
It was to prove that we need not fear a reaction to a limited nuclear attack.
Henry Kissinger had popularized this idea in his 1957 book Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy.
In the post mortem discussion of the Game I argued, and my military, intelligence and diplomatic colleagues on our war game team agreed with me, that the idea of limited nuclear war was nonsense.
If it did not retaliate with a ""victory-denying response,"" it would be overthrown and executed by its own military and security forces.
And the original attacker would in turn have to avenge the retaliation or it would face a similar fate.
Sagan pointed out that since both major nuclear powers had targeted cities, casualties could reasonably be estimated at between ""several hundred million to 1. billion people"" with an additional 1. billion people seriously injured.
Massive fires set off by the bombs would carry soot into the atmosphere, causing temperatures to fall to a level that would freeze ground to a depth of about 3 feet.
Planting crops would be impossible and such food as was stored would probably be contaminated so the few survivors would starve.
The hundreds of millions of bodies of the dead could not be buried and would spread contagion.
As the soot settled and the sun again became again visible, the destruction of the ozone layer would remove the protection from ultraviolet rays and so promote the mutation of pyrotoxins.
These would overwhelm not only the human survivors but, in the opinion of the expert panel of 40 distinguished biologists, would cause ""species extinction"" among both plants and animals.
These dangers, even if today they seem remote, clearly demand that we do every thing we possibly can to avoid the fate of the frog.
History does not exactly repeat itself, but, as Mark Twain has pithily said, subsequent events sometimes ""rhyme"" with those that went before.
So pressing the leadership of the opponent in this direction is literally playing with fire.
As President Kennedy and the rest of us understood in the 1962 crisis, even if leaders want to avoid conflict, at a certain point in their mutual threats, events replace policy and leaders become bystanders.
Among the Russians, as their history illustrates, a similar code of action prevails.
Having suffered, as fortunately we have not, horrifying costs of invasion throughout history but particularly in the 20th century, the Russians can be expected to block, by any means and up to any cost, intrusions into their zone.
Those who advocate what the British once called a ""Forward Policy,"" now see the necessary first steps to be the arming of the Ukraine.
And finally, 8) There is no way in which we or the European Union could arm the Ukraine to a level that it could balance Russia.
What we are now doing and what we contemplate doing is not in our interest or in the interests of the Ukrainians and is perceived as a threat by the Russians.
We cannot deliver on the policy we would encourage the Ukrainians to adopt by arming them without a war.
Economic sanctions are a form of that war, but they are unlikely to accomplish what we have been proclaiming.
So, the logic of events could force the Russians and us to the next step and that step also to the next and so on.
We should stop doing what does not work and is not in our interests nor in the interests of either the Ukrainians or the Russians.
Think how we would have reacted had Mexico tried to join the Warsaw Pact.
Consider that even before the issue of nuclear weapons arose, we tried to overthrow the pro-Russian Cuban government in the Bay of Pigs invasion and tried on several occasions to murder Cuban Head of State Fidel Castro.
We failed; so for two generations we have sought to isolate, impoverish and weaken that regime.
We would be foolish to expect that the Russians will not react similarly when challenged by an anti-Russian Ukrainian government.
Thus, to press for inclusion of the Ukraine into NATO is not only self-defeating; it risks overturning a generation of cautious moves to improve our security and increase our well-being and is pointing us toward at least a cold -if not a hot -war.
Just as the Russians realized that Cuba was part of our sphere of dominance and so backed down in the Missile Crisis, they will probably set their response to our actions on the belief that we will similarly back down because of our realization that the Ukraine is in their neighborhood and not in ours.
The danger, of course is that, for domestic political reasons -and particularly because of the urging of the neoconservatives and other hawks -we may not accept this geostrategic fact.
Then, conflict, with all the horror that could mean, would become virtually inevitable.
This is because the Russians and Ukrainians share an objective which the United States also emotionally shares.
The shared objective is that the Ukraine become a secure, prosperous and constructive member of the world community.
Becoming such a member can be accomplished only by the Ukrainians themselves.
But as all qualified observers have seen, Ukrainian society and political organization have far to go to reach our joint objective.
The best we can do is to remove outside deterrents to the growth of a healthy, secure and free society.
A first step in this direction could be for the Ukraine to join the European Union.
This, in general terms, should be and for our own sakes must be, our strategy.
Kissinger realized his mistake and partially repudiated what he had argued in a later, 1961, book, The Necessity for Choice.
This was apparently embodied in Jimmy Carter's Presidential Directive 59.
It was carried forward in President Reagan's Fiscal Year 1984-1988 Defense Guidance.
