ALL ABOUT HISTORY ANNUAL This All About History Annual is a collection of the very best content from the magazine's last 12 months, and contains some of the most interesting people and stories from throughout history.
You'll find tales that are known and loved, like the legend of Robin Hood, alongside some lesser-known but equally incredible stories, including the Night Witches of the Second World War.
We have delved right back into Ancient times to get to know Cleopatra and the Aztecs, and explored the most amazing discoveries that helped form the modern world.
We have included a broad selection of subjects here, from the ubiquitous to the unknown, to educate and excite as you expand your knowledge of the world’s past.
We hope that the subjects inside will help you to discover historical eras, icons and moments that you had never imagined, while learning about the stories you thought you knew in a new light.
Nothing in this bookazine may be reproduced in whole or part without the written permission of the publisher.
All copyrights are recognised and used specifically for the purpose of criticism and review.
Although the bookazine has endeavoured to ensure all information is correct at time of print, prices and availability may change.
This bookazine is fully independent and not affiliated in any way with the companies mentioned herein.
Using Saturn rockets and veterans of Projects Mercury and Gemini, the process of developing a safe rocket that could make the journey and a safe return began.
However, in 1967 the test launch of Apollo 1 ended catastrophically on the launch pad when an electrical fire in the cabin caused the death of all three from asphyxiation before help could get to them.
But each successive Apollo mission flight brought them closer to their goal of the Moon, testing everything from navigation systems, docking procedures and lunar suits.
Finally, on 16 July 1969 within John F Kennedy's anticipated time frame the Apollo 11 mission launched on board a Saturn V rocket, containing astronauts Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins.
It entered lunar orbit on 19 July, as Collins remained in the craft and Armstrong and Aldrin descended in the Lunar module Eagle.
After fears that they had overshot their landing target, they set down on the Sea of Tranquillity.
Aldrin took communion while Armstrong prepared to activate the shuttle's camera and step outside.
He descended the nine rungs to the Moon's surface and broadcast to a captivated world the words that would echo throughout history.
Indeed, while it would be the American flag that was planted on the Moon, and President Nixon who would make a phone call to the astronauts, it was a demonstration of how far the entire human race had come.
Athens was one of the most prosperous of some 1,500 city-states in 6th-century-BCE Greece, initially governed by an elite ruling minority.
Internal unrest and costly conflict with its neighbours, however, gradually brought the city to its knees.
Taking inspiration from rival Sparta, with its unusual egalitarian ethos, democracy was seen as an experiment that could unify society.
Shaped by Solon, Cleisthenes and Pericles among others and evolving over two centuries, every Athenian citizen was expected to get involved, though a randomly drawn, rotating council took care of day-to-day government.
Forward thinking as it was, democracy was a totally different beast then with women, foreigners and many others not represented.
Nevertheless it laid the foundations for what is now a cornerstone of the modern world.
Firefighter Mickey Kross was inside the World Trade Center's North Tower when it collapsed, yet even for those of us witnessing that indelible news footage on the other side of the world, his words resonate.
Just 46 minutes after American Airlines Flight 11 took off in Boston, five terrorists had taken over and flown the plane into the iconic building that would later tumble down around Kross.
United Flight 93's passengers reclaimed the plane and ensured it crashed out of harm's way in a Pennsylvanian field.
Everyone has an opinion about what caused 9/11, but more clear-cut are the effects.
In the immediate sense, it resulted in the deaths of 2,996 people the most ever in a single foreign attack on American soil.
Origins • Soviet Union invades Afghanistan December 1979 • Al-Qaeda emerges, calling on Muslims to join the 'holy war’ 1988 • First World Trade Center bomb kills six people 26 February 1993 Legacy • Launch of the War on Terror • War in Iraq and Afghanistan • Osama bin Laden is killed by United States Navy SEALs 2 May 2011 I 10 The first production line 1908 The assembly line was probably the greatest gift Henry Ford gave to the manufacturing industry This production process brought the car to the engineers, rather than the other way around.
It halved the time it took to create his Model T Ford and dramatically cut costs.
MURDER AT SARAJEVO 28 JUNE 1914 Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife fell to the gunshots fired by 19 year-old Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip, as they drove through the city.
Austria's retaliation was backed by Germany, and Europe exploded into conflict.
THE FIRST VACCINE 14 MAY 1796 The first vaccine for smallpox came courtesy of a microbiologist.
Testing the rumour that milkmaids were immune from it because they had already contracted the similar illness cowpox, Edward Jenner took pus from Sarah Nelmes 1 cowpox blisters and successfully inoculated an eight year-old boy.
FEAR AND DREAD UNLEASHED 6 AUGUST 1945 When the United States dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, up to 80,000, of the population of 350,000, were killed immediately.
The effects would be felt for decades as illness caused by the radiation brought the death toll to 140,000.
The second attack on Nagasaki three days later ended the war at a terrible cost.
FALLO TH BER NWA Built by East Germany in 1961 to keep the ‘fascist' elements of the West out, the heavily guarded Berlin Wall became a significant symbol of the oppression of the Iron Curtain, by preventing people in the East from defecting and emigrating.
With the decline of communist Russia, the wall could no longer be defended and was torn down by the people amid much celebration. mm* Gavrilo Princip is captured after killing Franz Ferdinand, which led to the start of the Eastern European conflict 11 50 events that changed the world The five-day working week 1926 In May 1926, Detroit, Henry Ford instigated a second American revolution.
He reduced the working week of Ford Motor Company's workers from six to five days and their working day from nine to eight hours.
Productivity at Ford soared as a result of the new, two-day weekend, a practice so successful it was adopted worldwide and is standard today.
The Vandals (an East German tribe) had already sacked and pillaged Rome once and, seeing Rome's weakness, others were rallying against their ruler.
Germanic general Odoacer finally entered the capital and forced the last emperor of Rome, Romulus Augustus, into exile.
When the outnumbered Athenians attacked first at Marathon, the Persians struck for the weak middle of their line.
The strongest troops were on the Athenian flanks, which decimated the invaders.
The forces of democratic Greece had not only stood up to the forces of Persia, they crushed them.
The American colonists' patience with the British parliament was at an end.
When The Sons of Liberty in Boston threw three ship loads of tea into the harbour, the shocked British were set on a path for war.
NAPOLEON SURRENDERS 1815 After being forced to abdicate by the French parliament, Napoleon Bonaparte requested protection from the British, who allowed him on board the British ship Bellerophon, commanded by Captain Thomas Byam Martin, where he was held in custody for some three weeks before exile to the island of St Helena in the South Atlantic.
SLAVERY IS ABOLISHED 31 JANUARY 1865 Three years after the Emancipation Proclamation, and with the Civil War still raging, Abraham Lincoln took a bold step and pushed for the 13th Amendment to be approved by Congress.
Even without the Southern representatives the vote barely made it through, but its success marked the start of a long fight for equality.
Converted by his vision and his victory, Constantine’s new faith began the Christianisation of the Roman Empire.
WOMEN GET THE VOTE 1918 Suffrage groups across the Western world began to make their voice heard in the mid-to-late 19th century, but by the beginning of the 20th century, women were still not counted among the number of those eligible to vote.
It took over 50 years, World War I, and the tenacity of leading suffragette societies to get women the vote for the first time on both sides of the Atlantic.
VOTtt WOMEN 1 12 50 events that changed the world 6 JUNE 1944 THE BIGGEST INVASION D-Day and the first step towards ending the Second World War On 6 June 1944, the Allied Troops under the direction of General Dwight D Eisenhower and Bernard Montgomery took the first step towards breaking Hitler's stranglehold on Europe with a massive assault on the French coast the largest amphibious attack in history.
In the preceding months the Allies had mounted a decoy operation, Operation Fortitude, in an attempt to convince the Axis forces that they would attempt to cross at Pas de Calais, where the English Channel is narrowest.
Meanwhile, Operation Overlord had been poised since 1 May but favourable weather conditions were vital to the plan's success.
After being postponed several times, Operation Overlord finally went into effect and the Allied forces set foot on Normandy beaches at 6:30am.
The troops taking part in the amphibious assault comprised 72,215 British and Canadian soldiers, and 57,500 Americans.
They were divided to attack five targets, designated Utah , Omaha , Gold , Juno , and Sword , over 80 kilometres of coastline.
With its cliff-top bunkers, which had not suffered much damage from the preceding aerial bombardment, Omaha was the most heavily defended, and the attacking United States forces took heavy casualties before taking the beach.
The German military was not alerted that an invasion was occurring until 4am.
After midnight on 6 June, American, British and Canadian paratroopers were dropped into Normandy to facilitate the attack at Utah beach, which would give the Allies access to Cherbourg harbour.
Due to the adverse weather conditions, many of the paratroopers missed their targets, but vital locations like Pegasus Bridge and the town of Sainte-Mere-Eglise would be captured.
At 6.00pm, Prime Minister Winston Churchill announced the invasion in the House of Commons.
By midnight, each of the five beaches had been taken and the liberation of Europe from Nazi Germany was well underway.
Origins • Five years of conflict 1939-1944 • Germany’s failed invasion of Russia 1941 • America enters the war 1941 Legacy • Peace in Europe • Atomic bombs and Japanese defeat • Formation of the United Nations A landing craft just vacated by invasion troops points towards a fortified beach on the Normandy Coast, June 6,1944 13 Launched by the Catholic church by Pope Urban II in 1095, the first crusade to retake the holy lands of Israel was originally to help the Byzantines repel the warring Turks, but soon evolved into a holy war to take back Jerusalem.
The successful campaign was the first of many 'holy' crusades that transformed the Middle East.
COLUMBUS FINDS A NEW WORLD 12 OCTOBER 1492 Despite attempting to find an alternate route to the lucrative Indies, Columbus's journey across the Atlantic brought him to the Bahamas and on to Cuba.
Although he wasn't the first European to set foot on the Americas, word spread about his discovery of a new continent across the ocean.
THE COMPASS IS INVENTED 1117 The first magnetic compasses, thought to have appeared in China during the Qin Dynasty, were not used for exploration, but rather for geomantic divination and feng shui.
The magnetic compass continued to develop in China until its first recorded use for navigation in 1117, and was used by European sailors soon after, revolutionising navigation and opening the oceans to exploration.
OIL IN SAUDI ARABIA 1938 The hunt for oil in Saudi Arabia began in 1922 but it wasn't until 1938 that eager American Max Steineke finally discovered a reserve of black gold, just weeks after having to plead with his employers for more time.
The discovery changed the world's energy practices and its relationship with the Arab world.
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels' Communist Manifesto is one of the most influential political manuscripts.
Its ethos of power to the working class has been the mandate of many coups since it was first published by German political refugees in London.
THE END OF THE AZTECS 1521 Having landed in the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico in 1519, the Spanish discovered a wealthy native people known as the Aztecs, expanding their control beyond Mexico.
The Aztec population was devastated by new diseases like smallpox and were overthrown by the better armed invaders. 14 50 events that changed the world 1989 INVENTING THE WORLD WIDE WEB It's hard to imagine life without the Internet today, but it wouldn't exist if not for one man's vision It's not as if technology that combined hypertext and the internet for globally sharing information wasn’t around in 1989, but British physicist Tim BernersLee wanted to take it to another level.
Collaborating with computer scientist Robert Cailliau the prototype software for the basic web system was demonstrated in 1990 on a NeXT computer, and it rapidly spread to other research labs and universities around the globe.
With the development of versions for more ubiquitous Mac and PC environments, the World Wide Web was ready to make the leap from academia to mainstream.
On 30 April 1993, CERN posted the source code for anyone to use, totally free of charge.
This rich nation used its pure gold currency as a statement of wealth and power.
WATT PERFECTS THE STEAM ENGINE 1796 The steam engine, invented by James Watt, did so much more than drive steam trains across the country.
It kick-started the Industrial Revolution so that factories could be built anywhere, not just near rivers, and steam-driven machines could do the job of dozens of workers in a fraction of the time.
JFK IS ASSASSINATED 22 NOVEMBER 1963 While being driven through Dealey Plaza in Dallas with his wife Jackie, John F Kennedy was shot and killed.
His death sent shockwaves through the American people and fanned the flames of growing mistrust and fear of their government.
There are those who still claim it wasn’t Lee Harvey Oswald who pulled the trigger.
LENIN SEIZES POWER 25/26 OCTOBER 1917 On 25 October, Bolshevik forces laid siege to the Winter Palace in Petrograd, finally gaining entrance in the early morning and placing the members of the unpopular provisional government under arrest.
The Russian people rallied behind the party of Lenin and Trotsky, who promised an exit from the First World War, food and equality.
Political tensions were high when the National Assembly of nobles, clergy and common people gathered at the Palace of Versailles, Paris, on 20 June.
They found that King Louis XVI had excluded them and convened in the tennis court where they swore to create a new French constitution thus sowing the seeds of the French Revolution to come.
THETENN S COURT OATH 15 Charles Darwin's discoveries on his voyage to South America on HMS Beagle would forever change our understanding of the world around us.
Forming the idea that one species could change into another, he began work on his theory of natural selection and published On The Origin Of The Species on 24 November 1859.
Apartheid ends in South Africa 1994 Apartheid was legislated in 1948 in South Africa, with four racial groups classified and forced into segregation.
After trade embargoes in the Eighties and growing civil unrest, its gradual breakdown culminated in Nelson Mandela's victorious abolition of the internationally hated regime.
LENIN DIES 21 JANUARY 1924 Lenin was bedridden and mute following three strokes by the time of his death.
While Trotsky seemed to be the natural successor, he was efficiently sidelined and subsequently expelled by Stalin, paving the way for one of history's most appalling dictators.
WRITING IS INVENTED 3200 BCE Writing sprung out of a need to keep records in court when memory proved insufficient.
True writing is distinct from early bronze age symbols and the use of digits to keep records.
THE TURING MACHINE IS INVENTED 1930 It must be a strange thing, to invent something years before anyone could even conceive of needing it.
Yet this is exactly what Alan Turing did when he invented the computer.
Moreover, his invention was an intangible mathematical theory for a computer, rather than a working machine, which wasn't used until Turing's tenure at Bletchley Park.
ROSA PARKS REFUSES TO STAND 1955 When Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat in the 'coloured' section of the bus for a white passenger in Montgomery, Alabama, she became the rallying point for a nation that would no longer accept the injustice of racial segregation.
Although the television wasn't the creation of a single inventor, John Logie Baird contributed two major improvements to its display and was the first to transmit an image a flickering greyscale photograph reproduced just a few feet away from the source.
He went on to demonstrate live moving images in 1926 and the TV was born. 16 50 events that changed the world 9000 BCE APDIPIIITIIPE ADCI1IK ^ uman race ta k es the first step away from HUnlUUU UHL Hnnl VLU hunter-gatherer culture and begins to settle down The exact site, the exact reason, and the exact date of the invention of agriculture has yet to be pinpointed.
Various theories have been put forth as to why, when and how men and women began to tend to and rear their own crops and livestock, with many variations on similar themes.
However, it is generally agreed that the innovation occurred shortly after 9000 BCE, and that the site of the invention of agriculture was in what is now the known as the Fertile Crescent, in the Middle East.
Climate change meant that the Levant area (in the Eastern Mediterranean) became the ideal site for settlers.
As the region became temperate and annual , plants like wild wheat and barley began to grow that produced large seeds rather than thick wooden stems or casings to protect them from the elements.
The Natufian tribes of that region were traditionally hunter-gatherers but the everincreasing proliferation of this vegetation made settlement an attractive proposition.
However, steps would have to be taken to ensure they did not drain the area of resources.
Opinion differs as to whether the decision to try rearing crops was pre-meditated, and many believe that it was a one-off experimentation rather than a strategy designed to provide them with a regular form of sustenance.
However, the combination of climate change and increasingly settled populations meant that this dabbling with crop-development was inevitable.
The technology began to improve and these tribes began to rear livestock, which similarly thrived in the Levant region, and tended to renewable crops.
The nomadic culture by which the human race lived would forever be altered.
The first step towards human society as we know it today, with its vast towns and cities, all started with agriculture.
In early 1776 a political pamphlet titled 'Common Sense’ was circulating the colonies.
A few months on, Thomas Jefferson penned a more formal statement, calling for a split from Britain.
The final engrossed declaration wasn't signed till 2 August, but America continues to celebrate the day it first voted for 'Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness' at the Second Continental Congress.
There are thought to be 26 surviving copies of the original Declaration in existence today, 21 owned by various United States institutions.
His theory that the Earth revolves around the Sun, took more than a century to be accepted, and Galileo was tried by the Inquisition for heresy in 1663 after agreeing to it.
Newton’s story about how his interest in the mechanics I of gravity was piqued by observing an apple dropping from a tree during a garden ^ stroll may have been exaggerated.
However, that interest led to his defining the term Universal Gravitation in his work Principia, published in 1687.
TELEPHONE IS INVENTED 1876 The telephone is one of the most important inventions of the modern era, which makes the story behind its invention all the more controversial.
Alexander Graham Bell was officially credited as the inventor because he got his patent filed hours before a strikingly similar patent by Elisha Gray, but some believe he stole a critical line from Gray's patent to get his approved first.
Only Greek men could enter, there were far fewer events than there are today, and many participated completely naked.
THE PILGRIM FATHERS LAND MAO PROCLAIMS THEREPOBLIC 10CTOBER 1949 20 years of Chinese civil war were ended by Chairman Mao’s defeat of Chiane Kai-shek The ____ country then established itself as a communist nation.
American fears grew, strengthened by the knowledge that they had tried to intervene and failed.
Diplomatic relations between the two nations would only be resumed with Richard Nixon's visit to China in 1972.
NOVEMBER 1620 The Puritan Pilgrim Fathers believed that Satan’s grip on England was strengthening.
So they set sail on the Mayflower for Virginia to create a new community.
They landed near Cape Cod after being blown off course after 65 days at sea, and founded the historic Plymouth Colony on the site of a deserted Native American settlement.
THE TET OFFENSIVE LAONCHES 30JAN0ARY1968 The tide of the war in Vietnam was irreversibly turned when the North Vietnamese forces mounted the multi-pronged, well-planned Tet offensive, beginning with five separate assaults.
Despite its straightforward appearance, it deals with the complex and interchangeable relationship between mass and energy.
The equation was born from a discrepancy between the work of earlier physicists like Isaac Newton, Galileo and James Clerk Maxwell and unravels why the speed of light is constant, as well as the concept of space-time.
Origins • Ole Roemer measures the speed of light 1676 • Emilie du Chatelet suggests energy is proportional to mv2, not mv (as proposed by Isaac Newton) 1740 Legacy • Better understanding of the Big Bang • 3D medical PET scans • Rise of nuclear power BENZ INVENTS THE CAR 1885 German engineer Karl Benz is credited as the creator of the first petrol-powered automobile.
However, the Benz Patent Motorwagen was more of a tricycle with the vital part of his invention his patented two-stroke petrol engine attached to it.
CHINA’S LAST EMPEROR FALLS 1812 Emperor Pu Yi succeeded to the throne at two years old in 1908.
Aged five, he was forced to abdicate by the Xinhai Revolution that turned China into a republic.
Strangely, he was permitted to keep his title and many of his privileges.
He fled after World War II and, when recaptured by China, became gardener at the Beijing gardens.
Mandela is freed 1990 Having just avoided execution, Nelson Mandela was tried by the South African government for sabotage, treason and violent conspiracy in 1964 and sentenced to life imprisonment.
He served over 25 years of his sentence and was released in a dramatically different political environment in 1990.
He then went on to become leader of the ANC and abolished apartheid in 1994.
World-renowned playwright and the most famous Briton ever, but did his plays hide a political message? .'■* i I / m » In' i M ■ 1 ■* mm 21 10 Murderous Kings Murderous Kings A blood-curdling countdown of history's deadliest monarchs I n this day and age it’s quite difficult to imagine the sheer power that kings and queens once wielded over their subjects.
In many ways these monarchs were more similar to modern dictators than the rulers that we know today.
Murder was often a means to a political end, while crimes of passion would rarely be met with any immediate consequences.
Although the kings had ultimate power, it was a power they were forced to fight for often using fear, war and murder, among other methods, to stay at the top.
The position of king was a precarious one and, driven by this fact and an unhealthy dose of paranoia, certain monarchs left a bloody trail through history.
Several of these kings earned their place on this list with their military campaigns.
With an almostconstant state of conflict, territories were lost and won with great frequency, which, of course, meant that they had to be reclaimed.
The glory of a kingdom was not just determined by its size necessarily, but by a king’s unwavering belief that the lands at stake belonged by right to the throne.
Look at Edward I’s brutal campaigns in Wales and Scotland, or Charles II of Navarre's ludicrous notions of what belonged to him both of whom feature in this roundup of deadly royals.
Murder was often the simplest way to ensure that anyone plotting against the king was removed.
Even with the introduction of the Magna Carta in England in 1215 and the emergence of Parliament, the monarch's essentially free rein to end the lives of their subjects remained.
Flimsy evidence could be put forward to prove a case for treason and conspiring against the monarch, as Henry VIII demonstrated on several occasions.
Meanwhile, with the whole country watching, any hint of rebellion would have to be squashed quickly and brutally, as Louis I of Aquitaine did to great effect.
In other cases, the reason behind a king's bloodthirsty nature would now be attributed to some form of mental illness.
Purity of the bloodline comes with a price, as lineages would abruptly end with offspring suffering from deformities, congenital illnesses and insanity.
However, a better translation of the moniker would be 'ill-advised', as it is generally agreed that the counsel Aethelred received was little and poor.
Although he was too young to have been complicit in the murder of his older brother , who was killed after having been on the throne for only two and a half years, the crime was carried out by those loyal to him in order that the younger sibling would take his place.
This meant that there was a lot of mistrust surrounding the young monarch and, as the reputation of the murdered boy grew after his death, it would become increasingly difficult for Aethelred to unite his subjects.
And the necessity for a united British army was urgent with a renewed threat from the north.
The Danes had recommenced raids along England's coast, breaking the treaty they had made with Aethelred's father, Edgar.
After the English suffered a serious defeat at the Battle of Maldon in 991, Aethelred began paying tribute to the Danes in return for peace.
However, the Danes were hard to appease and had restarted hostilities by 997.
Finally, in 1002, Aethelred reached breaking point and took drastic action.
It was an indiscriminate attempt at a show of strength that claimed the life of Danish leader Sweyn's sister, Gunhilde, and Sweyn invaded in retaliation, leading to Aethelred's downfall.
WARMONGERING ★★★★ INSANITY ★★★★★ POLITICAL MURDERS ★★★★★ PERSONAL MURDERS ★★★★★ 24 10 Murderous Kings 09 Louis I Louis the Pious was, in many ways, as sensible a leader as his nickname would suggest.
His father, Charlemagne, appointed him King of Aquitaine at the tender age of three.
When Louis nearly died in an accident in 817, he decided to ensure that, should he suddenly expire, there would be a neat plan of succession to set out who ruled what in the Frankish empire.
He confirmed that his nephew Bernard would remain the king of Italy, but the will described his son Lothair's position as ‘overlord', implying that Italy would be submissive to him.
Needless to say, the wording of this document did not please Bernard and, spurred on by rumours that Lothair was to invade, he set about preparing a rebellion.
However, word quickly reached Louis I of Bernard's plan and the king immediately took an army to confront his errant nephew.
Bernard was shocked by the speed of the king's reaction and went to try and negotiate, before being forced into surrender.
He sentenced his nephew to death, before deciding that he should be blinded instead a punishment that was apparently merciful.
As a result, while Bernard was indeed blinded, he spent two days in unbearable pain before dying anyway.
Three civil wars would follow but the legacy of this killing would haunt the deeply religious ruler for the rest of his life.
WARMONGERING ★★★★★ INSANITY ★★★★★ POLITICAL MURDERS ★★★★★ PERSONAL MURDERS ★★★★★ REIGN B14-84D COUNTRY AQUITAINE WORST CRIME JJ 08 Charles II The reason for Charles II's reputation as a bloodthirsty king is very much rooted in his heritage.
He was the last of the Habsburg line a lineage that was so devoted to preserving the purity of its bloodline through inbreeding that it eventually led to a man like Charles.
Disfigured, infertile and cursed to spend his life suffering from various illnesses, the king was in a similar amount of mental anguish.
He was just three years old when the throne became his and his mother, Mariana, became queen regent, designating much of the work of governing the country to advisors.
His mother remained regent long after Charles could have taken kingship himself, but it was decided that such a move would be unwise.
A struggle for power began when Mariana was exiled, and Don Juan Jose took responsibility for the country and the king.
Charles's illness was grotesquely misunderstood at the time interpreted as a sign that the king was probably bewitched; he would even undergo an exorcism in the final years of his life.
His worst crime was the 1680 auto-de-fe (display of public penance and executions) in Madrid, during which many heretics were burned.
Charles II attended the trial and burnings, though the executions were probably ordered by someone else.
He ordered the assassination of the Constable of France in 1354 and made a deal with the English, forcing the French King John II to make peace.
John grew tired of his treachery and finally arrested him in 1356, only for Charles to be broken out in 1357.
When John II agreed to a peace treaty with the English, Charles II freed all the prisoners in Paris.
With the city on the verge of revolution, Charles U-turned and took the opportunity to lead the aristocracy at the Battle of Mello and the subsequent massacre of the rebels.
He blindly swore patriotism and honour while consistently reaching out to the opposition in the hope of a better deal.
His meddling in the war between Castile and Aragon proved disastrous and he staged being captured to avoid having to participate.
Towards the end of his life he tried to convince English king Edward III to invade and overthrow Charles V, as well as being involved in two attempts on Charles's life.
When his scheming with Gascony against Castile went wrong, Navarre was invaded in 1378 and he was forced to agree to an alliance with Castile and France.
He burned to death in 1387 allegedly when the sackcloth filled with brandy he was bathing in caught fire.
WARMONGERING INSANITY ★★★★★ POLITICAL MURDERS ★★★★★ PERSONAL MURDERS ★★★★★ 06 Herod I ""He ordered that his wife be executed if he didn't return from an expedition"" There are many who would claim that King Herod committed his most heinous deed with the Massacre of the Innocents.
However, the story of the slaughter of all boys in Bethlehem under the age of two is only found in the Bible; there are no historical records from the time detailing such an atrocity.
REIGN 37-4 BCE COUNTRY JUDAEA WORST CRIME He was prone to fits of mental instability, which made his fierce love for his wife all the more dangerous.
At one point, before leaving for a political expedition, he ordered that Mariamne should be executed if he didn't return from this expedition because he couldn't face the idea of her being with another man.
His jealousy was exploited by his sister, Salome who despised Mariamne to convince Herod that his wife was plotting against him.
Two years later, Antipater Herod’s only son by his first wife was also executed for the same reason.
WARMONGERING ★★★★ INSANITY ★★★★★ POLITICAL MURDERS ★★★★★ PERSONAL MURDERS ★★★★★ 26 The man dubbed 'Lionheart' spent most of his life fighting.
He first took up arms against his father, Henry II, in 1173 and continued to aggressively pursue the throne until Henry's death in 1189, when some quite reasonably suggested that Richard had driven the king to his grave.
Blood was spilled on the same day that Richard took the crown, when the barring of Jewish figures bulk of his father's treasure chest to raise a new army, Richard set off for the Holy Lands in 1190.
He blazed a bloody trail through Sicily and Cyprus before arriving at Acre, Israel, in 1191.
Following the successful siege of the city, he ordered the execution of 2,700 Muslim prisoners.
The crusade eventually ground to a halt and Richard was forced to retreat in 1192, only to be from the coronation was misinterpreted as an captured in Vienna by Leopold V Once ransomed, order to instigate violence against all of London's Jews.
Richard ordered the executions of those who took part, but the instances of copycat 'Christian' violence would set the tone for a king who was desperate to join the Crusades.
Together with Phillip II of France, who had assisted Richard in his fight for the throne, England joined the Third Crusade.
Spending the he discovered that his brother, John, had given Normandy back to King Phillip in his absence.
He continued his war against Phillip until 1199, when he was struck by an arrow from the nearly undefended Chalus-Chabrol chateau.
The wound turned fatally gangrenous an undignified end for the warrior king.
Upon Henry Ill's death, Edward returned to England from the Crusades and started planning a military campaign in Wales.
Beginning with a successful invasion in 1277 he executed the Welsh leader, Llewelyn, in 1282 and Llewelyn's brother, David, a year later in response to rebellions.
This was compounded when Edward responded violently to French King Philip reclaiming the territory of Gascony by sailing to attack in 1297, later returning to quell the Scottish rebellion.
Edward intervened to such an extent that the Scots allied with the French and attacked Carlisle.
Edward invaded in retaliation, beginning a brutal and lengthy conflict that earned him his nickname, Hammer of the Scots.
WARMONGERING if if if if if INSANITY if if if if if POLITICAL MURDERS ★★★★★ PERSONAL MURDERS kif 27 Heroes <fc Villains 03 Erik XIV While many kings can lay claim to ordering the deaths of hundreds even thousands during the course of their reign, not many can say they committed murder with their own hands.
The king of Sweden Erik XIV suffered from mental instability, but not to an extent that made him incapable of ruling.
He strengthened Sweden's position in northern Europe by claiming territory in Estonia, leading to the Seven Years' War of the North between 1563 and 1570.
Although his military campaigns were successful Erik's mental state was rapidly deteriorating and evidence points towards schizophrenia.
Believing that the noble family would make a play for the throne, Erik began persecuting the Stures specifically Nils Sture.
In 1567, one of Sture's pages was tortured until he told Erik what he wanted to hear.
Following a trial, death sentences began to be issued but the king remained indecisive.
Finally, he visited the Stures at the castle in Uppsala where they were imprisoned, to tell them that they were forgiven.
When Erilc left he discovered that a rebellion was underway, led by his brother, John.
It was only a few hours later that Erik returned and stabbed Nils Sture before ordering the execution of the others. fr \ REIGN 1560-1568 COUNTRY SWEDEN WORST CRIME STABBING A NDB1EMAN TD DEATH L 1 WARMONGERING ★★★★★ INSANITY ★★★★★ POLITICAL MURDERS ★★★★★ PERSONAL MURDERS ★★★★★ 02 Henry VIII English king Henry VIII's voracious nature and hot temper have become the stuff of legend.
He is renowned for being a man of ferocious appetites in all aspects of life and he was prepared to use any means necessary to quell his opposition.
Shortly after ascending to the throne, Henry married Catherine of Aragon, as his father, Henry VII, had wanted to secure an alliance with Spain.
At the time he executed Edmund Dudley and Richard Empson two of his father's advisors on the grounds of treason.
From Thomas More to Thomas Cromwell, anyone who Henry perceived as either a threat to the throne or to his secession from the Catholic church was liable to find themselves with their head on the block.
However, he's most notorious for his list of spouses, driven by his desperation for a male heir and straightforward lust.
The annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon was prompted by a combination of the two as Anne Boleyn had already caught his eye.
As we all know, Anne Boleyn did not last long before facing the executioner’s axe having been dubiously accused of infidelity, treachery and incest.
Anne was followed by Jane Seymour, who died in childbirth; Anne of Cleves, who Henry soon separated from; and then the unfortunate Catherine Howard.
Henry accused Catherine of being unfaithful with her secretary, Francis Dereham, while she claimed that Dereham had raped her.
Fortunately for his last wife, Catherine Parr, he died before she too could fall out of his favour.
The exact number of executions ordered by Henry VIII has not been conclusively agreed upon, but it is generally believed to be between 57,000 and 72,000.
As a gruesome aside, he also made ‘death by boiling' a legitimate form of execution.
Anne Boleyn in the Tower of London portrayed just before her execution under the orders of Henry VIII WARMONGERING kit INSANITY ★★★★★ POLITICAL MURDERS ★★★★★ PERSONAL MURDERS ★★★★★ ""Anyone perceived as a threat was liable to find themselves on the block"" tr y\ REIGN 1509-1547 COUNTRY ENGLAND WORST CRIME EXECUTING ALL WHD OPPOSED HIM L — J 28 10 Murderous Kings Desperate to establish a colony overseas, Belgian king Leopold II turned to Africa and the potential riches of the Congo.
To circumvent his own parliament, he created a dummy organisation called the International African Association, which he claimed would act in the interests of philanthropy and scientific research with a view to converting the citizens to Christianity.
It was all completely legal and it gave the monarch the freedom to act however he wanted in the land under his control.
What had attracted Leopold to the Congo, in addition to the notion of creating an empire, was the tremendous supply of rubber in the area.
Despite having promised that he would protect the people of the Congo from slavers, Leopold promptly and brutally turned the country into a slave state.
Leopold allowed some missionaries into the Congo in order to allay the fears of foreign powers who believed he might be doing exactly what he was doing, and reports began to reach Europe about the maiming and executions of the men and women working on the plantations, as well as of the mass dumping of corpses.
It's impossible to know exactly how many people died during Leopold's rule of the Congo but the estimated figure is in the millions.
The atrocities led to the establishment of the first human rights movement and Leopold was finally compelled to give up the Congo to the Belgian parliament in 1908.
Medieval lovable rogue-type chap with green tights, good with arrows , lives in a hideout in Sherwood Forest with a band of jolly outlaws who fleece greedy travelling rich folic of their cash under the threat of violence, before sending them packing.
Like a giant, generational game of Chinese whispers, the legend of Robin Hood has been passed along the popular media of the times with a bit of embellishment added here, something considered dark, unflattering or politically unsavoury removed there.
And so, via the 20th century’s communication revolution, it has boomed into world fame.
In the last few decades we’ve been adding our own tint to this rose-hued tale of the arrow-slinging rebel, like the stories of Russell Crowe's disaffected soldier, Kevin Costner's noble Prince of Thieves and Errol Flynn's jubilant swashbuckling rogue.
If we're going to sort some fact from fiction here, we have to unravel the Hollywood-spun Batman of the Middle Ages back to where it began, sometime in the 12th century, and look at the direct origin of today's tale.
The legend himself, if not the tales, can be traced to the time of King John of England, who was born in 1166 and reigned from 1199 until his death in 1216.
These ballads and stories were born and cultivated out of an era of social upheaval.
The end of King John's reign saw the English barony revolt and the signing of the Magna Carta, which was the first step along a long road to the breakdown of the ancient feudal system of government.
While characters like Maid Marian appeared in tales from a later date, some of Robin's band of 'Merry Men' can be clearly identified at this time, but things get a lot murkier when it comes to the titular hero.
According to one of the more recent theories backed by, among others, historian David Baldwin, Robin Hood's real identity was that of a 13th-century farmer called Robert Godberd, whose escapades were far from the sugar-coated tales we see today.
When did she first enter Maid Marian is more a complete fabrication than an embellished character.
Robin Hood and the Sheriff, Robin Hood and the Friar and Robin Hood and the Potter.
Burly lieutenant Special skill: Staff-swinging He's one the first men to be recruited into Robin Hood's band in modern stories and he was one of the first mentioned in the ballads of yore, too.
Little John was a loyal, intelligent and, of course, strong man in poet Andrew of Wyntoun's lore.
He was the only one of the Merry Men supposed to be present when Robin died and he's thought to be buried in Derbyshire.
Vain swordsman Special skill: Wielding blades There's been much confusion over William Scarlet's character and his plethora of names over the centuries, with one bard even including both a Scarlock and a Scarlet character in his work.
Wily boy Special skill: Poaching This sneaky character has fallen into obscurity in favour of other characters in modern adaptations of Robin Hood but Much, or Midge as he's also known, appears in the oldest of the known Robin Hood ballads.
A poacher caught killing a deer on the Sheriff's land, he escaped punishment and became an outlaw in his gang.
Drunken holy man Special skill: Holding his drink If the legend as it appears today is to be taken at face value, Friar Tuck is a boozy and wily character who still has his heart in the right place.
His character is thought to derive from a certain 15th-century Robert Stafford from Sussex, and he entered the story of Robin Hood's exploits at the same time as Maid Marian did, during the May Day festivities in the 15th and 16th centuries.
The nature of their law-breaking has slowly been eroded throughout history to suit an increasingly gentile audience, compared with a medieval population accustomed to violence and who found Godberg’s activities entirely palatable.
Godberg and his fellow brigands were in defiance of a tyrant who had an iron grip on the extensive forested regions of Nottinghamshire.
King John enforced the enormously unpopular Forest Law, which allowed the royal court exclusive access to vast swathes of hunting grounds, with utter ruthlessness.
Thus, morally speaking, Godberg’s actions were justified by the common man as necessary for the greater good of the people.
The earliest is Robert Hod of Cirencester, a serf who lived in the household of an abbot in Gloucestershire.
He murdered a visiting dignitary early in the 13th century, fled with his accomplices and was subsequently outlawed by King John’s reviled minister Gerard of Athee.
Four other Robert Hods existed in 1265, at the Battle of Evesham during King Henry's time.
Each became fugitives and outlaws for various reasons, including robbing travellers and raiding an abbey in Yorkshire, which could explain how the character of Friar Tuck eventually made his appearance in later tales.
Later versions, namely two Robyn Hods, appeared respectively as an archer in a garrison on the Isle of Wight and as a man jailed for trespassing in the King's Forest and poaching deer in 1354.
The name Robert was a common one around this time, while the surname Hod or Hode likely came from the old English word for a head covering.
With the array of similar characters and names of people who existed at this time it's not surprising that historians have trouble pinning the character's origin on any one man.
To further confuse things, there are numerous accounts of outlaws in the 13th and 14th centuries adopting the name of Robin Hood and Little John, which suggests the story had achieved some popularity even then, although adopting the name of a famous outlaw fictional or otherwise was common among criminals at this time.
This Robin Hood had no spouse or family, no land and certainly no title.
No reason is given for his criminality and his characteristics were likely drawn from some real-life outlaws of the time.
By the 14th and 15th centuries, the tales of Robin Hood had gained some fame as they were disseminated in the traditional May Day festivities, while his story had begun to be written into plays and ballads.
There's no mention of the folk hero living at the time of King John, but he can be found in the 15th-century stories of Robin Hood and the Monk, The Lyttle Geste of Robyn Hode, Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne, Robin Hood and the Curtal Friar and Robin Hoode his Death.
The plays Robin Hood and the Friar and Robin Hood and the Potter were written specifically for the May Day Games in 1560 and were based on earlier ballads of the same name.
During this period, his Merry Men began to accrete together from various sources as 33 angry that his would-be bride has been stolen from him by an outlaw, pursues her in the second play and poisons her at Dunmow Priory.
The idea that Robin was a fallen noble and some kind of love triangle existed between King John, Maid Marian and Robin still endures in some stories today.
But by introducing a lover and giving him blue blood, the Robin Hood of the 16th century makes the transition from a brutal and often murderous outlaw in defiance of the monarchy to a more domesticated hero, a protagonist the ruling classes could admire and relate to someone with just cause against an evil ruler.
His status as an outlaw had been relegated to a trait that added an element of drama to the story, rather than one that defined it.
From the 16th century onward, with the advent of the printing press, the story of Robin Hood becomes more refined and much more familiar.
Word of the character had began to spread beyond the counties of the midlands and in the late-15th century, he is referred to in plays written as far afield as Somerset and Reading.
He was well known even to the famous womanizing, warmongering king of England, Henry VIII, and his royal court.
The young monarch's idea of celebrating May Day involved walking into Queen Catherine of Aragon's chambers with his nobles, ""apparelled in short cotes of Kentish Kendal, with hodes on their heddes, and hosen of the same, every one of them his bowe and arrowes, and a sworde and a bucklar, like outlawes, or Robyn Hode's men,"" according to Hall's Chronicle by Edward Hall, a 16th-century scholar.
By the late-16th century, the Merry Men had acquired a friar, Robin had a love interest and he'd also gained nobility.
Playwright Anthony Munday wrote two plays on the outlaw, The Downfall of Robert Earl of Huntington and The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington, in which Robin has clearly been lofted into high society.
Fleeing into the Greenwood, he is followed by the daughter of Robert Fitzwaiter, one of the leading barons who rallied against the king, where they fall in love and she changes her name to Maid Marian.
King John, King John was a real person who raised taxes for Richard's foreign wars.
King John was indeed a real person who lived at the same time Robin Hood was purported to be in and around Nottinghamshire, shaking up the status quo.
By today’s standards, he was a decadent, warmongering, self-serving tyrant who ruled over a turbulent period in British history.
He is commonly regarded as a cruel king but the truth of it is that he was a leader of his generation.
King John was a mercurial chap with a penchant for electing men outside the ranks of his barons to the royal court, favouring lesser nobles from the continent and spurning his own, powerful English nobles closer to home, whom he eyed suspiciously for signs of treachery.
It was this, in part, that led to the signing of the Magna Carta, the seminal charter that led to constitutional law in England.
His barons were sick of his arbitrary rule and insisted that, as a part of the Magna Carta, no free man could be punished by any other law than the law of the land.
Of course, the Magna Carta never limited the king's powers in practice and King John only signed it to mollify his barons, but it remains the single most significant act of his reign.
But this would have been lost on Robin Hood, the common serfs and farmers of these feudal times who as a general rule, would have feared the king and hated likes of his Forest Law, which would have been mercilessly enforced.
Historian John Paul Davis goes further as to suggest that Robin Hood stole from the rich and lent to the poor, as a kind of medieval loan shark.
If Robin Hood and his Merry Men did exist in the time of King John, it's highly unlikely they would have embarked on the scale of philanthropy portrayed in the modern tale.
This idea likely came from an early medieval ballad involving Richard at the Lee, a knight who had fallen upon hard times.
His lands were to be forfeited to an a sum of £400, before stealing it back off the abbot once Richard has paid the ^ abbey back.
Victorian-era author Howard Pyle and 20th-century films undoubtedly had a big hand in transforming Hood m ^ from a devious bandit into the m M philanthropist he is today.
That’s as clear as the legend itself. “ m r ■ HI ►< “16th-century Robin Hood makes the transition from a brutal and murderous outlaw in defiance of the monarchy"" and themes that generations to come would adopt when turning to their own adaptations.
For example, the ballads of the time talk of a series of tradesmen and professionals getting the upper hand with the hapless outlaw, while the Sheriff of Nottingham is the only one to be bested by Robin.
Robin dresses up as a friar in Robin Hood's Golden Prize and cheats two priests out of five hundred pounds nearly $16,000 in today’s money before he’s caught and summons the Merry Men with his horn.
The Victorians, notorious for enamelling history with their own style and values, weren't shy about leaving their mark on Robin Hood either.
By the mid-19th century, the cost and efficiency of printing books was such that they had become available to the masses.
United States writer and illustrator Howard Pyle took the traditional folk tale of Robin Hood and adapted it to his own children's version, serialising it into short stories called The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood, which became enormously popular.
His green-tights vagabond was a moral philanthropist who would go on to spawn a whole century of the people's hero that took from the rich and gave to the poor.
By the time author TH White came along, the story of Robin Hood was among the world's most well known.
White took it a step further and, as an author made famous by his Arthurian novels, brought Robin Hood and his Merry Men into his novel The Sword In The Stone, which was made into an anthropomorphic Disney film a quarter of a century later.
The late-20th century and the booming phenomenon that was cinema brought with it numerous adaptations, most of which aren't remotely faithful even to the 16th-century versions.
The Sean Connery and Audrey Hepburn film Robin and Marian made much of the romance but for the first time, cast King Richard as a lessthan-benevolent character.
The Robin of Sherwood television series went as far as to add a Muslim character in the form of Nasir the Saracen, a trend the famous Kevin Costner film followed through Morgan Freeman's Azeem.
Ukranian rebel Ustym Karmaliuk made his name in the 19th century for robbing the rich and distributing the proceeds of his crimes to the poor, and over a millennium before Robin Hood came to the fore, Boudicca, queen of the Iceni, defied the Romans when they forcibly took control of her lands and people.
She led a successful revolt that destroyed a Roman legion and the Roman capital before it was put down.
Almost every generation has a story that is similar to Robin Hood, illustrating the very human desire and need to have a figure who stands for right against wrong, light against dark.
Given that nearly a millennium has passed since the first tale of Robin Hood was told, in addition to his murky origins that even 13th-century bards cannot agree on, it's unlikely any historian will be able to settle on who Robin Hood and his Merry Men were exactly, or what little truth there is to their deeds.
As far as history is concerned, the Robin Hood legend has become a victim of its own popularity, obscured by generations of storytelling taking it firmly into the realms of fantasy.
Giacomo 'Big Jim' Colosimo, his body cooling from its exit wounds, had recently left his wife, filing for divorce and skipping town to marry a 19-year-old cabaret singer.
His ex-wife, Victoria Moresco, or one of her brothers, was the prime suspect in this crime of passion, but the police knew enough to pay a visit to two of Colosimo’s associates the genial Johnny Torrio and his sidekick, the disquieting Alfonse Capone, three nasty scars on his cheek contorting as he smiled.
Colosimo's murder on 11 May 1920 is still regarded as unsolved, but perhaps it’s a crime that Chicago Police Department chose to leave that way.
Booming in the early 1920s thanks to heavy industry and cheap labour, the Windy City was a Wild West frontier town with chimney stacks instead of cacti and bulletriddled Model-T Fords in lieu of horses.
Capone soon put the feared reputation he had enjoyed back home to work as a debt collector, seeing first hand how Colosimo's operation held a stranglehold over the underworld; gambling dens who refused to pay up for Big Jim’s protection would either find themselves the subject of a convenient police raid or worse still a visit from Capone, who was more than happy to break a few legs and mess up a card table with a swing from his baseball bat.
One, a young rising star called Johnny Torrio, would loom larger in his life later on.
Capone soon found work with Frankie Yale , a vicious thug with links to Torrio.
The furious Frank Galluccio called Capone out and slashed him three times across his cheek with a knife.
He needed 30 stitches, but he was lucky the hoodlum had been drinking because Galluccio was aiming for his jugular.
In the bar he also picked up syphilis, which eventually caused his death, but may have affected him even earlier.
I • 1 ‘ _ i « CAM 1 r« lll| (P ‘ **< Compared to the claustrophobic Big Apple, where half a dozen gangs butted heads over a block at a time, Torrio and Capone found Chicago fertile for expansion, as the only thing that stood in their way was their own boss.
In January 1920 the rules of the game changed again as the 18th Amendment to the United States Constitution came into effect.
Also known as the Volstead Act, which prohibited the production, transportation and sale of alcohol but not the consumption Prohibition meant a huge swathe of the population were suddenly transformed into potential customers.
Torrio and Capone saw that this was a revenue stream with the potential to dwarf even prostitution and racketeering, but to their dismay Colosimo was having none of it.
When Colosimo was conveniently removed from the picture, John 'The Fox’ Torrio became the boss of the Chicago Outfit, and by his side stood Al Capone.
With Torrio's blessing, Capone set about covertly reopening breweries and distilleries that had been closed by the Volstead Act, setting up an ambitious distribution network to the city's mean speakeasies with the help of his older brothers Ralph and Frank Capone.
The loyal Ralph was put in charge of one of the Chicago Outfit's legal enterprises, a soft-drink bottling plant which earned him the nickname 'Bottles', while Frank honed a reputation for savagery that overshadowed even Al's.
It was happening under Johnny Torrio's command but there was no doubt that bootlegging was Al Capone's kingdom, and he was soon to pay for it in blood as 1923 saw the downfall of Chicago's sticky fingered mayor, ‘Big Bill' Thompson.
The Democrat William Emmett Dever was voted in on a pledge to sweep the gangs \l Capone 1.
WHISKY ON THE BOARDWALK Ships laden down with whisky from Canada would anchor off the coast of New Jersey, well beyond the maritime limit patrolled by the United States Coast Guard.
Smugglers would sail out to pick up the crates of booze and New Jersey's vast coastline became something of a free-for-all, with rival gangs hijacking each other's shipments.
RUM FROM THE CARIBBEAN With Prohibition, Cuba emerged as a hedonistic getaway from the newly 'dry' United States to the Bacardi-soaked Caribbean.
Traffic flowed both ways, however, with 'rum runners' smuggling from Cuba, Jamaica and the Bahamas into South Florida, Texas and Louisiana.
In Texas, Galveston became the major entry point, supplying the rest of Texas and much of the Midwest.
A LAKE OF WHISKY Although Ontario had its own temperance laws, they didn’t ban distilling alcohol leading to a flow of hooch across Lake Michigan and up the Detroit River from Windsor to Detroit.
With illegally obtained papers saying their final destination was Venezuela, they would quietly off-load their cargo in Motor City instead.
Detroit had been 'dry' well before Prohibition and the Purple Gang tightly controlled the rumrunning trade and were major suppliers to Capone’s Chicago Outfit.
MULES FROM MEXICO Mass smuggling of United States goods into Mexico was turned completely on its head thanks to Prohibition.
Now home-made tequila and mescal was smuggled in the opposite direction by mule in groups of three or four, often crossing rivers at night, or by truck and car along dusty and isolated roads.
Texas’s 1,300km Mexican border was simply too wide be to adequately policed, and cat-and-mouse chases between the smugglers and Texas Rangers became the stuff of legend.
MOUNTAIN MOONSHINE While champagne, gin, rum and whisky were available to those with the cash to cover its dangerous distribution, the poorer had to be taken care of too and moonshine cut the costs significantly.
Rural communities in the Appalachian Mountains and the Midwest had a tradition of home brew, but now a market opened up for their moonshine.
While Torrio and Capone had ruled their criminal empire largely as Colosimo had with money in the right pockets and threats whispered in the right ears the takeover of Cicero was an overt display of force, as Capone set about rigging the mayoral election for the mob’s pet politician, Joseph Z Klenha.
On the eve of the 1924 mayoral election, Frank Capone burst into the office of the Democrat candidate for Cicero with some of his thugs, beating the hopeful to a pulp with their pistol butts, trashing his office and firing their revolvers into the ceiling as a preamble for the next day's audacious takeover.
Election officials with the stones to intervene were dealt with; a Democrat campaign worker was shot in the legs and dumped in a cellar, two other men were shot in the street and another had his throat cut.
Eventually, a desperate judge bussed in 70 Chicago police officers, deputised on the spot into the Cicero Police Department, to restore order.
As the rain started to fall, Frank Capone found himself in a firefight outside a polling station.
Opening fire on an approaching police car, he was gunned down by the startled cops, but it was too late the town belonged to the Chicago Outfit.
Despite the appalling bloodshed in the takeover of Cicero, A1 Capone had been something of an enigma to the press.
THE LOOK-OUTS McGurn stations lookouts the brothers Harry and Phil Keywell, both members of the allied Purple Gang in an apartment opposite Moran's headquarters, a nondescript garage behind the offices of SMC Cartage Company at 2122 North Clark Street.
STEP THE AMBUSH 5 Four gunmen in a stolen police car two of them wearing police uniforms burst in.
Believing this to be a routine raid, the six members of the North Side Gang and two of their associates surrender and allow the 'policemen' to remove their weapons.
THE SET-UP On 13 February 1929, McGurn has a booze hijacker approach Moran about selling him some top-end whisky for the bargain price of $57 a case, they arrange to meet in the morning.
He adds the whisky is stolen from Detroit's Purple Gang suppliers to Capone's mob.
THE TRAP CLOSES On 14 February at 10.30am, the North Side Gang gather at their garage HQ, expecting a shipment of Old Log Cabin Whiskey.
McGurn's scouts think they spot Moran arriving it's Albert Weinshank, wearing the samecoloured coat and hat as his boss.
THE LUCKY ESCAPE Moran and Ted Newberry arrive late through a side street in time to see the police car pull up and wait it out in a cafe.
Spotting another mobster, Henry Gusenberg, they warn him off, while a fourth survivor also arrives late.
Though retailing for $200 at a time when a car cost $400, it used ubiquitous .45 ammunition and could be easily broken down for transport and reassembled in under a minute.
Effective at a range up to 45 metres , the Tommy gun was perfect for close-range firefights across streets and the marble counter of the speakeasy.
It quickly became a cultural symbol of gangsters in the 1920s, so much that when the police started recruiting their 'G-men', they made sure to equip them with Tommy guns of their own.
Victims Four unfortunate victims of the massacre John May Not a member of the North Side Gang, May was a mechanic who worked on their cars and occasionally as muscle.
May was trying to stay out of trouble, but the demands of seven children left him with no other option but to take work from the mob.
Peter Gusenberg and Frank Gusenberg Hitmen for the North Side Gang, the Gusenberg brothers entered the criminal underworld in their teens.
They took part in a drive-by shooting of Capone's HQ in 1926 and killed two of his allies in 1928.
Adam Heyer Moran's business manager and North Side Gang accountant, Heyer owned the lease on the gang's headquarters.
Described as a snappy dresser, Heyer had been in prison twice once for robbery and once for running a confidence game.
Police investigation The hunt for the killers Frank Gusenberg lived on for hours despite being riddled with wounds, but sticking stubbornly to the mob's code of silence he refused to admit he'd even been shot, let alone who’d done it, before he died.
The Chicago Police Department quickly announced that they believed Capone associates John Scalise, Alberto Anselmi, Jack McGurn and Frank Rio were responsible, but the case floundered due to lack of evidence and McGurn skipped town with his moll.
In frustration, the police began its retaliation efforts by shaking down Detroit's Purple Gang on the basis that Moran's mob had recently been hijacking their liquor shipments.
On 22 February, the burnt remains of the police Cadillac were found, but it was impossible to pin it on either Capone or the Purple Gang, while the two murder weapons later turned up in a police raid on the Michigan home of bank robber and hitman Fred ‘Killer’ Burke in November that same year.
Burke, who led a vicious gang that Capone called his ""American boys"", was finally arrested in March 1931, attempting to rob a bank in Kirksville, Missouri, and died in prison in 1940 from diabetes.
Having killed a Michigan police officer, the Chicago police were unable to extradite him to Illinois and his role in the St Valentine's Day Massacre went unexamined.
Meanwhile in a completely unrelated case, the FBI had finally pinned down the ruthless Barker-Karpis gang of bank robbers and kidnappers, when one of their members Byron 'Monty' Bolton confessed to the St Valentine's Day Massacre and implicated Burke.
Having no jurisdiction over the case, the FBI suppressed the information but it finally leaked to the press, adding to the already considerable confusion and the mystery of the entire case.
At Capone ""His revolver levelled at Torrio's skull the gun clicked on empty and the woula-be assassins fled THE MASSACRE The two fake cops line the men up against a wall.
Suddenly the two plain-clothes assassins open fire with Tommy guns while the others join in with a sawn-off shotgun and .45 handgun spraying each man with at least ten bullets across their head and torso.
STEP 7 STEP THE COVER-UP The men in uniform lead the two plain-clothes assassins back to the police car with their hands raised, as if they'd been arrested.
Neighbours, peering out of the windows, alerted by the rattle of gunfire, assume the villains have been apprehended.
John Scalise and Alberto Anselmi John Scalise and Alberto Anselmi Capone's most feared hitmen, the Sicilian-born 'murder twins' were believed responsible for the death of North Side Gang boss and Moran's predecessor Dean O’Banion in 1924, as well as a failed attack on Moran and the murder of two police officers in June 1925.
Frank Rio One of Capone's most loyal and dependable bodyguards, Italian-born Rio had been arrested twice, once for handling stolen furs and once for the daylight robbery of a mail train but intimidation and bribery of judges helped him escape conviction, earning him the nickname 'Slippery' Frank Rio. enjoying a drink in a bar, when two men entered.
Witnesses, who quickly forgot all the other details, recalled him say a friendly ""Hello Al” before he was shot point blank four rounds into his cheek and two into his shoulder.
Nobody saw anything, nobody recognised the man, but the police knew who was responsible and so did the press, so for the first time, Capone's mugshot appeared on the front page.
Guzik was Capone's trusted money man, responsible for regular payoffs to cops and judges.
Soon the name ‘Scarface’ began to stick, needling away at Capone's vanity he never allowed the left side of his face to be photographed and he began to lash out at the flickering flash bulbs of the photographers.
The predominantly Irish-American North Side Gang run by Dean O'Banion controlled the breweries and the bootlegging in Chicago's North Side and had resisted all of Torrio's efforts to bring them to heel.
Alliances and truces had dwindled and fallen apart, but the last straw came on 19 May 1924 as O'Banion finally relinquished his share of the Sieben Brewery to Torrio.
As soon as Torrio and his boys joined by their allies in Little Sicily's 'Terrible Gennas' showed up, a conveniently timed police raid swept in and the boss was left with a $5,000 fine and a nine-month jail sentence.
One day while O’Banion clipped chrysanthemums in his flower shop, Schofields, Mike 'The Devil' Genna, John Scalise, Albert Anselmi and Frankie Yale strode in.
As O'Banion and Yale shook hands, Scalise and Anselmi fired two bullets into his chest and two into his throat.
As he lay on the floor in a pool of blood and petals, he was shot in the back of the head for good measure.
George Clarence 'Bugs’ Moran took over the North Side Gang and nursed their grudge, moving the headquarters from Schofields to the garage that would become the site of the shocking St Valentine's Day Massacre in 1929, the culmination of a brutal and bloody fiveyear gang war between the Chicago Outfit and the North Side Gang.
Upon his release Torrio kept a low profile safe in the knowledge that with Capone in the hot seat, he’d be less of a target.
For all of the Fox's wiles, he just hadn't reckoned on how personal this war had become.
Returning from a day shopping with his wife on the morning of 24 January 1925, gunfire lit up the street from a blue Cadillac lurking on the curb, shredding shopping bags to confetti.
Blood mingled with the groceries from a litany of wounds as Johnny Torrio stared at the sky, the shrieking of Anna Torrio strangely distant.
As Bugs Moran stood over him, blocking the crisp winter sun, his revolver levelled at Torrio's skull the gun clicked on empty and the would-be assassins fled.
Capone's ascendancy was immediate as Torrio underwent emergency surgery.
Capone slept by his mentor's bedside the men of the Chicago Outfit standing guard around the clock, eying each disinterested nurse and flower-clutching day visitor suspiciously.
With the Fox quietly returning to Italy, Capone moved his headquarters into Chicago's luxurious Lexington Hotel, taking over the 41 Heroes <fc Villains ""Capone moved into his study where petitioners waited anxiously for favours and his patronage'"" Five facts about Scarface Capone's specially-outfitted, bulletproof Cadillac was seized by the United States Treasury Department in 1932.
It was later used by the government as President Franklin Roosevelt's limousine.
Even though he is synonymous with Chicago, he only lived in the city for 12 years of his life.
Allegedly, he had never heard of Eliot Ness, the government agent sent to bring him to justice.
The man who helped America swim in booze during Prohibition's favourite drink was Templeton Rye whisky.
His men carried out most of the deaths he is responsible for, but Capone is still thought to have killed more than a dozen men personally. fourth and fifth floors where he held court like an emperor, surrounded by mobsters and prostitutes.
A concrete vault was installed in the basement and a secret staircase hidden behind a mirror in one of his bathrooms, just one part of a web of tunnels that would allow him a quick escape.
Rising late most days, he took his time pouring over the morning papers like a statesman, before dressing himself in expensive finely tailored suits.
Early afternoon, Capone moved into his study in another suite where petitioners waited anxiously for favours and his patronage.
Already the public had some sympathy for the bootleggers and Capone took hold of the notion and twisted it into the spectre of Robin Hood, portraying himself as heroic outlaw giving the people what they wanted.
The bigger Capone's business became, the more intricate and vulnerable the network of mobsters, bribes and alliances required to sustain it.
It got to a point where the endemic corruption of Chicago’s law and government simply couldn't be ignored.
In the wake of the shocking St Valentine's Day Massacre, Herbert Hoover was elected United States president on an anti-corruption platform.
His first move was to dispatch Prohibition agent Eliot Ness and a handpicked team of incorruptible 'Untouchables' to clean up Chicago’s streets by raiding Capone's speakeasies and stills, and more importantly, it transpired, a team of IRS agents headed by accountant-turned-lawman Frank J Wilson with a mandate to turn over Capone's finances for something that would stick in court.
Capone was sentenced to 11 years for three counts of tax evasion and two counts of failing to provide tax returns as his lavish lifestyle and lack of legitimate income was used against him. further counts of tax evasion and 5,000 violations of the Volstead Act were dropped out of fear the prosecution would be unable to get a conviction.
Capone's legal team originally struck a deal with the prosecution to admit to the lighter charges and serve between two and five years so business would be able to go on as usual.
However, when details leaked to the press the outrage was so great that the deal was immediately canned and the judge threw the book at him.
The jury was suddenly exchanged for another in the court by Judge Wilkerson when the police learnt of a plot from Capone's mob to bribe them.
The new jury, all from rural Illinois, were sequestered overnight to keep them out of the Chicago Outfit’s reach.
Wilkerson sentenced Capone to 11 years, $50,000 in fines, court costs of another $30,000 and no bail.
Capone was released into the care of his family on 16 November 1939 due to brain damage caused by neurosyphilis.
By 1946, he was deemed to have the intelligence of a 12-year-old, suffering from delusional fits, raving about communists and plots to kill him.
As the gangster was having a tantrum, one of the men tasked with bringing him to justice was having second thoughts.
While Capone wallowed in fine silks and syphilitic megalomania in his penthouse, Ness and his Untouchables began nipping at his heels shutting down 18 stills and arresting 52 bootleggers in a single night.
In the first six months alone, Ness' daring raids had cost the Chicago Outfit an estimated $1,000,000, as well as some of loyal lieutenants, who now languished in jail for violations of the Volstead Act.
He shrugged off Capone's clumsy attempts at bribery, as well as two assassination attempts.
It was only ever an irritant, taking chunks out of his income and his pride but to a mobster as egotistical as Capone, such defiance drove him into a rage.
It was a fury Ness gleefully exploited parading captured vehicles outside his hotel and taunting him on the phone.
However much Ness might have damaged his ego, the real danger to the man who made the streets of Chicago swim in booze and blood came from fraud investigator Frank J Wilson as he poured over reams of paperwork.
In May 1927, the United States Supreme Court's ‘Sullivan decision' had reversed a bizarre legal loophole that meant gangsters were legally exempt from having to register illegal income on their tax returns, on the basis that it would violate their Fifth Amendment rights.
Manly Sullivan, a Chicago bootlegger whose trial lent the decision its name, received a landmark conviction for tax evasion.
That same year, the Chicago Outfit's income was an estimated $108 million.
Facing a possible 34-year jail term from Wilson's tax case and Ness's Prohibition case, the former would stick and the latter wouldn't, but that scarcely mattered.
It was the end of Capone's empire of crime, brought down not by gunfire, violence and police raids, but by the simple, dry truth of the balance sheet.
Initially, Capone served his sentence in Atlanta, Georgia, continuing to rule his crime empire by proxy, bribing guards with thousands of dollars hidden in the hollow handle of a tennis racket to be able to communicate with the outside world.
He was then sent to the newly opened Alcatraz, where his link to the outside world was finally severed.
In Alcatraz, Capone's letters were censored, prohibited subjects and current events were removed, newspapers banned and all magazines had to be at least seven months old.
He was only allowed visits from immediate family, who would be separated from the one-time king of crime by a sheet of glass.
Alcatraz was a federal prison from 1933 until 1963 © Alamy;Corbi& Getty Heroes <fc Villains Marcus Tullius Cicero Strategist, philosopher and man of the people, Cicero's dramatic career coincided with the fall of a republic and the rise of an empire arcus Tullius Cicero peeked out of Ms covered litter to check if he was being followed.
The Roman Republic he had dedicated Ms whole life to protect had betrayed him once again and this time there would be no reprieve.
Out of the comer of Ms eye, he saw two armed soldiers strolling towards the slaves carrying the litter.
They called him by name and told the slaves to stop; Cicero knew he had oMy moments to live.
With no influence witMn the senate, fomm or any connections to the patronage network of the Patrician, Cicero's family languished in obscurity before he came of age.
Residing in the town of Arpinum, Cicero attended schools to improve Ms lot and Ms father insisted he should make something of himself within Roman politics.
He learned Greek and studied the philosopMes and teachings of Plato and Archimedes; in Roman culture this knowledge was required to be considered capable of leading Rome's political and military elite.
He was a diligent student, even visiting Greece to discover the secrets of their pMlosopMcal ideals.
As he gained a reputation in the provinces as uiuieis a gieeuy nr he and ii Cicero was more than aware of his enemies.
At the consular elections in 63 BCE he wore armour underneath his toga a skilled litigator, he also wooed the crowds gathered at public court hearings with Ms oratory skills, and became famous as a man who could win any legal case he took on.
Representing landowners and provincial merchants gave Cicero a firm understanding of the law but wasn’t enough for Ms burgeoning ego.
Therefore, when he was asked to prosecute a case involving Gaius Verres, a greedy Roman governor who had oppressed and intimidated the people of Sicily, he saw an opportumty to ascent to the place where he had always wanted to go; Rome.
He was talcing an awftrl risk though as Venes had hired Rome's foremost lawyer to defend him, Quintus Hortalus.
If the young and inexperienced Cicero lost against him he would be finished.
He diligently prepared his case, spending hours working on every inflection of Ms voice and action of Ms body to make sure he came across as the best orator ever heard.
He knew oMy the best would do, as the case was going to the Fomm in Rome, the centre of imperial Roman justice.
Not oMy did he win the case, he was guaranteed a place as a magistrate in the Roman cursus honorum, one of the most respected levels of government.
He continued to fly tMough the raMcs of public office, tMiving on the adventure that encompassed life while working high-profile cases.
He fell in love with the glamour of addressing the people from the plinths of the Roman Fomm.
Public speaking was one of the finest skills a Roman citizen could have, and Cicero was considered its greatest orator j 44 republic ated his :ect had 2 again"" Marcus Tullius Cicero Life in Cicero's time Rome the conqueror While Rome's power was not at its height during Cicero's lifetime, it was still a dominant force in the Italian peninsula and beyond.
Its influence stretched from the muddy fields of Gaul, modern-day France, to the grain-rich plains of the Egyptian Nile.
Slaves and free Romans Roman society was based around the distinction between Romans who had the right to own property and influence the political system and slaves who had no rights at all.
Slaves were used in every part of Roman life, from domestic servants to labourers in mines.
As was expected for a man of his standing, Cicero himself owned a number of slaves.
The Republic Before the great emperors of Rome stood the Roman Republic, a political system dominated by the senate and its consul leaders.
While the Republic looked democratic and free on the surface, in reality only the elite were allowed to serve and the whole political process was shamelessly corrupt.
Class struggle Class division was split between the Patrician, the ruling elite, and the Plebeian, all other Romans.
While the ruling families maintained control over the senate throughout this period they lived in constant fear of the ferrocity and fickleness of the plebeian 'mob', which had to be appeased regularly.
The gods and man Religion played an important part in the daily lives of Romans and their pantheon of gods and goddesses were seen to have a direct influence on the lives of Rome's citizens.
Strange cults and colourful religious ceremonies were a constant feature of the bustling city streets.
The senate was becoming unable to curtail the ambitions of powerful Roman leaders who commanded vast armies.
One of them, Gaius Julius Caesar, had been ruling Rome as joint consul with Pompey Magnus but feared a plot concocted by Pompey to overthrow his authority within the senate.
In short order, their conflict threw the whole of Rome and its dependencies into a disruptive conflict that pitted Romans against Romans.
As this was happening the senate struggled to maintain a role for itself within the city and was constantly being overruled by men like Caesar who was holding a lethal trump card an army capable of sacking the city.
When Caesar was assassinated, Mark Antony became the dominant force within the city.
When Caesar's adopted son Octavian, who also called himself Caesar, took over the city and Antony fled, Antony's supporters found themselves on shifting sand.
For senators like Cicero, this was a dangerous time and picking the wrong side during these insurrections could spell doom if the opposing side regained power.
There was also the constant threat of political assassination, a method not uncommon in Roman society for removing political enemies.
Timeline Cicero reached the peak of any Roman's career when he was elected consul, the highest office attainable.
As consul he utilised his oratory skills to put down a conspiracy of rebellion against him, convincing the mob to condemn the men involved as traitors.
He condemned them to death, reasoning that the situation was dangerous enough and that the tide of public opinion swelling around him would be protection against not affording the accused a trial.
The mob had turned against him, the new consul wasn't sympathetic and he was exiled.
So, in 57 BCE, when Roman leadership changed once again and Cicero was given a reprieve it was as Defining moment Gaius Veires' case 75 BCE One of the most celebrated cases of Cicero's career is his prosecution of the corrupt Sicilian governor Gaius Verres, a tyrant who brutalised his Roman subjects.
After hearing Cicero's reputation as an excellent orator, the Sicilians petition Cicero to prosecute Verres on their behalf.
After some debate, Cicero takes the case to Rome and promptly wins against Verres's expensive lawyer through his superb oratory skills.
With the gathered crowd cheering whenever Cicero speaks his relationship with the people is sealed.
This early success is the foundation upon which his political career is built. if his prayers had been answered.
He boarded a ship from his Greek residence and prepared to re-enter the cut-throat world of Roman politics.
Political upheaval revolving around two friends turned rivals, Pompey Magnus and Julius Caesar, was creating dangerous divisions within the already fractious Roman political system.
While Caesar courted Cicero's favour, looking for a respectable man to back his grievousness against Pompey, Cicero decided to play safe.
If he'd learned anything during his years in exile it was to back a winner when he saw one.
Pompey had more men, more support in the senate and seemed to hold the support of Rome's mob.
He threw in his lot with Pompey as the man I who would see the Republic restored and reward Cicero with power and influence once Caesar was defeated.
Defying the odds, Caesar defeated Pompey in open battle and again Cicero was exiled from Rome, along with Pompey's dilapidated forces.
For the second time Cicero was on the mn from his homeland and his future looked bleak.
His return to Rome came after Caesar, looking to shore up a very unsettled senate, decided to pardon him.
But flattery did not sway Cicero over to Caesar's side and what he found when he returned to Rome affronted • Philosopher Cicero becomes fascinated by Greek philosophy.
Roman society dictates that knowledge of Greek is mandatory for those in power.
Praetor is also a military position but he shows very limited interest in the military.
The decision to condemn the traitors to death without a trial will come back to haunt him.
While his father is a man of means, Cicero's family is not considered part of the ruling elite.
He serves during the War of Allies between the Republic and several Italian cities.
Caesar tried to bring Cicero into his inner circle while he was working within the political system CV ' ""He had made another critical error by trusting the young man who was now calling himself Augustus Caesar"" brutish Antony, claiming that he was a man of honour, and endorsed his fight against Antony.
Again, Cicero made a judgement call and assessed that Antony was finished, his flight from Rome retribution for his brash behaviour.
Surprisingly, Octavian made peace with Antony in order to steal power away from the hostile senate and, along with Marcus Lepidus, declared a Triumvirate a type of military Junta to mle Rome.
Cicero did his best to swallow his burning resentment at the destmction of the Republic and ingratiate himself with Octavian, but it was too little, too late.
He had made another critical enor in judgement by trusting the young man who was now calling himself Augustus Caesar.
Suddenly designated a public enemy, Cicero faced two options; stay and face a show trial or run.
The man who was later described by Quintilian as 'eloquence himself, bolted into the night, with nothing but the toga on his back, hunted by the people he helped bring to power.
As he raced for the safety of Greece, one of his brother's slaves betrayed him to Mark Antony's spy and he was apprehended within striking distance of the coast.
In the great marketplace of Rome two armed soldiers strolled up to the front doors of the Fomm canying a large, heavy sack.
Caesar was ruling the Republic like a tyrant, changing tradition to fit his own political needs.
Unsurprisingly, Caesar made many enemies and, in yet another explosion of ruthless violence, Caesar was murdered on the senate floor during the religious festival of the Ides of March.
Cicero decided to play this latest development more subtly than the Pompey fiasco.
He neither supported nor condemned the opportunist, profiting on the death of his master.
He publicly denounced him, writing orations against him and making scandalous remarks about his sexuality to friends.
But Antony held an army at his command, which outweighed the mere words of a skilled orator.
It appeared as if Antony was set to stay in Rome until Octavian, Julius's adopted son and heir, returned to the capital.
Cicero supported him as a liberator from the pulled out its contents, a dismembered head and two hands covered in congealed blood.
One of the men began attaching the head to the door, forcing the rotting jaw open and pulling out the tongue, pinning it across the putrid sldn to make the mouth look as if it was speaking.
With Caesar dispatched and Bmtus's conspirators looking for a man to rally around, Cicero once again became a man of power and influence, perhaps only bested in this respect by Mark Antony.
Antony's affiliation with Caesar was well known, and a source of intense jealously for less-connected men like Cicero.
Cicero makes overtures of friendship to the young man now calling himself Caesar.
This is a short-lived victory for Cicero and the Republic, as Octavian is unwilling to share power with the 'fools’ in the senate.
With Octavian and Antony now working together, Cicero finds himself out of favour and isolated.
He is subsequently forced to flee from the city with Pompey’s soldiers.
While Cicero is not present at the assassination he privately supports Brutus's actions.
Mark Antony In the following power vacuum, Cicero and Mark Antony become Rome's dominant figures.
Unfortunately, there is little love lost between the two and they frequently clash.
February 43 BCE 43 BCE Death of an orator • After seeing that Octavian Caesar and Mark Antony have betrayed him and he is now on their 'most wanted' list, Cicero flees Rome but is caught and summarily executed.
December 43 BCE 47 ©Corbis;Alamy Heroes & Villains 50 years after his death, John F Kennedy still inspires and fascinates the world E lection night, Tuesday 8 November 1960.
John 'Jack' Fitzgerald Kennedy waited for the voting results to come through on the television, his family sat around him in the living room of his brother's home in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts.
The endless television interviews, broadcast debates, rallies and travelling had taken their toll on his health, he hadn't had a proper meal or a good night's sleep in two weeks, and now he was beyond exhausted.
The endless lectures from his father, Joe, about image and how it didn't matter who you were, only what people thought you were, had started to grate on him.
After the ""longest night in history,"" as Jackie would later describe it, the call came in the following morning.
Nixon had admitted defeat and sent a congratulatory telegram to Kennedy.
The bare facts say it was hardly a ringing endorsement of Kennedy, but given the experience and relative popularity of Nixon, it was a spectacular victory.
Against the advice of his closet supporters, Kennedy visited Nixon in Florida on 14 November.
He silently listened to Nixon dominate what was meant to be a friendly conversation about the last few months, and wondered how a man like this had nearly won the presidency.
Kennedy’s presidency would go down in history as the dawn of a new era.
He changed the face of politics by courting the media and creating his very own cult of celebrity, inspiring hope through his charm and freedom through his liberal policies.
He gave the United States a renewed self-confidence through his tough reputation abroad, and after his brutal assassination in Dallas his legacy would live on.
Others were less JOHN F KENNEDY American.17-1963 John 'Jack' F Kennedy was born into a rich Irish-American Catholic family from Brookline, Massachusetts.
He served in the Navy during World War II, commanding a patrol boat in the Pacific that was destroyed by enemy fire.
He married Jackie Bouvier, a rich and well-established Catholic socialite in 1953, and ascended to the presidency in 1961.
He would only serve two years of his term before he was assassinated in 1963.
It was true that Kennedy had his critics, but it was his deep connection with the media, getting his name in the public domain and making sure that through his family connections it stayed out there in the best possible light, that made his political campaigns in the Fifties a success.
The media was enamoured with his good looks, beautiful wife and young family.
He represented the American dream, descended from Irish immigrants and doing well through America's bounty to become a senator in the most powerful country in the world.
This wasn't to say that he was a shallow man who simply enjoyed the press for his own vanity; the press shots of him and Jackie with their children in Hyannis Port may have been doctored to fit the idyll of the perfect American family, but they do portray a genuine sentiment of love.
One of the most compelling stories that illustrates his character was not caught on camera, however.
During his tenure in office, an aide was showing a group of disabled children around the White House when their wheelchairs prevented them from joining the rest of the tour group.
Kennedy, late for a meeting, spotted them and came over to the children.
Kennedy’s natural charm was rooted in compassion something that the press could project, but not create.
This was put to the test when he was nominated as the Democratic candidate for the presidency.
He knew he would need something more than his easy smile, good looks and friends in the print media, as these alone would not be enough against a seasoned politician like Nixon; he would need something that would allow him to reach millions and captivate them with his personality.
Kennedy's time would come during the first live television debates in September 1960, a contest that was watched by over 60 million people.
Both candidates were offered the services of a CBS make-up artist not that Kennedy needed it, as his skin looked tanned and healthy after campaigning in California.
Nixon, on the other hand, looked pasty and sweaty, having only just recovered from a knee injury, but declined the make-up services.
Ultimately, he got one of his aides to apply some make-up on minutes before the broadcast to cover up his stubble, but coupled with his pale complexion, it only made him look ill and dirty.
Kennedy received coaching from consultants to allow him to practice rebuking Nixon's comment ONE OF MY SONS WILL BE PRESIDENT Joe Kennedy famously made the above claim about his sons.
He was a man who expected a lot from his family after all, they were Kennedys, and thus destined for greatness.
Bom in 1888, Joe grew up in a well-established Catholic family from Boston.
He worked in Hollywood as a film producer and then entered politics as part of the Franklin Roosevelt administration.
He later became ambassador to Britain, famously saying the country was ""finished"" in 1940.
He was renowned for his political connections, using them to see his children established among the elite of American society after the war.
He was a domineering and harsh father, especially when his family didn't meet his high standards, and infamously had his daughter Rosemary lobotomised because of her violent personality.
He also 'vetted' husbands for his daughters, ensuring they all married into families that would benefit the family.
His affairs with other women were legendary, estranging him from his wife, Rose.
He was a pessimist and isolationist, weighed down with old prejudices of the Protestant-dominated middle class.
Kennedy chose a suit that contrasted well with the background of the set, while Nixon’s blended horribly into the backdrop.
The result was a popular victory for Kennedy, with one newspaper editor commenting, ""The medium is good to Kennedy and most unkind to Nixon.
Emphasising the differences in perception television offered, the majority of those who heard the radio debate thought Nixon had won, while those who watched on television were inclined in favour of Kennedy.
Kennedy was the first presidential candidate to properly utilise the power of the media and the idea of looking 'right' to connect with audiences through the medium of television, and it paid out in dividends.
To this day, the presidential debates are given the highest priority, with PR consultants spending hours coaching and teaching respective nominees when to smile, when to laugh and how to look, even down to the shoes and ties they're wearing.
It was Kennedy's stunning victory and his associations with the press before and after the 1960 election that subsequent presidential campaigns modelled themselves on.
The image of the man who would lead the American people was now just as important as the man's politics.
But of course, looking right was Presidential nominees Kennedy and Nixon smiling for the cameras prior to their first televised debate Senator John F Kennedy and VicePresident Richard Nixon during the second televised debate HOW AMERICA fcfej WAS WON 15 The presidential election of 1960 was one of the closest in American history.
Richard Nixon, Kennedy's opponent, was able to gain significant control over the American Midwest, a traditional Republican stronghold, and in California and Florida, which carried with it a large number of votes in the electoral college.
Kennedy, however, seized control of Texas, a state with a large number of voters, through his running mate Lyndon B Johnson and the industrial heartland of America in the Northeast with the help of his father through his political connections with influential industrialists.
One of the major battlegrounds was Chicago, Illinois, which held a large amount of supporters for both Kennedy and Nixon.
Controversies would emerge later about Democratic mayor of Chicago, Richard Daley, rigging the Illinois vote for Kennedy after a conversation he had with Joe Kennedy and, apparently, the Chicago outfit.
By 1960, the civil rights movement under Martin Luther King Jr was worrying the southern states, who were holding firm on segregation and humiliating the political community in America as a whole in the process.
It was a question that was becoming urgent, with the broadcast media reporting all the sit-ins and protests of black citizens in the deep south to an anxious American public; the very people Kennedy would have to get on his side if he was to take the presidency and keep hold of it.
As the election loomed in the autumn of 1960, Kennedy was still looking weak on the civil rights issue.
He was certainly more liberal than his opponent, but he didn't have anything of substance to beat him with.
By coincidence, King was arrested on 19 October a month before the election while taking part in a sit-in protest.
He phoned the shaken Mrs King, saying ""I want to express to you my concern about your husband.
It galvanised black voters, with King's father saying, ""He can be my President, Catholic or whatever he is.
Despite these words, he was still not pushing civil rights; he was playing the political game.
It was just words words enough to capture the presidency, but words nonetheless.
King would call Kennedy's bluff in August 1963 after Kennedy's inaction, marching on Washington with thousands of supporters.
Kennedy looked on open-mouthed; the rapture of the crowd hanging on King's every word was beyond impressive.
It was probably a combination of Kennedy's own moral scruples and King's loud insistence that finally got civil rights on the right path, but inaction would still dog Kennedy's record on the agenda.
To say that Kennedy was a mere political opportunist would be grossly unfair, however.
He was a man of principles, and the treatment of black communities in the deep South sickened him.
However, it is a myth that he was a radical activist of the civil rights movement; he was far too pragmatic for that.
Actively supporting the civil rights movement more than he did would have destroyed his support in the South and make what Nixon would later call the 'silent majority’ everywhere else uneasy.
His presidency did not bring solid change, and his successor Lyndon B Johnson would do far more, but it was a rallying cry for a new beginning.
By meeting King and publicly endorsing the ideal of civil rights for all, even if he did not actively support the campaign in practice, would give civil rights the national platform it needed and Kennedy's own celebrity endorsement to bring civil rights to the top of the national agenda.
Kennedy would not go eyeball-to-eyeball with civil rights, but he would with Communism.
It was the realms of foreign affairs where he would make his stand, where there could be no comprise, and where the legend of Kennedy's confrontation with the Soviets would change the world forever.
Communism was not only objectionable as far as Kennedy was concerned, but a moral evil.
It stood against everything he believed about human rights and human dignity.
The Communist leadership were godless, their state control oppressed its own people and their vast armies oppressed the people of the globe; it was to be despised.
When he made his inaugural address he spoke of not daring to ""tempt them with weakness.
This was the hard line of the Cold War warrior create the biggest conventional and nuclear arsenal available to scare the Communists into never attacking the free world, and Kennedy believed in it completely.
It was the first major military undertaking of his presidency, but the plan was illconceived and deeply flawed from the beginning.
Even Kennedy talked about plausible deniability of the whole affair by its end.
The plan was for the CIA to land thousands of military-trained Cuban exiles onto the Cuban mainland and, by proxy, try to enact a coup.
It relied on Castro not being in full control of Cuba, although unfortunately for Kennedy he was.
As the invasion party landed, Cubans loyal to Castro bombed and machine-gunned the exiles into the sea, causing horrendous casualties.
It was seen as a betrayal by the CIA and the Cuban exiles, who were left without adequate air cover and died in their hundreds on Cuban beaches.
She was born into one of the wealthiest Catholic families in America, and her father, John Vernou ‘Black Jack' Bouvier, owned land and capital throughout the Northeast.
She met Jack through her work as a photographer in Washington DC, marrying him on 12 September 1953 after a whirlwind romance.
Like her husband she courted the media, making sure she always dressed immaculately and remained on message for press interviews.
But she also made the position her own, and was a force for change in the White House, seeing to it that the unique furniture, ornaments and pictures within its rooms were preserved and catalogued, where before they had either been lost or neglected by previous occupants.
She established the post of White House Curator, and created the White House Fine Arts Committee to protect the treasures inside its walls.
She could also speak several foreign languages, which she would use to her advantage on goodwill missions abroad.
Her charm and grace enamoured foreign dignitaries, and after one trip to Paris, Vienna and Greece, Clark Clifford, advisor to the president sent her a congratulatory note saying, ""Once in a great while, an individual will capture the imagination of people all over the world.
As her celebrity status spread, she received so much fan mail that it required 13 people to process the letters.
Often they were deeply personal, with a girl from Indonesia writing, “I've seen pictures of you.
She became so popular that her husband often joked that it was Jackie people wanted to see.
Kennedy looks deep in thought as he awaits developments in the Cuban crisis that could have escalated to nuclear war The failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion did not temper the attitudes of the president or his closest advisors; quite the contrary.
The disaster convinced the Kennedy administration that the Communists needed to be taken seriously, as anymore failures would risk goading aggressive Communist intentions.
In the highly pressurised environment of the White House, straight-talking, hard-ball attitudes and the concoction of the 'red menace' frequently turned strategy into personal vendettas against the Communist leadership for the Kennedy family.
Bobby Kennedy, Jack's younger brother and Attorney-General for the American government, would take the Bay of Pigs disaster as a personal slight against him.
Castro had made the Kennedy family look weak, and now he was going to ""get him"" by any means necessary, even commissioning a plan for an exploding seashell to be planted at Castro's favourite diving spot to take his head off.
Conversely, Jack didn't order a full invasion of Cuba, nor any provocative move in that region until it was absolutely necessary.
In a famous comment made to an aide about the prospect of an American invasion of Cuba, he said; ""The minute I land one marine we’re in this thing up to our necks.
I can't get the United States into a war and then lose it, no matter what it takes.
But Kennedy's caution was still infused with the influence of manful bravado inherited from his patriarchal family and the hawks in his own government, who were ever-ready to go toe-to-toe with the Communists.
Kennedy felt deceived by the Soviets, who were talking to him about nuclear disarmament while installing medium-range missiles on the Cuban mainland.
He called the Soviets ""barefaced liars"" and hurled expletives whenever he heard the names of Castro or Khrushchev during meetings in the run up to the blockade.
They had made him look foolish and soft on the Communist problem, and the blockade represented the most he could do to confront them without tipping the world into a nuclear holocaust.
To Kennedy, however, ever-ready to fight the good fight, the threat was still real and it was engulfing south-east Asia.
He publicly endorsed the Diem regime in South Vietnam led by Ngo Dinh Diem, despite private reservations about their effectiveness and cmelty to their own people.
As the war intensified, Diem, a stanch Catholic, was drawing ever more criticism from his own people, the majority of who were Buddhist.
After brutal crackdowns on the Buddhist community at the beginning of 1963, monks set themselves on fire in the middle of a busy street in Saigon in protest.
The response by one of Diem's closet advisors, his sister-in-law Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu, was heartless.
She told a CBS film crew that the Buddhists had just ""barbecued"" themselves, and next time she would provide the mustard.
For Kennedy, a man who lived shoulder to shoulder with the media, this was a disaster.
The regime that America was supposed to be protecting was in fact a cruel dictatorship.
Kennedy's troops remained in Vietnam even after the brutal events of 1963 as Diem's regime may have been harsh, but as far as Kennedy’s administration was concerned, at least it wasn't Communist.
The memory of Kennedy's legendary standoff with Communism would linger in the halls of the White House after his death.
No future president would dare look weak in front of the Communist lest they appeared weaker than Kennedy, prompting a military invasion of Vietnam by Johnson and a perception that any failure to contain Communism throughout the globe was a de-facto failure of the current American administration.
Debates about whether the Vietnam War would have been conducted differently if Kennedy had been at the helm continue to endure.
Kennedy balked at appearing weak in front of the Communists, but he was a far more able negotiator than his successors and, it is said by some, would have brought Vietnam to a peaceful conclusion far quicker and with less casualties.
But part of Kennedy’s success was due to his international grandstanding.
His image as young, energetic and tough chimed well with the mood of a United States that wanted a nation that was assertive and cut away from the stagnation of the Eisenhower years and the defeats under Truman.
It is unlikely that he would have ordered a full withdrawal at Vietnam, but part of his enduring persona has, like the issues surrounding civil rights, created a myth that things would have been very different and a lot better had he survived.
Kennedy's funeral took place on 25 November, three days after his assassination.
As his funeral procession made its long march up to St Matthew's Cathedral, it was accompanied by Black Jack, a riderless horse symbolising the loss of a great leader.
When his casket was brought out after the service, foreign dignitaries including Charles de Gaulle of France and thousands of American citizens watched in silence.
Kennedy's final resting place was the Arlington National Cemetery as befitting an American hero.
His influence continues to be felt; Barack Obama's 'Hope' campaign for a new beginning in the United States was influenced by Kennedy’s own in 1960.
His death shocked everyone, and his boundless potential and hope for a better and more peaceful world was lost forever, along with the man that he might have become.
THE OTHER WOMEN MARILYN MONROE The Marilyn Monroe affair was probably the most infamous of Kennedy's relationships during his time in government.
The two met through Peter Lawford on four separate occasions, one of which, it is claimed, resulted in sexual relations.
Her raunchy rendition of Happy Birthday during Kennedy's 45th birthday celebrations and the dress she was wearing at the time, described as ""flesh with sequins sewed onto it,"" left little to the imagination.
JUDITH CAMPBELL Long the subject of repeated denials and cover-ups, until revelations in the Seventies revealed that Kennedy indeed had an on-off affair with Campbell, who was also linked with Mob bosses Sam Giancana and John Roselli.
It was one of the most enduring affairs Kennedy had, and he was aware of the risks to his political career of sleeping with a woman with connections to the Mafia, but carried on.
Von Post was a Swedish socialite, meeting Kennedy on the French Riviera after her aristocratic family sent her there to brush up on her French.
A passionate affair ensued, with graphic love letters and lustful liaisons occurring throughout the Fifties.
The tryst was so serious that Kennedy reportedly considered leaving Jackie for her, but feared his father's reaction.
SOPHIA LOREN In a rather embarrassing episode, Sophia Loren, one of the most iconic film stars of the age, turned Kennedy down, and in no uncertain terms told him and his lackey to leave her alone during a dinner at the Italian Embassy in Washington in the late Fifties.
This was despite Kennedy's gallant offer to include her female interpreter in a night of passion so that she didn't feel left out.
It was an image she cultivated and encouraged and one that would ultimately lead to her death.
Flames secured Joan's martyrdom, just as they provoked her fierce patriotism.
Jehanne DArc, or la Pucelle as she came to be known, was bom in 1412 in the village of Domremy, located across the river from Burgundy tenitory.
The Burgundians, allies of the English, regularly attacked French territory.
In July 1428, Joan's family fled a raid and returned to find the enemy had burned their town, fields and church.
Joan had heard angelic voices since the age of 12 or 13, urging her to remain pious, but now they gave her a specific mission.
The voices of Archangel Michael, St Catherine and St Margaret directed her to go into France and find her king, the Dauphin Charles.
The alliance between England and Burgundy had kept Charles from claiming the French crown.
His enemies not only occupied Paris, but also held the city of Reims, where coronations took place.
The crown would have to wait, however, as the French city of Orleans was currently in the grip of a protracted siege.
On 13 May 1428, the sixteen-yearold arrived in Vaucouleurs and begged Robert de Baudricourt, the captain of the garrison, to give her a military escort to Charles’ court at Chinon.
However, Joan would not be detened and returned in January the next year.
Baudricourt turned her down again, but her efforts were gaining traction.
She gained favour with local nobility, particularly the Duke of Lonaine.
Although Joan refused to attempt to cure his gout, the Duke agreed to give her a small escort and in February she travelled in men's clothes to Chinon, where she was presented to the court.
Taking advice from a mad heretic could be devastating to his campaign, but her story appealed to his love of astrology and fortune-telling and besides, he desperately needed any help he could get.
He was impressed, but ordered she be tested before giving any official credence to her claims.
One of the key figures in these trials was Yolande of Aragon, one of the hue powers behind Charles and an intelligent strategist.
After Joan's maidenhood was proved, she faced questions from clergy and theologians and passed with flying colours.
Charles now had a messenger of God, and Yolande raised a convoy for this messenger to lead. 4 tt Joan of Arc at the Coronation of Charles VII Life in the time of Joan of Arc The Black Death From 1348 to 1350, the Black Death ravaged England, claiming the lives of some 1. million people.
Carried by fleas, in turn carried by the rats infesting London, the bubonic plague spread through overpopulated towns and cities.
England's economy and resources would feel its effects for decades to come.
Emissaries from God Joan of Arc was not the first woman to claim the heavenly host had spoken to her.
Hildegard of Bingen railed against corruption in the clergy, St Clare of Assisi claimed to be able to hear and see Mass on the wall of her room when she was too ill to move, and Catherine of Siena (13471380) travelled Italy urging states to make peace with Rome.
From bows to cannons As the Hundred Years' War raged on through the decades, the technology of warfare began to change.
The English longbows at Agincourt in 1415 were the difference between victory and defeat, but as open battles were often replaced by lengthy sieges, cannon fire became a deciding factor.
Heresy trials The definition of heresy covers a great deal of sins, but the term boils down to denying any established Christian dogma.
In the Middle Ages, heresy trials became more common and the Catholic Church aggressively pursued any enemies.
This continued into the 16th century, with Copernican scholars accused of heresy.
The Bavarian Hussites Czech religious reformer Jan Huss was burned at the stake in 1415 for heresy.
After his death, the Hussite movement was born, separating itself from Rome.
The Hussites declared that communion should be given with bread and wine, they believed in poverty of the priesthood, punishment of sinners and freedom of preaching.
Heroes <fc Villains Edward III, one of the instigators of The Hundred Years' War, crosses the Somme The Hundred Years' War.
By the reign of English King Edward III in 1327, only Gascony and Pontieu remained.
When the French King Charles IV died heirless, Edward believed his mother and Charles' sister Isabella was the next in line, meaning the crown should be his.
A furious Edward refused to pay homage and when Philip confiscated his lands in Aquitaine in retaliation, Edward declared war.
King John II, but a compromise wasn't reached until the Treaty of Bretigny, in which Edward agreed to abandon his claim in exchange for Aquitaine and Calais.
War resumed in 1369 when Charles V of France responded to Edward the Black Prince refusing his summons by declaring war.
Charles successfully reclaimed many of the territories his predecessor lost, and the Black Prince's son Richard II would make peace with Charles VI in 1389.
After the truce had been repeatedly extended, war resumed in 1415 when Henry V invaded, leading to decades of conflict during which the English would take Paris and claim kingship.
They would not be driven out until the Battle of Castillon in 1453, the official end of the Hundred Years' War.
Timeline In April 1429, Joan rode out, holding her white standard and wearing a suit of armour commissioned by Charles.
She announced that her sword would be found in the church of Sainte-Catherine-de-Fierbois, hidden behind the altar.
It was an old gift to the church from the crusades, and the discovery was treated as a miracle.
Her pious conduct became renowned; she forced her soldiers to stop talcing the Lord's name in vain and expelled prostitutes from their camps.
She dictated letters to the English, instructing them to leave France or face the wrath of God.
A canny propagandist, the Dauphin ensured these letters were copied and widely distributed.
She arrived at Orleans eager for battle but had not understood that her forces were there as support, nothing more.
Although frustrated, she managed to get her men into the city, past the English troops and was rewarded with the adulation of the citizens.
They may have been pleased to see her but her impatience to attack was at odds with her fellow commanders' strategy.
In her frustration she hurled insults at the English from the battlements.
Joan sent many letters to English and Burgundian troops but she was illiterate and had to dictate them 1 up as the fight was in progress.
She dictated a fearsome final letter to the English, ordering them to leave, and on 6 May another attack was mounted.
She advanced again the next day, claiming to be the first to storm the ramparts at Les Tourelles, where she took an arrow to the shoulder but stayed in the fight.
The French commanders credited her for inspiring the troops to victory.
With Orleans free, Joan wanted Charles to proceed immediately to Reims but the Dauphin was more cautious.
He wanted to clear the Loire valley and began raising money r for the campaign.
Technically, the young Duke of Alengon led the army but he was a firm believer in the young female warrior and frequently deferred to her.
They swept quickly through the English resistance and laid siege to Beaugency.
The English surrendered without realising a relief force was on its way, a force the French promptly set off after.
They met at Patay on 18 June, where the ill-prepared English were decimated, with over 2,000 r ""She dictated a fearsome final letter to the English, ordering them to leave, and on 6 May another attack was mounted.
Joan led the attack herself, routing the enemy"" Defining moment First vision 1424 At just 12 or 13 years old, she first claims to hear the voices of angels speaking to her.
If she feels she had not behaved properly, the voices would admonish her.
They also tell her to reject the marriage her family had arranged for her.
As Joan grows older, Michael's messages continue to advise her toward piety, but gradually grow more political.
Finally, Michael and the other voices, those of St Catherine and St Margaret, tell her to travel to France and begin her mission.
She never receives formal education or learns to read and write, instead learning about religion from her mother Isabelle.
Her family flees to Neufchateau and returns to find the enemy having burnt their town.
She travels to Vaucouleurs to demand an escort, beginning a series of attempts ending in success after convincing nobles that she is the fulfilment of a prophecy.
May 1428 • Audience with the king Joan is granted a meeting with the Dauphin Charles, who sees value in her for his military campaign to free Orleans.
Joan immediately identifies him in a room full of people and impresses him with her fervour.
She announces that her sword can be found in the church of Saint Catherinede-Fierbois.
Joan played little part in it but by this point that mattered not, as her legend only grew stronger.
He led a grand procession, entered the city on 16 July and was crowned the next day.
She was desperate for the long to attack Paris but he chose to leave Reims instead, only to be barred from crossing the Seine by English troops.
After skirmishes throughout August and a tmce with Burgundy, on 8 September Joan finally led the Paris attack she had been itching for.
She stood on the moat, demanding sunender, but the only reply she received was an English anow through her leg.
After hours of bombardment, her men reached her under the cover of darkness, but she was determined to continue the fight the next day.
However, once Charles saw the number of French casualties he ordered her to return to his side.
She needed a victory to restore her reputation but in November 1429 failed to take the castle of La Charite after a long siege.
When she returned to court, Charles gave her hereditary nobility but made sure she stayed with him, frustrating Joan.
It was her duty to be on the battlefield expelling the enemy from her home soil, not rotting in court.
By 1430, the English were preparing a full-scale invasion of France to reclaim their recently lost territory.
When the city of Compiegne refused to surrender, Joan rode to support them without Charles' authorisation.
On 23 May she led an attack from the city, but the English reinforcements cut her off at the rear and she could not retreat.
She was pulled from her horse and forced to surrender to the Burgundians.
She leonly anexampk and Joan dressed in men's clothes claiming the spirits told her to.
She also wore her hair short, but this is often not depicted in portraits testified that constant sexual harassment was the reason she remained in men’s clothing, while the voices in her head told her not to escape.
The English needed to make an example of Joan and the Parisian theologians wanted to try her for heresy, idolatry and witchcraft.
She needed to answer for the way in ^ which she had circumvented the church by claiming to receive her instructions from her Voices' while her ability to inspire followers had to be stopped.
If she were convicted by a foreign power the damage to Charles' reputation would be severe, so the French court paid the Duke of Burgundy £10,000 for her.
Six rounds of questioning took place between 21 February and 3 March 1431, with nine more between 10 and 17 March, conducted in her cell.
On 24 May, she was taken to the scaffold and told that if she did not abjure, she would be given to the secular authorities that would carry out her death sentence.
In front of the crowd, she recanted and was sentenced to life imprisonment and to wear women's clothes.
Demanding she be allowed to attend mass, Joan was found in men’s clothes, claiming the voices had told her that her abjuration was treason.
On 30 May she was allowed to make her confession and take communion before she was taken to the Old Market in Rouen and tied to the stake.
She was given a small crucifix and a Dominican priest held a parish cross high so she could see it even as the flames began to lick around her.
The king she had helped crown, Charles VII, not once tried to help Joan.
Defining moment Siege of Orleans 29 April-8 May 1429 Joan arrives at Orleans amid great fanfare from the citizens of the city but is met with indifference by her fellow commanders.
She is determined to mount an attack as soon as possible but is told they would wait for a relief effort.
She is so poorly regarded by the other generals that when a sortie takes place, she’s not told beforehand.
Instead, she races out and joins the attack just in time to rally the flagging troops, ultimately claiming a fortress.
This will be the first in a series of victories that would liberate Orleans and confirm her status for many as a heaven-sent hero.
However, the siege fails as 1,500 men fall to the English bombardment, with Joan herself wounded, having to be pulled from the battlefield under nightfall.
She is cut off by the English and pulled from her horse while trying to escape.
She retracts her statement, only to change her mind days later, stating she'd rather die than deny what she knows to be true.
A Dominican priest holds a cross up high enough for her to see from the flames.
Finally, in 1456, the original verdict is annulled, deciding the process had been unjust.
He moved to London in the late 1580s to pursue an acting career, becoming a prominent and prolific playwright and poet, producing an average of two plays a year until 1611 before retiring to Stratford.
T wo guards grabbed him tightly and dragged him down a stone corridor, his shackled legs meaning he was unable to keep up the frantic pace they had set.
He was determined to show no sign of weakness and tried to concentrate on the senses around him, such as the rats scurrying by his feet, the insects crawling on the walls and the warmth on his face from the burning torches that illuminated the short path.
He was Robert Southwell, born into a good family and a man who devoted his life to God, being ordained a priest in 1584 in Rome.
But what had been one of the best years of his life had also turned into one of the most bitter when later the same year, the ‘Jesuits, etc Act 1 had ordered all Roman Catholic priests to leave England.
They were given 40 days' grace to do so and many of his friends had hurriedly scrambled their belongings together and fled the island nation for friendlier shores.
Pain ripped through his body as the guards swung him around a comer and flung open a new cell door for him.
Damn him and his desire for a male heir and his lust for Anne Boleyn that had seen him turn his back on the Catholic faith he had been brought up in.
And damn that German monk Martin Luther whose actions had led the Protestant Reformation that had swept through Europe and ultimately been adopted throughout England.
He recognised it horn the descriptions of others whose fate had brought them here; it was Limbo, the most feared cell within Newgate Prison, inside a gate in the Roman London Wall.
His heart beating wildly with fear, he reflected on his decision to leave Rome in 1586 to travel back to England to work as a Jesuit missionary, staying with numerous Catholic families, thus becoming a wanted man.
Eventually, the door swung open and he was dragged out of his cramped cell.
He could barely stand as he was taken to trial, hauled before Lord Chief Justice John Popham and indicted as a traitor.
He defiantly laid out his position, admitted to being a priest and his sentence was passed.
After being beaten on the journey through London's streets he was forced to stand.
Cut down while still alive, his bowels were removed before his beating heart was dragged horn his body and he was cut into four pieces.
This was England in the late-16th century Queen Elizabeth's religious compromise wasn't without its share of pain and suffering.
He had moved to London from Stratford-upon-Avon in 1587, leaving behind his young family to pursue a career as an actor and a playwright with the troupe Lord Strange’s Men.
He had married Anne Hathaway in 1582, when he was 18 and she was 26, and together they had three children, Susanna, Hamnet and Judith.
One of them was Robert Greene, arguably the first professional author in England.
By 1594, he had written more plays and seen both Venus and Adonis and The Rape ofLucrese published.
He dedicated them to his patron Henry Wriothesley, the Earl of Southampton.
Southampton was from a long Catholic dynasty and he appreciated poetry and theatre.
When the theatres re-opened in 1594 following an outbreak of bubonic plague, he was keen to invite the Earl along.
After all, Shakespeare's new troupe, Lord Chamberlain's Men, was becoming popular, with them even invited to perform in the royal court of Queen Elizabeth I Shakespeare had also bought shares in Lord Chamberlain's Men and was becoming a powerful and influential figure.
The Reformation had changed England's approach to religion, moving the country away from its Catholic roots and into the arms of Protestantism.
Protest leaders who encouraged more than 30,000 priests, gentry and commoners to demand a return to Catholicism in 1536 had been executed.
Two years later, reformers had banished the cult of saints, destroying shrines and banning the population of England from making pilgrimages.
Riots in 1549 were repressed in the most vicious of ways the reformers would hang priests from church towers and lop off the heads of laymen who refused to obey the new order.
All this affected the Bard; he wasn't writing in a bubble and nor were the actors who performed his work.
Speaking out against the establishment was hard not least for those who wanted to keep their heads.
Anyone wanting to put across another point of view had to be smart and Asquith believes the man who would go on to be England's most celebrated poet and playwright rebelled and devised a secret ""Queen Elizabeth's religious compromise wasn't without its share of pain"" code, inserting messages and double meaning into his writing.
It isn't as outlandish as it may sound; cryptology had been used since ancient times and there were examples of secret codes being used in this time period.
For example, it is known that Mary, Queen of Scots used a cipher secretary called Gilbert Curie to handle her secret conespondence.
It wasn't entirely sophisticated, though, so her plot to overthrow Elizabeth was soon uncovered Catholic double agent Gilbert Gifford intercepted letters that had been smuggled out in casks of ale and reported them to Sir Francis Walsingham, who had created a school for espionage.
For example, 'tempest' or 'storm' were used to signify England's troubles, according to Asquith.
So Shakespeare may well have been convinced he could change people's view of the world by writing on an entertainment and political and religious level.
Philip II of Spain, who had married Mary I, felt England's Catholics had been abandoned and there had long been a promise that, if the Catholics bided their time, help would come.
Such an assessment revises the prevailing thinking that Shakespeare wrote universal plays and avoided any topicality.
It’s plausible that he wanted to do more than merely shake the literary world; he wanted to influence politics and religion, to affect his society.
When he sat at his desk, overlooking the squalid, filthy conditions of London, William Shakespeare may have been looking out at a more enlightened nation than ever before, but is was still a city and a country where the screams of religious and political prisoners filled the corridors of cramped jail cells as torturers extracted forced confessions.
This sobering reality was a stark reminder of the perils of religious divisions that continued throughout Shakespeare's life.
The final and definitive answer to that, like some of the great man's work, is unfortunately lost to the ages.
SHAKESPEAREAN THEORIES He didn't really write the works The authorship of Shakespeare's work has been the subject of debate for decades.
With no original manuscripts, no mention of him even being a writer in his will and a command of Latin, Greek and other languages that would belie his apparent poor education, many believe that Edward de Vere, the 17th Earl of Oxford was the writer rather than the small-town boy from Stratford.
And if not him, then one of 80 other historical figures that have been mentioned over the years, such as Marlowe.
He didn't even exist Some scholars believe that the Shakespeare revered today as a playwright was actually a fictional character.
They believe that the few documents relating to him were actually for a man called William Shaxper or Shakspere who was born in 1564, married and had children but became an actor and remained in such a role until his retirement.
Had Shakespeare been such a prominent playwright, there would surely have been many documents mourning his passing, critics say.
He was an Italian Those who argue Shakespeare was not quite who he claims he was are called anti-Stratfordians.
One of their theories is that Shakespeare or Michaelangelo Florio Crollalanza had moved from Sicily to London, fearing the Holy Inquisition.
Sicilian professor Martini luvara claims to have proof and mentions the Sicilian play Tanto Traffico Per Niente written by Crollalanza.
With the untimely death of King Edward VI in 1553, struck with fever and cough that gradually worsened, Mary I ascended to the throne and set about calling a halt to the Reformation.
She swung England firmly back towards Catholicism, causing reformers to run scared and flee.
Terror had been brought on the Protestants but Cecil had the ear of Elizabeth, who he had known for years.
She had embraced the Church of England, so much that she had been imprisoned for two months in the Tower of London by her half-sister Mary, who feared she was part of a plot to depose her.
When Mary died in 1558, Cecil wanted to return to a Protestant England.
Queen Elizabeth succeeded the throne since Mary had born no child and Cecil became her advisor.
Crucifixes and candlesticks were to be allowed, although new bishops protested.
But Protestants who had fled returned and wanted their religion to be supreme.
Cecil ensured Catholics would be excluded from public life although he allowed them to worship as long as they did not threaten the queen and did so discreetly.
The Armada was defeated but it had succeeded in creating further religious and political divisions, so the authorities were on even greater alert.
Within this world Shakespeare got to work and, at first, kept things simple.
Their plots related to divided families, parallels for an England cut in two.
Asquith believes the Bard placed certain markers in his texts that signalled a second, hidden meaning.
Asquith takes this as reference to the black clothes worn by Puritans and to the 'high' church services that would include mass as opposed to the 'low' services that didn't.
If this theory is tme a matter of some debate then it enabled Shakespeare to get specific messages across, using characters to signify the two sides and by using words commonly associated with Catholic codes.
For example, according to the theory, 'love' is divided into human and spiritual and 'tempest' refers to the turbulence of the Reformation and CounterReformation and the Bard used his own terms to disguise a message that was pro-Catholic.
Shakespeare's patron, the Earl of Southampton, rebelled against Elizabeth I, becoming Robert, Earl of Essex's lieutenant in an attempt to raise the people of London against the government.
The Essex faction had ordered a performance of the 'deposition' play Richard II just before the rebellion and Shakespeare's company had their work cut out afterward denying complicity.
The plan ended in failure in 1601, but in that same year, Shakespeare wrote Hamlet, encouraging action against unjust mle.
If this is tme, then Shakespeare really was one of the defining rebels of the period.
Critics have said for decades that the writer was against populist rebellions and supported authority and the rule of law, ""but with the recent reassessment of the extent of dissidence at the end of Elizabeth's reign, Shakespeare's Elizabethan work begins to seem more oppositional”, Asquith argues.
Suspicious that his childhood friend is his pregnant wife’s lover, Leontes accuses his wife of infidelity and having an illegitimate child.
Having ordered the newborn baby to be abandoned, he is later reunited with her, much to his delight.
As with The Tempest, Pericles and Cymbeline, The Winter's Tale started with suffering and ended with happiness.
It showed a transition that could put past remorse to bed, highlighting the possibility that evils can be defeated and overcome and that a true home can be found for spiritualism if it is wanted.
It would have encouraged the audience to keep the faith and not give up hope.
Written between 1588 and 1593, the play is set in the latter days of the Roman Empire.
Bloody in the extreme, the play explores the life of a fictional Roman general, Titus, caught in a vicious circle of revenge with the queen of the Goths, Tamora.
Shakespeare appears to be pleading for calm among England's dissidents, having written a play that highlights suffering and repression while arguing the case against a violent rebellion.
The message, claims Asquith, is very much about biding time, waiting for help in the guise of a promised invasion and, as such, it mirrored the rhetoric of Catholic leaders who stressed England would be saved via diplomacy or invasion rather than an internal uprising.
Written between 1590 and 1592, the courtship of Petruchio is at the heart of the play.
It shows his attempts to tame the wild Katherina, a girl he loves but is rebuffed by until he manages to win her over.
Her sister is called Bianca, meaning 'white' and she is the respectable one of the two.
This paints Katherina to be like a reformer and in need of being brought into line.
For those accustomed to finding deeper meanings, the message would have been obvious, according to her.
He wants to pass the monarchy to his three daughters and asks them to prove they love him the best but one cannot so he splits it between two before falling into madness.
Lear's actions caused a tumbling effect as various people were banished, reunited, imprisoned and heartbroken.
The more elaborate plays retained the puns, wordplay and double meanings so beloved of audiences in Elizabethan times, but Asquith notes that some of Shakespeare's characters came to be increasingly dramatic and allegorical; they had a hidden spiritual meaning that transcended the literal sense of the text.
When King James assumed the throne in 1603, Catholics had assumed that he would lend them greater support than Elizabeth, given that his mother was a staunch Catholic.
But that was not to be and Shakespeare must have been well aware of a growing political and religious resentment against the monarchy, with a feeling of rebellion growing.
His plays in this period became more cynical, which some have speculated was a consequence of the world he was living in.
Guy Fawkes, Thomas Wintour, Everard Digby and Thomas Percy hired a cellar beneath the Houses of Parliament for a few weeks, gathering gunpowder and storing it in their newly acquired space.
Their plan was to blow the building sky high, taking parliamentarians and King James I with it.
But their cover was blown and Guy Fawkes was taken away to be tortured into confession, the deadly rack being the instrument said to have broken him.
At around the same time, Shakespeare wrote King Lear, Othello and Macbeth, all plays warning against unjust rule, which many Catholics felt James I was guilty of.
Such an assessment revises thinking that Shakespeare wrote universal plays and avoided any topicality.
It's plausible that he wanted to do more than merely shake the literary world; that he wanted to influence politics and religion.
Sat at his desk, overlooking the squalid conditions of London, Shakespeare may have been looking at a more enlightened nation than ever before, but is was still a place where the screams of religious and political prisoners filled the corridors of cramped jail cells as torturers extracted confessions.
The definitive answer to that, like some of the great man's work, is unfortunately lost to the ages.
But after fighting alongside Julius Caesar on the battlefield, he quickly established his military prowess.
After Caesar's assassination, he formed a power trio with Marcus Lepidus and Octavian, but his growing love of the Egyptian queen Cleopatra would prove to be his downfall.
Cleopatra was the daughter of Ptolemy XII Auletes ■■ 0M and Cleopatra V ~ Born in Alexandria in 69 BCE her bloodline propagated a series of brothersister marriages that were frequently corroded by family violence and murder.
After a tumultuous reign, Octavian of Rome invaded Egypt and ended her rule.
Rather than face the humiliation of defeat, Cleopatra committed suicide.
WorldMags.ne 68 The last pharaoh THE LAST PHARAOH AND THE FALL OF ANCIENT Egypt C leopatra VII remains an icon of both the ancient and modern world.
Today, she continues to captivate and puzzle historians, remaining one of history's most enchanting and enigmatic figures.
The alliance of Mark Antony and Cleopatra changed the face of the world.
A coalition which began as a political statement soon evolved into a tumultuous, and later tragic, love affair.
Despite her florid reputation, Cleopatra took only two lovers both were rulers of Rome.
Egypt, rich in gold and grain, provided the material resources to fuel that power.
They had enabled the queen to establish a secure and profitable union between Rome and Egypt.
Despite this, however, events took an unexpected turn when she met the younger general.
Cleopatra and Mark Antony fell in love, embarking on a passionate and unpredictable relationship that brought both riches and remorse.
Their partnership, as lovers and politicians, both immortalised and destroyed a dynasty it brought to a close 3,000 years of pharaonic rule.
In doing so, Cleopatra had secured for herself an enormous power base, for Caesar had no heir.
Despite its material wealth, Egypt had suffered years of famine that had weakened the reserves of her granaries and her people.
Her allied states had also felt the grip of Rome tightening around In 30 BCE, a love affair between a powerful queen and a respected military leader caused scandal in Rome and ultimately brought about the end of a dynasty their throats.
As a gateway to the East, it was a major port with a large cosmopolitan community.
Egypt also had an abundant source of grain with which it fed its imperial army.
On the other hand, the Romans regarded the Egyptian people and their religion with suspicion its cults, along with its strange animal-headed gods, were an abomination to the refined Roman senses.
While her alliance with Rome continued, Cleopatra and her throne remained secure.
Having grown up in Rome, he was familiar with upperclass women who were cloistered in the home and whose only role in life was to be that of good wives and mothers.
The women of Rome were largely regarded as vessels of chastity; Cleopatra was the antithesis of a Roman woman.
Growing up in a highly political and dangerous household where life was precarious, she was descended from a long line of rulers all named Ptolemy who could trace their line to Alexander the Great.
In order to keep their bloodline pure, female rulers often married their brothers.
This practice brought outward strength but inner conflicts; during her early life Cleopatra witnessed brutal power struggles within her own family.
Indeed, as her power grew, she had no choice but to execute her rival siblings.
She spoke several languages, including Egyptian making her unique among her peers.
Despite her later reputation as a femme fatale, she was not considered beautiful.
It was said she had a charismatic presence, was a fine conversationalist and had a sweet, seductive voice a trait she may have cultivated as a child.
Most importantly, Cleopatra was a survivor; she knew that in order to sustain her throne, she needed to control the might of Rome, and Mark Antony could offer this.
Like Cleopatra, he sought decadence and danger he had quickly gained a reputation for drinking and gambling, and seems to have been attracted to exotic religious cults.
Later, he earned fame and fortune among the militia; as the commander of a cavalry regiment he received great honours fighting with Caesar's armies in Gaul.
Antony and Caesar formed a mutual friendship and a distant kinship had strengthened their alliance.
As Caesar’s star ascended, so too had Mark Ancient civilisations Antony's, and when the elder man became dictator, Antony was appointed Magister Equitum (Master of the Horse) and governed Rome in Caesar's absence.
Better suited to the battlefield, Mark Antony made an impetuous politician highly volatile, his excesses in wine and women became the topic of much public gossip, for these often included affairs with other men's wives.
After the assassination of Caesar, Cleopatra and Mark Antony fled Rome and Cleopatra returned to Egypt.
The Romans regarded a female ruler with abhorrence and she desperately needed an ally in the Senate.
When revolt failed to materialise, Mark Antony returned to the Forum to find a city outraged at the atrocities that had befallen Caesar.
The assassins were executed or fell into obscurity, and it was left to Octavian (Caesar's appointed heir), Lepidus and Mark Antony to calm the storm.
The three men formed the Second Triumvirate granting themselves equal powers of government.
As the three men began to carve out Roman territory each assigned themselves important provinces.
He sent a message to his lover asking her to meet him at Tarsus in modern-day Turkey, determined to win her support for his military campaigns.
On this particular meeting she presented herself as the embodiment of the goddess Venus.
The imperial queen of Egypt arrived on a golden barge; decked in fine linen and precious gems, she was attended by servants dressed as sea nymphs.
While she drifted towards Mark Antony like a creature from myth, she refused to disembark.
In order to secure his loyalty, Octavian arranged a marriage between Mark Antony and his sister, Octavia a move that infuriated the Egyptian queen.
To avoid a public insult, Mark Antony stumbled into an acrimonious and dangerous union.
Meanwhile, the queen of Egypt financed his army, allowing him to capture Jerusalem where he installed Herod as the puppet king of Judaea.
His relationship with Cleopatra had gathered momentum and he had made Alexandria his home.
Despite his union with Octavia, he married Cleopatra and they had another child.
Soon, Antony grew tired of luxurious living, exotic palaces and hunting in the Egyptian Delta; he longed for the glories of war.
Octavian took this opportunity; he demoted Lepidus, belittled Mark Antony and seized unilateral power.
He reminded Rome of the menacing relationship between Antony and his abominable foreign queen.
While feigning shock at the abandonment of his sister, he told the citizens of Rome that Mark Antony was now living as an Egyptian; this was regarded as an act of treason.
After a successful invasion of Armenia, Mark Antony infuriated his fellow Romans by holding a Triumph in the city of Alexandria.
A modern reader's perspective of Cleopatra has no doubt been heavily influenced by the numerous works of fiction that have been released charting her life in the many centuries following her death.
Foremost among these must arguably be William Shakespeare's 1623 tragedy Antony And Cleopatra, a play that follows events from the Sicilian revolt of 44 BCE through to the Final War of the Roman Republic in which Cleopatra commits suicide in 30 BCE by asp bite.
In this performance, Cleopatra is frequently portrayed as beautiful, power-hungry and manipulative.
The one in question from which the Great Bard draws is the Life Of Mark Antony, which is interesting, as it does not deal directly with the pharaoh but rather with the Roman general and his relationship to her.
Further, Shakespeare does not lay out events of the time as stated by Plutarch, with dates and events shifted in time and contrasting accounts of Cleopatra simplified.
A good example of this is how varying accounts of her death, including death by poisoning, willing death by snake bike to the arm and unwilling accidental snakebite to the arm, is rewritten as willing death by snakebite to the breast.
Of course, Shakespeare's account of Cleopatra has been further embellished in subsequent centuries with other works of fiction such as the well-known 1963 film adaptation of her life with Elizabeth Taylor playing the lead.
Aside from Taylor's questionable portrayal, this movie introduced many smaller yet pervasive inaccuracies such as Cleopatra wearing her hair in bangs.
In reality, the Egyptian queen would have worn a wig of tight curls on top of her head, which would have been shaven.
Unlike his compatriot Mark Antony, Octavian placed great importance on Roman morality, and was more suited to philosophy than war.
His rise to power was largely due to adoption by his maternal great-uncle Gaius Julius Caesar.
Along with Mark Antony and Marcus Lepidus he formed the Second Triumvirate.
The Triumvirate divided the Roman Republic between the three of them and ruled as military dictators.
Despite his reputation as a cruel and calculating ^ leader, Octavian brought an era of peace and prosperity known as the Pax Romana.
Italian Gaul Mark Antony was a seasoned campaigner in Gaul where he accompanied his kinsman Julius Caesar into battle and proved his mettle as a soldier.
Macedonia The Ptolemies were descended from a line of Macedonians that could trace their origins to Alexander the Great.
It was here that the Romans found exotic animals for their gladiatorial arenas.
MARKANTONY Mark Antony was born on 14 January 83 BCE and died, aged 53, in Alexandria, Egypt.
According to Plutarch his early life was spent gambling and drinking as he embarked on a series of dangerous love affairs.
He was a hedonist and a womaniser whose many wives bore him a cacophony of children; his descendants included notable emperors such as Caligula and Nero.
As a soldier, though, he showed promise; his bravery and determination made him popular among his men and he distinguished himself as a cavalry officer.
His connections with the noble families of Rome secured his future role as a powerful but somewhat unpredictable military leader.
MARCUS AEMILIUS LEPIDUS Lepidus, like Mark Antony, was a fierce advocate of Julius Caesar who gave Lepidus great honorary titles and a role in the Senate that was equivalent to that of a prime minister today.
In allowing Lepidus to live, Caesar's assassins made an irrevocable error of judgement.
Octavian, Antony and Lepidus became the driving force of Rome their initial aim, to cut off the head of the Senate.
After they had executed many of their enemies, their alliance, in effect, heralded the end of the Republic.
Lepidus ruled over Spain and Africa and, while he was abroad, Octavian began his quest for ultimate power.
THE MEN WHO RULED ROME 43 33 BCE Ancient civilisations ACTIUM The ancient battle that changed the world The battle took place on 2 September 31 BCE, on the Ionian Sea on the border of the city of Actium.
Agrippa launched his initial attack from the left wing of the fleet and attempted to outflank Mark Antony the battle was brutal and prolonged.
Unfortunately, many of Antony's soldiers were dying of malaria and his ships were undermanned.
These Liburnian vessels were manned by well-trained and rested soldiers, and the ships were fast and agile.
As they outmanoeuvred their enemy, the deck soldiers used fire arrows and slingshots to diminish their capability.
Realising the severity of his situation, Mark Antony decided to retreat and regroup.
He took advantage of a break in the enemy formation and made a dash for it.
In doing so, he abandoned many of his men to their fate. l # Defeated by Octavian's fleet, Mark Antony fled the battle, leaving his soldiers to die Roman law dictated Cleopatra should be treated as an enemy of the state, taken back to Rome and paraded before the mob” children heirs to his conquered territories.
Mark Antony named Caesarion the legitimate son and heir of Caesar Octavian, of course, being the 'adopted' son of the former dictator.
He told the Senate that Antony had ""gone native"" and that he had been effeminated by the Egyptian queen.
Mark Antony divorced Octavia and accused Octavian of forging Caesar's will.
Rome was drawn into a civil war which culminated in the defeat of Antony at the Battle of Actium.
During the 12 months that followed, he left Antony and Cleopatra to contemplate their defeat and consider their demise.
Egypt's neighbouring territories were largely annexed to Rome; for this reason, Antony and Cleopatra's attempts to regroup and raise an army proved futile.
Antony made one last valiant attempt to usurp the Roman leader, but in the end, his fate had been cast.
He did what was required of all honourable Roman soldiers and fell upon his sword.
In an attempt to safeguard her children Cleopatra made a tentative effort to make terms with Octavian.
In his final hour, Antony was brought to Cleopatra's mausoleum and he died in her arms.
Octavian allowed Cleopatra to conduct burial rituals for Antony's body.
While he presented an outward show of friendship, he naturally wanted her dead.
Roman law dictated that Cleopatra should be treated as an enemy of the state.
She should be taken back to Rome in shackles and paraded before the mob.
However, a female ruler was a rare entity the display could end up backfiring on Octavian and prove highly distasteful.
He was relieved then, when Cleopatra took the courageous decision to end her own life.
Some historians believe that she was bitten by a snake hidden in a fig basket.
Iras, one of her women, lay dying at her feet, and Charmion, just ready to fall, scarce able to hold up her head, was adjusting her mistress's diadem.
In Rome, the son of the orator Cicero announced the deaths of Antony and Cleopatra with relish.
Mark Antony was stripped of his accolades, his image erased from coinage and his statues removed.
Under threat from Octavian, Iullus Antonius Mark Antony's eldest son later committed suicide.
Concurring with Homer that ""It is bad to have too many Caesars"" Octavian also had Caesarion murdered.
The remaining children of Cleopatra and Antony were spared and taken to Rome where they were adopted by Antony's family.
With the death of Cleopatra, the Sun had finally set on the Hellenistic Dynasty and indeed on the 3,000-year rule of the pharaohs.
END OF AN ERA Cleopatra's surviving children were adopted by Octavia, became Roman citizens and faded quickly into obscurity.
While Alexandria continued to flourish, it became a site of many religious and military uprisings.
Zenobia an admirer of Cleopatra was quick to behead her detested Roman foes.
She ruled Egypt until 274, before she herself was taken hostage by the Roman Emperor Aurelian; in an ironic twist of fate, Zenobia appeared in golden chains during Aurelian's Triumph in Rome.
It can be seen in a series of magnificent temples that were built along the River Nile.
These include the Temple of Hathor at Dendera, where fabulous images of Cleopatra and Caesarion still dominate its walls.
The delicate amalgamation of the Egyptian and Roman cultures can be seen on many mummy portrait panels from the Greco-Roman period.
Contrasts are visible in paintings and sculptures where traditional Egyptian iconography is paired with Roman symbolism.
The plumes on the top were usually 4 made from horsehair or feathers, though may have only been worn for ceremonial duties.
PILUM _/I TAKING OUT ENEMIES FROM AFAR Metal-tipped and with a weighted end, the legionnaire’s javelin was between 1. and 2. metres long.
It could be hurled to devastating effect and was accurate up to around 30 paces in some hands.
GLADIUS THE PRIMARY WEAPON USED DURING CLOSE COMBAT Adopted during the Punic Wars, this short sword was the legionnaire's main offensive weapon of choice.
It was primarily a thrusting and slashing sword, ideal for close combat, and became part of the legionnaire's signature parry-and-stab move.
The only colours not used were black and pink, yellow and green, as they were considered feminine.
CALIGAE THE LIGHTWEIGHT FOOTWEAR THAT WAS BUILT FOR LONG MARCHES Despite superficially resembling sandals, these were in reality marching boots, made of leather with heavy soles.
They were designed to allow air to circulate around the feet and reduce the risk of blisters during marching, although in colder locations woollen socks were often worn with them.
A COAT OF METAL TO DEFLECT ATTACKS Once only used by the highestranking soldiers, this form of armour eventually became standard after the Romans perfected the ability to massproduce metal goods.
Consisting of strips of iron or steel that had been heated by coal and quenched in oil or water, it was perfect for deflecting swords and arrows.
What's more, they did so across a broad range of fields, from astronomy to medicine, hoarding their acquired knowledge within huge libraries of codices that contained the secrets to the vast and impressive society they had built.
Unfortunately, much of this knowledge was lost forever when the Spanish conquistadors of Hernan Cortes brought the civilisation to their knees in the early-16th century, with these supposedly heretical texts burned en masse.
Luckily, a few records of Aztec scientific knowledge survived and today historians are working tirelessly to unlock their secrets.
Read on to discover some of their most impressive scientific knowledge.
Marvelous mathematicians Buried deep within the Codex Vergara (a cadastral manuscript) lies a wealth of information about Aztec mathematics, which has now been decoded and revealed to be a vigesimal system rather than our decimal system in use today.
The Aztec vigesimal system uses 20 as its base, with written dots equating to one, hyphen-style bars equating to five and various other symbols accounting for 20 and multiples thereof.
According to the Vergara, as well as other codices, this system was employed for tax purposes, which was largely based on land owned, as well as for commerce, with quantities of produce traded with precision thanks to the creation of hard rules for addition, subtraction, division and multiplication.
Of all the preColumbian peoples of Central America, the Aztecs were the most accomplished mathematicians, using a unique numbering system for arithmetic, record keeping and even in a taxation system for Tenochtitlan and the surviving lands.
Land was also measured mathematically, with a selection of algorithms utilised to calculate area, the most basic being the multiplication of length by width, while multiplying the averages of two opposite sides by an adjacent side used for irregular shapes.
While their origin is unsure, recent evidence suggests the culture grew out of a tribe of hunter-gatherers occupying the northern Mexican plateau prior to the 12th century.
Their capital city, Tenochtitlan, was founded on Lake Texcoco and it remained the heart of their empire until the Spanish invasion of Hernan Cortes led to its collapse in 1520.
If you needed any other evidence of the advanced state of Aztec learning then analysis of the society's alphabet seals the deal.
The Aztec alphabet was split into three different sections, utilising pictograms, ideograms and phonograms.
On the other hand, phonograms were pictures representing sounds, a lot like the vast majority of alphabets today, with letters representing specific sounds that words can be constructed from.
The Aztec alphabet contained four basic vowels and a large selection of consonants including cu, hu and ch.
Finally, ideograms were the most abstract part of the alphabet, consisting of symbols that represented an entire idea.
For example, a footprint symbol in the Aztec alphabet represented a journey or passage of time, so would frequently be used to depict the movements of famous people in stories.
The Aztecs used their alphabet to record information about their cities and culture ""By harnessing the secret knowledge of the celestial cycles, the Aztecs could use astromony to track the length of a solar year” in length.
For measurements under a land rod, a variety of other symbols including arrows, hearts and hands were used for indication.
This level of mathematical precision also stretched into other areas, such as construction, which was one area where the Aztecs were most advanced in terms of technological prowess.
They were also excellent house builders, with even the poorest commoner typically living under human-made shelters, with the average dwelling measuring in at approximately 20 square metres in the capital city of Tenochtitlan.
Due to their environment, Aztec houses tended to be built on elevated platforms crafted from wattle-and-daub, with codices indicating that they stood approximately 40 centimetres off the surface.
Walls were constructed from wooden frames and then filled in with stone, sand, lime and clay with adobe bricks sculpted from a mixture of water, sand and clay very common.
Roofs ranged in both design and construction materials, with both flat-pole and peaked roofs widespread and everything from straw through to wood and bricks used.
Judging from excavated evidence as well as the information deciphered from surviving codices, a selection of construction tools were utilised in each build, ranging from cutting tools such as knifes and axes through to trowels and picks, with additional carvings undertaken if the house's patron was particularly wealthy.
Important nobles would often have their dwellings painted, with the Aztecs using natural plant and animal ingredients such as beetles, eg the cochineal species containing red carminic acid to create coloured dyes and paints.
Buildings were arranged within a city in terms of importance, which relied largely upon the Aztecs' mastery of astronomy.
Together, these two cycles formed a 52-year century or ‘calendar round' for the civilisation, with the former based on the movements of the sun and the latter based on religious belief.
The year-count cycle consisted of eighteen 20-day months, with a separate five-day period at the end that was considered unlucky.
The day-count cycle consisted of twenty 13-day periods referred to as trecena, with each trecena attributed to a different god.
While it is obvious that many parts of the their calendar system were inaccurate, the fact that the Aztecs could harness their advancements in astronomy and mathematics to create a calendar that was so close to an Earth year while deep in the isolated jungles of central America, is a remarkable feat.
Furthermore, despite the Aztecs' religious calendar being centred on mythological deities, many of its aspects are based on scientific study of the Earth's environment and atmosphere.
A good representation of the Aztec religious calendar the cycle referred to as the day count can be seen in the Aztec calendar stone, a massive 3.7m in diameter, 24-ton ornate sun stone that once held great importance in the ancient civilisation of the Aztecs.
The stone, which demonstrates the Aztecs’ advanced understanding of geometry, is broken down into constituent parts in the diagram to the right.
Flames Circling the calendar's perimeter is a ring of flames, depicted as the flaming tail of a pair of fire serpents, which were referred to as Xiucoatl.
Along with the Sun, these were thought to fight their natural enemies of night and the Moon.
Days Surrounding the elemental and sun gods lie graphical representations of the 20 days in the ritual cycle, which are commonly referred to as day signs.
These range from animals, such as rabbits and deers, to abstract concepts such as death and movement.
Sun At the centre of the stone calendar lies a depiction of the Sun, which here is shown with the face of the Aztec sun god Tonatiuh.
Elements Surrounding the Sun are four gods, three of which represent the elements of fire, water and wind.
The fourth is the jaguar god Ocelotonatiuh, which in an indirect way represents the passage of time, with the god associated with the most remote cosmological epoch. the night sky for centuries and handing it down through generations in isolation from the wider world.
For example, the Templo Mayor of Tenochtitlan was aligned so that on the spring equinox the Sun rose directly between its two top-mounted shrines, with ceremonies held there in dedication of it.
From their ability to navigate by the position of the stars, through to their creation of solar calendar and onto their construction of temples in perfect alignment so that the Sun’s rays shone focussed on their summit during the equinox, the Aztecs were truly expert astronomers.
Astronomy was practised primarily by Aztec nobility and priests, with the latter using dedicated observatories within temples to track the movements of celestial bodies.
By harnessing the knowledge of the celestial cycles, the Aztecs could also use astronomy to 11 Ancient civilisations track the length of a solar year and lunar month, as well as determine the duration of Venus's orbit and the prediction of any solar or lunar eclipses.
According to depictions in Aztec codices, they also became extremely skilled at timing the appearances of comets and asteroids and often marked such occasions with ritualistic events.
The former calendar was physically manifested in Tenochtitlan as the Calendar Stone, displayed so that all could keep track of the passing of time.
Formidable farmers One area where the Aztecs utilised their scientific and technological ingenuity to maximum effect was in their farming practices.
Living in and around large swamps and lake-heavy areas of Central America, the Aztecs designed and employed terracing and artificial island systems to ensure crops had optimal land area to grow.
They built aqueducts and dug channels to ensure crops were irrigated, and crafted their own tools and basic farming machines for crop planting and harvesting.
The most common crop grown by the Aztecs was maize , but due to their mastery of the art many other crops such as squashes, beans, avocados and guavas were delivered.
With their largest city-state of Tenochtitlan built in the middle of Lake Texcoco and housing north of 200,000 people, a large and consistent food supply was necessary for the Aztecs.
Their mastery of irrigation and the chinampas construction system meant that vast fields of produce were grown all-year-round, with maize, beans, squash and much more grown with a frequency unsurpassed on the continent.
The Aztecs also harnessed knowledge of nutrition, specifically in terms of the health of soils and water when used to grow crops.
Impressive Its base was 250,000m 2 and was 60m tall, with a shrine for each deity.
Quetzalcoatl Contrary to the majority of other Aztec buildings, its shape was round.
This was common in the temples devoted to this god. uuu TENDCHTTLflN t f * » What makes Tenochtitlan truly remarkable is that the entire city was built in the middle of a lake.
This massive Aztec metropolis floated on Lake Texcoco, one of the largest inland water masses in Mexico.
This was possible thanks to the Aztecs inventing and then mastering the construction of chinampas, raised artificial islands that could be used both for construction and agricultural purposes These artificial islands were created by first staking out the lake bed with wooden poles and fencing off the rest of the lake with wattle.
The fenced-off area was then layered with mud, sediments and decaying organic matter repeatedly until it rose above the water level of the lake.
Finally, willow or cypress trees would be planted in each corner, which when grown acted as stabilisers for the landmass, with their roots binding them.
These chinampas were built in straight lines and separated with small canals, thereby creating a thoroughfare for travel around them in canoes.
Once an adequate surface area had been built through the chinampas system, buildings could then be constructed on top or crops planted en masse, with the fertile soil base and superb water source meaning that any plant grew rapidly and with a high crop yield.
These artificial, reef-style islands were then interconnected with a series of causeways and terracotta aqueducts, the latter supplying the inhabitants of the floating city with fresh water from the nearby Chapultepec springs.
Channels Six main channels crossed the city that could be sailed for those wishing to access a different part of it.
Secrets of the Aztecs Location The capital above the Texcoco lake Towards 1325, the Aztec settled in the region of the Texcoco lake, south of Mexico valley.
They built the city of Tenochtitlan on a long islet that reached a population of more than 200,000 inhabitants, the double of any European city of the time.
It was divided into four neighbourhoods where the twenty clans or calpulli, that grouped the Aztec families, were distributed.
Each calpulli was relatively autonomous; it had its own temples, schools and markets.
Tens of canals crossed the city sailed by 50,000 reed boats every day and crossed by wooden bridges that were removed at night.
Road to Iztai and Xochimil Road to Tacuba and Chapultepec Road to Tepeyac Great Tenochtitlan, ceremonial centre 2.
Tlatelolco This great open-air market was divided into sections for different products.
Houses Most of dwellings in the city were simple, single-storey houses.
Chinampas These were artificial floating gardens that served to grow a variety of produce, including corn, pumpkins, pepper, cocoa, beans, apples, tomatoes and vanilla.
The ruins of Tenochtitlan as they look today Ancient civilisations 'Aztecs granted prestige to the position of doctor and encouraged them to study the human body and potential remedies it time to recover.
Further, specific crops were partnered with ones ensuring a nutritional balance within the planting area, with the combination ensuring that farms maximised crop yield for every square metre of land used.
The Aztecs also grew many herbs within their systems, with these used in another specialist Aztec science; herbology.
Masters of medicine Aztecs' understanding of medicinal science was incredibly advanced for the time.
In a period where most western nations were still addressing illnesses with either prayer or misguided placebos, Aztec civilisation granted prestige to the position of doctor and encouraged them to study the human body and potential remedies in depth.
Other inventions included organic paste painkillers, liquid rubber for curing earaches and ground obsidian for the sealing of wounds.
Aztec physicians became the most skilled herbalists in the world, thanks to their in-depth study of the human body and their environment.
Indeed, along with the establishment of hospitals, Aztec doctors were encouraged to undertake research, studying the effects of plants grown in large communal gardens.
Our information about the Aztecs comes from a combination of surviving Aztec documents, such as the codices Borbonicus and Boturini, which were written by Aztec priests, Spanish reports on the Aztecs from their conquest of the region in the 16th century, and excavated archaeological evidence.
Of the sources, the primary Aztec codices are the most useful, with rich details about their calendar, rituals, ceremonies and tradition derived from them.
Unfortunately, codices from pre-conquest Mexico are few in number due to the Spanish burning many of them when they took over, so today decoding what few codices remain is crucial to furthering our understanding. and technologically surpass many of Earth's other ancient cultures, and in a fraction of the time, with the Mesoamerican peoples taking mere centuries to build a society the others such as Ancient Egypts took thousands of years to build.
The secrets of science that they uncovered have, on the whole, withstood the test of time, with salvaged knowledge from the ancient culture leading to further developments in their field and contributing greatly to the sciences as they exist today.
Originally constructed in 1325 and then added to and extended six times afterwards, the massive Templo Mayor citadel of Tenochtitlan was surely one of the wonders of the ancient world, towering over the Aztec city state's other structures at close to 30 m in height.
Every part of the temple was decorated with carvings and surrounding it lay a vast stone-slabbed precinct that measured 4,000 m 2 filled with balustrades and further decorative aspects.
Not bad considering it was constructed by slaves and working-class craftsmen under the direction of a ruling class of learned architects and mathematicians.
Indeed, El Templo Mayor was arguably the culmination of the advanced construction techniques mastered by the Aztecs over their civilisation's tenure in Central America.
From the sculpting of vast blocks of stone from dedicated quarries for its terraces the Aztecs were the first culture to industrialise this process in Central and South America to utilising scaffolds and rope lifts to transport men and tools up its structure and onto the expert craftsmanship that allowed them to carve vast ornamental dragons and mix polychrome paints to decorate the temple's exterior, El Templo Mayor became the temple of temples.
It symbolises the height of Athenian power as well as that of the great leader who championed its construction.
Athenian empire He secured Athenian wm democracy Pericles is remembered as a great orator and is famed for his speeches espousing the value of democracy.
During Pericles' rule, Athens became the foremost member of the Delian League, a group of hundreds of Greek city-states formed to oppose Persia's invading forces.
This became an Athenian empire, establishing colonies in Italy and expanding into the Mediterranean.
AFHe ruled almost ^unchallenged Early theatre patron From early on in his career, Peri From early on in his career, Pericles patronised the theatre, including the tragedian Aeschylus.
Later, in his attempts to promote Athenian culture, Pericles used state funds so poorer citizens could attend the theatre, subsidising their entry fee.
Pericles' popularity with the citizens made it easy for him to remove political opponents, many of which, such as his predecessor Cimon, were exiled by popular vote or ostracism.
Though he suffered accusations of corruption and tyranny himself, his political influence was such that he was only deposed once, briefly, during his entire rule.
Saigo Takamori, the leader of the rogue group of samurai, and formally a highly respected held marshal in the Imperial army, had been wounded in his leg and stomach during the righting and so beseeched his friend, Beppu Shinsuke, to carry him to a quiet spot.
Once there he committed seppuku a form of suicide by disembowelment practiced by the samurai, which was considered an honourable way to die.
With their leader dead and a force of around 30,000 Imperial forces commanded by General Yamagata and his technologically advanced weaponry close by, there seemed little hope for the waniors that for centuries had played a prominent role in Japanese society.
Rather than suffer the shame of surrender, Beppu Shinsuke gathered the remaining samurai and led them brandishing their swords fiercely on a suicidal charge against the Imperial forces.
The Gatling guns barked in the early morning air and cut the doomed men charging straight at them to pieces.
The era of the samurai had thereby ended in a brutal yet emphatically memorable fashion.
For much of the previous 1,000 years it would have been unthinkable that the samurai would cease to exist as they had played such an important and vital role in Japanese society and seemed ingrained in the fabric of the country.
Advances in technology aligned with Japan ending its isolationist ways and opening trade routes and with it an exchange of knowledge and culture signalled the beginning of the end for a proud warrior caste that did not want to, or see why it should, change its ways.
Although samurai developed a complex code of honour, rituals and ethics that meant being a samurai was a whole way of life, they originally came into existence and then prominence through their fighting skills.
In 646CE the Taika reforms in Japan led to the country being dominated by a handful of large landowners and created a feudal system similar to that of medieval Europe.
These large landowners needed their land to be protected from those who would take their crops or land.
In this lied the origins of the samurai, as the men hired to provide protection slowly began to develop a code.
After a succession of weak emperors, the Heian Dynasty began to lose control of the country and the warriors began to move into the power gap created.
By 1100CE they held significant military and poktical power over the land.
This ushered in a golden period for the samurai and throughout the next centuries until the end of the Edo period this warrior class was at the heart of Japanese life, as rival clans battled each other for control of the country and dominance.
The Edo period saw greater peace and stability that meant many samurai were not needed for combat and so became teachers and members of government.
Despite the decline in use of the samurai, they were still revered in society and were the only class allowed to carry swords, which was a mark of their rank.
This period of peace may have reduced the key role of samurai in Japanese society, but it was nothing compared to what was to come.
The world was experiencing political and social revolutions and against it a bow and arrow or a sword would be unable to hold back the tide of change that was washing in.
For Japan, this change began when in 1853 Commodore Matthew Peny of the United States entered Edo Bay to seek trade links.
He began formal sword training very young and one of the books he wrote declares that he fought his first duel aged 13.
Supposedly he was born with a left arm six inches longer than his right, meaning he could generate greater power on his shots by drawing the bowstring further back.
The great bowman committed seppuku in 1170CE after he was captured during battle and the tendons in his left arm were severed, thus rendering him useless as an archer.
Saigo Takamori Although he is famous for leading the revolt against the Imperial army, Takamori actually had a part in establishing the new government as in 1867CE his troops supported the Emperor in the Meiji restoration and he was Imperial advisor to the new government.
He became disillusioned with what he saw as the country's Westernisation, failure to invade Korea and the dismissing of samurai importance, so he eventually led a doomed revolt against the Imperial forces.
Samurai were famously loyal to their masters and were expected to show complete obedience to them.
Integrity One of the most important elements in the code many samurai believed that without this the rest of the code would fall apart.
Integrity is doing what the samurai believes is right without wavering, no mater what.
Courage Samurai were expected to show courage at all times and to commit seppuku to avoid capture.
If they were in a position on the battlefield where they could not help their side, they were also expected to take their own life.
Mercy Samurai had the power of life and death in their hands -w if they felt that a peasant had offended their honour, even if they hadn't, they had the right to kill them.
Respect Politeness and courtesy were a large part of samurai life and they were expected to show both to fellow samurai, as well as to their masters and superiors.
Any loss of honour often resulted in long and deadly blood feuds between rival factions.
In many cases, committing ritual seppuku was the only honourable option left.
Honesty It was held that true samurai disdained money and that having wealth led to luxury, which was seen as a menace to manhood.
The Confucian philosophy of the samurai dictated that simplicity was the only way of the warrior. “gpP"" eUP THE ED □ E I in order to compete with other world powers.
At this point Japan was still, in practice, ruled by an emperor, but the real power resided with the shogun.
Understanding that the country needed drastic change, two daimyos (powerful territorial lords) formed an alliance against the ruling shogun and aimed to give the Emperor genuine power.
The ruling shogun, Tokugawa Yoshinobu resigned from his position but had no intention of giving up real power and when Emperor Meiji issued an Imperial decree dissolving his house, he sent his samurai army to the Imperial city of Kyoto with the aim of deposing the emperor As swords from the two opposing factions clashed and clinked in battle, the fate of the country hung in the balance.
The war followed the same path as the battle and the Emperor, with more-modern weaponry and tactics, prevailed.
With victory secured, the young Emperor allegedly influenced by his advisors began the process of reshaping Japan.
Social reforms such as universal elementary education for children were introduced, as was investment in heavy machinery to breathe new life into their manufacturing industry There was also a focus on Westernisation, with an edict issued in 1871CE encouraging the adoption of Western-style clothing and food.
Arguably the biggest change that affected the samurai though was the forming of a modern conscript army, which meant that their role as the primary fighting men in the country was disappearing and that they were not the only strata of society allowed to bear weapons.
These new weapons guns and rifles required much less skill to operate than those of the samurai and meant that a peasant with a gun could now conceivably defeat a samurai in combat.
If the implementation of a conscript army indicated that the days of the samurai were slipping away, then the next decree by the Emperor in 1876CE left no one in any doubt; samurai were banned from wearing swords.
Even though their position of prestige had been in ""As word spread of the rebellion, samurai and peasants from across Japan flocked to join the cause"" Samurai during the Boshin war period Death of the samurai wm I* Japan 1389 Social structure of feudal Japan Japanese society was organised into clans or families who disputed over farmland Emperor Of divine origin, the emperor did not care much about politics or the economy.
Samurai In service to a daimyo, samurai owed him absolute obedience and loyalty.
Ronin Wandering, masterless samurai who were often dishonoured and outcast from society.
Samurai cut their own stomach and then a trusted friend cut off their heads.
Suneate Made from leather and cloth, suneate were tied with cords around the calves to protect them.
Sandals 5flmUKRI Samurai were warriors that emerged in Japan with the appearance of the shogunate in the 12th century.
Trained in the art of war, they wamor . . , , ... . . , His aim was to achieve an cultivated a philosophy of life called Bushido heroic death in battle.
Mempo Protective masks painted with fierce faces were used to frighten the enemy.
Weapons Each warrior wore two swords as a symbol of distinction of their samurai caste.
Later the curved shape was preferred, in the search for an even Katana A long sword measuring at over 61cm.
Warriors often gave names to their weapons because they believed they were the soul of their fighting capacity.
Bushido code Bushido means 'way of the warrior-knight' and required an almost religious dedication to military life.
Seppuku Only samurai carried out this ritual suicide in preference to a dishonorable death. stronger edge.
Haidate Haidate protected the lower part of the thigh and was worn under the kusazuri.
Kusari Kusari protected the upper thigh and was made from lacquered iron plates connected together with several silk cords.
Light and easy to be replaced Ancient civilisations steadily decline, for many samurai this was the final insult.
The Japanese leaders felt they needed to modernise to avoid being left behind and the samurai were simply one of the casualties of war; the government believed that in their current form they belonged to a different era and had no relevance in this new Japan they were forging.
There were some samurai that adapted to this modernisation process and, for the good of the country, abandoned their old beliefs and tried to put themselves at the forefront of this new Japan.
The government instigated a programme to rehabilitate samurai, help them find employment and try to place them at the head of enterprises, as they were more educated than the majority of the population.
However, a group of samurai decided that the country was changing too fast and losing its culture and traditions.
Saigo Thkamori was a great bear of a man who stood nearly six-feet tall with a stout and sturdy frame.
Bom the son of a low-ranking samurai he had previously fallen into disgrace following the death of his lord and had been banned to a ""Being unable to fight, Takamori did what honour dictated, as did the remaining samurai who charged into the bullets"" Imperial officers in their Western-style uniforms accept the surrender of un-uniformed rebels Death of the samurai remateHddfflij Uni wafl-&Mifiald&MaihtalQ Qastl^ahd, with their samurai and arpy smiTtl ffigaymiiMd hdttoigniiie hfldqdHizbiiahe castle.
For two bloody nights prttaaHHnyitHKew ttoheltitlgupattlfetiiiEaTfaKiWfaiis attempt to scale them, but the gcattonkHMtifflidpBllSdMifieAfflachsgHiilEliyigiflhSrgeand had no co-ordinated plan offthehOTdtata@dreherfiiMffU^ absence of man^/femcarglBteHnnmalErBliffiltlfEiaghiliiB/eflpiJHidngaged with the rebels, several thAWfstdHBl^ienaDilethbeiiHihiyth sKfcarrilnafltyed.
The rebellion went on to wlrtfbis^apKMhtodndadehlfeibatlvaidffij^aHJitthHtctories, the government harBSgrHdlfra^lhiiHslDaHpalnsflrfoHiad ratuntnedster than the rebels, who were K^adhaliy j^hBiKihfcsetiiljysili]^ firepower, such as warships.
Hftsemtpfterfedh^pjierlHipaninb^afetkcKihaitdiffldthan 6,000 troops and had saKhhfiDairihhdBd,hflMnjfegTiMMs^^ army had 7,000 casualties thara±iiha.OgOwEirai[irledt.Following a series of engagements, the depleted rebel force Thkamori's footnote in history looked destined to be a minor one, as he lived out his days honouring sneaked into Kagoshima and took possession of a castle mountain in Shiroyma.
It took the government troops several days to locate them but when they did, there was no doubt what the eventual outcome would be.
Takamori organised a sake party for his closest friends, an impressive display of bloody-mindedness, as he must have known what was coming.
It was to be his last night alive, as at 3.00am Imperial forces stormed the mountain castle.
By the time they were repelled, only 40 of the rebels were still alive and Takamori was badly injured.
Being rendered unable to fight, Takamori did what honour dictated, as did the remaining samurai who charged into the bullets of the waiting Imperial army.
The age of the samurai may have been extinguished that day, but it was done in such a way as to display perfectly all of the central ideals that had made this warrior class so legendary honour, courage and loyalty.
Like the Aztecs who later dominated the area in the 14th century, the Mayan race left behind vast and elaborate stone cities and documented evidence of their existence.
They were ruled by kings, or 'kuhul ajaw' , who were viewed as semi-deity figures and representatives of the gods.
The Mayan civilisation spanned the breadth of ancient Mesoamerica, the name of the area that encompassed the Yucatan Peninsula and modern-day Guatemala, as well as parts of Belize, Honduras, El Salvador and a few of the states of Mexico. m\ Ancient civilisations Ancient Maya id y ▼ v Vf Urban populations The Maya's most visible legacy is their great stone cities.
As many as 40 cities were built, each home to between 2,000 and 20,000 people.
At its peak, the population of the Mayan civilisation was as high as 2 million.
Trade and commerce Much of the Mayan civilisation was based on using local resources, like the rainforests, to their advantage, participating in long-distance trading with other Mesoamerican races.
Routes were established stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to Colombia, in addition to sea routes to the Caribbean islands.
He was responsible for building the famous three-temple complex in Palenque.
They loved sport The Maya even had their own ball game, which involved bouncing a rubber ball through hoops located alongside a massive stone court.
The games had enormous cultural significance, and are believed to have involved human sacrifices as part of the occasion.
Sacrifice and torture There is also a darker side to Mayan civilisation.
There were frequent bloody civil wars between rival Mayan city states, and torture, self-mutilation and human sacrifice were vital components of their religious festivals, with bloodshed being believed to be necessary to sate the Gods.
He consolidated his father's reign by greatly expanding the great city of Tikal.
The reason for this remains inconclusive, but while some blame overpopulation and war, recent theories suggest it was a weather phenomenon such as drought.
X Victory & Defeat Alexander the Great At the head of the world's most feared fighting force, Alexander the Great took for himself a vast empire through the sword, and has been called a hero, tyrant and a god T he king died quickly, his white robes soaked red.
The laughter and rejoicing of a royal marriage the wedding of his daughter had quickly turned to screams and wails of lament as Pausanias, a member of the king's personal guard, turned on his master, driving a dagger between his ribs.
Tripping on a vine as he fled the scene for his getaway horse, the assassin was brutally stabbed to death by the furious spears of pursuing guards.
His legacy would leave bloody footprints across the whole of Central Asia and the Middle East.
Bringing his rival monarchs in line through war, military alliance and marriage, Philip II had reformed the Macedonian army into one of the most feared fighting forces in the ancient world, with a view to bloodying their most hated foes, the Achaemenid Empire of Persia, which had humbled and humiliated the Greeks in the Greco-Persian Wars a century earlier.
Aged just 20, Alexander III of Macedon soon to be remembered as Alexander the Great took the throne as the head of a military machine on the brink of war and legendary status, and gleefully drove it full throttle over the edge.
Alexander had been groomed for greatness from birth, but he was no pampered prince.
Tutored by the austere Leonidas, who forbade all luxury, the general Lysimachus and the philosopher Aristotle, Alexander was proficient with weapons, horse riding and playing the lyre, and an expert in ethics, philosophy and the skills of debate.
He trained daily in pankration, an Ancient Greek martial art, which focused on savage grapples, punches, kicks and choke holds.
A Renaissance man before the Renaissance, he was schooled in the skills to conquer and the knowledge to rule.
At 16 he had governed Macedon as regent while his father warred far from home, the young heir putting down rebellious tribes in Thrace and founding a whole new city, Alexandropolis the first of many that would bear his name.
Like so many civilisations before and after them, the Ancient Greeks loved to gossip.
Olympias, mother of Alexander and once-favoured wife of Philip, had been in danger of losing her status to a younger Alexander the Great ALEXANDER THE GREAT Greek.6-323 BCE Becoming king of Macedon after his 44$|yH father's murder, Alexander led the Greeks into war against the powerful Persian Empire.
With charisma and cunning, he led from the frontline to create an empire that stretched from Libya to India, creating a new golden age for Hellenic culture.
Victory & Defeat ""He trained in pankration an Ancient Greek martial art, which focused on savage grapples, punches and kicks"" bride; and Alexander himself, who promptly executed all other contenders for the crown and crushed rebellions across Greece.
Olympias, too, set about consolidating her power, having Cleopatra Eurydice, her replacement as consort to the dead king, and her baby daughter burned alive.
The dubious heroes of myth were Alexander's own blueprint for greatness.
With legendary figures on both sides of the family tree, it was hard not to be convinced of his own special destiny.
His father's bloodline claimed descent from Hercules the son of Zeus and bull-wrestling demigod of Twelve Labours fame while his mother's family looked up to Achilles, the all-but-invulnerable champion of the fabled Siege of Troy.
Omens and portents prefigured every decision, but as much as this ambitious new king gave every appearance of being a slave to destiny looking for meaning in flights of birds and consulting oracles at every turn he steered destiny himself, consciously building a legend that would lift his accomplishments well beyond those of his father and into the same world of the legendary journeys and heroic battles that had once inspired him.
In just shy of a decade, he crushed the life out of the once-mighty Persian state and expanded the borders of his domain from Libya to India to create a mighty empire.
Leaping from his warship in full ceremonial armour, vast plumed helmet and golden breastplate, the emperor-to-be sent a spear whistling through the air to crash into the undefended soil of Asia Minor.
It was the first blow in a war that would claim for Alexander over 200,000 square miles of land and leave between 75,000 and 200,000 dead.
The coastline of what is now Turkey was littered with Greek cities ruled by the Persian invaders, and of them Troy had particular significance for Alexander.
The alleged site of his maternal ancestor Achilles' most celebrated victory and tragic death, Alexander carried with him on his journey the story of the Trojan War, Homer's epic Iliad (a gift from his tutor Aristotle), and quoted from it often.
First, he had the tomb of Achilles opened so he could pay tribute, then riding to a nearby temple of Athena, the Greek goddess of wisdom, the Macedon king was shown what they claimed were the weapons of Achilles.
Alexander wasn't merely content sharing a fanciful familial association with Achilles; he wanted to rival him, visiting this site of bloodshed and heroism, and taking the mantle of one of Ancient Greece's greatest heroes.
His fierce pragmatism and ambition would suggest both a dangerous and unpredictable combination that made him one of the battlefield's most iconic generals.
Leading from the front ranks, a feint drew the stronger Persian units and their battle-hardened Greek mercenaries out, spreading their line thin and allowing Alexander's cavalry to hammer through their scattered ranks.
He was welcomed as a liberator by the Greek subjects of Asia Minor, and endeavoured to win over the local population too.
Claiming to distrust tyrants, he appointed local rulers and allowed them relative independence, but with a new centralised tax system he ensured their autonomy was reliant upon his handouts.
Using heavy cavalry to prise apart the weakest part of the enemy line while his finely drilled infantry kept the bulk of the enemy tangled up on their spears, it relied upon the professionalism of Macedon's army, as well as the unique talents of its core units.
It showed that Alexander knew how best to use the forces that his father had amassed.
Cavalry charge Alexander's cavalry charge sweeps left and into the flanks of the Persians, who are locked in battle with his phalanx and cavalry.
Persian retreat More Greek pikemen pour through in the wake of Alexander's charge and into the Persian infantry.
Mind games The Persians expect the thrust of the attack to come from Alexander's right flank and his feared Companion Cavalry, so deploy more units on that flank.
Attack Alexander and his Companion Cavalry then smash through the weakened centre of the Persian lines in wedge formation.
Phalanx Hypaspists Alexander and companions Victory & Defeat ""The power-drunk Alexander burnt the palace to the ground in, it is believed, retaliation for the sack of Athens"" had to abandon their own city.
Were the king to fail here then Darius' army would be able to link up with his powerful navy and Alexander's whole campaign, resting as it did on his thin line of victories down the coast, would be wiped out and all dreams of Greek civilisation free from the menaces of its aggressive Eastern neighbour would spill out into the dust like so much wasted Macedonian blood.
At Issus, like many battles before and after, Alexander rode up and down his ranks of assembled men to deliver an address worthy of heroes, playing on old glories and grudges.
With shock etched upon his face, Darius fled the battlefield as the Greek charge cut through his ranks like a scythe, with Alexander at its head, crashing straight through the Persian flanks and then into their rearguard.
Unexpectedly, he then turned his attention not east toward the enemy's exposed heart, but west in the direction of Egypt and Libya.
They, like the Greek colonies of Asia Minor, would welcome him as a saviour.
With no standing army and whole swathes of the country in the hands of Egyptian rebels, the Persian governor handed over control of the province outright.
The last set of invaders had disrespected their gods, so perhaps the Egyptians were keen to take advantage of Alexander's vanity and safeguard their faith by placing this new warlord right at the heart of it.
Maybe, too, Alexander had seen how illusionary Persian authority was in Egypt, and wanted to try a different tack.
He may have been one of the world's greatest generals, but he knew the sword was not the only path to acquiring new territory.
Riding out to the famous Oracle of Amun the Egyptian answer to Zeus at the Siwa oasis, Alexander was welcomed into the inner sanctum of this ancient temple, an honour usually afforded only to the ordained priests of Amun, while his entourage was forced to wait in the courtyard.
The exact details of Alexander's exchange with the Oracle remain a mystery, but the end result was unambiguous.
Even the myth of Achilles reborn could scarcely contain his ambition, and he declared himself the son of Zeus.
His worship spread across Egypt, where he was raised to the rank of Pharaoh.
Despite his 'haughtiness', Alexander had been raised on tales of the Egyptian gods from his mother, and Greeks the philosopher Plato among them had long journeyed to this ancient land to study in what they regarded as the birthplace of civilisation.
Standing amid the great pyramids and temples, the 25-year-old Alexander either saw around him an ancient power to be held in great respect or feats of long-dead god-kings that he had to better.
The result was the city of Alexandria, planned in detail by the king, from wide boulevards and great temples to defences and plumbing.
Like an angel of death, Alexander turned from his ‘liberation’ of the Achaemenid Empire’s downtrodden subjects and drove east with a vengeance.
Now in the belly of the beast, Alexander's less heroic qualities were beginning to show themselves with greater regularity an arrogance, cruelty and obsessive drive that had he failed in his conquest, would have been remembered as the madness of a tyrant rather than the drive of a king.
Provincial rulers loyal to the humiliated king of kings promptly surrendered.
Overcome with pity and perhaps respect for this foe they had chased across mountains and deserts they offered the dying king of kings water from a nearby spring.
Companion cavalry Strengths Well trained, wedge formation made turning easier, heavy bronze armour.
Led by Alexander personally, the Companion Cavalry were the unstoppable knights of Macedonia.
Usually stationed on the right flank, they would punch through the enemy lines with their xyston lances and then wheel round to charge the rear.
Thessalian Cavalry Strengths Well trained, diamond formation for manoeuvrability, variety of weapons.
Similar to the Companion Cavalry, the Thessalian Cavalry's lighter armour and shorter spears and javelins made them an effective defensive unit.
Stationed on the left flank, they could go where they were needed to see off any attackers.
Hoplites were the citizen menat-arms of the other Greek states and one of the army's main cornerstones.
Versatile but not necessarily as well-trained or heavily armoured as other units, Hoplites were placed behind the phalanx to prevent the army being encircled.
Phalanx Strengths The phalanx formation is devastating against cavalry, well trained and fast moving.
Created by Alexander's father the well-drilled and fast-moving pikemen fought in the dreaded Macedonian phalanx with their 18-foot sarissa lance.
Deployed in the centre of the battle line, the phalanx could rush forward to tie down enemy cavalry or infantry.
Macedonia's elite commandos, the Hypaspists carried large round shields, thrusting spears and swords, and were placed on the flank of the Foot Companions for their protection.
Despite a rare crushing defeat in the bloody bottleneck of the Persian ambush, Alexander was able to make use of local knowledge, as well as his hardy skirmishers and turn the wild terrain in his favour, ambushing the Persians in turn and decimating them with his two forces.
Historians have called this victory 'complete' and 'decisive' and it left him able to take the ancient capital of Persepolis unopposed and claim its massive wealth for himself.
Weaknesses Variable equipment and training, light armour of leather or linen.
A combination of lighter armed and armoured cavalry from the other Greek states and local horsemen conscripted in Asia.
Deployed dependant on weapons and training, Alexander came to rely on them as the traditional Greek heavy cavalry dwindled.
Left A painting showing Alexander the Great and his forces battling an Indian army a fiction, and only a handful of frontier provinces remained in the usurper's blood-slick hands.
Casting the first torch into the building himself, looting and burning spread across the city.
Zoroastrian prophecy had foretold ""demons with dishevelled hair, of the race of wrath"" and now, Persia's holy men realised, the demons were here.
As his predecessor Darius had been, Bessus was chased down by the ferocious and dogmatic Alexander into what is now Uzbekistan and Afghanistan.
Across deserts with little supplies, Alexander rode along his lines, picking up men who fell and lifting their spirits.
A charismatic leader even against the backdrop of the bloodiest of campaigns, he had the power to inspire his weary soldiers.
With no army worth a damn, he had been forced to burn crops and stores before the Greek advance in a lastditch attempt to slow Alexander's terrible pursuit.
Fittingly for the betrayer of the last Shahanshah, his own men handed him over to the Greeks.
His nose and ears were cut off at Alexander’s command, and he was sent back to Persia in chains to be impaled, the Persian punishment for traitors.
This rampage across Persia and her furthest fringes wasn't the first time Alexander's determination had taken on a more murderous hue.
Refusing to surrender and believing their island fortress was impregnable from land, Alexander laid siege, blockaded the port from the Persian navy and over seven months built a causeway from the mainland to the city an incredible feat of engineering that allowed his catapults to come within range of the city.
Tyre was soon breached, and Alexander's fury fell upon the city's population.
Of the 40,000 inhabitants of Tyre, 2,000 were crucified on the beach, 4,000 were killed in the fighting, a handful were pardoned, and over 30,000 sold into slavery.
Welcoming Alexander with open arms, the Greekspeaking Branchidae were set upon when it became known their ancestors had collaborated with the Achaemenids, while other defenders were murdered because they surrendered too late, or been promised safe passage to lure them from behind their walls and into the spears of the Macedonian phalanx.
Like arterial spray on armour, growing accounts of sackings, burnings, enslavement and murder pepper the record of Alexander in gore.
It seemed like the further he got from home, the darker his deeds became.
Scimitar to head While galloping around at the Battle of the Granicus , Persian nobleman Rhoesaces slashed at the back of Alexander’s head, splitting his helmet in two.
Dazed, but not seriously hurt, Alexander quickly regained the initiative and speared his attacker in the chest.
His armour stopped it penetrating too deeply into the king's shoulder, but the Greeks butchered all their prisoners in revenge nonetheless.
Stone to head and neck Putting down a revolt in Cyropolis in what is now Tajikistan , Alexander led his soldiers through a dry stream and under the walls, where he was struck with a rock and concussed in the street fighting.
Catapult to chest Receiving an omen that he would be wounded in the Siege of Gaza , Alexander ventured too close to the city walls, and a missile from a catapult split his shield, tore through his armour and into his chest.
Scaling the walls himself, the Indians pushed the ladder back, leaving the king cut off.
Taking an arrow in the lung, he fought on drenched in blood until he suffered a haemorrhage.
Believing their king dead, the Greeks went berserk and massacred the townspeople.
Arrow to ankle In tribute to his ancestor Achilles, Alexander was struck by an arrow to ankle during the Siege of Massaga , breaking the bone.
The Indian fort was then reduced to rubble and its inhabitants massacred.
Then, later that year he struck another body blow against his traditional supporters.
Alexander accused Callisthenes of collusion in the pages' conspiracy, and had him put to death.
Convinced he was a god, it would be the needs of men that would bring the conquests of Alexander to heel.
Adamant that they were at the edge of the world and expecting to see the great sea that the Ancient Greeks believed ringed their continent from which they could return home, Alexander pushed his increasingly mutinous army into India.
Confronted with valley after valley of new lands to conquer beginning to tire not just of this endless war that had taken them further and further from home, but Alexander's increasing pretensions.
This monarch from Greece's barbarian hinterland had begun to dress in Persian robes, train Persians for the army and insist on courtiers throwing themselves to the ground in the manner of subjects before the Persian king of kings an affront to the dignity of the Greeks, who took pride in never bowing to their monarchs.
The general bristled, turned to Alexander, and told him that he would be nothing without the accomplishments of Philip, and all that he now possessed was earned by the blood and sacrifice of Macedonians.
Alexander, more petulant than entirely regal in his fury, threw an apple at the general's head, called for his guards and then for a dagger or spear, but wary of escalation, those present quickly began bustling Cleitus from the room and tried to calm their monarch.
Battered and broken after 22,000 kilometres and eight years, monsoon season arrived and drenched the army in water and disease.
Rumours also reached the camp that India was a bigger than they had previously heard, and contained armies even greater than that of Porus.
Alexander's generals, mindful of the fate that had befallen other critics of their king, approached cautiously and appealed to his nobility.
Coenus one of Alexander’s most trusted commanders implored him to let them return home to their families, saying so eloquently, ""We have achieved 98 Alexander the Great BATTLE OF THE HYDASPES Alexander's battle for the Punjab opens up Indra to the Greeks rc Despite leaving him with 1,000 Greek dead, Alexander was eventually able to overcome the numerically superior force and deadly war elephants of King Porus.
He managed to do this by using a classic pincer movement and refusal to bow down to nature in this case, the fastmoving waters of the Hydaspes River.
Porus’ defeat left the Punjab region of northern India open to the Greek invaders, but the death toll would add to rumblings of mutiny in Alexander's ranks.
Secret crossing Alexander secretly leads a small detachment up river to cross via a small island.
Porus sends a force led by his son to cut Alexander off, but arriving too late, he's easily defeated.
Natural defence King Porus assembles his army on the banks of the monsoon-swollen Hydaspes river to prevent Alexander's crossing.
War elephants Porus wheels his vast army around to confront Alexander head on with four times Alexander's forces and terrifying war elephants.
Pincer attack Alexander sends his light cavalry round the rear, while he leads his heavy cavalry into the weakest part of the Indian line.
With an attack on two sides and peppered with arrows, the war elephants panic and cause carnage.
Building a temple to Dionysus on the riverbank and leaving the inscription 'Alexander stopped here', they built a fleet of flat-bottom ships and began a long voyage home.
Alexander the Great's conquest began with Homer’s Iliad as its guide a tale of triumph and conquest and ended with the Odyssey a desperate voyage home.
There were more battles, tragedies and triumphs to come, and many would never see home thanks to the long-running battles with the Indian kingdoms they passed through on their way down the Indus River toward the Arabian Sea, from where they could sail to Persia's southern coast.
Even with his dreams of ceaseless conquest doused like campfires before battle, Alexander fought fiercely until an arrow pierced his lung, his chroniclers describing air escaping with the blood.
Even with all Alexander had subjected them to, his army remained devoted to their monarch believing him dead, they rampaged through the city, looting, killing and burning in retaliation.
Patched up by his doctor, gaunt and unsteady, Alexander had to be sailed past his army while lined up on the riverbank before they would accept he was still alive.
With one force exploring the Persian Gulf, Alexander led the remnants of his army through what is now the Balochistan province of Iran a sparsely populated landscape of arid mountains and desert.
His men died in their hundreds, gasping for water, stumbling through the baking sands in their tattered sandals and blinking into the brilliant sun.
The Macedonians he placated, but the grief he felt at the loss of ""the friend I value with my own life"" could not be so easily put right.
Before his eyes poured the spears of the phalanx south into Arabia and west into Carthage and Rome.
In his tactical genius, charismatic leadership, enduring legacy and fanatical drive, Alexander was far removed from those around him.
Perhaps in his view, ‘elevated’ above those around him, he was so far removed as to be incomparable.
He was never defeated in battle, partly because of his tactical skill, leadership and army, but also because he was prepared to pay a toll in human lives.
Tales of the Greek gods endure not just because they present an ideal of heroism and greatness, but because they were flawed beings a soap opera on a cosmic scale.
Like the squabbling deities of Mount Olympus, Alexander the Great was violent, vain, petty and cynical, and like them he overcame impossible odds and accomplished breathtaking feats through ingenuity, charisma, martial prowess and force of will.
His example were venerated by emperors, tactics studied by leaders for over 2,000 years, and in the Middle East, tales of Alexander the Cursed’s' savagery are still told in the lands he wronged.
Despite wave after wave of Christian knights pouring all their religious fervour and military might into its ancient walls, it had held back the tide and somehow halted the progress of the foreign hordes that now threatened to overrun the entire Near East.
When the first army had been held at bay, the city's inhabitants thought they were safe, that the invasion was defeated.
However, then yet another army landed and the city’s main artery, its port, which provided passage in and out of its walls, was taken.
The city's defences were tested once more, with an even more ferocious attack battering at the doors and calling for blood.
Luckily for those within, once more the city held off the mass of warriors, its infidel leaders repelled.
Then, with the new year's sailing season, another invader arrived by sea with a fresh bloodthirsty army.
He was followed in May by yet another, with tens of thousands of soldiers joining the infidels' camp outside the walls, swelling their numbers to terrifying proportions.
The lack of food and supplies in the city, and the spread of disease within the invaders' camp drove both sets of warriors to extremes, stoking the fires of faith that lay within their hearts to pursue bolder and bolder acts of violence.
Today is the eighth day of June 1191 and, as Acre slowly suffocates in the oppressive heat of the Levant's summer months, yet another fleet is landing in the city's once-prosperous port, this time with one of the biggest forces the city has ever seen.
If the ruler of Acre, the noble and great Saladin, doesn't send meaningful reinforcements soon, then the city will fall and the gates to the Holy Land will be brutally wrenched open to the Christian hordes.
They call this one, this man-mountain stepping off his ship onto the dusty dry shore, the Lionheart, and he is here to kill them all in the name of his god and glory.
The passage had been long and painful, featuring storms, shipwrecks and a mad despot who threatened to derail the Third Crusade before it had even begun.
No matter, King Richard the Lionheart and his army had survived the trip across the Mediterranean Sea and reached the Holy Land.
After months of pursuit and planning, they were primed to fulfil their mission, Richard's mission, God's mission, to take the Holy Land by storm and cut a direct path to the holiest of all cities, Jerusalem.
At 16, Richard took control of his own army and thanks to a series of victories over rebels threatening his father's throne, developed a reputation as a great military leader.
Following his father's death and his own coronation he launched the Third Crusade.
Victory <fc Defeat CRUSADERS I BATTLE OF ARSUF A major battle in the Third Crusade, Arsuf saw Richard and Saladin face off RICHARD THE LIONHEART Excellent on the battlefield, Richard the Lionheart was a brutal killer and a gifted tactical thinker, leading an army of religious fanatics with ruthless efficiency.
TEMPLAR KNIGHT The most skilled Christian fighting unit to take part in the Third Crusade, the Knights Templar were wealthy, well-trained and fanatical fighters, driven by a holy purpose.
Weakness Few in number and fanatically religious, leading to recklessness.
To get there, he had to move south along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea and then traverse the Wood of Arsuf, one of the few forested regions in all of the Levant.
Saladin knew this and after tracking and harassing Richard's slow-moving baggage train and infantry, decided the woods would be the ideal position to strike.
Saladin had already identified a striking point however a narrow clear plain in the forest approximately 91cm from Arsuf.
Saladin intended to engage in skirmishes along the length of the convoy and then hit its rear with a decisive attack.
HMMi 03 Scouts at dawn Moving out of their camp at dawn on 7 September 1191, Richard’s scouts reported Saladin's scouts could be seen.
Richard realised that this meant Saladin's full army was nearby and started to arrange his army.
Men were deployed at the fore and rear of the convoy column, with the van the foremost division made up of the Knights Templar under the command of their 11th grand master, Robert de Sable.
KEY WEAPON BROADSWORD The most popular hand-to-hand weapon of all Christian knight orders, including the Knights Templar and Knights Hospitaller, the broadsword was a wellbalanced and deadly weapon capable of stabbing and cleaving.
At the front, Saladin sent a dense swarm of skirmishers, while behind them streamed squadrons of heavy cavalry and foot and horse archers, splitting so that the army attacked from the centre, left and right.
To the disgrace of all of Christendom, Jesus’s city had fallen four years previous to the Saracen Ayyubid hordes, which was now not only ruled by Christianity's arch-nemesis Saladin, but also defiled by their very presence within its hallowed walls.
Here he now stood, ready 05 Crusader flanks hold Saladin's chief tactic was to break the flanks of the crusader column and ordered incursions of javelin throwers and mounted archers to perform lightning strikes along their flanks and retreating before crusader crossbowmen could retaliate.
Conquering Acre was merely the first step in wrestling Jerusalem from Saladin's grip.
So far the city's capture and wider crusade had been in the hands of a number of other leaders.
These included Guy of Lusignan a proud Poitevin knight and the supposed rightful king of Jerusalem through his marriage to Sibylla of Jerusalem and King Philip II of France, who had helped raise the 'Saladin tithe' to pay for the crusade.
The Duke of Austria, Leopold V, had overall command of the imperial forces.
There had been yet more leaders at the Lionheart 10 Ayyubid army scatters Its right wing smashed, the Ayyubid army soon routed, scattering back into the hills and forests south of Arsuf.
Richard, realising the pursuing knights could be ambushed in a surprise counterattack, drew the warriors back into an orderly formation at Arsuf and ordered them to pitch camp at the now-secure fortress.
Saladin was forced to retreat with his reputation as an invincible leader tarnished.
OS Templars let loose Freed from the tactical order to defend and maintain discipline, the crusader knights took the fight to the Saracens, unleashing their hatred and combat prowess in one brutal wave of death.
The right wing of Saladin’s army couldn't sustain the assault and collapsed almost immediately, with Richard himself weighing into the heart of the fighting.
As a bloody revenge for the day's attacks was complete, the Knights Templar set off in pursuit of the fleeing Saracens.
The full weight of the crusader army therefore suddenly switched emphasis from defence to attack, ramming into the Ayyubid army with immense ferocity.
Saladin joined the assault along with his brother to inspire his men to make a breakthrough.
Richard held the convoy together despite some losses and edged them toward Arsuf.
Seeing his men in trouble, the grand master of the Knights Hospitaller, Gamier de Nablus, broke ranks and charged the Saracens. siege's instigation the summer previous but illness and disease had claimed many over the winter months, with Frederick of Swabia and even the holy Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem all passing from this mortal world into the next.
The siege itself had stalled, so every passing week threatened to allow Saladin to outmanoeuvre the crusaders.
Richard, being the honed and experienced military leader that he was, realised this and after meeting with the other leaders, gave orders for vast siege engines to be built, ones that could bring down the city's walls.
These engines, these machines of death, once completed, towered over the Christian knights and, when unleashed, brought the siege into a deadly endgame.
Colossal boulders rained down upon Acre's walls, smashing against them with thunderous brutality.
Corpses of animals and Muslim soldiers littered the city's streets, spreading disease and sapping the morale of the terrified residents.
Most fearsome of all though, flaming balls and arrows set ablaze anything that wasn't made out of stone, causing panic to quickly spread among Acre's populace.
LEADER SALADIN He attained his exalted position as leader of the Ayyubid army and founder of the Ayyubid dynasty and was a wise and experienced military commander.
KEY UNIT MOUNTED ARCHER The light cavalry of Saladin was feared throughout the world due to its ability to strike quickly and at range, with skilled marksmen riding the world's fastest horses.
Weakness Easily cut down by knights in hand-to-hand combat. cavalry units excelled in bowmanship, with their short bows used to swarm arrows on crusader forces at every opportunity.
Weakness Could be outranged by the longbow and all-but-useless in hand-tohand combat.
Victory & Defeat Vezelay Marseilles They call this one the Lionheart AND HE IS HERE TO KILL THEM ALL IN THE NAME OF HIS GOD AND GLORY” Saladin's orders.
On receiving the news of Acre's fall, Saladin immediately set out for the city.
On his way he received news that Richard had taken the surrendering Muslim garrison of 2,400 men captive and was offering their return for a ransom.
Saladin, known for his loyalty to his men and his wisdom, agreed to the ransom, which not only included monetary compensation but also the release of all of his Christian prisoners.
In Acre the banners of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, France, England and the Duchy of Austria fluttered in the light breeze.
With Acre down, Richard knew that only the city of Jaffa to the south stood in their way of making a direct assault on Jerusalem, so he began making preparations for the continued crusade, as well as for the reparation of the sacked city.
These preparations were swiftly interrupted by an argument that developed between the conquering leaders as to how the city should be divided up and to how the spoils of their victory should be apportioned.
This quarrelling led Richard to strike down the Austrian standard from above the city's walls, slighting Leopold, as the king of England sided with Guy of Lusignan rather than Philip and Leopold over who should become king of Jerusalem when the city was taken.
Philip and Leopold preferred fellow crusader and Italian nobleman Conrad of Montferrat, with Phillip so angry he threatened to return to Europe.
This cauldron of scheming and disagreement was tipped over the edge when Saladin delayed in paying the garrison's ransom.
An already irate and disgruntled Richard deemed the lateness a massive slight and ordered every single one of the garrison to be executed.
Saladin reached the city just as the decision was made, but could only watch as man after man was publicly executed, their heads lopped from their shoulders atop the city walls.
The enraged Saladin replied like-for-like, executing the 1,000 Christian prisoners in his custody.
Whatever deal could conceivably have been reached between the rival leaders now lay in ruins, seemingly as dead as the unfortunate prisoners.
Angered and frustrated with Richard and Guy, Philip and Leopold finally decided that their participation in the Third Crusade was at an end, leaving in late August for their European homes. 7 / * i LIONHEARTS CRUSADE The Third Crusade faced challenges even before reaching the Holy Land -• <-r —r5 04 Battle of Arsuf Arsuf 7 September 1191 4 Richard and the crusaders move out to _ S* capture Jaffa.
However, Saladin intercepts £ it Richard near the fortress city of Arsuf, ~ pursuing him right up to the city, but Richard wins the engagement.
Following the Lionheart's arrival at the siege on 8 June 1191, the city's prolonged defence falters.
A papal decree Rome 29 October 1187 Pope Gregory VIII decrees the fall of the Kingdom of Jerusalem is punishment ' for Christian sins, before issuing a papal bull calling for the Third Crusade.
France i ^ and England heed the call, imposing the 'Saladin tithe’ to fund the mission.
This white garment not only kept the Sun off their metal armour, also displayed the symbols of the Order.
ANATOMY OF A TEMPLAR KNIGHT The key kit and weapons carried by the most elite of Christian warriors Helmet Decapitation resistance The great helm was the mainstay of the Templar Order and offered excellent protection against blows, as did the sugarloaf helmet.
Due to narrow viewing corridors and high temperatures experienced in the Holy Land, many opted for more lightweight alternatives with open faces.
Jerkin A guaranteed chafe-free experience Unseen, however often critical in keeping a Knight Templar breathing, was the haubergeon, a padded jerkin that sat against his skin.
The jerkin extended over much of the upper body and was the last line of defence from enemy blows.
In colder climates, it also helped keep the warrior warm not an issue in the Holy Land.
Chainmail ; Shield The first and best line of defence Adorned with the Christian cross of their order, the Templar shield was large and long, with a teardrop design protecting their entire torso and upper legs.
It was constructed from wood and had a metal rim, the latter helping to protect against it splitting under the weight of sword blows.
Broadsword Designed to hack and slash As standard for western knights, the typical Knight Templar was armed with a broadsword, however when fighting on horseback spears were also used.
Sometimes, two-handed broadswords were opted for while fighting on foot, but while they granted extra reach and cleaving power, they left the knight shieldless.
Thy enemy's blade shall not pass The primary form of defence against enemy strikes, the hauberk, a longsleeved shirt of chainmail fitted with chain covers for the hands and a chain coif hood for the head, was a knight's armour.
The chainmail would be partnered with iron chausses to protect their legs.
For Richard, though, such betrayal of faith was unimaginable, and after calling on the Philip to do right in the eyes of god, managed to persuade him to leave behind 10,000 French crusaders along with the necessary funds to pay for their upkeep.
The Lionheart was now the central remaining commander of over 20,000 crusaders, knights and soldiers alike and, burning with glorious purpose, ordered the continuation of the crusade, with the bulk of the crusading army marching out of Acre in August's final days.
The next city on the crusaders' relentless march to Jerusalem was Jaffa, an important port that provided passage into the southern Mediterranean Sea.
As long as Jaffa remained untaken Saladin had a natural avenue to pour more of his troops into the region from his impregnable stronghold of Egypt, but if it fell to the crusaders Saladin would be forced to move men over land, a far less effective and more timeconsuming proposition.
The city also lay a mere 65 kilometres (40 miles) from Jerusalem, making it the ideal coastal base for crusaders.
Before it could be taken, though, the crusaders needed to get there in one piece.
Richard knew Saladin was somewhere in the nearby area and, aware of his enemy's skill in arranging ambushes, ordered his troops to march down the Mediterranean coastline, with the baggage train protected by being nearest to the coast.
This tactic prevented Saladin from attacking on one flank, as Richard also got his fleet to sail down the coast in parallel with them, shutting off the sea as an avenue of possible attack.
However, to the north of Jaffa lay the Wood of Arsuf, one of the only forested areas in all of the Levant.
The woods ran parallel to the coastline for over 20 kilometres and had to be traversed by Richard's army if they were to reach Jaffa.
After harassing Richard's troops with small hit-and-run attacks within the woods, Saladin sanctioned a full-scale assault on the crusaders, which led to the largest pitched battle of the Third Crusade.
Saladin knew the battle would be decisive, but couldn't possibly have foreseen how disastrous for him it would be.
As the Sun went down on 7 September 1191 the Saracen army had “Saladin could only WATCH AS MAN AFTER MAN WAS PUBLICLY EXECUTED, THEIR HEADS LOPPED FROM THEIR SHOULDERS ATOP THE CITY WALLS’” Lionheart been routed in a decisive counterattack led by Richard's Knights Hospitaller.
Saladin retreated from Arsuf to regroup what was left of his battered army and lick his wounds.
The crusaders made a beeline for Jaffa, swiftly besieging and taking it.
Despite some disagreement with the other crusader leaders, Richard with Jerusalem almost in sight decided to open negotiations with his enemy.
Saladin, who was being questioned by some of his subjects following the defeat at Arsuf, agreed to the negotiations and sent his brother, Al-Adil to Jaffa to lead the talks.
Despite headway being made at one time Richard's sister Joan was being talked about as a potential bride for Al-Adil with Jerusalem as a wedding gift the talks ultimately broke down.
The breakdown of the talks caused unrest in the crusader ranks, with arguments arising about the best way to proceed toward their goal.
Richard, growing tired of the constant in-fighting, acted decisively and ordered the army to move on Jerusalem in November, first moving through Ascalon and then Latrun.
The Christian army was soon at Beit Nuba, a mere 20 kilometres from Jerusalem.
The news quickly spread of the crusaders' progress and the morale in the Muslim garrisons within the city crumbled.
Saladin's forces had been crushed, Acre, Arsuf and Jaffa taken and Jerusalem looked set to be next.
Saladin had proven himself a worthy and tricky foe and, not knowing the extent to which his forces had been depleted, Richard feared that a retaliation attack, most likely another large-scale ambush, was very near.
SALADIN 2700 Muslim prisoners Richard had executed in the city of Acre The main features and kit of the most respected Muslim warrior of all Swords Straight and deadly The swords the Saracens used in the period of the Crusades were generally straight, unlike the curved blades often depicted in films of the period.
Armour For the high-ranking While the lower ranking Saracens wore little or no armour higher ranking warriors and leaders such as Saladin would often wear mail coats or other armour under their robes.
Horseback rider Warfare on the move The Saracen army in the Third Crusade had a good number of cavalrymen more than their Christian counterparts.
The soldiers on these horses were normally archers and could be very effective when harassing their enemy.
Physical appearance Slight, not scary Most accounts of Saladin make reference to him being quite slight and frail he did not have the imposing physical stature of Richard but was well respected for his wisdom and piety.
The modern day city of Jerusalem Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub was the first sultan of Egypt and Syria and the founder of the Ayyubid dynasty.
He was elevated to this lofty position through a series of military victories, first under the Fatimid government and then his own leadership, with him overseeing the decisive Battle of Hattin in 1187. it was due to Saladin himself that the Third Crusade was instigated, with the fallout from the Battle of Hattin and the fall of Jerusalem leading to the famous ‘Saladin tithe’, a tax levied in England and some parts of France to finance an army that was capable of reclaiming the holy territory.
Despite Saladin and Richard's armies clashing multiple times during the Third Crusade, the two men famously shared a more complicated relationship than would have been expected, with great respect reported on both sides.
After the Battle of Arsuf a battle in which Saladin's army was soundly beaten Saladin sent Richard two excellent horses as Richard had lost his own in the battle.
The two men never met in person, though, and Saladin died a year after the Third Crusade, struck down by a fever while staying in Damascus.
While Richard consistently displayed supreme physical courage, gallant and splendid are not adjectives one would use today of the man who slaughtered 3,000 prisoners at the siege of Acre and nearly bankrupted the kingdom twice in his ten-year reign.
The enduring legend of Richard as a heroic Christian warrior is due to the brilliant public-relations campaign of his mother, Eleanor of Aquitaine, to raise the ransom when he was taken hostage returning to England after the events of the Third Crusade.
The True Story Of England's Crusading King, published by The History Press.
These factors caused Richard to pause for thought rather than make straight for the holy city and he consulted his fellow crusaders.
It was agreed that if they started besieging Jerusalem and were hit with a relieving force from Saladin, the general poor conditions would lead to a massacre.
The invading army spent the rest of the winter months in Ascalon before continuing hostilities in the spring of 1192.
Saladin, who had been forced by his emirs to disband much of what was left of his army the emirs favouring consolidation rather than open hostilities launched no major attack.
However, bands of Saracen troops constantly plagued the crusaders, with a series of small fights and skirmishes slowly eroding the crusader army's numbers and morale.
This came to a head on 22 May when the fortified town of Darum fell to the crusader forces after five days of bloody fighting.
The crusaders had won great battles in the Holy Land but no more armies were journeying across the Mediterranean to bolster their forces; those men who fell in battle weren’t going to be replaced.
Richard’s crusade was faltering, its primary purpose slipping away like sand in an hourglass.
The crusading king of England managed to marshal his remaining forces together for one last advance on Jerusalem, marching inland in June of that year.
This time, far from being checked at Beit Nuba, the crusaders actually came within sight of the hallowed city.
Richard was to return Jesus's city to its rightful owners and reinstate Christianity as the dominant religious and military power in the Holy Land.
However, as the tired, dusty and bronzed warriors stood there watching the distant city from afar, once more the poison of dissent started to seep among its leaders.
Despite standing before the city, months of resentment over the course the Crusade had taken boiled over among the military commanders, with debate over the best military course of action descending into personal attacks and squabbles.
The majority of the leaders, including Richard, believed the best way to take Jerusalem was not besiege it but to attack Saladin directly in Egypt, thereby forcing him to relinquish it of his own free will as a bargaining chip to prevent his own fall.
However, the leader of the surviving French crusaders, the Duke of Burgundy Hugh III, believed the only course of action was an immediate and direct assault on the city.
News of the split in the leaders' plans filtered down to the crusaders themselves, with the knights and soldiers now breaking previous allegiances and siding with one side or the other, splitting the crusader army in two.
Neither of the two forces were now powerful enough to assault a city, let alone Jerusalem, and as such Richard was forced to order a retreat.
While progressing back toward the coast, angry with the French, Richard decided to return to England.
However, just as he was approaching Jaffa, news arrived via a scout that the city had fallen to Saladin, who had personally overseen the assault.
Furthermore, the scout reported that the lives of all the people there were under a very real threat as the Muslim ruler had lost control of his army, the thousands of Muslim soldiers driven berserk due to the massacre at Acre.
With the lives of the surviving crusaders in his hands (after all, it had been Richard who ordered the Acre executions) a return to England would have to wait.
With a band of 2,000 surviving knights and soldiers, Richard launched one final assault on Saladin, approaching Jaffa by sea in a surprise attack.
The Ayyubid soldiers who had only just taken the city were completely unprepared for the attack and were soon overrun, with a combination of knights and crusader crossbowmen decisively breaking their resistance.
The attack was so brutally effective that Saladin was forced to flee from Jaffa to the south.
The geographical region of Palestine, between the River Jordan and the Mediterranean Sea, was referred to as the Holy Land by Christians and Muslims alike.
Both religions claimed ownership due to an association with their faith, with the city of Jerusalem held in particular esteem.
Both Islam and Christianity were Abrahamic monotheistic religions and as such, both sides considered the other to be unbelievers in the one true god and considered their presence heretical.
By the Third Crusade, Jerusalem and large parts of Palestine and the Levant region had changed hands again and again, with conflicts destabilising the region.
Richard, coming from the Christian West, therefore perceived the fall of Jerusalem to Saladin's forces in 1187 as a direct attack on his faith.
From Saladain's point of view he was merely taking back the spiritual heartland of his own faith; one that had previously rested in the hands of infidels. the Christian crusaders and Muslim Ayyubids sapped of any further willpower for bloodshed.
The fighting had gone on for three years and large parts of the historic area lay in ruins.
Tens of thousands of men, women and children had lost their lives and, despite some areas of the Levant changing hands, nothing had really changed.
Jerusalem remained under Muslim control, Saladin was ruler of the Ayyubid Empire and Richard the Lionheart was still the \ fierce warrior king with a renowned reputation in Europe without a firm foothold in the Holy Land.
What had changed, though, was Saladin and Richard’s desire for more war and bloodshed, and so a treaty soon followed.
Jerusalem would remain under Muslim control but from now on, Christian pilgrims and traders would be permitted to visit 17 Months Richard the Lionheart remained in the Holy Land the city, with their rights protected by law.
For Richard, the treaty was to be his last act in the Holy Land and the final curtain for the Third Crusade, with the king setting out on his return to England immediately after.
His return journey, though, would not be as straightforward as the one over, with a series of events leading to his own capture, temporary imprisonment and yet more battles.
However, the war he would go down in history for was his quest for the Holy Land a journey full of bloodshed, plunder and religious fanaticism, but little territorial success.
It ensured his legacy would forever be debated between those who see him as a crusading Christian king and others who view him as an amoral, cold-blooded killer, a debate that still rages on today.
The war had begun after Napoleon I returned from exile on Elba to Paris on 20 March 1815.
This set into motion a chain of events that would see Napoleon reclaim his position as emperor, the Congress of Vienna declare him an outlaw and the Seventh Coalition pledge to field a large army to bring his rule to an end.
With hundreds of thousands of soldiers drafted to take Napoleon down, it was only a matter of time before blood was spilt something that occurred two days prior to Waterloo when Napoleon struck at the Prussian army before it could join up with Wellington's on 16 June.
The French ruler did this by splitting his army into three groups, with two dedicated to the Prussians.
The following exchange was the Battle of Ligny and saw Napoleon defeat the Prussians by causing their centre to collapse under repeated French assaults.
While the Prussians lost men, they were not routed however and as we shall see were disastrously left to retreat uninterrupted, with only a cursory French force giving chase.
On the same day as the Battle of Ligny, Napoleon's army's remaining left flank had been engaged with some of Wellington’s forces at Quatre Bras, where they had attempted unsuccessfully to overrun the Prince of Orange's position.
With the Prussians apparently defeated, Napoleon turned his attention on Quatre Bras, reaching the area the following day.
By this point, however, Quatre Bras had been abandoned by both sides; Wellington could not hold it without the Prussians.
After catching up with his left flank commander, Marshal Michel Ney, who was pursuing a retreating Wellington towards Waterloo, Napoleon ordered his right flank commander, Marshal Emmanuel de Grouchy, to see off the Prussians more definitively.
By this time, with Napoleon issuing the order late on the afternoon of 17 June, the Prussians had already made significant ground and regrouped at the town of Wavre a position from which they could easily rejoin Wellington at Waterloo and Marshal Grouchy was unsuccessful in catching them.
Despite eventually defeating a solitary Prussian Corps at Wavre on 18 June, by this time the Battle of Waterloo was in full swing and Grouchy was unable to take part.
After Napoleon had issued the order to Marshal Grouchy he continued to hunt down Wellington with his remaining forces before making camp south-west of Wellington's position at Waterloo.
The scene was now set for the Battle of Waterloo the next day , which, as we all know, resulted in a famous victory for the Duke of Wellington and a final defeat for Emperor Napoleon.
As a consequence of Napoleon's loss at Waterloo, the French monarchy was restored, with King Louis XVIII regaining the throne on 8 July 1815, while the emperor himself was banished to the volcanic island of Saint Helena in the Atlantic Ocean.
Napoleon would live on Saint Helena for a further six years, before passing away in May 1821.
NAPOLEON’S BODYGUARD Protecting Napoleon during the battle were his Old Guard elite veterans of the Imperial Guard that he handpicked based on their combat experience.
One of the most common traits was above average height, meaning that they towered over many other units on the battlefield.
Their charge famously repelled a key French advance, caused the complete destruction of a large French infantry column and led to the capture of Napoleon's 45th Regiment of the Line's eagle standard.
While the primary antagonists of the \ Battle of Waterloo were the UK and ' France, a host of other nations played a part, joining with the British to form a coalition against the new emperor of France.
These included the Netherlands, Hanover, Nassau, Bavaria and Prussia the latter contributing most significantly.
While Waterloo was not a medieval meatgrinder of a battle, with tactics very firmly on display, it still had a huge casualty list.
Of Napoleon's 72,000 troops, around 25,000 were killed outright or wounded, 8,000 were taken prisoner and 15,000 went missing.
Strengths Very confident and energetic leader Weakness Not the most tactically astute of generals INFANTRY IMPORTANT UNIT Among the best on the planet, the infantry dug in deep at Waterloo to deny many French cavalry charges.
Strength Versatile troops that could fight at close to medium range Weaknesses Easily outflanked by cavalry and vulnerable to cannons CANNON KEY WEAPON Very destructive, the Coalition's artillery helped slow the French forces and break up their lines.
Strengths Cannons had excellent range and could do a lot of damage Weaknesses Needed supporting troops for protection as fairly fragile under fire and few in number First foray Between 10 and 11.30am on 18 June the Battle of Waterloo began with a French attack on a Coalition position at Hougoumont, a large farmhouse that served as a tactical outpost.
This fighting was low key at first with few troops from each side engaged, but by the early afternoon it had become a bloody epicentre for much of the fighting, with the Coalition forces holding out against numerous French assaults.
The cannons caused many casualties in Wellington's cavalry, opening a potential weak point in the defending lines.
Despite hoping to rally his remaining troops behind them, the strength of the Coalition's forces left this untenable, and all Napoleon could do was order a retreat.
His exit was covered by the Old Guard, many of whom died holding back the Coalition's advance.
The initial fighting went the way of the French, with the left’s infantry pressing Wellington's forces back.
However, just when it looked like Napoleon would make a decisive break, he was informed that Prussian troops were fast approaching.
He tried to send word to Marshal Grouchy to engage with them, but his commander was in Wavre.
British heavy cavalry attack Seeing their infantry was about to buckle, Wellington's First and Second Brigade of heavy cavalry charged and smashed into the French infantry.
By the time they reached the bottom of the hill, they had completely halted the infantry's advance.
In doing so, however, they had left themselves exposed and without backup.
The Old Guard who had been supporting the French position at Plancenoit beat a hasty retreat.
With his forces temporarily holding off the Prussians at Plancenoit, Napoleon went on one last major offensive.
He sent the supposedly undefeatable Imperial Guard into Wellington's army’s centre in an attempt to break through and attack his flanks from within.
While the guard had some success, breaching multiple lines of the Coalition force, eventually they were overrun by Wellington's numerically superior infantry and wiped out.
At roughly 4.30pm the Prussians arrived and, noting the village of Plancenoit on Napoleon’s right flank was a tactically important position, began to attack the French forces in position there.
A massive central battle ensued, with cavalry, infantry and artillery all involved.
While Napoleon's cavalry regiments took out much of the Coalition's heavy cavalry, they could not wipe them out.
Coalition and French squares then undertook a series of back-andforth exchanges.
All the while cannon and musket fire continued to rain down from all sides and, aside from one more combined arms assault by the French on the centreright of Wellington's lines, a general melee ensued, with each side seeing their numbers steadily chipped away.
Strengths A savvy strategist with plenty of battle experience Weaknesses Erratic,he took a detached approach to fighting CAVALRY IMPORTANT UNIT French light cavalry was considered the best of its kind in the world and played a large part in holding off the Coalition's heavy cavalry charges.
Strength Fast, agile units capable of easily outflanking the enemy Weakness Direct cavalry charges rely on surprise to be most effective MUSKET KEY WEAPON The musket was wielded by Napoleon's Old Guard with deadly accuracy, picking off large numbers of Coalition soldiers at Waterloo.
Discover the expert verdict on Adolf Hitler's tactical prowess S ince the fall of the Third Reich in 1945, our verdict on Hitler's leadership has mostly come from the pens and mouths of his generals.
Many of these men had grown to resent their former leader, and with the fall of Germany they seized the opportunity to criticise and embarrass the Fiihrer at every opportunity.
When Germany declared war on Poland on 1 September 1939, they had not expected to encounter such fierce opposition from Britain and France.
After both countries declared war on the Third Reich in response, the German population were distraught; World War I was still fresh in the nation's memory, and the country had only just started to thrive again from the harsh penalties imposed after their defeat in 1918 and later the Great Depression of the 1930s.
Now the leader of the Nazi party was dragging them into another war against familiar foes.
Despite his popularity, Hitler was not immune to criticism and the start of World War II saw a significant drop in morale in Germany.
But that all changed when France fell in just a matter of weeks to Germany's Blitzkrieg tactics.
Riding on this success, Hitler quickly involved himself in all aspects of the operations of the German army much more so than the respective leaders of other countries.
He was known for an attention to detail that was interfering at best, and detrimental at worst.
The popular picture of Hitler is of a man that heeded no advice a leader that would rather listen to his own gut instinct than to the rational arguments of his generals.
This was true to an extent; Hitler was distrustful of some of his senior officers, who in turn criticised him for his inexperience in warfare, and he certainly grew more distrustful and erratic as the war progressed.
That being said it was largely the officers themselves that have swayed our view of Hitler's leadership, as they resented his involvement in their military, as Dr Megargee points out.
However, for the first few years of the war at least, Hitler relied upon his generals greatly and would seek their advice on both strategy and tactics, albeit some more so than others.
The Fiihrer, though, was not blithely ignorant; he was well aware of the hatred some of his officers felt towards him, and he used this to his advantage at every available opportunity.
They would throw in their opinions at briefings and he would go with whoever he agreed with, so it was sort of a divide-and-conquer kind of approach to leadership.
As mentioned the Fiihrer had an uncanny attention to detail and thus involved himself in the smallest of minutiae about particular units, and many of his generals would be caught short if they could not supply him with precise information such as, for instance, the number of tanks in a particular division.
By 1943 Hitler had started bringing two stenographers to each of his meetings, and although many records were burned at the end of the war, those that survived reveal Hitler's meetings to be intricate to the point that they were discussing the movements of very small units on the front and their equipment.
When you start talking about how many trucks a particular unit has at its disposal, that's just ridiculous for a head of state to try to interpret as a military commander.
Such was the extent of his attention for detail that by the end of the war almost no major unit was allowed to move without Hitler’s permission especially one on the retreat.
Hitler would go on to employ the same tactics in other countries, including France in 1940.
The expert’s view ""If Germany was going to have a war, then September 1939 was probably the best time to attack,"" says Dr Megargee.
The campaign in Poland was devised by General Franz Haider, chief of the general staff, but it was ultimately Hitler who gave the order to invade.
Germany employed Blitzkrieg (which translates as 'lightning war 1 ) tactics, denting Poland's front lines with Panzer tanks and aircraft before troops moved through gaps this created.
W « The approach was hugely successful, although it was not one that Hitler came up with.
On 27 September 1939 Poland surrendered, albeit with a Soviet invasion from the east dividing the country. against Germany at that point and I think Hitler even said that.
But, of course, he was counting on Britain and France to stay out of it.
The first was Case Yellow , where German forces advanced into the Ardennes region and pushed the Allied forces in Belgium back to the sea.
This ultimately resulted in the mass evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force at Dunkirk between 26 May and 4 June.
A second operation known as Case Red began on 5 June, with Germany's air superiority and armoured units overcoming the depleted French forces.
German forces pushed into Paris on 14 June, and by 22 June they had signed an armistice with the French that would see Germany occupy the north and the west of the country until 1944.
However, it was Hitler that ultimately convinced the German High Command to accept the plan, which undoubtedly was a significant factor in defeating France.
The campaign prevented the stalemate that had occurred in World War I, and enabled Germany to begin focusing its attention on other foes.
The expert's view ""Hitler especially at this stage of the war was extremely nervous about how it was going to all work out.
He was very worried about the left flank of that attack going through the Ardennes to the coast of the English Channel, and he was worried that the French might counterattack.
Bourge^ 10 May 1940 Germany begins its campaign to take control of western Europe.
He was one of the main ' instigators of an offensive through the Ardennes during the invasion of France in 1940, which ensured Germany a swift victory in Europe.
He later attained the rank of general, but his constant criticism of Hitler's strategies coupled with his failure to turn the tide at the Battle of Stalingrad in 1942 saw him ousted from the German army in March 1944.
He was captured and imprisoned by the British in August 1945, and died almost 30 years later on 9 June 1973.
At this point in the war Hitler's generals were doing their best to convince him of employing different tactics, such as initiating smaller offensives instead of large ones, but Hitler was having none of it.
For all his shortcomings, though, Hitler did at times make some smart decisions, but embarking on a war at all was a poor one.
The idea that Germany could take on the British Empire, the Soviet Union and then the United States at the same time was at the very least problematic.
With the hand Hitler had been dealt or rather the hand he had dealt himself he managed to conduct himself, and the army, in a reasonable manner at the start of the conflict.
The Battle of the Atlantic 3 September 1939 8 May 1945 For all his inexperience in ground warfare, Hitler was even more of a novice when it came to the sea.
He didn't have any considerable knowledge of navies, and thus for the most part he left naval operations in the hands of generals he trusted including Erich Raeder and Karl Donitz, who both served as commander-in-chief of the Kriegsmarine during the war.
The Battle of the Atlantic was the longest military campaign of World War II, running continuously from the outbreak of war on 3 September 1939 to 8 May 1945.
The Germans relied considerably on their U-boat submarines, with only a handful of warships available.
The campaign revolved largely around the Allied blockade of Germany and a subsequent counter-blockade by the Kriegsmarine.
German U-boats attempted to attack convoy ships travelling across the Atlantic, but the strength of the Allied navies, combined with Hitler's decision to pull many U-boats away for other campaigns, would see the Allies gain control of the Atlantic and the Channel by 1944.
The expert’s view ""Hitler was involved in some key decisions, especially to take U-boats away from the Atlantic and send them to Norway and the Mediterranean.
Blitzkrieg strikes Germany takes control of large portions of western Europe, including Belgium, culminating in the surrender of France.
The German High Command had been especially unconvinced that France would fall in such a short amount of time, and thus they set about deciding what Germany's next course of action should be.
Hitler was all too aware that Britain posed a significant threat and, with little chance of a diplomatic resolution, he would have to attack.
The prospects of a potential invasion of Britain , however, were incredibly slim.
The Royal Navy was far superior to the German Navy , while the Royal Air Force posed a formidable threat in the skies.
If an invasion were to happen, the German army wanted to get as many troops ashore as possible, while the Kriegsmarine was adamant that such an operation would be impossible.
With numerous options available, Hitler eventually opted to test out the defensive capabilities of Britain with an attack from the air.
If the German Luftwaffe could manage to gain air superiority over the Royal Air Force, it could then keep the British Royal Navy at bay while Germany mounted an allout ground invasion.
Britain, however, proved a much more stubborn opponent than Germany had ever anticipated, and ultimately the RAF was never in too much danger of succumbing to defeat.
One of the key factors that affected the outcome was the decision for the Luftwaffe to switch from bombing British military targets and airfields to bombing cities such as London as a terror tactic.
With the Luftwaffe unable to gain air superiority, Hitler postponed Operation Sealion indefinitely in October 1940.
The Battle of Britain is about to begin"" Winston Churchill, 18 June 1940 Hitler at War About 6,000 Heinkel He Ills were built, but for the most part they were outperformed by British Hurricanes and Spitfire^ However, the bombing of civilian Britain continued in what was to become known as the Blitz. resources and they still could have stopped an invasion quite effectively.
Germany's battle with the Red Army began with the five-month-long Operation Barbarossa on 22 June 1941, and culminated in the Soviets liberating Minsk and Majdanek in July 1944.
Hitler and his generals believed that the Soviet Union would fall if Germany mounted a sustained attack.
They presumed, somewhat naively, that the Red Army would collapse and the Soviet people would surrender after a short military campaign, allowing Germany to occupy large portions of the USSR while focusing their efforts on Britain in the west.
This, of course, was anything but what really happened, and Hitler’s underestimation of the Soviet Union was a major failing of the entire campaign.
Hitler ultimately made the choice to focus on the economic resources of the Soviet Union rather than the capital.
Hitler had good instincts in this regard, but the overall decision to attack the Soviet Union was a poor one.
The Soviets refused to 'roll over’ the way the Germans had expected them to, and while Hitler's direction of the campaign in the summer of 1941 was adequate, his refusal to heed the advice of his generals as the invasion dragged on was a major flaw on his part.
Germany's Blitzkrieg tactics that had been so successful earlier in the war were nullified by the Red Army's tactic of holding back before launching counteroffensives.
In December 1941 Germany was at the gates of Moscow, but the Soviets kept attacking and wore the Germans down.
With winter approaching, many of Hitler's generals suggested the German army should retreat and consolidate before attacking again in spring 1942.
Hitler, though, was adamant the army should hold everywhere to ensure they didn't lose any of their heavy equipment, which • Russia he came under much criticism for.
His decision was arguably the right one at first, but later in the war he became too enamoured with the technique.
With their first attempt at defeating the Soviet Union unsuccessful, Germany would try again before the war was out.
Hitler and his generals were convinced the Red Army was on the ropes, and sustained attacks would wear them out.
But the Russians stood strong and, after successfully defending key cities including Moscow in 1942, Hitler was left with few options but retreat.
The expert’s view ""The genocide of the Jews and the general abuse and destruction of the Soviet population really made it impossible to come to any kind of arrangement with the Soviet people.
There's an argument to be made that if the Germans had gone in with a different attitude they could have Ukraine and the Baltic states, and perhaps other portions of the Soviet Union, away.
But Hitler assumed they were going to have a quick military victory and saw no reason to compromise.
He convinced himself that the Red Army must be on the ropes, and they kept pushing in the winter, still trying to take Moscow and still trying to advance in the south, and they ran out of steam.
Dvinsk, Minsk and Lvov ""Baltic Sea Leningrad 5 December 1941 With winter setting in.
Hitler orders the army to take up defensive positions and Operation Barbarossa ends.
What he didn't count on, however, was the steadfast refusal of Britain to enter into any sort of diplomatic negotiations.
He was in an economic bind; he was not going to be able to continue this war over the long run against the British because, sooner or later, Germany was going to run out of strength for that even with the tentative support of the Soviet Union.
That decision was based on the assumption which his generals shared and backed that the USSR would collapse that there would be one short military campaign which would destroy the Red Army.
Indeed, the war came to a point in 1941 where defeat for Germany seemed all but inevitable and Hitler's strategic choices became ever-more limited.
By 1942, after a second attempt at defeating the Soviet Union had failed, Dr Megargee suggests that, for Hitler, it became ""just a matter of holding out as best he could in the hope that the Allied coalition would break up.
By 1945 Hitler was all but dictating to his generals exactly what to do, and he had very little trust left in any of them.
But by then, and possibly even much earlier, for all the strategic knowledge in the world, Hitler had no hope of leading the Third Reich to an eventual victory.
Hitler's deterioration from sanity to irrationality, therefore, was not the deciding factor in the war, however there can be little doubt that his leadership style did little to help what was already a difficult cause for Germany.
Perhaps even with the greatest generals in the world the Third Reich would have been defeated; of that we cannot be certain.
What we do know, however, was that Hitler was not the great military leader he himself thought he was.
For his handful of victories there was a huge truckload of defeats, and his refusal to listen to reason ultimately accelerated Nazi Germany down the path to an unavoidable defeat.
Tensions between the largely industrial North and agricultural South had been rising, but the election of Abraham Lincoln as president on a platform of keeping slavery out of the new territories tipped the balance.
Before he even took office in March 1861, seven Southern states had seceded from the Union.
The American Civil War was a conflict between the 11 Confederate states who sought independence from the remaining Northern and other loyal states.
The key issues causing division between the North and South were state rights, the economy and tied up in both of these the abolition of slavery.
The Battle of Gettysburg The first industrial war The American Civil War is considered to be the template for many subsequent industrial wars that would follow.
It became characterised by large-scale conscription of the civilian population, use of railroads and other fast transportation for troop deployment, and communication by telegraph and wireless devices.
Also known for Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, this small borough of Pennsylvania was the ground for one of the bloodiest confrontations of the Civil War.
Casualties from Gettysburg are estimated to have been around 51,000 that accounts for around eight per cent of all casualties during the four-year conflict.
American Civil War The end of slavery The Emancipation Proclamation was an executive order issued by President Lincoln on 1 January 1863, freeing slaves in the Confederate states.
It paved the way for the 13th Amendment, which was passed by the Senate in April 1864 and ratified in December the following year, abolishing slavery nationwide.
The signing of the Emancipation Proclamation at the start of 1863 Union vs Confederacy The Union, ie Northern States, was made up of 20 free states and five border slave states and stood against 11 Southern slave states, making up the Confederacy.
It has been estimated that the forces on each side numbered around 2.13 million Union troops against 1.08 million Confederate troops.
Death by disease More troops were killed in the Civil War than in any other conflict in which the USA has been involved before or since.
Of the estimated 620,000 casualties, almost two-thirds are believed to have perished to disease.
Lincoln was pronounced dead at a nearby guesthouse at 7.22am on 15 April.
Key figures Abraham Lincoln 1809-1865 A Kentucky-born congressman for Illinois, Lincoln was a lawyer before running for president.
Robert E Lee 18071870 General and commander of the Confederate army, he was actually offered command of Union forces first.
Ulysses S Grant 1822-1885 Lieutenant general during the Civil War, Grant was later elected president, holding office from 1869 to 1877.
Jefferson Davis 18081889 Confederate president during the Civil War, he was captured but freed after two years without facing treason charges.
John Wilkes Booth 1838-1865 The assassin who killed Lincoln at Ford's Theatre had originally plotted only kidnap before changing the plan to murder.
Major events Lincoln elected 6 November 1860 Abraham Lincoln wins a very divisive election despite receiving no support from a single Southern state.
Confederacy formed 8 February 1861 The Confederate States of America is formed by six of the seven secession states.
Emancipation Proclamation 22 September 1862 Lincoln announces a preliminary proclamation stating his aim to free Southern slaves, making abolition the focus of the war.
Gettysburg 1-3 July 1863 Described as the turning point of the war, the Battle of Gettysburg is also the bloodiest confrontation of the conflict.
A member of one of the Soviet Union's numerous flying clubs aviation was one of the many symbols of modernity and dynamism that gripped the imagination of communist society since she was 15 years-old (she hadn't told her parents), Nadia had completed her first solo flight and her first parachute jump aged 16.
As soon as war was declared she abandoned the dress she was ironing and rushed to the airfield to enlist, but it would only be October 1941 four months of heartbreak later that her offer would be accepted.
She would become part of a unit a squadron leader, no less that flew up to 30,000 missions and dropped an estimated 23,000 tons of bombs, outfoxed the growling Messerschmitt fighters of the Luftwaffe with the most primitive of planes and struck fear into the hearts of the most feared fighting force of the 20th Century.
She lost 30 comrades in action, and would be one of the 23 women of her regiment awarded the nation's highest honour the gold star and red ribbon of the Hero of the Soviet Union, along with the Order of Lenin and three Orders of the Patriotic War.
By 1945, this incredible young woman from the coal fields of eastern Ukraine would write her name in pencil on the wall of Reichstag in Berlin, the red flag of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics fluttering victoriously through the smoke and booming artillery as Hitler's empire finally died.
Nadezhda Popova was a Night Witch, and institutionalised disdain was as implacable an opponent as the Nazi aggressors she lined up in her sights.
In June 1941 the Wehrmacht ground a murderous trail across the vast unprepared expanse of the Soviet Union; Operation Barbarossa was well underway.
Hitler’s plan to seize vast swathes of fertile Belorusian farmland, Ukrainian oil fields and Russian industrial centres had taken Soviet despot Joseph Stalin by surprise.
More than a war of conquest, this was, in the Fuhrer's own words, a ""war of annihilation"" that transformed Europe's eastern fringe into a great and terrible charnel house.
The unprepared Red Army was overrun, and by October 1941 the swastika was flying over Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, Belarus, and Ukraine.
Despite the number of women prepared to fight or fly to defend their homeland and avenge their loved ones, and the supposed egalitarianism of communist society, women were refused combat roles.
One young woman, eager to serve, recalled a recruiting officer telling her, ""Things may be bad but we're not so desperate that we're going to put little girls like you up in the skies.
It would take a personal plea to Stalin from Marina Raskova ""Russia's Amelia Earhart,"" according to the international press for the situation to change.
Raskova, who was 29 when war broke out, was one of the Soviet Union's most famous aviators.
With Stalin's blessing Raskova formed and trained the 586th Fighter Aviation Regiment, flying Yakovlev Yak-1, Yak-7B and Yak-9 fighters, Raslcova's own 125th Guards Bomber Aviation Regiment which flew state-of-the-art Petlyakov Pe-2 dive bombers, much to the envy of male bomber regiments, and arguably the most famous of the lot the 588th Night Bomber Regiment.
Later renamed 46th ‘Taman' Guards Night Bomber Aviation Regiment, it would become better known by the name given to it by its German enemies die Nachthexen, or the Night Witches, as they would idle the engines and drop through the clouds at a glide to bomb German units in nearsilence, with only a broomstick-like rustling of the canvas body to give them away.
Specialists in precision bombing of supply depots and command Marina Raskova and her co-pilots in 1938, right before their record breaking flight to Kosomolslt Poliltarpov Po-2 biplanes being flown before the war The Night Witches centres, and 'harassment bombing’, in which the Night Witches' role was to keep the enemy on edge, unable to sleep or rest without fear of death from the skies at any time.
So unnerved were the enemy that many refused to smoke at night, lest the glow of their cigarettes reveal their positions, and an Iron Cross the highest military honour awarded to German soldiers would be issued to anyone who brought down a Night Witch.
They used wood-frame Polikarpov Po-2 biplanes mockingly referred to as 'sewing machines' that first saw service in 1928 and had since been relegated to crop-dusting and training.
The Po-2’s open cockpit exposed the pilot and navigator to frostbite, the small carrying capacity meant their two bombs were at the expense of even a radio and often a light machine gun, and so to keep up constant pressure on the Nazis were forced to fly over and over again Popova's record was 18 gruelling sorties in one night.
With an all-female ground crew as well as pilots, they moved from airbases behind Soviet lines to temporary airfields closer to the front and, as night fell, they deployed on their seemingly neverending missions from Popova's native Donetsk Basin to the besieged Crimea, to Belarus and Poland, and eventually even Germany itself, with planes landing and taking off three minutes apart.
Always on the move and always in action, each Night Witch would fly around 1,000 missions by the end of the war when the average for a British bomber crew was 30.
My whole body was swept by fear of being killed"" The Night Witches receiving their orders on the Belorusian Front in 1944 obsolete biplanes which flew too low to bail out of, and would burst into to flames with sickening ease when hit by tracer shells from the 'circus of flak' the rings of wicked 37mm anti-aircraft guns pointed skyward, guided by searchlights whose touch often meant death.
To combat the searchlights the Night Witches developed a strategy that tested their already beleaguered nerves, flying in groups of three, the first two planes would deliberately probe the circus until they had the attention of the searchlights and their accompanying symphony of gunfire, allowing the third plane to dip in and deliver its payload.
The whole crew which was shot during the night flight was burning alive, and it was awful.
Before each mission and as we approached the target, I became a concentration of nerves and tension.
Eventually the Germans were forced to start deploying their own mothballed biplanes to counter them.
As advantages go, having a plane too clunky to dogfight was scarcely a fair trade for their vulnerability or the punishing frequency of their deployment, nor to the standard by which they were held by male airmen when they first deployed.
Though the Night Witches were eventually awarded the coveted 'Guards Regiment' status, along with the variety of battle honours and medals they had rightfully earned, the prejudices that kept women out of combat until Operation Barbarossa reached its height weren't easily dispelled.
Some male pilots refused to let their planes be maintained by female ground crews, and officers made disparaging reports of airwomen colouring in their lips with navigation pencil used to mark routes on maps, dancing on the airfield and keeping kittens in their barrack.
They could and they did, and amazingly the Soviet Union's female flyers managed this without sacrificing their femininity.
Nobody exemplifies this better than the ‘White Rose of Stalingrad', Lydia Litvyak, a pilot with one of the Night Witches' sister regiments.
Upon fly everything from the Spitfire to the B-25 Mitchell, and rocket and jet-powered fighters for the United States Air Force.
Rather telling her adopted father that she wanted to become a by 1943 their pay would be placed in line with their male wonderfully WASP's winged munchkin mascot, the gremlin pilot, Ataturk enrolled her as the Turkish Airforce's first counterparts.
Credited with a vital role in the Battle Of Fifinella, was invented by children's author Roald Dahl and female trainee.
Nadia Popova similarly never forgot the motto of the 588th despite the rigours of war, she would fluff up her hair pressed flat by the leather flying cap in a tortoiseshell mirror after each flight, and would eventually meet her future husband pilot Semyon Kharlamov in a convoy, after being shot down and separated from her unit.
When Popova ended the war in the ruins of the Reichstag, Semyon was by her side, and they wrote their names together on the crumbling walls.
Like so many of Popova's contemporaries, Marina Raskova and Lydia Litvyak died in combat Raskova in 1943, crashing into the banks of the Volga river in a violent snow-storm, and Litvyak later the same year, ambushed by Messerschmitts while she attacked a German bomber.
Popova survived, married, and returned to her home town a hero, greeted by crowds throwing flowers and a marching band a more triumphant and provincial echo of Marina Raskova's state funeral in Moscow; the first the Soviet Union had given in wartime and a tribute to her status.
Despite the glory and the tragedy, the 588th and its sister regiments would be sadly disbanded and, much like in Britain and America, the role of women who had served their country every bit as faithfully and bravely as their husbands, fathers and brothers was expected to return to its pre-war setting.
While many of them were forced to return home and become housewives their deeds largely unremarked upon until the Eighties when the old authoritarian Russian regime began to crumble and the Europe bequeathed by Joseph Stalin was finally dismantled Nadia Popova continued to work as a flight instructor, and when she died on 8 July 2013, aged 91, her death was mourned not just in her native Russia, but around the world.
History provides few enough examples of women being able to endure the same terrible hardships and perform the same incredible feats as men, and fewer still exist where they were allowed to accomplish these things on their own terms as women.
These 20-something girls from collective farms and steel towns defied society once when they became pilots, and then defied it again when they abandoned their ironing and took to the skies in war, and their example in an era when the idea of women in combat roles is still contested defies it once more.
THE EQUATION THAT REWROTE PHYSICS 1905 Easily Albert Einstein's most famous discovery, this deceptively simple equation states that mass and energy are related, and can work out how much energy is generated from mass being converted.
After its conception it became a central tenet of all physics and remains so to this day Exploration <fc Discovery While it's myth the apple fell on Isaac Newton's head, the apple inspiring him is thought to be true NEWTON’S LAWS OF GRAVITY m Prior to Isaac Newton's revelation of the force of gravity the question of why objects were bound to the Earth was limited to quasimystical explanations.
However, when Newton introduced his law of universal gravitation in Principia Mathematica in 1687, he helped lay down a coherent explanation of how the physical world worked that would dominate science for centuries.
The theory of gravitation was, according to Newton himself who liked to repeat the story to colleagues first formulated as he sat in Cambridge's Trinity College (though alternative locations have been claimed) and witnessed an apple fall from a tree.
While it is myth that the apple fell on Newton's head, texts from the time such as William Stukeley's Memoirs Of Sir Isaac Newton's Life confirm the incident, with Newton being inspired to determine why that apple should always descend perpendicularly to the ground.
The precursor to modern calculus was discovered in the 17th century, when English mathematician Isaac Newton and German mathematician Gottfried Leibniz both created their own systems.
Newton's was based on the idea that change was a variable over time, while Leibniz's was based on the difference ranging over a sequence of infinitely close values.
The tale of the discovery of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) begins with a Swiss physician and biologist named Johannes Friedrich Miescher.
Originally training to become a doctor, after suffering a severe bout of typhoid fever that damaged his hearing, he was forced to abandon that vocation and instead turned to physiological chemistry.
He thought at first he would study lymphocytes (one type of white blood cell), but was subsequently pointed in the direction of leukocytes by German biochemist Felix Hoppe-Seyler.
After filtering cell samples, Miescher attempted to isolate the nuclei from the cytoplasm, which he achieved by subjecting the nuclei to an alkaline extraction and then acidification.
Today, of course, DNA has been studied extensively and revealed to be responsible for the encoding of genetic instructions in the functioning of every living organism on the planet.
Originally theorised to exist in 1964 by Peter Higgs and five others, the boson's discovery in July 2012 is a milestone, as it is considered the pivotal missing element in the Standard Model of physics.
It explains why fundamental particles have mass a key building block for the construction of the universe.
Interestingly, despite its discovery being considered monumental, at this present juncture there is no immediate benefit that the Higgs boson brings.
Scientifically, if it were conclusively proven to exist, then it could answer many currently unexplained questions such as how particles gain mass, how cosmic inflation occurs and even what might happen to the universe in the far future.
However, finding the Higgs boson in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN is purely academic.
Whether or not it will have an impact on society later much like quantum mechanics from the early-20th century remains to be seen.
THE MIGHTY ATOM ms Nothing can come from nothing so modern physics tells us.
This was the birth of atomic theory and a crude notion of atoms that would remain largely unchallenged until the 19th century.
Indeed, nothing really changed until English scientist John Dalton produced his own atomic theory, published in A New System Of Chemical Philosophy in 1808.
This is considered the birth of modern atomic theory, as it eloquently describes how elements are made from extremely small particles called atoms and that atoms of different elements combine to form compounds.
Of course, one thing Dalton didn't realise was that atoms could be split something that would be achieved just over a century later by New Zealand-born scientist Ernest Rutherford.
German physicist Wilhelm Rontgen first found the electromagnetic radiation X-rays in 1895.
His breakthrough was the result of studying Crookes tubes experimental discharge tubes invented by scientists investigating cathode rays and tubes in the 1870s.
They were the precursor to the cathode-ray tubes used in computer monitors and televisions.
These discharge tubes generated free electrons that were accelerated out of the devices at such high speed that, when they hit the glass walls of the cylinder, they produced X-rays.
Rontgen studied this phenomenon extensively, creating numerous X-ray images the first of which was of his wife’s hand.
For thousands of years the origins of the Earth and the universe had been held captive by a mixture of ignorance and religious scripture.
Of course, while the Big Bang theory still remains a theory, it provides a plausible model for its formation and continued activity one that is increasingly being backed up by scientific evidence.
The origin of the Big Bang theory emerges with, interestingly, a Catholic priest and scientist called Georges Lemaitre, who in 1931 published his Hypothesis Of The Primeval Atom.
Here Lemaitre proposed a model of the universe beginning with a cataclysmic explosion that is still expanding -• and at an accelerated rate.
Despite rival theories from Edwin Hubble and Alexander Friedmann also emerging around the same time, it was Lemaitre who described it most accurately, with Albert Einstein moving to endorse the theory after its publication.
Lemaitre’s prediction of the accelerating expansion of the universe would go . on to be confirmed in the Nineties by observations made by, ironically, the Hubble Space Telescope.
Lemaitre's theory was later ratified by the Hubble telescope in 1991 FLEMING’S GREAT MISTAKE 1928 The development of penicillin was an amazing story of accidental discovery.
Working hard in his laboratory for months on end, Scottish scientist Alexander Fleming decided to take a month-long holiday in August 1928 to see his family.
Quickly throwing some of his things together he promptly left London, leaving his workplace in a bit of a mess; this mess included a number of Petri dishes filled with the bacteria staphylococci.
Little did Fleming realise that these Petri dishes would help him revolutionise the world of medicine.
On returning to London and entering his laboratory Fleming immediately noticed that on one of the Petri dishes a distinctive mould had grown and in doing so killed any of the nearby staphylococci bacteria.
After tidying up, Fleming attempted to regrow the mould himself in a pure culture.
He succeeded shortly after and, after trialling the culture on various bacteria, saw that it destroyed several that caused disease.
Realising what he had discovered, Fleming published his findings and so was born the precursor to the modern-day antibiotic.
Simply put, it determines how everything about an organism is made and how that organism's cells will be reproduced.
As such, simply discovering the very concept of a genetic code was a monumental breakthrough in the grand scheme of human biology.
Following the discovery of DNA’s structure by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, numerous scientists embarked on a mission to attempt to determine what bases were responsible for encoding the 20 standard amino acids used by living cells to build proteins.
Earth was the focal point of the galaxy (which was considered to be the entire universe in the 16th century) and to dispute this geocentric model of the Solar System was considered heretical by the Catholic Church.
Einstein's theory of relativity 1905 Containing both Einstein's theories of special and general relativity, this has single-handedly revolutionised modern physics.
Since its conception the theory has transformed theoretical physics and astronomy entirely largely superseding Newton's take on classical mechanics.
It enabled the nuclear age to prosper both for better and worse as well as furthering our grasp of neutron stars and black holes.
QUANTUM THEORY m For centuries the Standard Model of physics set by Newton and his contemporaries was considered the definitive set of laws that governed the physical world.
But by the start of the 20th century multiple disciplines such as atomic theory were hinting there could be a whole other level to physics that was yet unaccounted for.
By 1920 these disciplines loosely intertwined to create quantum theory a new branch of physics that focused on physical phenomena on truly microscopic scales, entering the realm of atomic and even subatomic particles.
From Albert Einstein's work on electromagnetic radiation, through to Werner Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and Erwin Schrodinger's wave mechanics (the mind behind the famous ‘Schrodinger’s cat' paradox), increasingly complex models for how physics works have been at the least theorised or in some cases partly demonstrated.
Since then quantum theory has become increasingly important to almost all scientific disciplines, with branches such as quantum chemistry, quantum optics and quantum information science expanding our understanding or, to be more accurate, our current lack of understanding about how the universe works on the most fundamental of levels.
Marie Curie's theory of radioactivity helped us understand how particles move as well as the health risks of radiation While the discovery of radiation could be attributed to numerous people, ranging from German physicist Johann Wilhelm Ritter who found ultraviolet in 1801, through to the discovery of neutron radiation in the 1930s, one figure arguably stands out.
Polish physicist and chemist Marie Curie along with her husband, Pierre studied radiation extensively during their lives, with the pair uncovering two new elements in the late-19th century.
Due to her continued work in the field, which included coining the phrase 'radioactivity' and probing into the nature of radioactive half-lives, she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics jointly with her husband and fellow French physicist Henri Becquerel for their 'researches on the radiation phenomena' in 1903.
Several years later in 1911 after Pierre had tragically been killed in a road accident she would receive the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of radium and polonium.
Today, Curie's work into radiation including the huge danger it poses to humans (Marie Curie famously died of radiation poisoning in 1934) has proven invaluable to modern science, with everything from energy generation, medicine and astronomy benefiting massively from her findings.
Evolving in use from simple firecracker-style explosives, through to fireworks and on to the motive force behind cannons, muskets, rifles and bombs among many other explosive weapons, gunpowder's discovery has resulted in the deaths of countless millions.
According to science historian Joseph Needham's Science And Civilisation In China, the development of gunpowder as we know it today was a gradual process and involved many accidents.
One of the most notable of these is recorded to have occurred in 1280, where a large gunpowder arsenal at Wei-yang accidentally caught fire.
Despite its abstract appearance, the theorem simply states that in any right-angled triangle, the square of the hypotenuse (the longest side) is equal in length to the sum of the squares of the other two shorter sides.
DARWIN AND EVOLUTION m When Charles Darwin set off on his roundthe-world voyage on 27 December 1831, little did he realise that history was about to be made.
As Darwin moved from port to port of far-flung lands, studying geology, natural history and wildlife, a previously conceived theory of his was being fleshed out before his eyes.
Evolution the change in inherited characteristics of biological populations over generations was becoming irrefutable.
Of course, it would not be until Darwin published On The Origin Of Species in 1859 that he would deliver evolution with compelling evidence and, at the time, religious institutions and many learned scholars decried it.
Indeed, it was not until the sixth century BCE that just the concept of a spherical Earth was even speculated.
Even then it was not until around the third century BCE that Greek astronomy demonstrated Earth was spherical, with this model for the planets of the heavens slowly dispersed via the old trade routes.
Believe it or not, it wasn't until the early-16th century that conclusive proof of the Earth's shape was attained, with Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan leading the first expedition around the planet.
While Magellan died on the threeyear journey killed during battle in the Philippines a handful of sailors continued the voyage and arrived in Spain on 6 September 1522.
Of course, as soon as we ventured into space in the mid-20th century there could no longer be any doubt.
While the use of fingerprints as we know it today to identify people and as a means of catching criminals is a relatively modern discovery there is evidence that finger and thumb prints were used in ancient times.
For example, the Babylonians in 2000T000 BCE pressed the tips of their fingers into clay to record business transactions, while thumbprints were also used in ancient China as a means of 'signing' documents.
It wasn't until the 19th century that fingerprints were used to reduce crime.
Sir William Herschel, a chief magistrate in India, had residents record their fingerprints when signing business deals to fight fraud in 1858.
From this point the path to a more universal adoption of fingerprint records was relatively swift; Scottish doctor Henry Faulds published an article discussing using prints as a means of personal identification in 1880 and 12 years later Argentine police officer Juan Vucetich was the first to use prints to catch criminals.
By 1896 Sir Edward Richard Henry developed a classification system that enabled prints to be classified and sorted Scotland Yard adopted this system in 1901.
This led to the capture of criminals due to their genetic makeup and would indelibly change the way that the police solved crime.
The theory of absolutely everything L970s The Standard Model of particle physics addresses the strong, electromagnetic and weak nuclear interactions that control the dynamics of subatomic particles.
This robust theory is essential for explaining how the physical world works.
New employees at the Cornhusker Ordnance Plant in Nebraska having their photos and fingerprints taken in 1942 HH H HOW GERMS CAUSE DISEASE m Prior to the discovery of bacteria in 1676 by Dutch scientist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek and the later discovery of the connected germ theory of disease, which states illness can be caused by microorganisms, a number of wacky and superstitious explanations were commonplace.
Chief among these was the belief in the miasma theory, which stated that deadly diseases such as cholera, chlamydia and the Black Death were caused by the spreading of a noxious form of air.
Indeed, this was the prevailing theory of explaining disease right up until the 19th century.
On the back of his success Koch devised a set of rules to test if an organism such as bacteria causes disease and these criteria are still used in modern medicine.
Today, thanks to the discovery that certain bacteria and viruses can cause infectious diseases and that they can be spread via environmental mechanisms, like water, air or physical contact, doctors have a far more accurate understanding of how to both prevent and treat many illnesses.
NASA; Look and Learn; SPL; CERN; Getty; Corbis How a tiny island in the Atlantic Ocean came to own an empire so large that the sun never set on it he date was 22 January 1901 and the British Empire was the largest of any in human history, but the monarch who reigned over it would not live another day.
As Queen Victoria lay dying in Osborne House on the Isle of Wight she looked back on a reign that spanned over 63 years.
She had seen her empire grow from a collection of scattered isles, separated by vast plains of lands and insurmountable oceans, to the greatest the world had known.
It had reached over India, plucked its riches and mounted it as the glimmering jewel in her crown.
It had butchered its way mercilessly across Africa at the cost of thousands of British corpses and countless natives who had tried in vain to stand in its way.
It was powered forward both by Christian values and colonial greed, so as Victoria drew her last breath, she left a world forever transformed by the empire she had built.
When a young Princess Victoria ascended the steps of Westminster Abbey on her coronation day, few would have foreseen the mighty empire she would eventually rule over.
The British public were increasingly disenchanted with the monarchy and her grandfather, the mad king George III, had failed to protect British interest in the Americas, and her uncle George IV's terrible relations with his wife and reckless spending had tarnished the monarchy's prestige.
But this blue-eyed, silvery-voiced lady possessed a stubborn will of iron and her reign would become the longest in British history.
Her ascension marked not the death of the British Empire, but the new dawn of a kingdom so massive that none could ever hope to challenge it.
The tiny, scattered rural villages of England were being abandoned en masse and the cities were transforming into sprawling metropolises.
Great towering concrete chimneys rose from the ground and the whirr of machines sounded across the country the age of steam had arrived.
At 63 years her reign is currently the longest in British history, and is associated with the Industrial Revolution, economic progress and most notably, the expansion of the British Empire to the largest domain of all time.
WorldMags.net ration <fc Discover Finding itself in economic rot, Egypt sold half its stake in the Suez Canal to Britain.
This prompted an eventual revolt and launched the 1882 Anglo-Egyptian War.
Egypt provided a vital trade route between Britain and India, cutting out the long journey around Africa.
England captured Canada from France after the Seven Years' War in 1763, also known as the French and Indian War.
As well as adding a massive landmass to the British Empire's bragging rights, Canada was a resource-rich country with a small population.
Canada provided ample trade of timber, ores and furs. 5 things you probably didn't know about Benjamin Disraeli Born to Italian-Jewish parents, Disraeli was the first ^ British prime minister with a Jewish heritage, though he was baptised as a Christian. fjk The British gained control of the Cape of Good Hope in the early-19th century and set up a colony.
When South African Dutch settlers felt their territory was at /.* risk, the two powers engaged in a series /fi of military clashes known as the Boer ' Wars, leading the Boers to submit to British rule.
Serving as a stopping station on the way to India, Southern Africa was also rich in gold and diamonds.
Disraeli pursued many early business ventures that failed, leaving him in crippling debt, leading to a nervous breakdown from which it took him years to recover.
He introduced much legislation that benefited the poor, such as the 1877 Artisans Dwelling Act that provided housing, as well as the Public Health Act the same year.
Railways and steamships brought the British overseas territory closer to the mother country, opening up opportunities for trade and commerce that were previously unfathomable.
It was Albert, Victoria's beloved husband, who opened her and Britain's eyes to the ideas that went on to shape her empire.
Fascinated by mechanisms and inventions, Albert organised The Great Exhibition at the Crystal Palace a temple to the ingenuity of the rapidly developing modern world.
Inventions from around the world were displayed, but this was Britain's show, first and foremost.
The symbols of British might, which occupied half of the entire display space, served as clear examples of what the British Empire was capable of and fostered the ideas of national supremacy in the eyes of Victoria, the government and the majority of the British population.
The Great Exhibition proved that far from the crumbling remains of a once-powerful nation, the British Empire had the might, ingenuity and limitless ambition to conquer the world.
The opportunity to pave the road for this empire arose in 1857 with the Indian Mutiny.
India had Victoria's Empire British involvement in Australia began when Captain James Cook landed on the continent in the late-18th century.
The number of Aboriginals living there quickly plummeted because of European diseases and loss of land.
Australia became a penal colony and thousands of British convicts were transported there as punishment.
When gold was discovered there, British immigrants raced to the sandy shores in search of their fortune.
After largely being “ i controlled by the East A i T Ji * India Company, India became part of the British Empire after the Government of India Act in 1858.
Known as the 'jewel in the crown’, India was the most valuable piece of Britain's empire, with lucrative trade from spices, jewels and textiles.
The most important provision of India, though, was its manpower, which contributed massively to Britain’s military might.
How Victoria's British Empire became the world's biggest been ruled by a private entity the East India Company from 1757.
The rebellion manifested the discontent felt by the Indian people for the blatant disrespect of their beliefs and customs.
The company showed disregard for the Indian caste system and issued new cartridges greased with cow and pig fat that had to be opened with the mouth, highly offensive to Muslim and Hindu soldiers.
These actions opened the eyes of the Indian people to the daily injustice they were being subjected to, and unrest snowballed into mass riots and an uprising.
Although the mutiny was eventually quelled, the rebellion led to the dissolution of the company, the passing of power to the British state and the creation of what Victoria would call the jewel in her crown the British Indian Empire.
She presented herself as a maternal figure and a crusader for peace, justice and honest government ideals largely inspired by her husband.
Albert had instilled in her mind the vision of King Arthur's Camelot, an empire ruled not by tyranny but by justice, where the strong serve the weak, where good triumphs over evil, bringing not oppression and bloodshed, but trade, education and welfare.
His influence on Victoria was immense and when on 14 December 1861 he died of suspected typhoid fever, the empire veered into an entirely new direction.
When Albert drew his last breath in the blue room at Windsor Castle the queen was inconsolable; the loss of the love of her life changed not only herself as a person, but the fate of her empire.
As she donned the mourning clothes she would wear until her own death, she drew a veil over Albert's vision and pursued a different path for her kingdom one of world domination.
An emerging figure in Parliament would come to foster her views Benjamin Disraeli.
The ambitious and rebellious leader of the Conservatives was led by a passion for imperial power and glory.
Inspired by tales of imperial adventures, Disraeli believed Britain should pursue an empire of power and prestige.
J , simple enterprise of _ _ London businessmen / ^ W J \ who wanted to make ^ ‘ 1 *l money from importing spices.
The company was granted a royal charter by Queen Elizabeth I in 1600, and in 1601 James Lancaster led its first voyage.
The company set up trade outposts in Indian settlements that slowly developed into commercial towns.
Steadily increasing its territory, the company claimed vital trading ports from Aden to Penang.
As its control extended, the company became the most powerful private company in history, with its own army established by Robert Clive, the first British governor of Bengal.
With its great military power behind it, the ffjf company controlled + ^ India with a combination of direct rule and v> ' alliances with Indian princes.
The East India Company eventually accounted for half Lancaster was an the world's trade and Elizabethan trader specialised in cotton, and privateer silk, tea and opium.
William Gladstone, the leader of the Liberals, thought the empire should serve a high moral purpose, to follow not a path of conquest but one of commerce, sharing their moral vision with the rest of the world.
These two fiery and driven men fought over these opposing visions in Parliament as Victoria continued to mourn.
Without Albert she felt incompetent and unable to face the immense duty that her role dictated.
With her strong conservative views she found Gladstone and his liberal reforms dangerous and unpredictable.
Disraeli, suave, coy and dripping with forthright confidence, enchanted the lonely queen.
With his constant flattery and sharp wit, Disraeli reignited her interest in politics and captivated her, as Albert had done so previously, with his vision of just how mighty the empire could be.
However, Gladstone's liberal vision and Albert's quest for Camelot had not completely faded.
The British people, led by strong Protestant beliefs Victoria herself had instilled in them, felt it was Britain’s role their duty even to civilise people around the world.
They believed the British cause was to export not only trade, but also gospel values of morality and justice.
This policy ensured British dominance of the seas with a string of naval bases encompassing the whole world.
The pure size and strength of the navy served its purpose deterring any would be competitors and confirming its position as ruler of the waves.
THE INDUSTRIAL Britain was the first nation to harness the power of steam and the first to undergo an industrial revolution.
This resulted in mass production of low-cost goods to trade around the world.
It also gave Britain's military an array of resources like rifles, steamships and trains, equipping it to defeat any possible enemies.
Medical advances also allowed British explorers to penetrate remote areas without fear of tropical diseases.
THE QUEST TO SPREAD DEMOCRACY Land grabbing aside, the British Empire was led by a strong Protestant desire to improve the world.
Britain saw itself as an agent of civilisation one they wanted to spread worldwide, bringing peace, order and stability.
This belief that they were doing genuine good led men like David Livingstone to travel to Africa to spread the word of God, and with it, the British Empire. turned their attention to Africa.
Little was known of the 'Dark Continent', but the common perception was that it was a place of pagan worship ravaged by tribal wars.
One missionary in particular would capture the attention of the British nation.
Tall, handsome and heroic, David Livingstone embodied everything the British believed their nation to represent.
A medical missionary, Livingstone's daring adventures around the continent were followed by a captivated British public.
Fighting vicious beasts, battling through dense jungles and suffering a multitude of illnesses, Livingstone was the heroic face of the empire's Christian ideals.
Livingstone's horrific confrontation with African chain gangs was to drive the British cause of expansion.
The slavery rife in Africa was abhorrent to Livingstone and the British public, as the practice had been abolished across the empire in 1833.
The queen and government united behind Livingstone's quest to find a suitable trade route, hoping that by doing so, the African people would find ways to make a living that wasn't built on the backs of slaves.
Livingstone's journey was a failure and he returned to scathing criticism something the imperialist Disraeli leapt on with glee.
His flattery of Victoria had completely won her over and the monarchy and government became united in pursuit of one goal the expansion of the empire.
The perfect opportunity to begin this new empire emerged as another nation struggled to survive.
The Egyptian ruler, Isma'il Pasha, was confronted with crippling debts after reckless spending on lavish ceremonies and a costly war with Ethiopia.
In an act of desperation he made an offer to sell to the British Egypt's shares in the Suez Canal.
The canal was more than a mere trading port; it opened up a short route to India across Egypt and down the Red Sea, cutting out the lengthy journey around Africa.
The Egyptian ruler's offer would give the British controlling influence over the jugular of the empire, so Disraeli urged Victoria to accept.
With control of India, Britain was already the most powerful nation on Earth and three-quarters of the world's trade was transported in British ships, but this control was being threatened.
The Russian Empire had been steadily expanding east TAKING ADVANTAGE OF THE COMPETITION As major powers of the world such as Spain, France, the Netherlands and the Ottomans were losing power, the British began to peak in strength.
Britain was able to take advantage of the European wars that had weakened other nations as it enjoyed a period of relative peace, allowing uninterrupted expansion of its empire.
Any threats that did emerge, such as Russia, just gave Britain new zeal to cement its powerful hold on the world.
STRONG LEADERSHIP Britain was ruled by a single monarch throughout most of the 19th century Queen Victoria.
The record-breaking length of her reign brought a sense of stability and contributed to the unconquerable notion of the British Empire.
Although Victoria did involve herself in government, her role was symbolic rather than one of direct power, which ensured stability of British politics.
While other nations were dealing with socialist movements, Britain enjoyed a long period of relative domestic peace.
The ironclad battleships of the 1870s and ‘80s were replaced by pre-dreadnought ships, which were built from tough steel and reinforced with hardened steel armour.
The engines were powered by eight coal-fired cylindrical boilers, which produced an impressive speed, but at the cost of high fuel consumption.
The first purpose-built steam battleship was Le Napoleon of France with a speed of 12 knots regardless of wind direction.
Soon the United Kingdom was rapidly producing steam battleships to challenge France's strength, building 18 new ships and converting 41 to steam power.
There were four heavy slow-firing guns, which were difficult to operate but capable of penetrating the armour of enemy ships.
The HMS Prince George also carried a secondary battery of 12 quick-firing .40-calibre guns.
The ship was reinforced with 22.9cm of Harvey armour, which provided it with equal protection for less weight.
As a result, the pre-dreadnought ships benefited from a lighter belt than any previous battleships, without any loss in protection.
The battery, conning tower and deck were also protected by thick steel. and south and was getting uncomfortably close to Victoria’s prized jewel India.
The Middle East was largely controlled by the Turks, but they were busy dealing with violent rebellions.
The Turkish treatment of their Christian subjects was shocking and atrocious, but as Russia backed the rebels the British had no option but to support the Turks.
The British public, to whom Russia stood for everything Britain opposed ignorance, slavery and subjugation largely supported this choice.
Facing the prospect of imminent war with the strongest nation on the planet, Russia agreed to peace talks and thanks in part to the charisma and negotiation skills of Disraeli, agreed to stop their advance on the Middle East.
Imperial spirit rushed through the public as the might of British muscle flexed and proved itself again.
As the empire continued its steady expansion across the continent it came face to face with the most powerful African nation the Zulus.
The British, with a bloated ego, underestimated the strength of their spear-wielding enemies and suffered a crushing initial defeat.
In the end it took 16,000 British reinforcements to prise the Zulus’ independence from their grip.
Expecting to return to a wave of praise for their daring exploits, the victorious army were surprised to discover that British opinions were changing once again.
Gladstone, the ""half-mad firebrand"", as Victoria dubbed him, preached his outraged opinions about the mass slaughter of Zulus and rampant destruction of their homes.
Victoria was outraged but the public sided with Gladstone and, much to the queen’s dismay, the power of the government switched hands once more.
Liberal leader or not, all of Europe's attention was firmly fixed on Africa as nations began a scramble to establish colonies there.
In amongst this mad rush to establish new territory by European powers, it was arguably one man’s actions that would determine the ultimate fate of Victoria's empire.
Led by Muhammad Ahmed, revolution was tearing through the Sudan as tribes rose against their corrupt rulers.
As this holy war drew uncomfortably close to the Suez Canal, Victoria urged Gladstone to utilise the British troops stationed there to defend it.
In order to buy time he sent one man, General Charles Gordon, to secure the evacuation of loyal civilians and soldiers.
He was brave, dashing, popular and his decorated military career had painted him in the British public's eyes as a gleaming knight of old.
When he reached the Sudan he was horrified by the slavery rife in the region and decided to face the Mahdi in battle.
With limited forces, Gordon soon found himself besieged in the city of Khartoum.
His appeals for aid, to the adoring public's outrage, fell on deaf ears in the government.
It took more than eight months of public fury to finally force Gladstone's hand, but it was too late Gordon, the nation's hero of Christianity, was dead.
In an instance the liberal vision was shattered, Gladstone was voted out and his moral influence departed with him.
The renewed crusading spirit of British imperialism found its poster boy in a Victoria's Empire Right 1892 caricature of Cecil Rhodes, after he announced plans for a telegraph line and railroad from Cape Town to Cairo “They believed the British cause was to export not only trade, but also gospel values of morality and justice"" man who would lead the empire down a dark and dangerous path.
Moving from England to Africa to work on a cotton farm, Cecil John Rhodes had become outrageously wealthy from the diamond rush, but he wanted more the whole of Africa.
Driven by greed and lust for power, Rhodes wished to create a British colony across Africa, not for the betterment of its people or to spread Christian values, but for profit and business.
Using the tenacity and cunning that had elevated him to success, Rhodes tricked and butchered his way across the continent with the British government backing him every bloody step of the way.
His path of colonial greed led Britain head-first into a conflict now known as the Boer Wars.
Gold had been found in Transvaal in northern South Africa and Rhodes worried that this would prompt an alliance with the Germans, thus cutting off his route to the north of the continent.
Rhodes planned an uprising to overthrow the Boer leaders, but it did not go as planned far from the naked, spear-wielding foes he had previously conquered, the Boers had guns, and they fought back hard with skill and courage.
Outrage tore across Europe against what was seen as an unprovoked attack on an independent state, but not in Britain.
Fully convinced of their noble mission, the British people believed the Boers to be vicious and uncompromising.
More soldiers poured into the region into a war they believed would be short and glorious, but as more British bodies piled up Victoria's own grandson among them British confidence in their own unconquerable might began to wane.
As British reinforcements continued to flood into the territory the tide slowly began to turn.
Rhodes had managed to squeeze a win from the jaws of defeat and the Boer territories became British colonies.
Rhodes’ controversial actions during the war including forming what would come to be known as the first concentration camps had been a step too far for the British public.
What had begun as a noble quest of Christianity had transformed into a greedy and brutal scramble for power.
When Rhodes died his merciless version of imperialism was buried with him in the dry African dirt.
When Victoria passed away she was finally rid of the black mourning clothes she had worn for 40 years and was dressed entirely in white.
Spring flowers were scattered around her body and her wedding veil was placed on her head as she prepared to reunite with the dearest love of her life.
She was, however, leaving another behind; the Empire she had mothered now stretched across the globe with large parts of maps of the word coloured in the pink that showed British rule.
As the sun set on the quiet room in which she lay in Osborne House, it was rising on the bustling spice markets of India, and soon the vast plains of British land in Africa would be bathed in warm golden light.
Victoria had died, but the legacy she left behind expanded over the face of the entire planet.
This reduced the weight of the second axle behind it, making it faster.
Stephenson’s famous Rocket experiment was examined and documented not only by the judges present at the day of the Rainhill trials but also by spectators gathered at the unveiling of the Liverpool and Manchester railway line the day after, where British prime minister Arthur Wellesley, Duke of Wellington saw the latest breakthrough in steam locomotion for himself.
Stephenson, like all the great engineers of the time, wrote technical specifications on all of his inventions and the Rocket's design was used as a template for all future steam engine production.
It has gone down in history as a triumph of British engineering and as such has been studied and written about extensively.
The Rocket is currently housed and displayed at the Science Museum in London.
One to 'drive' the engine and look out for obstructions on the track and another to feed coke (derivative of coal which burned more cleanly) into the firebox and keep an eye on the amount of heat being produced by the boiler.
As the steam was released through the exhaust pipe, steam entered from the other side of the piston rod by the eccentric rod D-valve, which forced the piston rod back up.
Previous models relied on one tube surface for the gas to travel through to produce steam but The Rocket had multiple tubes, increasing the heated surface area within the boiler, which produced more steam.
The hot gas then traveled through firetube pipes into the water-filled boiler, creating steam.
The Rocket's firebox was separated with a water jacket which, when it got hot, increased the temperature in the boiler.
Stevenson’s Rocket \\l V hry few inventions in history have changed the fabric of British society quite as much as Robert Stephenson's steam locomotive prototype popularly known as Stephenson's Rocket.
With its successful test at the Rainhill trials in Liverpool in October 1829, a new dawn of steam locomotion was born which brought every community in Britain together through speedy and reliable rail travel.
Stephenson had a lot riding on the success of the Rocket, as the engineering company he co-owned with his father had created its engine with many costly new refinements.
Adding to this pressure was the fact that Stephenson's rivals had produced bigger machines with seemingly more powerful engines.
The Rocket did have one advantage over its competitors though it was not reliant on redundant technology.
Stephenson had incorporated new ideas to make better use of its steam-powered pistons.
The design combined established principles of locomotion with some new enhancements.
These included a multiple firetube boiler, which enabled the Rocket to punch above its weight when hauling freight and passengers.
The Rocket also had a blast pipe, which increased the intensity of the fire that produced the steam, making the boiler more effective.
The Rainhill grandstand spectators were astonished to see Stephenson's small yellow engine pull carriages three times its own weight on the train tracks, reach a maximum speed of 30 mph unheard of at the time and even climb up a shallow incline while hauling material.
The other locomotives had either broken down or could not reach the required minimum average speed.
Stephenson was awarded the £500 prize money for creating the first reliable steam-powered train locomotive which could be used for passenger and material transport.
The design set the standard for steam locomotives and all trains produced by workshops from that moment were based on this invention.
As the cylinder compressed the steam and the rod was forced up and down it drove the wheels on the track, creating forward motion.
The dome also acted as a barrier to stop water getting from the boiler into the cylinder.
Chimney The chimney expelled the hot gas through a vertical pipe safely away from the driver and engineer.
Another of the Rocket's innovations was the blast pipe located within the chimney.
The blast pipe allowed the firetubes to work more efficiently by creating a vacuum at the bottom of the chimney, pulling the gas from the firebox through the firetubes.
The exhaust pipe only pushed the steam in one direction, which created a fully integrated system and was one the reasons the Rocket was so powerful.
Sculptor Amelia Peabody asked her to work with her, and together they invented the world's first solar-powered house.
ISAAC NEWTON ENGLISH 1642-1727 Isaac Newton was the inventor of the world's first reflecting telescope.
Newton had studied and lectured on the optical theories behind the reflecting telescope for a number of years before finally inventing one, and used his creation to prove that white light was made up of a spectrum of colours.
The main advantage of the Newtonian telescope was that it gave a clearer picture since it did not suffer from the chromatic aberration problem of the refracting designs available at the time. any of da Vinci's inventions were iscovered through his sketche Leonardo da Vinci ITALIAN 1452-1519 Da Vinci was a master painter, sculptor and inventor in Renaissance Italy.
His talent and curiosity allowed him to rub shoulders with the upper echelons of Italian society.
His inventions included a grinding machine, hydraulic engines and contraptions used for draining water from harbours.
Many of the inventions he designed never saw use, as they were too outlandish to be constructed, such as a flying machine and an armoured tank.
Mark Zuckerberg AMERICAN 1984Widely credited as the inventor of Facebook, Zuckerberg created the idea of the social networking site from his college bedroom at Harvard as a means for the college fraternity to keep in touch with each other.
As this premise developed into a business, Zuckerberg and his four co-founders built their company through one vision to make the world open.
Facebook has over one billion active users throughout the world. 10 inspiring inventors ""We should be glad of an opportunity to serve others by any invention of ours"" Benjamin Franklin Tim Berners-Lee ENGLISH 1955The creation of the World Wide Web was a combination of inspiration and abstract thinking by Tim Berners-Lee while he was working for CERN, the European organisation for nuclear research.
JAMES DYSON ENGLISH 1947One of the late-20th-century's most iconic inventors, James Dyson’s first invention was the Ballbarrow, a modified version of a wheelbarrow using a ball instead of a wheel.
Other inventions also using a ball followed including a trolley that launched boats before he became frustrated at the poor performance of his vacuum cleaner and decided he could do better.
After five years of different prototypes, his invention was completed, but no UK manufacturer would take the product so he launched it in Japan through catalogue sales.
Dyson vacuum cleaners are now one of that industry's premier brands and Dyson continues to invent, with his latest product a fan without external blades.
He is perhaps best known for the Archimedes screw, which is reputed to have been invented in the Hellenistic period.
The screw revolutionised irrigation techniques in Ancient Greece and Egypt by allowing farmers to transfer water from a low to a high position.
Thomas Edison AMERICAN 1847-1931 Edison revolutionsed communication in 1877 when he invented the carbon microphone, which allowed one person to hear another through a telephone.
The invention was essential in radio broadcasting and saw widespread application in telephones until the 1980s.
He also delivered power to thousands of American homes using his direct current distribution system transferring electricity from power generators to homes, although this was superseded by Tesla's alternating current system.
Benjamin Franklin AMERICAN 1706-1790 Inventor, revolutionary and one of the founding fathers of the United States, Benjamin Franklin is credited as the inventor of a number of contraptions, such as the lightning rod, harnessing electricity from storms, and the Franklin stove.
He also proposed a number of theories to harness the power of nature, including a thesis on kites being used to pull ships across waterways.
He never patented his inventions, as he believed everybody should be able to enjoy them.
His designs did not achieve the recognition his enormous skill deserved until he made a great breakthrough with his Bleriot XI flyer that channel-hopped from England to France in 1909, winning the Daily Mail English Channel challenge.
After his daredevil flight he stopped flying altogether and founded the SPAD aviation company because of his wife's concerns over his safety.
The Wright Flyer was first demonstrated in total secrecy Curtiss flying beat While the design for the first flying boat looked ungainly, Glen H Curtiss' pusher proved to be a success, enabling 1903 Page P.P.42 Based on the designs of World War I bombers, the Page was big, ugly and slow because of the drag it produced.
Wright Flyer The Wright Flyer was as much a moral triumph as it was a triumph of aerial engineering.
There had been countless failures, crashes and accidents resulting in near death before Orville Wright's successful flight on December 17 1903.
The first flight ended in failure, as a problem with one of the Flyers' elevators sent it crashing into the sand around the takeoff zone.
The brothers persevered though and finally the rudimentary pusher engine, the huge wingspan and the pulley system the flyer sat on which was designed to overcome the power-to-weight problem all worked perfectly.
Blerict X The Wright Flyer may have proved it was possible for an aircraft that was 'heavier than air’ to fly, but it was the Bleriot Flyer that showed that air travel was a viable form of transportation.
The Bleriot XI was the first plane to fly across the English Channel in 1909.
The brothers flew their craft in absolute secrecy barring a few select witnesses who could testify that they'd done it.
To the public at large flight was in the purview of socially awkward inventors and university professors, not on the horizon of wider society.
But these contraptions were little more than unreliable, flimsy experiments; good for the inventors who professed that it could be done, but good for little more than this.
Until 1914 there simply wasn't the pioneering spirit outside of the brave experiments of Wright and Bleriot for serious attention to be given to flight.
War gave inventors the opportunity they needed to bring their designs to the attention of powerful men.
With the resources of industrialised nations preparing for war, the gentlemen flyers were given the time and money they needed to truly get off the ground.
Terrible weapons were invented and the war brought the concept of the aerial bomber capable of levelling cities and ever-faster single-seat fighters that filled the skies with deadly dogfights.
As the war drew to its catastrophic conclusion, the aircraft of the early 1900s bore little resemblance to the reliable, skinned war birds of 1918.
Man could now fly into the heavens and have a reasonable expectation that he would make it back to earth in one piece.
The airline started out in the freight industry, offering a mail service from America to the Caribbean.
The company then branched out to offer passenger routes to the Caribbean, Cuba and the paradise locations of Hawaii and the Philippines.
The airline was renowned for the destinations it would fly to, even offering a service to Hong Kong, opening the wonders of the Far East.
Spirit cf St Leu is The Spirit of St Louis was the first plane to cross the Atlantic nonstop.
Flying beat Imperial Airways, later to be known as British Airways, offered comfort and style.
Initially offering its services as a carrier for colonial officials in the ugly but reliable Page H.P.42, the airline quickly grew to accommodate civil passengers flying to exotic destinations.
HOWARD rtDCRCS Hughes H-1 Racer Howard Hughes, the eccentric legend whose millionaire status meant that he could afford to design and build aircraft, designed the Hughes racer.
It was Hughes himself who was at the controls of the racer when he broke the speed record in 1935.
In the attempt he even flew the plane until it ran out of petrol, resulting in him having to make an emergency landing.
American.05-1976 The eccentric millionaire Howard Hughes was a maverick designer and test pilot of the air industry during the golden age of flight.
He was a man who strived for bigger and better aircraft, designing his Hughes H-1 racer to be the fastest aircraft on earth and then his H-4 Hercules to be the largest.
What's more the designs currently in circulation could easily be modified to create passenger planes.
Converted military bomber designs such as the Page H.P.42 offered few luxuries apart from the bonus that it no longer took colonial officials weeks to get anywhere in their vast empires.
Ferrying around the masters of Europe kept fledgling aviation businesses like Imperial Airways afloat, but it didn't make them the super corporations we know them to be today.
As the memories of World War I slowly ebbed away into the new hope of the roaring twenties, pilots started to break records once again.
Charles Lindbergh broke distance records across the Atlantic ocean in the elegant Spirit of St Louis in 1927.
In 1933 the eccentric one-eyed pilot Wiley Post flew his Vega 5C the 'Winnie Mae’ around the world in seven days.
Planes became more and more powerful with new designs to their wings and bodies to make them slick and streamlined.
Reginald Mitchell’s designs for Supermarine created the Supermarine K5054 later to be known as the Spitfire.
It was still not commercially viable for everyone despite the immense interest and press that was lavished on the heroes of the industry.
It wouldn't be enough to fund such a risky business into a mass market on the expectation that people would simply want to travel in planes as an extremely expensive alternative to sea travel.
The answer to convince people to use air travel was found in its appeal the dream of flight.
The aspirational luxury of travelling in a wonderful flying machine to an exotic destination.
Chuck Yeager saw the advent of a new age of air travel from the propeller to the jet.
Starting from humble beginnings in Virginia, Yeager left school and immediately joined the Army Air Corps as a mechanic.
His adventures in flight did not stop there and in 1947 he became the first man to break the sound barrier in the Bell X-1. and Lindbergh.
People wanted to travel and they fell in love with the romanticism of the great pilotexplorers of the age.
The next problem was designing an aircraft that matched the dream’s expectations.
The romanticism of air travel would die a quick death if passengers were forced into cramped, dirty, cold, converted bomb bays of a dressed-up warplane.
The answer lay in a standardised, cheap-to-construct plane that could offer comfort and style for customers and keep the operator in business.
So, in 1926, the airliner was invented and adopted by American Airlines.
Henry Ford, who had been interested in developing a production line base model for the airline industry, created the first of these new 'air trains' in the form of the Ford 5 AT Tri-Motor.
The cabins were still cramped but uncle Ford's planes offered leather interiors, in-flight meals, room for luggage and a host of air stewardesses on-hand to offer stiff drinks and hearty reassurance.
The noise of the engine and the juddery ride didn't make for a restful flight, however.
Designs were proposed for safer craft that offered all the luxury of a sea voyage, the air industry's biggest competitor.
The new flying boats of Boeing encapsulated this drive for luxury travel.
The designs were wild, opulent and captured the essence of glamour inside and out of the aircraft.
Domestic airlines started to set the standard for modern airline services.
Routes within the United States and beyond started to be serviced by the new DC-4s and Boeing 307s, with the great rival companies of Douglas and Boeing going head-to-head to offer more luxury, comfort and safety with smoother rides and faster flights.
World War II changed the aircraft industry yet again this time by unprecedented propositions.
The advent of the jet engine created bigger, faster and more numerous aircraft.
The industry had developed from the domain of the super rich to a service attainable by the new middle classes of the free world.
Aerial regulation, tighter business control and the ever-increasing need to make air travel cost-effective meant that much of the golden age extravagance was lost.
There were to be no more flying boats they were simply too expensive to operate.
No longer could the airlines offer three-course gourmet dinners in a saloon-style bar in-flight, as it was too dangerous any rival fighter aircraft.
Ace American fighter pilot Chuck Yeager was reportedly one of the only men t ever shoot down Me-262.
The turbo prop allowed the propeller to be driven by compressed air making it faster and more fuelefficient.
The aircraft would be travelling too fast for pilots to simply open the canopy and jump.
Instead, a seat combining vertical rockets and seat restraints was designed.
In order to get the pilot clear of the tail fin, the seat had to accelerate the occupant vertically to lOOmph in 0. seconds.
Jacqueline Auriol was one of the only female test pilots during the Cold War.
As daughter-inlaw to the French President during the Forties she was already a minor celebrity.
She than set a world speed record in 1963 with the Dassault Mirage flying at 1,274mph. m Air roKtE N £ 1062 A rocket with a cockpit, the Bell X-1 was the first plane to travel faster than the speed of sound.
Its shape was modelled on a bullet, with its oval nose and thin wings making it as aero-dynamic as possible.
The X-1 was equipped with four rocket chambers that, if fired all at once, created an, ""impact nearly knocks you back into next week"", in the words of test pilot Chuck Yeager.
Competition between East and West created a drive for faster and bigger flying machines me Cell X I to have half-drunk passengers wandering around the cabin if the plane experienced an emergency.
This meant that as standard shapes and sizes in plane design emerged, such as the Boeing model 377, the elaborate styles of the Twenties and Thirties were lost forever.
Big corporations now decided what flew and what didn't based on profit margins.
No one could put this principle better than the American test pilots in the Mojave Desert the men who had broken the sound barrier in the Bell X-1.
Their funding was being cut to make way for space rockets, the next great adventure into the heavens.
In-keeping with this tight eye on business, standard safety features and the need for evergreater passenger capacity per aircraft was the new Holy Grail airlines were forced to pursue.
With the new long-range airliners by 1957 more people were crossing the Atlantic by plane than they were by boat.
The jet engine was gratefully acquired and adapted from the military and soon the propeller-driven airliner was a thing of the past.
The power of the media was harnessed; the sex appeal of air travel with beautiful women and the huge jet planes they could be found in was used to attract the rich and powerful.
As the money started to finally roll in, the market began to shrink to the big players.
Imperial Airways became British Airways, independent American airline companies became united under United Airlines and Pan Am, unable to sustain its fleet of flying boats or its routes adequately without incurring huge losses, finally folded.
It was now possible to travel from London to Sydney in less than 24 hours non-stop in the global village that the airlines had created.
Planes were no longer designed to offer extravagance but rather a safe and comfortable ride.
There was no need for airlines to see themselves in competition with sea voyages, the by-gone years of sea travel in luxury was an expense few modern people could afford.
Business became so successful that airlines could offer evercheaper fares, opening up more markets to well and truly stamp their dominance over the travel industry.
It soon became a dreary era of bigger planes for bigger capacity based on the same basic designs.
In amongst this mediocrity stood one machine that was a piece of breathtaking aeroengineering genius.
It blended the envelope of technological advancement with pure style and luxury worthy of the golden age of flight.
Many airports have had to modify their facilities to accommodate their gigantic size.
The technical challenge of getting an airliner to perform like a fighter aircraft was so huge that when British-Frano aerial engineers started working on the designs more than one critic said it could never be done.
Everything about Concorde was built for speed, its delta wings, its four Rolls Royce engines and its airflow control system were designed to give maximum velocity with minimal drag.
Lockheed SR-I1 Blackbird Reaching a velocity of over three times the speed of sound and a height of 100,000 feet the SR-71 Blackbird was the highest and fastest aircraft in the world.
Used by the United States military for spy missions, its aerodynamics aimed to give maximum power for the least amount of drag, prompting its rather unique appearance.
In order for its pilots to survive the extreme conditions of near space flight, they had to don a space suit with its own oxygen and heat supply.
F 35 f Lightning II f The most technically advanced fighter aircraft and widely rumoured to be the last manned fighter, the F-35 is a true stealth, fly-by-wire, air-superiority fighter.
RICHARD BRANSCN A true pioneer in the modern age of flight, he founded one of the world's most important airlines, Virgin Atlantic, and has since been involved in a number of different air challenges.
One of his most famous record attempts was to be the first man to travel around the world in a hot air balloon, which failed in 1998.
The plane's name was Concorde and it offered its passengers the chance to travel faster than a speeding bullet.
Concorde's retractable nose and delta wing enabled it to pierce the sound barrier, while its four custom-made Rolls Royce engines were powerful enough to give a cruising speed of mach 2.
Yet Concorde was launched into a world that was becoming increasingly hostile to air travel.
Flight was no longer viewed as the glamorous adventure it was three decades before.
Some of the crucial factors stacked against the plane were fuel and noise pollution, the cost of a ticket which for Concorde clocked in at £6,000 return and the extraordinary expense the Concorde planes took to maintain.
There were also serious questions being asked about the aircraft's safety, when in 2000 an Air France-run flight crashed shortly after take-off, killing over a hundred people.
Luxury and speed was now seen as optional extras rather than requirements.
In this competitive world the Concorde represented a technical marvel but one meant for a different age, an age where air travel was something special rather than a mundane day-to-day activity.
From the tentative first flight of the Wright Flyer lifting a few feet off the ground, to the roaring sound of Concorde's Rolls Royce engines at the cusp of the sound barrier, the air industry has always inspired and been inspired by the dreams of entrepreneurs, pilots and adventurers.
Greater and more-powerful machines continue to be designed by the top names in the industry, from the smart fighter jets of the F-22 and F-35, to the first green aircraft of NASA's Helios, ensuring that people continue to take to the air and conquer the heavens above.
Offer code ‘ZGGZIN’ must be quoted to receive this special subscriptions price.
The USA issue rate is based on an annual subscription price of £50 for 13 issues, which is equivalent to $78 at the time of writing compared with the newsstand price of $9.99 for 13 issues being $129.87.
