UZI LANDAU Section: Opinion 1146 Words Page: 04 OpenURL Link The words that follow will not be to the liking of those who consider themselves ""peace activists"" embracing the notion that if only Israel were more ""forthcoming"" peace would prevail.
He knew this represented an immediate threat to the United States and waited to see how the young president of the United States would respond.
On October 22, he addressed the American people declaring that any attack upon the United States emanating from Cuba would be viewed as an attack on the United States by the Soviet Union itself.
United States vessels and planes imposed a blockade on Cuba, stopping Soviet ships from reaching the island.
Six tense days passed before Khrushchev ordered the removal of the missiles.
On November 20, and not before the last missile had been removed, Kennedy lifted the blockade.
NOW FAST forward to 2000, when in the wake of serious terrorist attacks, Israel rashly and unilaterally withdrew from its security zone in South Lebanon.
Hizbullah had been born in the early 1980s, inspired by Iran and energetically fostered by Syria.
Israel's withdrawal gifted its enemies with a perfect opportunity to increase the flow of arms to Hizbullah in South Lebanon and train it for the next war.
In a short time, thousands of rockets threatening Israel were deployed in the region creating a new balance of terror.
Israeli prime ministers received detailed intelligence reports on the rocket array capable of reaching beyond northern Israel virtually to the country's center.
Our leaders also turned a blind eye when Hizbullah detonated explosive charges along the northern security fence, and basically disregarded Hizbullah's abduction and killing of IDF soldiers on various occasions.
The Israeli leadership continued to shirk its responsibilities to deal with the military infrastructure Hizbullah had created its chain of subterranean bunkers, protected rocket-launching sites and command and control systems.
Having established its strength in the field, Hizbullah then ran for the Lebanese parliament, further consolidating its already powerful political position within Lebanon.
While Damascus was directly supplying the missiles and openly preventing Lebanon from acting against Hizbullah, not a single word of warning to Syria was uttered.
That may be the way peace activists view the world, but it is not the way Syria, Hizbullah and Hamas understood Jerusalem's acquiescence to Arab assertiveness.
Instead, the terror-supporting entities saw Israel as weak and indecisive.
In the face of the powder keg threatening to explode in its face from Lebanon, and the Kassam rockets raining down on its citizens in the South, Jerusalem mostly sat on its hands.
No wonder that on July 12 Hizbullah attacked Israel's northern border, launching a diversionary rockets assault on nearby boarder towns while killing eight soldiers and abducting two others.
All the while, Syria continued to send missiles to Hizbullah, paralyzing a third of the State of Israel.
Israel did attack the weapons convoys coming from Syria, but only after they had crossed into Lebanon.
It proved the United States' willingness to confront the USSR in order to defend its own citizens.
It was also this American assertiveness that prevented a nuclear confrontation between the two superpowers.
It goes without saying that Kennedy's standing grew as a result of his steadfastness against aggression, while Khrushchev was deposed not long afterwards.
In comparison, our Lebanese ""missile crisis"" ended with a victory for the Axis of Evil.
That helps explain why Iran has contemptuously dismissed the latest ultimatum from the international community and has stepped up its nuclear development program.
It explains why, in Lebanon, Nasrallah's standing is growing ever stronger, despite the fact that he is forced to hide in his bunker.
It is Israel's position that has been weakened, first of all in the eyes of its enemies.
But even more worrying, some of our friends now view Israel as less of a strategic asset and more as a burden.
He lacks the courage and historic wisdom needed to guide Israel in this treacherous region and difficult time.
If only he had learned from Kennedy to threaten the messenger, but place the onus on and act mainly against the actor actually calling the shots.
As rockets and missiles were launched that sent a million Israelis to their bomb shelters, Olmert failed to hold Syria rather than Lebanon responsible.
Had he done so from the start, he might have prevented the war that was.
But even more ominously, Olmert's fear of confronting Syria despite its blatant role in the month-long bombing campaign against the North has sown the seeds for the next war.
More than Israel needs a commission of inquiry, it needs to speedily rehabilitate the Israel Defense Forces.
Israel must be willing to go to war to prevent future rocket and missile attacks against our population centers.
But what we most need is the kind of courageous, wise and determined leadership provided by a Jack Kennedy.
That was the moment, half a century ago this week, when Russia and America squared up to each other with the threat of nuclear weapons.
When the tense stand-off ended with the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba, it was widely seen as a triumph for United States President John F Kennedy, emblematic of his presidency and proof of his skills as a crisis manager, communicator, team leader and PR genius.
For Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, though, it was seen as an embarrassing climbdown and he fell from power two years later.
But newly released tapes of Kennedy's meetings reveal a secret deal that conceded more to the Russians than anyone suspected.
It was on October 16 that photographs from United States spy planes showed the CIA the Soviets had installed 12 SS-5 and three SS-4 nuclear missile launch pad sites on Cuba, only 90 miles from the American coast.
Kennedy's reaction was to set up a special Executive Committee to offer him advice.
It had his brother Bobby, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and other top advisors, including CIA boss John McCone.
The transcripts emerged 23 years later under the Freedom of Information Act.
He and most of ExComm favoured an air strike to destroy the missiles, until the air force said it could not guarantee the destruction of all sites.
Instead, in a TV address on October 22, he announced a blockade of Cuba to stop any more getting there.
Since these were international waters, it could have been considered a declaration of war.
The Turks owned 15 Jupiter ballistic missiles under Nato control with United States warheads at the time.
To make matters worse, U-2 spy plane pilot Major Rudolf Anderson Jr was shot down and killed over Cuba on October 27 by Soviet forces acting without Khrushchev's approval.
If things had escalated, events could have been put in train that might have led to the end of life on Earth.
If the Russians had rolled their numerically superior Warsaw Pact forces into western Europe, it could have been only a matter of time before Nato would have been forced to use nuclear weapons it could not have held back a conventional attack.
And both sides had enough nuclear megatonnage to destroy the Earth many times over.
At the United Nations, United States ambassador Adlai Stevenson said unless the second Khrushchev letter was dealt with, the initiative would be lost.
It was feared that Turkey, unwilling to be treated like pawns, would derail any deal by blocking the removal of the Jupiters.
Meanwhile, work was continuing round the clock in Cuba to make the nuclear sites operational.
Difficulties were also multiplying in maintaining the blockade without a conflict.
Unknown to ExComm, at 7.45pm on October 27 a private conversation took place in Washington between Bobby Kennedy the US Attorney General and Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
Bobby threatened to invade Cuba, but he also offered to remove the Jupiters within six months accepting the terms of the second letter.
He was therefore publicly accepting the first and privately accepting the second a brilliant tactic far removed from what he publicly claimed to be doing.
By 9am on October 28, Washington had been informed Khrushchev had accepted terms.
Within three hours, workmen in Cuba began dismantling the nuclear sites.
The Americans ended the blockade and stood down their forces from DefCon 2.
One of the stipulations Robert Kennedy made was that the Cuba-Turkey connection should be secret or it would smell of appeasement.
If the Russians publicised it, he said Washington would deny its existence and keep the Jupiters in Turkey.
Khrushchev was seen to have ""blinked first"" but the Russians got more than they could have hoped, considering their aims were more limited than people realised.
The United States gave up its missiles and gave an undertaking that Communism was safe only 90 miles from its shores.
The Castro regime still rules Cuba today and has long outlived the Soviet Union itself.
Afterward, men on both sides of the drama came away believing only luck prevented the two superpowers from plunging the world into a nuclear conflagration.
Kennedy, with his admirers recounting how he kept his nerve and averted war.
Concerned about the Americans' edge in nuclear weapons and United States efforts to topple Cuba's pro-Moscow regime, Khrushchev decided in May 1962 to send more than 40,000 troops and dozens of nuclear missiles to Cuba.
All the while, Khrushchev kept reassuring Washington that deploying Soviet offensive weapons to Cuba was out of the question.
American leaders were astonished when they learned on October 16 of the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba, captured in photos taken by a U-2 spy plane.
On October 22, Kennedy laid out the crisis in a speech to Americans and ordered United States forces on a state of maximum alert.
The president rejected the advice of his generals and opted for the naval blockade.
With United States warships in place, the White House waited anxiously for the arrival of Soviet ships steaming towards Cuba.
The Soviet vessels turned around and headed back home, a move greeted with relief around the world.
Kennedy and Khrushchev searched for a way out of the deadlock, but their efforts were hamstrung by crossed wires, misunderstandings and cumbersome diplomatic correspondence that allowed for no direct channel of communication.
On the evening of October 26, the Soviets proposed withdrawing their missiles on the condition the Americans promise not to invade Cuba.
But the following day, Moscow issued a public demand for the United States to pull out its Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
On October 27, what would become known as ""Black Saturday,"" a U-2 aircraft was shot down over Cuba and Kennedy's advisers then debated retaliatory air strikes.
It was not until 30 years later that the Americans learned ""the Soviets had dozens of short-range battlefield missiles on the island, equipped with nuclear warheads capable of wiping out an entire invading force,"" wrote Dobbs.
Under a compromise, Washington pledged not to invade Cuba and secretly agreed to pull out its missiles from Turkey, while Moscow promised to withdraw its warheads from the island.
For the former head of the KGB's Cuban department, Nikolai Leonov, the peaceful ending seemed like a miracle.
Ardolino, of Burnt Store Marina, south of Punta Gorda, served a couple of years as a member of Company B, 25th Signal Battalion in Germany during the early 1960s.
He and his buddies strung telephone lines from the command center to the front lines in case war broke out.
It was after basic at Fort Dix, N.J., Ardolino was sent to Fort Gordon, Ga., in the Signal Corps and learned to set telephone poles and string wire.
Then he was sent to Germany to serve the final two years of a three-year hitch in the Army.
The other eight months we were in the field on maneuvers living in 10-man tents.
We had cots and sleeping bags that got dirty and you didn’t want to get into after a couple of weeks.
We had a 2 ½-ton truck and were on our way back from the field and stopped in a local restaurant to get something to eat.
When we left the restaurant our team chief wanted to drive and got behind the wheel of the truck.
I don’t think we went three-quarters of a mile in the cold when our leader couldn’t negotiate a curve and the truck flipped after running off the road.
We’d flipped a coin to see who was going to get the warm spot and sit in the center with each one of us on either side.
My other buddy was thrown clear of the truck and only suffered a broken ankle.
Ardolino ended up in the hospital for weeks recovering from a severe gash on one leg and a broken bone in his other leg.
When he was released he was put on light duty for a few months until he could get back on his feet.
She wrote me and said the Army wouldn’t tell her very much about what happened to her son.
I couldn’t write her back and tell her anything without being reprimanded by my superiors.
They told me my records showed the only injury I suffered in the accident was a broken nose.
After the hearing, the VA bumped my claim up from 10 percent to 40 percent.
They also issued us live ammunition when we were on guard duty and that was a big thing.
Russian President Nikita Khrushchev sent JFK a letter diffusing the incident when he wrote he would pull the Soviet missiles out of Cuba if the United States would pull its missiles out of Turkey.
After he was discharged from the state police, he and his wife, Diana, moved to Burnt Store Marina in 1978.
The ensuing crisis brought the world the closest it has ever come to thermonuclear destruction.
During the next 13 days, as Kennedy's inner circle debated what to do, the president secretly tape-recorded the discussions.
These tapes, meticulously edited by Harvard historians, present a definitive record of how the U S. government functions in mortal crisis.
The tapes should prove invaluable to historians of this period and foreign policy mavins willing to put in the often tedious work of reading them.
In addition to the raw material of the tapes, the editors present a background of key historical experiences, such as Munich, Pearl Harbour and the Bay of Pigs, which dominated the minds of the president and his advisers.
They also supply continuity when key discussions are unrecorded, and assess the thinking of the Soviet side, based on records, such as Nikita S Khrushchev's memoirs, that are now available.
What the editors do not provide is any perspective to help the reader see the crisis in the broader scope of history or the moral struggle of the species.
Staring at them -in their imaginations -is the ghostly visage of Soviet Chairman Khrushchev, who has initiated the crisis and commands the only force on Earth that seriously can challenge the United States.
Kennedy's job, and that of his advisers, is to discern Khrushchev's motives and anticipate his actions.
Throughout the debate, Kennedy seems considerably less in charge than the editors of this volume claim.
Whatever structure exists, and many of the final solutions, are provided mainly by McNamara, whose role the editors inexplicitly slight.
The tapes tell the familiar story of how the United States imposed a naval blockade to stop delivery of new missiles and warheads to Cuba, and how, eventually, Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships to turn around.
But the tapes do contain a major revelation or, at least, a confirmation of what many historians long have suspected, that Kennedy secretly agreed to remove U S. nuclear-armed Jupiter missiles from Turkey, in return for a Soviet agreement to dismantle the missiles in Cuba.
Secrecy was maintained to protect the credibility of the NATO alliance.
Indeed, Kennedy warns Khrushchev that if the deal is made public, the offer will be withdrawn.
When the two-week crisis is over, the sigh of relief from the American team, nerve-frayed and exhausted, is almost audible.
How close the world came to Armageddon, how chaotic the process of decision-making was.
In providing a record of the crisis, The Kennedy Tapes begs the question if ever again the world can afford an international system that permits the world to come this close to destruction.
Craig Eisendrath was a United States Foreign Service Officer during the Cuban missile crisis.
The retired Air Force colonel was on the front lines of the crisis in 1962 when the United States and the Soviet Union came close to war over the installation of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
But tension and a United States blockade lasted until Nov., when Cuban Premier Fidel Castro agreed to remove Soviet bombers, as well as the missiles.
Kern was then a captain and one of nine pilots brought in to fly U-2s for the Strategic Air Command as tension increased during the summer of 1962.
There were reports as early as July of Soviet missile shipments to Cuba.
During the height of the crisis, Kern and the other U-2 pilots flew out of Laughlin AFB in Del Rio for almost daily flights over Cuba.
One particular mission in mid-October turned out to be a pilot's worst nightmare.
Kern was approaching Havana International Airport when he saw two Soviet-made MiG-21 fighters take off and head in his direction.
The cabin frosted over, so Kern couldn't see out the windows and his pressurized flight suit inflated automatically.
He was also gliding in a lifeless plane and his only view of the outside was through his drift sight, a device used to see out the bottom of the plane.
When Kern saw the MiGs take off, he decided to break the radio silence imposed on the mission to report the enemy plane action to ground control in Florida.
He also called Robert Spencer, another U-2 pilot flying a parallel track about 10 miles to the right and five minutes ahead.
If he had waited much longer, his radio messages wouldn't have gotten through.
He knew he could restart his engine once he got to a lower altitude, where the air has more oxygen.
United States fighter planes went after the MiGs, who decided to withdraw rather than risk a confrontation.
Kern was born and raised in San Antonio, graduating from Jefferson High School.
He remained a U-2 pilot participating in missions over Vietnam and other areas and received many decorations, including the Distinguished Flying Cross, the Air Medal and the Legion of Merit.
Kern said he has flown 16 different types of military aircraft, but seemed especially well suited to the U-2.
Charles Jr. works on the flight line for a commercial airline in Boston and William is a playwright based in Chicago.
Khrushchev's thoughts were outlined in an extraordinary exchange of post-crisis letters with Kennedy that the State Department made public Monday after keeping them secret for more than 29 years.
The letters highlight the hopes, fears and deep mistrust of the two leaders as they sought to come to grips with the aftermath of the most dangerous nuclear crisis the world has confronted.
The disclosure of the letters ended a four-year campaign for their release by the National Security Archives, a private foreign policy research group based in Washington.
Fifteen letters exchanged between Oct., 1962, and Dec., 1962, were released.
The crisis erupted in October 1962 after United States reconnaissance flights verified reports that the Soviet Union was building missile launching sites in Cuba.
Kennedy rejected advice from the Pentagon to launch a surprise attack to destroy the sites.
On Oct., he declared a ""quarantine,"" or naval blockade, around Cuba and demanded withdrawal of all missiles.
After two tense weeks during which it seemed as though nuclear war was inevitable, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles while Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and to remove the blockade.
Two days after the crisis ended, on Nov., Khrushchev wrote Kennedy, ""We received your assurances that you would not invade Cuba and would not permit others to do it and on this condition we withdraw the weapons which you called offensive.
At the time, the outcome of the crisis was widely viewed as an American triumph because Kennedy had been able to induce Khrushchev to dismantle the missiles.
There is little new information contained in the letters, but they underscored once again the difficulties the two sides experienced in working out the final details of the tentative agreement that defused the threat of a nuclear war.
The exchanges indicated the concern of the two leaders that the agreement could have fallen apart, reviving the crisis.
Kennedy expressed grave concern about the opposition of Cuban President Fidel Castro to outside verification that the missiles had been withdrawn and to initial refusal to go along with the United States demand that several high-performance Soviet bombers be removed.
While Khrushchev sought to minimize the significance of the bombers, Kennedy said their presence in Cuba was a matter of ""great importance"" to the United States.
After weeks of sparring, the flap ended with an agreement to return the bombers to the Soviet Union.
Instead, they found a grim-faced John Kennedy, sitting at a desk, a speech clutched in his hands.
Without ado, he announced that missile bases were being built on the ""imprisoned island.
In downtown Miami, folks crowded around televisions in the windows of appliance stores.
Stunned, they watched in silence as the president announced a ""quarantine,"" blocking any military supplies going to Cuba.
What the president did not reveal was that, as he talked, about 80 nuclear-laden B-52s were in the air, heading toward the Arctic, prepared to launch an immediate attack on the Soviet Union if there were indications that the Soviets were ordering a first-strike at the United States.
For the first and only time in its existence, the Strategic Air Command had been ordered to Defcom 2 status, one step short of all-out war.
The largest mobilization of the United States military since World War II was under way.
For the next week, one-eighth of the nation's B-52s were to be airborne at any given moment.
As Kennedy finished his crisp, 17-minute speech, 22 United States interceptor aircraft were sent into the sky over Key West and the Florida Straits, prepared to stop any sudden air strike that might come out of Cuba.
The speech culminated a long, tension-filled day for the Kennedy administration.
Leaders had been busy briefing a steady stream of politicians and allies about the Cuban situation.
Richard Russell of Georgia had exploded, demanding that the United States invade Cuba immediately.
Kennedy said he had considered that option, but rejected it because he thought it could well lead to nuclear war.
Republicans, even though the off-year election was only days away, decided they had to support the President.
At a symphony concert in Dade County Auditorium, 2,000 people stood and sang the national anthem after being told about the speech.
The Greater Miami Council of Churches asked all churches to remain open all night and the next day for prayer.
Tony Varona, leader of Rescate, a Miami exile group, asked Washington to form all Cubans into military units so they could participate in the invasion that he was convinced was imminent.
Having heard the American news reports about a possible invasion and hearing that Kennedy was about to make a major announcement, Fidel Castro had ordered the Cuban military to its highest alert level at 5:40m., more than an hour before Kennedy's speech.
Castro was ready for anything and willing to sacrifice anything to defend Cuba and the revolution.
Aleksander Alekseev, Soviet ambassador to Cuba at the time of the crisis, urged Kremlin leaders to allow release of the letters.
Other ""people very close to Gorbachev and the Central Committee"" also embraced the idea, he said.
But Blight said the Soviets would not release the correspondence without the State Department approval.
Previous requests by the library on behalf of individual scholars have been rejected.
The State Department has not announced its decision to the school or library.
Edward M Kennedy, D-Mass., in a letter and a telephone conversation last month that the documents would remain sealed.
Kennedy had been working on behalf of the school to have the documents declassified.
Kennedy aide Paul Donovan said discussions between Shultz and the senator were private and that Kennedy would not release his correspondence with the secretary of state.
The world leaders exchanged 22 letters between Oct. and Dec. concerning the missile crisis, according to Suzanne Forbes, an archivist at the Kennedy Library in Boston.
Ten of the letters were declassified in 1973 by the State Department and the 11th was released in 1979, she said.
The remaining letters, written by both men from Oct. through Dec., have remained sealed at the Boston library despite periodic requests by the library on behalf of scholars to have them released.
Blight expressed skepticism about the ""national security"" reason for keeping the letters classified.
Blight also suggested that the State Department may fear setting a precedent.
Florida Author: CHRISTINE ARMARIO Associated Press Section: News 1521 Words OpenURL Link MIAMI — Julio Castro sat at his uncle's Miami home as President John F Kennedy came on the television the night of Oct., 1962, to tell the nation the Soviet Union was building launch sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba capable of reaching almost every city in the Western Hemisphere.
Castro had fled the Caribbean island earlier that year, and his parents and siblings were still there.
He'd joined the United States Army in August, thinking that with the help of a superpower, he and the growing contingent of exiles in Miami could defeat the communists who had taken control nearly four years before.
Castro stood ready for his orders, ready to do anything to secure the United States and free his family.
Unbeknownst to one another, Julio and Jose Castro had both enlisted in the military, the older brother with the United States, the younger with Cuba.
As the United States and the Soviets inched closer to catastrophe half a century ago this month, one brother stood in the trenches watching Soviet troops set up outside Havana, while the other awaited orders in Miami.
Each well knows what may have happened had Kennedy heeded some advisors' call to invade Cuba.
He would go around the city in his red Austin Healey coupe and hit the clubs with friends.
Under Fulgencio Batista's rule, the gap between rich and poor grew wider and corruption was rampant.
The boys' own grandfather, a congressman who belonged to an opposition political party, was followed and harassed.
Inside their own household, there was joy and discontent when Fidel Castro, who is not related to them, and the revolutionaries marched triumphantly into Havana and took control of the government in 1959.
Their father, who had studied philosophy, liked the ideas of socialism.
Their mother, on the other hand, was startled by the firing squad executions of former Batista officials and many others shown on television.
Jose Castro was also starting to develop a political consciousness of his own.
He'd been asked to leave his Catholic school after joining a student revolutionary group, and because he was still too young for most jobs, his options were limited.
At night, when they met at home, the two young men refrained from discussing their political differences.
Jose Castro joined a union and pledged to enlist in the new government's revolutionary army, which was no small commitment.
In order to join up, Jose had to complete a 38-mile walk to prove his stamina.
He looked at his mother, wishing he could say something to console her, but knowing that his mind was firm.
His older brother, meanwhile, had begun making arrangements to leave Cuba in the months after the battle at the Bay of Pigs, in which the Cuban military routed an invading brigade of American-trained Cuban exiles.
Julio Castro applied for a student visa with the help of an uncle in Miami, not telling his brother or his father.
If either knew, he feared it could put his exit in jeopardy or endanger the entire family.
So on a January day in 1962, he left for the airport alone in a taxicab, without saying goodbye to anyone.
As he worked his way through an inspection at the airport, a member of the revolutionary guard, a young man from their neighborhood, recognized him.
Several United States officials argued for an immediate invasion of Cuba, but Kennedy doubted that was the best approach.
Ninety miles away, Jose Castro received orders to help guard a Soviet base in a wooded area; while he was told there were missiles inside, Castro never saw them himself.
He was assigned to stand in the trenches outside, and could see the Soviets enter and leave the base.
On Oct., Kennedy went on television and informed Americans of the impending nuclear threat.
Any attack from Cuba in the Western Hemisphere would require ""full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union,"" he said.
He had already agreed to participate in Operation Mongoose, another CIA plot to remove Fidel Castro and the communist regime from power.
As the missile crisis unfolded, he was awaiting his orders to be sent for bacterial, chemical and nuclear training at Fort Knox in Kentucky.
B-52s and intercontinental ballistic missiles were prepared to launch at a moment's notice.
Soviet and United States diplomats went back and forth, seeking a peaceful solution.
Finally, on Oct., Kennedy agreed to remove missiles in Italy and Turkey in exchange for the Soviets dismantling and removing the nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Jose Castro was sent back to the factory, where he had continued working, not yet a full member of the military.
Julio Castro was shipped the next month to Fort Knox, where, even after the crisis was averted, he worked on Operation Mongoose and hoped to overthrow the communists.
His mother and two sisters left the island and joined his older brother in the United States during that time.
His mother kept in contact with his wife, and sent him One A Day vitamins that he took for decades, even when he was sent to Angola.
When his military service was over, Jose Castro entered the civilian workforce.
He didn't have the benefits given to members of the military anymore food and vacations for his family and rides to work.
He and his family lived in a modest apartment with furniture his mother had bought in the 1950s.
In 2004, more than 10 years after retiring from the military, Jose Castro was granted permission to leave the country.
In some ways, Jose Castro grew up to be more like his big brother than he might have known.
Though Cuba's communist leaders remain at odds with the United States 50 years later, both governments have eased their policies, allowing more interaction between Cubans on either side of the Florida Straits.
For Julio Castro, the Cold War still remains, the mission he wanted to accomplish only half complete.
The family is reunited, though in a different country than they had hoped to be.
