Its dates are often given as Oct.-28, 1962, but we might say the crisis really began Oct., when Maj.
Richard Heyser took off from the California desert in a U-2 spy plane, flew over Cuba and landed at Orlando's McCoy Air Force Base.
The images he captured from 70,000 feet above Cuba would start the United States on the road to a scary confrontation with the Soviet Union.
Eight days later, on Oct., President John F Kennedy told the nation on live television that the Soviets were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba that were capable of striking most United States cities.
The sky over the Orlando area roared with ""an endless procession of troop carriers and cargo planes,"" and two of the Air Force's top-performing fighter planes had also been spotted at McCoy.
McCoy was a Strategic Air Command base, ""and you didn't see paratroopers at a SAC base,"" Grierson said in 1987.
Soon, McCoy's B-52 fliers were told that the Air Force was sending them to other bases to make room at McCoy for more Army paratroopers, who could be dropped into Cuba for an invasion.
Bomb shelters, mall openings As longtime Central Floridians look back at October 1962, many remember confusion and fear.
But if you scan the city's newspapers from late that October, you might be impressed by how low-profile the crisis appears.
Headlines about it competed for Orlandoans' attention with the grand opening of the expanded Colonial Plaza.
Hailed as ""the largest and newest shopping complex south of Atlanta,"" the shopping center now included an enclosed mall capped by a four-story Jordan Marsh department store.
At the mall's opening Oct. the same day President Kennedy would address the nation 11 beauty queens snipped a ribbon, kicking off ""one of the biggest shopping sprees in the history of Orlando,"" the Sentinel reported.
By Oct., the annual Parade of Homes vied for front-page space with the latest from Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev.
It's important to remember that news coverage in 1962 was far different than it is today.
Television stations didn't broadcast around the clock; they signaled the end the broadcast day with the national anthem, followed by a test pattern.
When President Kennedy asked for TV time from the three broadcast networks for 7m. on a Monday night, his address signaled a major event not only in the Cold War but also in the evolution of television.
When the Soviet Union deployed missiles in Cuba, it led to the Caribbean crisis,"" Putin said, using the Russian term for the Cuban missile crisis.
The discovery in October 1962 that Moscow was secretly building nuclear missile launchpads in Cuba pushed the world close to nuclear war in a terrifying 13-day brinkmanship between the Soviet Union and the United States.
Moscow has reacted angrily to the plans, saying the missile defence system is actually aimed at Russia.
Putin said on Thursday that Washington was creating ""threats"" near Russia's borders.
The Russian president was speaking at a press conference after meeting EU leaders at a summit in Portugal.
His comments came after the head of Russian strategic missile forces warned that Moscow could restart at short notice production of short and medium-range missiles, amid fears of a renewed arms race.
We have everything needed to do this,"" said General Nikolai Solovtsov, quoted by Interfax.
US and Russian officials have discussed possible compromises on the missile defence shield, including allowing Russia access to the installations and ensuring they are only activated when a threat is identified.
So begins the first of some 21 meetings held during the succeeding two weeks as the United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war.
The existence of tapes of these meetings was a closely held secret until the summer of 1973 when they were revealed during the investigations of the Watergate scandal.
Transferred to the John F Kennedy Presidential Library in 1975, they remained, for the most part, classified.
The result is a work of nonfiction as gripping as any fictional account of international crisis, and more compelling by virtue of being true.
After Kennedy left the final meeting of the day (leaving the tape running), Robert McNamara, secretary of defense, mused, ""I'll be quite frank.
Troubled by the risk of escalation following military action, McNamara floated the idea of a blockade of offensive weapons.
Though the blockade became the first line of American response, Kennedy and his advisers talked their way through the maze of options as tension increased day by day with the discovery of intermediate range missile sites, as some of the medium range sites became operational, and with the discovery of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff were never far in the background, preparing for air strikes and an invasion, and urging commitment to significant military action as soon as possible.
The tension reached a climax the evening of Oct., a Saturday that began with Khrushchev publicly offering a deal radically different from one he had proposed privately the night before in a long rambling letter to Kennedy.
Soviet ships continued to head for Cuba, Cuban forces were mobilizing, a U2 spy plane inadvertently strayed over Soviet air space , and another U2 was shot down by the Cubans.
The last meeting of that nightmare of a day ended with a bit of gallows humor.
With the 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade boarding ships to carry it to invasion staging areas, President Kennedy had difficulty sleeping and stayed up late to watch ""Roman Holiday"" with Audrey Hepburn and Gregory Peck.
Terrifying though the plot is, ""The Kennedy Tapes"" is reassuring in the view it gives us of American crisis management in action.
Kennedy's advisers represented a wide range of points of view, and wildly different characters.
With courage, patience and the calm determination to find the best option, they managed to avoid the war that might have destroyed our civilization.
Castro, the only surviving leader of the three involved in the 1962 confrontation that brought the United States and Soviet Union to the brink of war, welcomed more than 30 participants to a three-day conference on the crisis.
Cuba, the United States and the former Soviet Union have recently released previously classified documents relating to the 1962 crisis when United States President John F Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev confronted each other over Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Castro said he had not yet had a chance to study letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev recently released in the United States.
He added that he believed other unpublished messages between the two leaders could ""shed a little light"" on the 1962 crisis.
Kennedy's defense secretary, and former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko.
Each side has its own version of events of what happened in October 1962, when the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba, and the United States imposed a quarantine on the island and demanded and obtained the removal of the rockets.
The session was closed to reporters, and the participant spoke on the condition of anonymity.
The participant said the Cubans also had complained that the United States should have used diplomatic channels to express its demand that the Soviet missiles be withdrawn and to clarify American intentions.
Georgy A Arbatov, head of the U.S.A.-Canada Institute, a Kremlin research organization, told the conference that then-Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev had erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he had not anticipated the United States reaction and humiliated his country, the participant said.
But other Soviet officials at the session praised Khrushchev as a ''great statesman'' who succeeded in getting the Americans to promise not to invade Cuba.
Seated around an oval table topped with blue felt, McNamara and other United States participants including McGeorge Bundy, Theodore C Sorensen and Pierre Salinger exchanged thoughts with Soviets, including Gromyko, Arbatov and Anatoly F Dobrynin, the former Soviet ambassador to the United States.
In a message read at the ceremony by Jack Matlock, the United States ambassador to the Soviet Union, Bush called the session the ''latest example of the new openness'' under Soviet leader Mikhail S Gorbachev.
Bush said international security would be helped by closer study of the Cuban missile crisis.
Associated Press MOSCOW Americans and Soviets who led their nations through the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 met Friday to draw lessons from the incident in superpower brinkmanship.', St.
Garthoff, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and a State Department participant in the crisis, based his article on Soviet sources who under the policy of greater openness, or glasnost, are beginning to discuss formerly taboo subjects.
Sergo Mikoyan has now confirmed that the full Soviet military complement in Cuba in October 1962 totaled 42,000 men,' Garthoff wrote.
Such ""voluntaristic' actions led to Khrushchev's downfall two years later.
The deal, which was very close to the final resolution, called for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba in return for removal of United States missiles from Turkey.
Fyodor Burlatski, who was a member of Khrushchev's inner circle, and Sergo Mikoyan, who is the son of Anastas Mikoyan and is an expert of Soviet-Cuban relations.
Garthoff also quoted a number of unidentified Soviet officials who he said are well-placed but not ready to step into the spotlight.
More disclosures are possible at an international conference on the Cuban missile crisis tentatively scheduled for January in Moscow.
By standing firm and acting tough, the United States forced the Soviet Union to withdraw its missiles from Cuba.
But the crisis really ended in a tie, since the United States secretly promised the Soviets it would not invade Cuba and it would remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey, according to Lebow.
Nonetheless, what people remember is the tough guy act, and that is reflected in current United States nuclear policy, he said.
He is an expert on crisis management, a scientist thrilled by uncovering how statesmen behave in times of pressure.
As a professor of government and director of the Peace Studies Program at Cornell, Lebow is in a position to influence national thinking about nuclear crisis management.
Lebow also has created war games for high-ranking military men, and has lectured to the staffs of President Reagan and former President Carter, he said.
By analyzing the assumptions and mistakes made in past military crises, Lebow hopes to help statesmen make better decisions in the future, he said.
The stakes are much higher now, with thousands of nuclear weapons scattered around the earth.
The motives of the other side are not always what they appear to be; all factors cannot be controlled; and countries may actually act tough because they feel insecure, not strong, he said.
Lebow, who is writing a book on the subject, participated in two meetings last year on the 25th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis.
The idea was to have policy makers speak frankly about those 13 tension-filled days that brought the world to the brink of a nuclear confrontation, said Lebow.
The meetings were extraordinary because three top Soviet officials gave their perceptions about the crisis, and demonstrated how wrongly the United States interpreted the motives of the Soviets, said Lebow.
The Soviet officials who visited Harvard for the meeting in October were Georgi Shaknazarov, a member of the Soviet Central Committee; Fedor Burlatsky, a speech writer for Khrushchev; and Sergi Mikoyan, a Foreign Ministry officer.
From Kennedy's point of view it seemed as if Khrushchev was flexing his nuclear muscles, said Lebow.
Khrushchev claimed to have more missiles than the United States, had started the Berlin blockade, and had tightened the grip of communism in Eastern Europe.
But what the three Soviets at the conference revealed was that Khrushchev put the missiles in Cuba because he felt weak, said Lebow.
And the United States response only worsened that feeling and tightened his room to maneuver.
With the help of newly installed satellites, the United States was able to see that the Soviet Union did not really have nuclear superiority over the United States.
Kennedy imparted this to Khrushchev, said Lebow, and the Soviet leader was worried that the United States might publicly expose the weakness.
Khrushchev also was intimidated by the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, right next to the Soviet Union, said Lebow.
He wanted Kennedy to have the same feeling -that death was at his back door, said Lebow.
The Soviets also misinterpreted actions of the United States, said Lebow.
Right before the crisis, the United States military conducted a series of what it considered benign exercises.
They were a mock invasion of an island nation with the intent to overthrow a communist dictator.
The code name for the exercises was ORTSAC -Castro spelled backwards, said Lebow.
This, combined with the Central Intelligence Agency's repeated attempts to kill Fidel Castro, convinced the Soviets that an invasion of Cuba was imminent -even though the United States had no such plans at the time.
While just two small components of the Cuban missile crisis, these two examples demonstrate how misperception can color and influence the creation of policy, said Lebow.
The United States and the Soviet Union felt challenged because they misinterpreted other's actions, he said.
Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis.
Caroline Kennedy unveiled the ""Rape of the Sabine Women"" on Thursday, on loan through Jan. from the Museum of Fine Arts.
The painting, a 6-foot-by-4-foot vertical oil on canvas, depicts in bold colors two armed men with spear and sword raised toward each other, standing over a woman and wailing child.
Picasso started the work soon after the 13-day crisis, referencing a fabled abduction of Sabine women by ancient Romans.
Legend has it, Rome faced a shortage of marriageable women after it was founded or perhaps sought an alliance with a nearby warlike tribe, the Sabines.
Roman leaders invited the Sabines to a feast, only to capture dozens to hundreds of Sabine virgins.
The Sabines later tried to rescue the women, who reminded them the Romans were now the men's relatives by marriage and brokered a truce.
On the back of a flatbed trailer, the deactivated missile -which may once have carried a nuclear warhead -is due to pass through the area on Interstate 95 before dawn Thursday ahead of its scheduled arrival at the George T Baker Aviation School in Miami.
Then it will be returned to the barn at the Nike Missile Base in Everglades National Park in time for the 50th anniverary of the Cuban missile crisis in October.
We were preparing for World War III,"" said Ryan Meyer, the park ranger who oversees the Nike site.
One whose memory has never waned is Charles D Carter, who over the past 11 years has worked to locate a surplus missile to bring to the site where he was stationed as a 17-year-old Army private.
Carter, who nows lives in Palm Desert, Calif., became the Nike site's unofficial historian after the Sept. 11 terror attacks.
He visited the Nike site, found it in good condition, and with the cooperation of the National Park Service, began to hunt for a missile.
Through the Army's Center of Military History, he found it in the Anniston, Ala., Army Depot.
Carter was also instrumental in getting the 40-acre Nike base listed on the United States Department of the Interior's National Register of Historic Places in 2004, as a site with important cultural significance.
The base, which is within Everglades National Park, includes 22 buildings, including three missile barns, a missile assembly building, a guard dog kennel and a barracks.
The Army stopped using the base, home of the 52nd Air Defense Artillery, in 1979.
It opened to the public in 2009, with tours available from December through April.
The $10,000 cost of transporting and restoring the missile is being picked up by the South Florida National Parks Trust, said Meyer.
Once unloaded, the missile will be positioned beside two aircraft parked on school grounds, and may be visible to motorists passing by on Lejeune Road, east of Miami International Airport.
Sometime in October, the missile will be trucked to Homestead and displayed in a launch position when the park resumes tours of the Nike base in December.
For Meyer, the addition of the missile will rachet up the impact for visitors.
SunSentinel.com/missile Tours available Special tours of the Nike Missile Base within Everglades National Park will be announced once the missile is installed in November.
Regular daily guided tours will resume in December and be available through April.
They showed Soviet soldiers hurriedly and secretly setting up nucleararmed missiles 90 miles from Florida.
The 45th anniversary of the beginning of the Cuban missile crisis is this week.
The Soviets had been sending defensive weaponry to Cuba, including antiaircraft missiles.
But they secretly supplied missile installations that could be used offensively, after Cuban leaders became convinced the United States was planning to attack the island.
Once the presence of a ballistic missile was confirmed, Kennedy demanded their removal and dismantling of the bases.
On Oct., Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba to stop further shipments and declared that any missile launched from Cuba would warrant a full-scale retaliatory attack against the Soviet Union.
After sharp exchanges, the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw its missiles in return for a U.S. pledge that it would not invade Cuba.
However, to complete the deal, Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev also made a private agreement to remove United States missiles from Turkey, which shared borders with the Soviet Union.
On Oct., the two leaders completed the agreement and the crisis ended as suddenly as it had begun.
The crisis was one of the most serious incidents of the Cold War, a period of intense U.S.-Soviet rivalry that began after World War II ended.
With armed forces on both sides at their highest state of readiness, most experts believe that for 14 days the fate of millions of people rested upon the ability of Kennedy and Khrushchev to reach a compromise and avoid nuclear war.
The agreement between Kennedy and Khrushchev was kept secret because many, both in Europe and the United States, would have opposed it.
Almost all Americans thus thought that Kennedy had forced the Soviet Union to remove the missiles simply by threatening war.
Some experts believe that, as a result, United States foreign policy used greater toughness and more threats of force after the crisis.
Some think this led to United States military opposition to communist forces in the Vietnam War.
It also led to a direct communications link between Moscow and Washington, the so-called red phone.
For Fidel Castro, although the Russians shut him out of negotiations, Cuba continued to be protected from invasion.
Kennedy and Khrushchev were eyeball to eyeball, and Khrushchev blinked.
So we learned from Robert Kennedy's account of the crisis, ""Thirteen Days,"" published after his death, in 1969.
The missile crisis began on Oct., 1962, when President Kennedy learned from analysis of U.S. reconnaissance flights that the Soviet Union had secretly placed nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Within the Kennedy administration there was strong support for an immediate United States military attack.
Kennedy decided to see, first, whether there was some way to get the missiles removed without a war that might lead to escalating nuclear exchanges.
On Saturday, Oct., a U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba by a SAM missile.
Almost all of Kennedy's advisers agreed that United States bombers should go in the next morning and destroy the SAM sites.
The president and Secretary of State Rusk asked Robert Kennedy to meet with the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin.
When they met that evening, Robert Kennedy told the ambassador that we ""had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed.
He was told about a letter, sent to Khrushchev, proposing removal of the bases and missiles, under international inspection, and in return an assurance that the United States would not invade Cuba.
The ambassador then raised the question of American nuclear missiles in Turkey, on the Soviet border.
The next day, Sunday, Oct., Dobrynin asked to see Robert Kennedy again.
The truth, then, is that a secret American undertaking -to remove missiles from Turkey -made the solution possible.
If President Kennedy had undertaken publicly to remove the missiles from Turkey in return for removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba, hawks would have denounced him as weak.
The history is worth recalling as another crisis threatens war in the Persian Gulf.
So is the attitude that President Kennedy maintained during the missile crisis.
He had read Barbara Tuchman's book on the bungling that led to World War I, ""The Guns of August,"" and it made a deep impression on him.
If anybody is around to write after this, they are going to understand that we made every effort to find peace and every effort to give our adversary room to move.
Perhaps only those who lived through the 13 days can appreciate how scary that time was, how close nuclear war seemed.
It is as important now as it was then to understand, before acting, what the consequences of war may be.
Also, Cuban leader Fidel Castro urged Moscow to launch a nuclear attack on the United States, ABC News reported.
The revelations came during a review of the Cuban missile crisis at a weekend conference.
Former Kennedy press secretary Pierre Salinger, a conference participant and now an ABC correspondent, yesterday quoted a top Soviet source as saying that on Oct., 1962, Castro urged Khrushchev to fire the missiles at the United States to head off an invasion.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev eventually withdrew the missiles in exchange for President John Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba.
At a news conference wrapping up the conference yesterday, McNamara said the figures on Cuba's war readiness and casualty estimate were provided by Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's ruling Politburo.
Other American officials said privately that the Cubans had said the casualty count could have reached 800,000.
McNamara said 40,000 of the troops were Soviet, four times higher than United States intelligence estimates at the time.
Dmitri A Volkogonov, director of the Soviet Defense Ministry's Institute of Military History, said Saturday that 20 Soviet nuclear warheads were on Cuba at the time of the crisis.
American officials have said that they never were sure whether any Soviet nuclear warheads had reached Cuba but that they assumed they had.
Soviet visitors at Tuesday's Harvard conference had surprising observations and memories.
Sergei Mikoyan, son of one of Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev's key aides, said Khruschev started installing missiles because he was sure the United States would invade Cuba again.
Mikoyan said he'd believed rumors of an imminent United States landing until the Harvard discussions.
Washington Post story suggesting that rogue elements of the Cuban military, not the Soviets, shot down a United States U-2 plane during the crisis.
Mikoyan, who was in Cuba with his father at the end of the crisis, said he ``absolutely excluded any possibility'' of armed conflict, Cubans against the Soviets.
Fedor Burlatsky, a former Khrushchev speech writer, said many Soviet leaders had believed the United States would allow the missiles to stay in Cuba.
The author of a play about the crisis, Burlatsky recalled the tension of ``Black Saturday,'' the day before the crisis ended.
Public opinion later changed, Burlatsky said, and a ``myth ... a mystery'' grew around the slain leader.
He also joked with Robert McNamara, who complained after viewing the TV film The Missiles of October, that the actor playing him was too fat.
One of Marilyn Monroe, one of John Kennedy.'' Fedor Buriatsky, Former Khrushchev speech writer Co pyrig ht 19 8 7, 19 9 6 Ganne tt Co ., Inc.
But intelligence analysts in Washington discounted their reports of seeing huge missile-like tubes.
They believed the Soviet military buildup in Cuba was purely defensive.
Studeman said Monday during an unprecedented seminar at CIA headquarters.
The compilation of documents includes notes taken by the director of the CIA at the time, John McCone, during White House crisis meetings.
It also includes estimates by the intelligence community, reports from Cuban agents and memorandums coded Ironbark meaning they were based on information from one of the most valuable Soviet spies of the Cold War, Col.
If the CIA could do it over, Studeman said, it would pay more attention to the informers reporting sightings of Soviet missiles in Cuba and analyze better how the Soviets viewed deployment of missiles outside their borders.
As it was, the deployment only became known when a U-2 spy plane photographed the launching pads on the western third of Cuba on Oct. at least one month after the first batch got to the island.
Warren Frank, then with the agency's foreign intelligence branch, said much of the reporting by the Cuban agents was collected in Miami at what became the largest CIA station in the world.
The CIA received hundreds if not thousands of such reports, many of which its agents in Miami deemed credible, Frank said.
Analysts said part of the problem was that they could not understand why the Soviets would want to deploy medium-range missiles in Cuba.
A landmark analysis on Sept., 1962 also declassified Monday said the Soviets were deploying antiaircraft missiles in Cuba only to deter a United States invasion effort in the wake of the botched Bay of Pigs landing the year before.
So skeptical were analysts at CIA headquarters that at one point they cabled Miami, telling the station to stop submitting reports by the Cuban agents, Frank said.
In another cable, CIA headquarters dismissed a Cuban agent report of a tube as long as a palm tree, saying palm trees come in different sizes.
At the same time, U-2 reconnaissance planes and lower-flying spy aircraft were providing photographs of Soviet ships laden with crates of military material.
But, he said, the CIA did not discover for sure that the Soviets had nuclear warheads until the crisis was defused at the end of November and the Soviets began loading missiles back onto their ships for return to the Soviet Union.
Letters From Castro to Khrushchev THE BRINK OF WAR December 5, 1990 | San Francisco Chronicle Author: JEAN EDERN-HALLIER Section: BRIEFING 3358 Words Page: 1/Z1 OpenURL Link In October 1962, the world probably came closer to nuclear war between the superpowers than it has anytime before or since.
But the impression one gets in reading these fascinating documents is quite the opposite.
Quite simply that Castro recommended to Khrushchev, in a letter dated Oct., 1962, that he launch a nuclear strike against the United States if the United States military attempted to invade the island to neutralize the nuclear missiles the Soviets were installing.
In the same letter, Castro who at this point did not even consider the possibility that the Soviet leader might give in to President John F Kennedy's demands and withdraw his missiles says he expects an American operation within the coming three days.
Several missiles had reached Cuba, and Kennedy seemed unlikely to remain satisfied with the naval blockade he had announced October 22.
Khrushchev, realizing he had lost the high-risk wager he undertook by sending the missiles to Cuba , did not resist the American pressure long.
Though he said nothing to Castro, fearing the Cuban might scuttle an agreement, Khrushchev agreed to withdraw his weapons in exchange for a United States commitment not to invade Cuba.
Despite his heated rhetoric, Khrushchev knew that there would be no winners in a nuclear war simply a devastated planet.
Castro's frenetic ideology and visceral anti-Americanism (only a year before his troops had repulsed the U.S.-supported invasion at the Bay of Pigs) was such that he was ready to ""heroically"" accept the possibility of apocalypse for his people, and many others.
INSIDE LOOK The interest of these letters which provides a fascinating inside look at the most dangerous crisis of the cold war is more than just historical.
It is of immense importance today, with the East-West balance of power which was built on the superpowers' belief in dissuasion and their notions of responsibility and self-interest badly shaken.
These letters raise the delicate problem of the spread of nuclear weapons to nations beyond the great powers.
After reading Castro's letters, one cannot help but wonder where we would be today in the Middle East if Saddam Hussein had nuclear arms and what risks we will face tomorrow, when not only Baghdad but India, Pakistan and other nations possess nuclear arsenals and the blind hatred to use them, even it means collective suicide.
The Cuban missile crisis began on Oct., 1962, when American intelligence services presented Kennedy with aerial photos taken from more than 65,000 feet by the famous U-2 spy planes showing clearly that the Soviet forces which had arrived that August were installing launch platforms for nuclear missiles.
The pictures also showed the missiles, which had a range of about 1,150 miles.
But on October 25, faced with the show of American determination, Khrushchev sent a secret message to Kennedy (the text of which has never been published), in which he acknowledged the presence of nuclear missiles and suggested that they might be withdrawn in exchange for an American commitment not to invade Cuba.
When Castro wrote the following letter to the Kremlin leader, he clearly was unaware of Khrushchev's approach to the White House.
I realize that the latter, to be carried out, would require the use of considerable forces, and that it is the most repugnant form of aggression, which might rule it out.
The morale of the Cuban people is extremely high and they will face the aggressor heroically.
I believe that the aggressivity of the imperialists is making them extremely dangerous, and if they undertook such a brutal and illegal act as the invasion of Cuba, it would be the moment to eliminate such a danger forever.
It would be an act of pure self-defense, as harsh and terrible as the solution may be, for there is no other.
I understand how bitter these hours must be for you, with the results of your superhuman efforts so seriously threatened.
But at the same time, we are calmly preparing to confront a situation that we see as very real and very near.
After Khrushchev's secret message of October 25, Moscow spread confusion in Washington by publishing on October 27 a new message from the Soviet general secretary in which he again offered to remove the missiles from Cuba in exchange for an American promise not to invade, but in which he also demanded the withdrawal of the American missiles in Turkey.
Kennedy chose to ignore this message, but responded positively to the earlier message, promising not to invade Cuba if the missiles were removed.
But in this letter he had to explain his decision to Castro, with whom he clearly had not consulted.
I won't go into it here because by now you will have heard the text, which is being broadcast on radio.
At a time when an agreement is in sight, the Pentagon is looking for a pretext to sabotage it.
Yesterday you shot one of them down, whereas in the past you did not shoot them down when they flew over your territory.
Of course, if there is an invasion, it will have to be repelled using all means.
Castro was deeply irritated in principle by the agreement reached by Kennedy and Khrushchev, particularly since he had not been consulted.
He explains his feelings in this letter, and also tells the Kremlin boss that the decision to shoot down the American spy plane had been made with the agreement of the Soviet military advisers in Cuba.
I would like to clarify something concerning the anti-aircraft measures we have taken.
There was a danger of a surprise attack on specific military installations.
We decided not to simply stand idly by because a surprise attack . . . could have completely destroyed these targets.
The commander of the Soviet forces can provide you with additional information on the plane that was shot down.
In this long letter, Khrushchev reproaches Castro for having called for a nuclear attack on American territory.
He also tries to explain his failure to consult with the Cuban leader during the peak of the crisis.
We understand that certain difficulties may have arisen for you following the promise we made to the United States to withdraw our missile base from Cuba, in exchange for the United States commitment to abandon plans for an invasion of Cuba by their troops and those of their allies in the Western Hemisphere, and to end what they call the ""quarantine,' otherwise known as the blockade of Cuba.
But we, as political figures and heads of state, are the leaders of the people, and the people do not know everything.
Some are saying that we did not conduct the necessary consultations with you before reaching the decision you are aware of.
But had we continued consultations in such conditions, knowing that the unrestrained warriors of the American military wanted to take advantage of the situation to attack Cuba, we would have lost time and they might have succeeded.
In your cable of October 27, you proposed that we should strike the first nuclear blow against enemy territory.
This would not be a simple blow but the beginning of global thermonuclear war.
No doubt the Cuban people would have struggled courageously heroically, as well but no doubt they would have perished.
In this letter, Castro continues to complain about Khrushchev's decision to withdraw the missiles, and about his failure to consult with Havana.
You say we were consulted before the decision was reached to withdraw the strategic projectiles.
I merely told you that the morale of our people was very high and that we would have resisted an attack heroically.
We know, don't think we didn't, that we would have been exterminated, as you imply in your letter, if a thermonuclear war had begun.
But that did not lead us to ask you to withdraw the missiles, to ask you to give in.
You yourself said that in the current conditions, a war would very quickly, inevitably, become a thermonuclear war.
The destructive power of these weapons is so great and the speed of launching is such that the side that is first to use a nuclear weapon can enjoy a considerable advantage.
The weeklong confrontation between President John F Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev brought the world closer than at any time in history to triggering a nuclear war, all agreed.
At the time of the crisis, Gorbachev said in the message, ""it became clear that general human principles must be considered"" in superpower relations.
The Cubans had never before met their American counterparts from the days of the missile crisis.
The document, which was circulated to only 12 people, including Kennedy, was dated Feb., 1962.
At the U.S.-Soviet meeting in Cambridge, McNamara denied that the United States had any plan or ""intent"" to invade Cuba, according to ""On the Brink,"" the book-length account of the conference by James G Blight and David A Welch.
Those are among the highlights of the Walters interview with Castro, which will air at 10m.
The taped interview is the first lengthy televised exchange with Castro since Walters last spoke with him in 1977.
Walters peppers Castro with a variety of questions that begin with Cuba's alleged involvement with terrorism and ends with a synopsis of the Elian Gonzalez saga and its effect on U.S.-Cuba relations.
Castro responds in a friendly, though sometimes terse tone, using Walters' first name for effect.
In the interview, Castro also briefly discusses the Varela Project, an initiative that calls for a referendum on sweeping democratic reforms.
Castro acknowledged that the Cuban Constitution guarantees citizens a right to gather signatures but he stopped short of legitimizing the unprecedented effort.
During a five-day conference this week, Cuban President Fidel Castro is expected to talk about feeling betrayed by the Soviets; former United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara is expected to hold Cuba at least partly responsible for the tensions that led to the crisis; and the Russians are expected to provide details of nuclear missile sites so closely guarded that not even the Cubans had free access to them.
An intriguing moment should be the meeting of McNamara and Castro, who both have ""hurricane force personalities,"" Blight said.
McNamara, who will make the opening presentation for the United States, is expected to propose that Cuba assume some of the blame for the missile crisis.
In lower-level meetings leading up to the Havana conference, Blight said, the United States has been as honest as possible about the Kennedy administration's secret missions to topple the Castro government, but the Cuban side has stonewalled about its activities shipping weapons and exporting revolution to other countries.
After the United States learned that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba, Kennedy ordered a naval blockade and demanded the removal of the missiles.
Tensions escalated, with the shooting down of a United States plane over Cuba and Castro ordering his country to prepare for war.
Finally, after tense negotiation, Kennedy and Khrushchev had a meeting of minds, and on Oct. the former Soviet leader gave the order to begin dismantling the missiles -virtually ignoring Castro and Cuban concerns.
The Havana symposium is the culmination of more than five years of work by the U.S.-Russia-Cuba project and is the fifth in a series of meetings that have probed decision-making during the missile crisis.
The first three-way meeting between Soviets, Cubans and Americans took place in Antigua in January 1991 and paved the way for the high-level Havana meeting.
McNamara and former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko participated in one of the conferences, in Moscow, in 1989.
Although the world context is now completely different -one of the two superpowers involved, the Soviet Union, no longer exists -the United States and Cuba are still frozen in a relationship of mutual mistrust.
The conference, which runs through Sunday, begins today with a visit to the spot along the Havana coastline where a solitary Soviet missile stands as a reminder of the October crisis.
Three Russian generals will field questions about nuclear warheads and missile deployment.
The action prompted the United States to begin preparing for an invasion of the island.
United States conference organizers, meanwhile, say they detect a lot of repressed anger against the Russians over the missile crisis and expect this will bubble to the surface during the meeting.
After Castro's presentation, the three sides will have a day and a half to query each other.
On Saturday, Castro is expected to return to the meeting for a discussion of the future of U.S.-Russian-Cuban relations.
The symposium will conclude Sunday at Finca Vigia, Ernest Hemingway's home in Cuba from 1939 until shortly before his death in 1961.
United States -Former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara; Arthur Schlesinger, aide to President Kennedy; Gen.
William Y Smith, former special assistant to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Ray S Cline, former deputy director of the CIA; Edwin M Martin, former assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs; Raymond L Garthoff, former special assistant to the deputy undersecretary of state for politicalmilitary affairs.
Cuba -President Fidel Castro; Defense Minister Raul Castro; Vice President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez; Gen.
Fabian Escalante, vice minister of the interior; and Carlos Lechuga, former ambassador to the United Nations.
Former Soviet Union -Georgy Shakhnazarov, aide to Mikhail Gorbachev; Oleg Darusenkov, deputy chief of mission in Havana during the missile crisis; Oleg Troyanovksy, Khrushchev's special assistant; Alexander Alekseev, former ambassador to Cuba; Gen.
Leonid S Garbuz, former deputy commander of all Soviet forces in Cuba; Gen.
Gribkov, former chief of staff of the Joint Command of the Warsaw Pact; Gen.
Georgy Voronkov, former commander of Soviet forces in Oriente Province.
