The bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki with atomic weapons opened a new chapter in warfare.
Most people in the world hold onto the hope that nuclear weapons will never be used in the future.
He knew that the United States was trying to oust him from office from the time he began.
He led a Communist government that the United States didn't particularly want just 90 miles from the country's mainland.
The weak attempt by American-backed Cuban refugees had been an embarrassing defeat.
Castro knew this would not be the last attempt that the United States would make.
He was intent on finding a strong country to ally himself with for protection.
They were not able to create as many nuclear weapons as the United States was.
Even more disturbing to the Soviets was the concern that the United States had set up nuclear missiles in Turkey.
The United States' missiles were capable of reaching across oceans to anywhere in the world.
Just after John F Kennedy took the office of President of the United States, he met with the leader of the Soviet Union, Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
They discussed the possibility of resolving their differences and slowing down the production of nuclear weapons.
After this meeting, Khrushchev informed members of his government that he believed President Kennedy was going to be a weak president.
He didn't believe Kennedy was capable of making the decisions that would have to be made to keep America strong.
Based on these conclusions, the Soviets decided to form an alliance with the Cubans.
Cuba would provide the land the Soviets needed to build a nuclear missile base.
In return, the Soviets would provide the protection and security Castro believed Cuba needed.
By mid-summer of 1962, the Soviets were well on their way to completing a lethal missile system all around the island of Cuba.
On October 15, a plane flying reconnaissance for the United States spotted the construction.
After meeting with his top advisors, he contacted the Soviet foreign minister and told him that the United States would not tolerate the missiles in Cuba.
Now was the time that President Kennedy would prove Khrushchev wrong in his assessment of the president's ability.
He could invade Cuba with military forces and try to defeat the Cubans and Soviets.
He announced the discovery of the missiles and his plan to deal with them.
He said that he was preparing to set up a blockade around the island of Cuba.
He also stated that if any missile was fired from Cuba, it would be taken as an attack upon the United States.
People around the world prayed for clear minds to decide the fate of the world.
On October 28, Khrushchev announced that his government would take the missiles apart and bring them back to the Soviet Union.
The United States agreed not to invade Cuba, and the world breathed a sigh of relief.
Government officials later shared their fears that a nuclear war had been just minutes away from happening.
A Nikita Khrushchev B John F Kennedy C Fidel Castro D Robert Kennedy 3.
Khrushchev was wrong to believe President Kennedy was a weak president.
