It is worth reflecting, however, why the crisis occurred and whether the results should be reconsidered.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was a volatile and unpredictable personality who by 1962 had already encountered serious domestic opposition to his reforms in agriculture and the Soviet bureaucracy.
In March 1962, during a visit to Bulgaria, he decided to install nuclear missiles on Cuba, together with launch pads and almost obsolete IL-28 bombers.
From Khrushchev's perspective, little had gone right during the three years leading up to the Cuban missile crisis.
Khrushchev had failed to remove the Americans and their allies from the divided city of Berlin in 1959 and 1961, finally giving in to the request of his East German allies to build a wall to prevent a further exodus to the West.
He had tried to browbeat the young United States president at a summit in Vienna in June 1961.
United States territory was not under threat from Soviet weapons, whereas United States missiles could reach Soviet cities from Turkey, Italy and West Germany.
U2 planes had violated Soviet airspace and carried out spying missions until a Soviet missile downed the plane of Gary Powers on May 1, 1960, over Sverdlovsk.
Even thenUnited States President Dwight Eisenhower had refused to issue an apology.
For Khrushchev, an opportunity to exact some revenge occurred after Fidel Castro led rebels in overthrowing the proUnited States regime of Fulgencio Batista in 1959.
Although Castro's political affiliations were not immediately evident, the Soviets knew that his brother Raul was a Communist, as was the Argentine revolutionary Che Guevara, who had played a prominent role in the Cuban revolution.
The abortive Bay of Pigs invasion by Cuban exiles in April 1961, backed by the CIA, was perhaps the turning point for Castro, who adopted the Communist cause.
He believed that if the Soviets could present the United States with a fait accompli, then there could be little reaction.
Seemingly, the Soviet side had succumbed to pressure once it was clear that the Americans intended to respond.
First, he said Kennedy was desperate, claiming that he may well have been overthrown by the United States military if the crisis was not overcome.
We know that General Maxwell Taylor advocated countering any Soviet nuclear response with United States nuclear attacks on Cuban military targets.
Second, the two leaders acted coolly, while the president's younger brother Robert, the attorney general, averted the crisis through talks with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
Their discussions ignored the warmongering official rhetoric and exchanges of notes.
Third, the Soviet side made a collective decision to remove the missiles only with a public guarantee that there would be no United States invasion of Cuba.
Lastly, the Soviet leader believed that the Americans understood that if Soviet blood were shed in Cuba, retaliatory steps would be taken in Berlin.
In this way, Khrushchev ""saved"" Cuba, scoring a significant foreign policy victory for the Soviet Union.
The international community, as well as the Soviet Presidium, however, saw the crisis somewhat differently.
The threat had come from the Soviet Union, which had turned back its ships once the United States imposed the quarantine.
Cuba, as even Khrushchev acknowledges, was outraged by the Soviets' implicit cowardice.
What's more, neither Cuba nor the world made any links between the Soviet ships' turnaround and the removal of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the simple reason that Kennedy — and, surprisingly, Khrushchev as well — did not make this link public.
Within two years, Khrushchev was removed from office in a KGB-led coup.
The Soviet leadership wanted to end the dangerous adventurism of a reckless, irresponsible leader.
In 1964, Khrushchev was replaced by the bland party leader Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin as head of government.
Perhaps, then, we should simply dismiss Khrushchev's version of the Cuban missile crisis as wishful thinking.
Yet 60 years on, the Castros still rule Cuba , and the tiny island's communist leadership has already outlasted the Soviet Union by more than 20 years.
Because of the success of low-level diplomacy and the terms of the agreement, it was not possible to publicize Soviet gains.
Communism would make significant progress in coming years, partly through decolonization and partly through the United States quagmire in Vietnam.
In the end, Soviet prestige and that of its leader,had suffered the most.
The prevailing image was of a young United States president standing up to a crude bully.
It was far from the truth, but the image of a Soviet moral defeat has prevailed and will always be equated with the ill-fated Khrushchev.
At least 10 independent media outlets have been blocked or closed down over their coverage of the war in Ukraine.
The Moscow Times needs your help more than ever as we cover this devastating invasion and its sweeping impacts on Russian society.
