Photographs taken by an American U-2 spy plane over western Cuba on 14 October revealed a missile launching ramp under construction.
This was contrary to Khrushchev's assurances that Soviet military aid to the Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, was solely for defence against any United States invasion.
Kennedy imposed a naval blockade to stop Soviet ships carrying the missiles from reaching Cuba, and prepared to invade the island.
Khrushchev ordered his ships and their submarine escorts to sail straight through the American fleet and told Soviet forces to resist any United States landing.
Then, at the last minute, Khrushchev backed down, the Soviet ships reversed course, and within weeks all missile sites on Cuba were demolished.
The free world hailed President Kennedy as a hero who, in an eyeball-toeyeball confrontation with the Communists, had made Khrushchev blink.
The truth is even more terrifying.THOSE leaders who took part in the Cuban missile crisis who are still alive now agree that at the time they greatly underestimated the danger.
The fact is that all the leaders and their advisers during the missile crisis were guilty of misconstruing the others' beliefs, intentions, determination, military strength and command structures.
The crisis developed its own momentum until the danger that all-out nuclear war might be started by a second lieutenant became very real.
Our interviews in Washington and Moscow, and information from recently-released archives in both countries, confirm that:Soviet nuclear missiles had already arrived in Cuba at the time of the crisis.
One theory is that the Cuban revolution aroused a powerful sentiment in die-hard Bolshevik leaders.
Khrushchev's son, Sergei, says that when the Cubans crushed the CIA-sponsored invasion at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, 'not only the government but the people viewed the Cubans as heroes, being next door to the huge neighbour but having the audacity to disagree with him.
General Boris Surikov, a missile expert, told us the following story:'Khrushchev and his Defence Minister, Rodion Malinovsky, were at Khrushchev's estate on the Black Sea.
The best witness on Khrushchev's motives is probably Alexander Alexeyev, the Soviet ambassador in Cuba at the time and a personal friend of Castro.
I said Fidel's strategy to defend the revolution was based on the growing solidarity of world public opinion for Cuba.
Devised by General Simeon Ivanov, deputy chief of the Soviet general staff, its details have only recently emerged.
It deployed mediumrange R-12 missiles and longrange R-14 missiles in various locations scattered around the island.
By the time of the crisis, 36 nuclear warheads were available for these missiles sufficient to destroy all important American military targets and East Coast cities, along with their inhabitants.
To protect these missiles from air attack required two divisions of air defence troops with surface-to-air missiles, and from a sea-borne landing, nine Luna missiles with a range of 40 miles.When Khrushchev briefed the man who was to be commander of the Soviet forces in Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, a famous battle-front officer in the Second World War, the question arose over who could order the firing of these missiles.
The strategic missiles those capable of reaching the United States would remain under the control of the commander-in-chief, Khrushchev.
But after some thought Khrushchev gave Pliyev permission to employ the nine tactical Luna missiles for the immediate defence of Cuba in the event of a United States invasion.It is tempting to conclude that Khrushchev did not understand the gravity of this decision.
No one we spoke to doubts that if the Soviets had fired nuclear missiles at United States troops then America would have replied with an attack on the Soviet Union and a full-scale nuclear war would have followed.
The first freighter, the Maria Ulianov, arrived in Cuba on 26 July, followed by nine others during the next four days.
Weapons and equipment that looked like agricultural goods were unloaded around the clock.
Tanks, missiles and special military equipment were unloaded only at night.
Soviet troops were sent to their designated areas wearing Cuban army uniforms and all commands were spoken in Spanish.But it was not possible to keep secret for ever an operation of this size.
The use of so many ships from the Soviet merchant fleet meant that there were not enough for normal trade, and the Soviet government had to go to the international charter market to make up the shortfall.
In the close-knit shipping world this did not go unnoticed, but the connection with Cuba did not come until August.In that month Philippe de Vosjoli, the Washington station chief for the French intelligence service, visited Cuba.
Although they wore civilian clothing in public, most seemed to have chosen identical check shirts.
De Vosjoli collected several reports of missiles being unloaded and transported and he passed on this information to the director of the CIA, John McCone.On 10 August McCone put together de Vosjoli's information, that from the Cuban exile community in the US, and a list of the movements of Soviet cargo ships from the Black and Baltic seas to Cuba.
He concluded that Moscow was up to something new and different in Cuba.
Over the objections of his senior officers, he wrote to the Kennedy the same day, voicing his suspicions.At a National Security Council meeting on 22 August the president brought up McCone's memorandum.
Kennedy did not believe that Khrushchev would take such a risk, since the United States had 5,000 ballistic missiles to the Soviet Union's 300.
But he ordered his defence chiefs to draw up a contingency plan to deal with a situation in which Soviet nuclear missiles were deployed in Cuba.Meanwhile in Cuba, all was not going well.
Attempts to speed up the construction of the launch pads failed because the Soviet troops could not cope with the heat, humidity and mosquitoes.
Moscow then decided to send an eight-man delegation of senior officers from the Defence Ministry to supervise the work.
The missile divisions must only be used with the personal approval of Khrushchev.
The delegation's trip to Cuba could be seen as an omen for the whole of Operation Anadyr.
It left Moscow on 14 October on an Aeroflot TU-114 for Havana with a refuelling stop at Dakar in Senegal.
Over the Mediterranean one of the aircraft's engines fell off and the group had to start all over again.
On our approach to Havana we were repeatedly circled by United States Air Force planes, and one even made a mock attack run.
Moscow, meanwhile, was putting out a barrage of lies to mislead the Americans.
On 4 September, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, Dobrynin, who knew nothing about the missiles, told Robert Kennedy that Khrushchev had asked him to assure the president that he would not place any offensive missiles in Cuba.Dobrynin repeated this promise to Theodore Sorensen, the president's speech writer, at lunch two days later.
In response to these false assurances, Kennedy now made two major mistakes.
New orders for the pre-positioning of troops, aircraft, ships, and other equipment and supplies were brought to a state of readiness.These were only contingency plans, and Kennedy later insisted he had no intention of implementing them.
But he failed to consider how these preparations would appear to Castro.
The film was flown to Washington, and on the morning of Monday 15 October a team of CIA experts in a National Photographic Interpretation Centre laboratory, hidden over a car dealer's showroom not far from Capitol Hill, began to examine it.
But to an expert, the photograph was a revelation.One of the intelligence prizes which the Soviet defector Oleg Penkovsky had brought to the West was a Soviet military manual dealing with the construction of missile sites.
Like all military machines, the Soviet one did things strictly according to the manual.By comparing pictures of known intercontinental ballistic missile sites in the Soviet Union with Penkovsky's manual, the CIA had been able to identify what its experts called 'the foot-print' for each type of missile site.The supervisor looked at the San Cristobal photograph and saw the footprint of a medium-range nuclear missile site, probably an SS-3.
McGEORGE BUNDY, the national security adviser, went to the White House the next morning, Tuesday 16 October, and broke the news to the president while he was having breakfast in his bedroom.
At 11.50am the president chaired a meeting in the Cabinet room at the White House.
Those present, the civilian and military leaders of the US, were to become 'ExComm', the executive committee of the National Security Council.
They were to meet mostly in a windowless conference room at the State Department almost continuously throughout the crisis.The dominant feeling at the meeting was shocked surprise.
The intelligence community, in its national estimate of the future course of events, had advised the president on four occasions that the Russians would not make offensive weapons available to Cuba.
The feeling of the meeting was that some form of action was required and that a surprise air strike against the missiles would be the only course.
