In the early morning of April 17th, 1961, a group of Cuban exiles attempted an invasion on the southwest coast of Cuba.
The exiles were directly financed and trained by the United States Central Intelligence Agency, who feared the expansion of communism in Latin America.
The exiles, on the other hand, opposed the Cuban revolution, which had nationalized many of the country’s services and centralized the press.
The plan was to bomb important airfields in Cuba, then send two groups of soldiers to invade.
On April 15, 1961, an airstrike by the US missed many of the important airfields in Cuba.
The general public was notified, meaning a second airstrike wasn’t plausible.
The operation was a failure they were outnumbered, inexperienced, and under armed.
It created an everlasting hole in United States foreign relations, especially with Cuba.
The situation only got worse the Soviet Union wanted to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 50 miles from Florida.
Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy Ken-e-dey for me Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy Do you want a man for president Who's seasoned through and through But not so doggoned seasoned that he won't try something new A man who's old enough to know And young enough to do Well it's up to you It's up to you It's strictly up to you Do you like a man who answers straight A main who's already fair Both the United States and the Soviet Union had become superpowers after World War II, with both nations possessing supreme nuclear weapons.
Nikita Khrushchev, the first secretary of the Soviet Union, was worried about the US’ “first strike capability,” in which the States could destroy the USSR’s key nuclear infrastructure before they had the chance to retaliate.
A group of Soviet military specialists obtained a meeting with Fidel Castro in early 1962.
Cuba’s leadership believed that another invasion by the United States was only a matter of time, and agreed to the deployment.
While Castro himself initially objected because it would “make him appear as a Soviet puppet,” he eventually was persuaded on the basis that it would help the entire Socialist camp.
By July 1962, the program was fully approved, and the missiles began deployment in complete secrecy.
As supplies were delivered to Cuba, the Soviet military repeatedly denied that they were offensive.
They warned the United States that, if an attack were to happen on the ships transporting supplies, it would mean war.
The United States government grew suspicious; CIA director John A McCone reasoned that it only made sense if the Soviet Union used them to shield missile bases from discovery.
On the Senate floor, Senator Kenneth Keating warned that, “in all probability”, the Soviets were constructing a missile base in Cuba.
He put the blame on the Kennedy administration, and stated that they were covering up a crisis.
Ever since the Bay of Pigs invasion, the US had been sending U-2 spy planes over Cuba.
On October 15th, the CIA reviewed its photographs and identified missile bases in Cuba.
John F Kennedy was notified about this, and quickly began discussing how to respond.
The Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba, capable of striking the entirety of the United States.
On October 22nd, Kennedy delivered a speech to the nation, announcing the discovery of the missiles.
I was a junior in high school in Maine, in Wilton Maine, in the middle of nowhere United States basically, up in rural Maine.
A lot of people I've talked to around here were really scared, they were a little older than I was at the time, they were in their early 20s, they were really more frightened than I was.
But I was you know I was young and believing and hoping that things would be alright.
At first, Kennedy was advised that an airstrike against Cuba would be the best course of action.
But, after further discussion with his advisers, he decided on a naval blockade.
I think blockades and things like that are strong signals, that, y’know, we're taking this very seriously and we're not gonna fool with you.
Just like sanctions I think in europe right now against Russia, are very important.
Y’know and things like what’s going on right now bring back all these memories of the Cuban missile crisis and the cold war and the fall of the berlin wall, and different things like that.
I remember growing up knowing about the atom bomb and it was very scary, to think that that could be used again.
Some people had drills where they went under their desks and things like that.
Throughout Kennedy’s short presidency, he was a controversial and flawed leader.
However, during the crisis, reasoning with the Soviets was the best choice of action.
Any option that would provoke the slightest bit of anger could mean world ending disaster.
Debate and diplomacy between the two nations was very important during the crisis.
I’m trying to think if there was somebody else, who was just a little bit older than me, who might have experienced it a little bit more.
Television was a big part of our lives, not just the newspapers, but television and Kennedy was coming on the TV every night talking about this and people who knew how serious this was.
It prevented the world from using nuclear weapons after seeing the devastating effects even the suggestion of nuclear war can cause.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine mirrors the threat of a nuclear war on a level not seen since October 1962.
