Alerts, Crises, and DEFCONs Read more about Alerts, Crises, and DEFCONs Update Washington D.C., May 26, 2021 – “The United States came fairly close to using tactical nuclear weapons” during the Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1958, according to a top-secret 1966 RAND summary report posted today for the first time by the National Security Archive.
Washington contemplated this extreme response to anticipated Chinese aggression “despite opposition to its policy by most of its allies and many in the United States,” the report notes.
Soviet First Responder and Smiling Diplomat Read more about Anastas Mikoyan: Soviet First Responder and Smiling Diplomat Washington D.C., December 18, 2020 – Anastas Ivanovich Mikoyan was born on November 25, 1895, in Armenia.
From a modest background and early revolutionary activity in Armenia he joined the Bolsheviks and eventually became one of the most significant statesmen of the Soviet Union.
On the 125th anniversary of his birth, historians still debate his role in Soviet domestic and foreign policy.
Nuclear Weapons and Turkey Since 1959 Read more about Nuclear Weapons and Turkey Since 1959 Washington, D.C., October 30, 2019 – The current crisis with Turkey over Syria has raised questions, yet to be resolved, about the security of 50 United States nuclear weapons stored at Incirlik Air Base.
These questions have been posed before, going back almost to the start of nuclear deployments in Turkey in 1959.
Operation Mongoose Read more about Kennedy and Cuba: Operation Mongoose Washington, DC, October 3, 2019 – When the Soviet Union put nuclear missiles in Cuba nearly 60 years ago, American officials refused to believe that at least one Soviet motivation was the defense of Cuba.
But declassified United States documents published in the Digital National Security Archive confirm a series of sometimes frenetic covert operations ordered by the Kennedy White House and run by the CIA in those years to overthrow the Castro regime that in hindsight make Moscow’s concerns about defending the island much more credible.
The posting contains never before published translations of Russian memcons with Khrushchev and Thompson’s cables from Moscow.
A “Harsh and Terrible … Solution” Read more about A “Harsh and Terrible … Solution” Washington, D.C., January 11, 2018 A new book by long-time colleagues of the National Security Archive, James G Blight and janet M Lang, offers a fresh exploration of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis and plumbs its lessons on the continuing dangers of nuclear war.
