The story of the Cuban missiles begins in April 1962, when the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to increase very substantially the limited military support hitherto provided by the USSR to the government of Fidel Castro in Cuba.
But it was only after August 29, 1962, when a U-2 reconnaissance plane spotted the SA-2 missile sites, that Kennedy went public, on September 4, with a warning that whereas such land-to-air defensive missiles were acceptable, the installation of offensive missiles in Cuba would not be.
Indeed, the Kennedy administration had been assured, by Khrushchev and by Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the US, that no such missiles were or would be placed in Cuba.
Dobrynin reassured Robert Kennedy accordingly, with all the more conviction in that he, too, knew nothing about the ballistic missile emplacements.
The United States authorities accepted these reassurances, particularly since, as George Ball notes in his memoirs, the Soviet Union had never hitherto placed offensive missile bases outside its own territory, not even in the neighboring countries of the Warsaw Pact.The significance of the MRBMs and IRBMs lay in their reach.
They were designed not to hit incoming aircraft but to land on targets deep inside the US; the range of an SS-4 was about 1100 nautical miles, that of an SS-5 nearly twice that.
A Soviet MRBM of that era, launched from Cuba, could hit Washington, D.C.; an IRBM could hit almost any target in the continental US, sparing only the far Pacific Northwest.
They were useless as defensive weapons; their only possible value was offensive—or as a deterrent to the offensives of others.
Thus when a U-2 flying over San Cristobal, in western Cuba, on October 14 spotted three missile sites under construction, and when these sites were identified in Washington as identical to known MRBM launch sites in the Soviet Union, President Kennedy and his advisers drew the obvious conclusion.
But among the other strategies considered—and according to Kennedy it was not until October 21 that he made his final decision—were a more comprehensive blockade than the selective one eventually imposed, an air strike on the missile sites in Cuba, a blanket air strike on the island’s military bases, and a full-scale military invasion.AdvertisementThe Joint Chiefs of Staff favored the most extreme response, but they had little civilian backing on ExComm.
The option of ignoring the build-up and continuing as before had no takers.
An air strike risked missing some of the missile sites—their exact number was unknown—and thus inviting a response from those still in place, or in some part of the world where the balance of forces favored the Soviet Union, notably Berlin.
Conversely, if the nuclear warheads were not yet in Cuba—and no one at this stage knew the answer to that—an air strike was excessive; a blockade on all incoming offensive weaponry would suffice.
And since an invasion took some advance planning, it could be kept in reserve as an option if all else failed.
Meanwhile, a naval blockade or quarantine would buy both sides time to reconsider.
Following the advice of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Under Secretary of State George Ball, and his Soviet experts , this was the option that Kennedy chose.On October 22, then, having first informed senior congressmen, leading NATO allies, and the Soviet leadership of his intentions, Kennedy announced to the world the presence of offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba and the United States response—a limited naval quarantine until the offending weaponry had been removed.
To justify his actions, Kennedy emphasized the threat to peace in the Western Hemisphere and the United States commitment to defending the West, as well as the danger now faced by Americans living under the shadow of nuclear missiles.
The men sitting in the White House did not know this, however, and even those who suspected it could not be sure.
When the quarantine went into effect at 10 AM on October 24, the crisis seemed to be approaching its climax.
Far from expecting Khrushchev to accede to his demands, he feared a speed-up in the missile-site construction, a formal threat of Soviet nuclear retaliation if the United States were to attack Cuba—and possibly a move to take advantage of the crisis to squeeze the West out of Berlin.In fact, the whole matter passed off peacefully.
Kennedy and his colleagues took special care to seek out a harmless freighter to intercept and allow through, thus making their point without running undue risks.
Khrushchev in turn did not wish to have the United States discover and inspect his most advanced weaponry, and so, as Kennedy had anticipated and hoped, he ordered missile-carrying ships to stop and turn back, which they did on Thursday, October 25.
But the United States administration still had no solution to its primary concern, Soviet nuclear missiles already in Cuba.
Mr President, we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knots of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter this knot will be tied.
And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied will not have the strength to untie it, and then it will be necessary to cut that knot.
Khrushchev’s letter, born of a growing fear in the Kremlin that Kennedy was about to attack Cuba and force a confrontation, might have defused the crisis there and then.
The Soviet proposal put Kennedy in a difficult position—as he commented to George Ball that Saturday morning, “Well, this is unsettling now, George, because he’s got us in a pretty good spot here.
The complications of such an exchange , together with the shooting down of a U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba that same day, seemed to leave the crisis unresolved and the clock ticking.
Kennedy’s military advisers insisted that delaying an air strike beyond Monday, October 29, was imprudent; but the President himself was more concerned than ever about the acknowledged impossibility of destroying all the missiles in one strike.
In the end it was decided to reply to Khrushchev’s first letter and, in essence, accept it.
Dobrynin’s report of this meeting—that the Americans were serious and that President Kennedy was under irresistible military pressure to commit the irreversible—may have exaggerated Robert Kennedy’s message, but it had the desired result.
On Sunday, October 28, Radio Moscow broadcast Khrushchev’s formal acceptance of the official United States terms for an end to the crisis—“The Soviet Government… has given a new order to dismantle the arms which you described as offensive, and to crate and return them to the Soviet Union”—and work on dismantling the missiles began directly.
Much remained to be worked out—the exact list of matériel to be removed from Cuba, the conditions of observation and on-site supervision, which Castro vehemently rejected, and the secret understanding to remove missiles in Turkey.The United States imprudently pressed its public advantage to insist that the IL-28 light bombers be removed as well, even though Kennedy himself had privately recognized that they posed little threat.
But Khrushchev conceded these terms, on November 20 the quarantine was lifted, and on December 6 the last bomber was shipped out.
It made no sense to install some of the Soviet Union’s most advanced military hardware seven thousand miles away on an undefendable island, in the hope that the United States would not notice what was happening until it was too late.
Khrushchev was certainly frustrated with his inability to shift the Western allies from Berlin, despite his threats and bluffs of the past five years; what he calls in his memoirs the “anomalous” outcome of the 1945 Potsdam accords was a source of irritation to the Soviet Union throughout the first decades of the cold war.
But a change in the Berlin situation would at most have been a side benefit of a Soviet nuclear presence in Cuba; it was not its main purpose.Khrushchev’s main purpose was to compensate, rather desperately, for Soviet military shortcomings.
The successful launching of Sputnik in 1957 and Khrushchev’s own exaggerated boasting had aroused American fears of a “missile gap”—fears that Kennedy successfully exploited in his 1960 election campaign.
But high-level reconnaissance flights over the Soviet Union had convinced the Americans that Soviet intercontinental ballistic capacity had been vastly overstated, and in October 1961 Roswell Gilpatric, the United States assistant secretary of defense, had publicly revealed United States knowledge of Soviet strategic inferiority.
A year later, by the time of the Cuban crisis, the Soviet Union was at a 17-1 disadvantage in intercontinental missiles.Khrushchev knew this, and he knew that the Americans knew it.
The temptation to place medium-range missiles just off the Florida coast seemed irresistible.
As Khrushchev complained to United States Ambassador Thompson in April 1961, “The USA…believes that it has the right to put military bases along the borders of the USSR”—and a few Soviet missiles up against America’s borders would serve it right.
American experts had not fully appreciated the depth of Khrushchev’s fears for Cuban security.
With some help from Castro himself the United States had made of Cuba a pariah state; it had actively supported one abortive invasion and was known to be devising all manner of schemes to undermine and overthrow the local regime, including the elimination of Castro himself.
To begin with, the members of ExComm were old enough to remember, and invoke, the events of the Thirties and Forties.
The errors of appeasement, the success of the Berlin airlift of 1948-1949, the lessons of the Korean War, were uppermost in their thinking.
After his criticisms of Eisenhower, his failure at the Bay of Pigs, and his poor showing at the 1961 Vienna summit, Kennedy was ultra-sensitive to any hint of indecision or weakness.
American pressure on the British and French to withdraw from Suez in November 1956 had led to fears among the NATO countries that when it came to a war the United States might retreat to its hemisphere, abandoning the vulnerable and exposed European allies.
Conversely, the fiasco of the Bay of Pigs had taught Kennedy and his advisers the wisdom of observing at least the forms of legality.
Hence the decision—urged upon Kennedy by Dean Rusk in particular—that there should be no unannounced actions, and that any actions taken should be both prudent and legal so as not to shake further the allies’ confidence.These foreign policy concerns made Kennedy simultaneously resolute and cautious.
Domestic politics, however, all pointed toward a need to appear uncompromising, at least in public.
Republican congressmen, notably Senator Kenneth Keating, had for some time been warning of the growing threat from Soviet missiles in Cuba; the administration’s belated public acknowledgement of the extent of the danger gave its opponents a leverage over the handling of the crisis that Kennedy felt had to be offset by an appearance of granite resolve.
Most of his nonmilitary advisers, with McNamara in the lead, were convinced that the missile emplacements had no impact on the United States’ overall strategic superiority and thus in no way increased United States vulnerability.
As McGeorge Bundy later observed, it was not United States missile superiority but the mere risk of nuclear war which kept Khrushchev from ever pushing too near the brink.
But President Kennedy, who was not much liked by his senior officers and who faced a midterm election the following month, could hardly say this in public.
Robert Kennedy reported himself as having said to his older brother at the height of the crisis, “If you hadn’t acted you would have been impeached”—a remark to which the President apparently nodded agreement.
This is characteristic hyperbole from the excitable younger Kennedy, but it certainly must have been a factor in the President’s decisions at the time.
These background considerations had a major part in determining the United States response to the Cuban missile crisis—indeed, they helped define for the United States leadership just what sort of a crisis it actually was.
Thus Kennedy and his advisers were reluctant to play down the Soviet threat, or trade missiles in Turkey, or do anything else that might “let down our friends” and make them lose faith in American determination to preserve the free world.
They are the Rosencrantz and Guildenstern of the crisis plot, and their story is told in full for the first time in his book.
In December 1957 NATO decided to install these intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Turkey and in Italy.
Their presence fulfilled United States promises to provide its allies with credible defenses against the Soviet nuclear threat, plugged the apparent “missile gap” in the aftermath of Sputnik, and provided a use for an early generation of vulnerable, ground-based, liquid-fueled American missiles that were obsolete long before the last of them was deployed, after numerous delays, in March 1962.
The Turks alone wanted them, and more for domestic political reasons than anything else.
About the only military value of the Jupiters lay in increasing the number of targets the USSR would have to attack in the event of war.Few had any illusions about these weapons, which were provocative to the Soviets and of no help to the West.
Even Eisenhower, the president who approved their installation, thought them militarily insignificant, according to Nash.
Later, some of the ExComm members calculated that even if an air strike on Cuba brought retaliation against the Jupiters, that would be a reasonable and tolerable risk.Khrushchev, meanwhile, was equally aware of the Jupiters’ negligible military significance, and he paid them little attention.
As Khrushchev would later conclude, “This agreement was primarily of moral significance and had no practical consequences.
And partly, if Anatoly Dobrynin is to be believed, to protect the future presidential ambitions of his brother.
It is noteworthy that the Soviet leadership, who might have had an interest in making it more widely known, chose never to do so.
Two final considerations shaped and inhibited United States behavior in the crisis.
Having talked up the Cuban threat in public and assiduously encouraged and participated in “Mongoose” and other CIA schemes in 1961-1962 to destroy Castro, they were ill-placed to minimize the danger in October.
For the same reason they did not fully grasp how much their preoccupations had made Cuba one of the Kremlin’s own major concerns.
Once Khrushchev had decided to place offensive missiles there, however, the visceral unacceptability to Americans of Soviet missiles being that close to home was itself a political element in the situation that Kennedy could hardly ignore.Finally, there was Berlin.
In retrospect it seems absurd that Kennedy and his advisers should have been so obsessed by the possibility of a Soviet move there.
They were convinced that Khrushchev was engaged in a complex, Machiavellian ploy to achieve his longstanding German objectives.
Hardly an hour passed during the first ten days of the crisis without ExComm reverting to the subject of West Berlin, to the need to counter Khrushchev’s anticipated countermove in the divided city.
The lesson of 1948 had been learned too well—“To the Kennedy administration West Berlin was indeed a vital interest of the West,” Bundy wrote, and of course the most vulnerable.
Just as Truman and Acheson had seen the Korean incursion as a possible prelude to a Soviet probe across the divided frontier of Germany, so Kennedy and his colleagues saw in the missile emplacements in Cuba a Soviet device to blackmail a vulnerable America into giving way in Berlin.The irony is that the Berlin crisis of the early Sixties was in fact already over.
Ever since 1957 Khrushchev had been pressing for a “resolution” to the unfinished business of West Berlin.
On more than one occasion he had threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with the East German regime and give the latter full control of access to Berlin’s western half.
At the Vienna summit meeting with Kennedy he tried to use Soviet superiority in conventional forces as a threat to push the Americans out of West Berlin.
In the summer of 1961, duly impressed, Kennedy even increased the national defense budget specifically to buttress the United States military presence there.Khrushchev was bluffing—he did have a vast superiority of local conventional forces in Europe and could have occupied West Berlin any time he wished.
But the United States had sworn to defend the freedom of West Berlin by all means—which in practice meant nuclear weapons—and Khrushchev had no intention of risking nuclear war for Germany.
Instead, he resolved the local dilemma of the East German authorities—the thousands of their subjects who were voting with their feet and heading west—by putting up the Wall in August 1961.
Two months later he withdrew his earlier “deadline” for a peace treaty and nothing more was said of the matter.But the Americans, here as elsewhere, took Soviet bluster and propaganda all too seriously and—mistakenly believing that Berlin mattered as much to the Russians as it did to the West—built their understanding of US-Soviet relations around the Berlin question.
This dramatically ratcheted up the apparent meaning of the Cuban crisis.
Give him an inch on Cuba, ran the general line, and he’ll take a mile on Berlin.
The books under review, The Kennedy Tapes in particular, provide the opportunity for us to think afresh about men we thought we knew, the more so since they were speaking “off the record”—only the Kennedy brothers knew they were being recorded.
Dean Acheson, a diplomat of considerable stature during his years as secretary of state under Truman, is here revealed as a grumpy old statesman who has learned nothing and forgotten nothing.
Douglas Dillon, Kennedy’s urbane secretary of the treasury, comes across in the tapes as an unreasoning warmonger, hungry for military action.Senators Richard Russell and William Fulbright, who were among the senior congressmen brought in on the secret before Kennedy’s October 22 press conference, express views that are quite frightening.
Discussing Kennedy’s choices, Russell declares, “A war, our destiny, will hinge on it.
Fortunately, Kennedy was not seeking the advice of these men and their congressional colleagues, merely their support, and this at least they gave him.The advice Kennedy received from his service chiefs was similarly extreme.
From beginning to end they pressed for immediate and large-scale air strikes and an invasion, and even after Khrushchev’s acceptance of Kennedy’s terms they voted for military intervention nonetheless, with only General Maxwell Taylor, their chairman, dissenting.
Military contempt for the young president is palpable, with General LeMay’s remarks bordering on insolence.
Fortunately Kennedy only met with them once, as a group, on October 19, and their scorn for him was matched by his suspicion of them.
General Wheeler: “From a military point of view, I feel that the lowest-risk course of action is the full gamut of military action by us.
Llewellyn Thompson, the former ambassador to Moscow, is especially impressive.
Among the inner circle of Kennedy advisers, most of whom we are predisposed to see through the dark glass of Vietnam, George Ball maintained a moderate attitude, always seeking the least provocative and most promising avenue out of the dilemma—hardly surprising to those who recall his later dissent from the Indochina policy of the Johnson years.
This advice was based on the insightful conclusion, which Ball reached on the first day of the crisis, that the Soviets didn’t realize what they had done.
McGeorge Bundy was sharp and analytical, asking hard questions about the risks of an attack, though he curiously inclined toward the end of the first week to align himself with the hardliners, whose assumptions he nevertheless clearly questioned.Robert McNamara’s views, on the other hand, may come as a surprise to those who recall his advocacy of bombing in Indochina.
After describing the naval blockade option in some anticipatory detail on the same day, he acknowledged that “this alternative doesn’t seem to be a very acceptable one.
And despite having to fulfill his role as secretary of defense and assess the pros and cons of military options, he was always among the most clearheaded of the group in understanding that the crisis, and its resolution, were and must remain above all political.Dean Rusk, too, comes across in these pages as a force for reason and calm.
He spoke most emphatically on October 24 against those who wanted to capture and inspect Soviet vessels carrying arms; the point, he reminded his colleagues more than once, was not to seize Soviet ships but simply to prevent missiles from reaching Cuba with the use of minimum force.
In view of his sad performance during the Vietnam War, it is worth recalling for the record that during the Cuban crisis at least he always favored negotiation, a role for the United Nations, and a peaceful resolution if at all possible.Vice President Lyndon Johnson, too, displayed an unfamiliar side during these days.
He spoke little and was not one of the men to whose opinion Kennedy paid very close attention.
And I don’t see what you get with that photograph that’s so much more important than what you…You know they’re working at night, and you can see them working at night.
In contrast, Robert Kennedy’s political reputation can only suffer from the publication of these records.
To be sure, his “back channel” conversations with Ambassador Dobrynin helped draw the crisis to a close, and toward the end he was one of those, with Thompson and Bundy, who saw the advantage of accepting Khrushchev’s first communication and ignoring the more troublesome follow-up letter.
But in the early days of the crisis Robert Kennedy’s contributions were unhelpful, to say the least.
As the administration’s senior figure most intimately committed to the tactic of “dirty tricks,” he was angrily belligerent in response to the Soviet move.
Hell, if it’s war that’s gonna come on this thing, or if he sticks those kinds of missiles after the warning, then he’s gonna get into a war six months from now, or a year from now.
So…”This was consistent with the younger Kennedy’s personal obsession with the Cuban issue.
He did not know the foreign policy questions in detail, but apparently thought himself to be expert in them.
Dobrynin, like everyone else, recognized the necessity of getting on with the younger Kennedy.
But nothing in the recorded evidence or the recollections of the senior staff of either John Kennedy or Nikita Khrushchev suggests that Robert Kennedy’s ascension to the presidency would have been an asset to the United States in world affairs.
The most likely cause of a shooting war would clearly have been sheer misadventure—a missile fired, a bomb dropped, a ship sunk by accident or by some unauthorized trigger-happy officer.
As it was, the United States went to Defense Condition 2 on October 24 and the Soviets “unintentionally” brought down a U-2 over Cuba on October 27.
Either of these moves, or an attempt to stop a sensitive ship in the quarantine zone, could have been fatal, if only by misleading the other side into supposing that war was imminent.
And if they weren’t, it was because the top leader on each side was determined they shouldn’t be.We might also ask what would have happened if Khrushchev had not accepted within twenty-four hours Kennedy’s reply/ultimatum of Saturday the 27th.
At the time it seemed as if the United States had no fallback position and would have had to begin air strikes and an invasion the following week, as ExComm had agreed it must, in view of the fact that construction of the missile sites was apparently continuing apace.
In fact, as we have only learned in recent years, Kennedy did have a secret reserve position.
He would, in extremis, have authorized Dean Rusk to encourage U Thant, the UN Secretary General, to propose a public missile swap which the United States would then have accepted.
In other words, if all else failed, he would have agreed to the terms of the second, “unacceptable” Soviet letter of September 27, proposing the removal of the Jupiters and an agreement not to invade Cuba in exchange for the dismantling of the missiles there.But even if there really had been no fallback plan and Kennedy had authorized air strikes and an invasion of Cuba in the following days, a generalized nuclear war would probably not have happened, despite the strong Soviet military presence in Cuba and the nuclear weapons already there.
Both leaders tried hard to pretend otherwise, of course, for the sake of public appearance and because their diplomatic strategies depended upon the credibility of their nuclear threats.
And in The Glasnost Tapes, Khrushchev does suggest that precisely because the Soviet Union could not have responded to a Cuban invasion with an effective attack on the US, war might have broken out in the European theater instead.
Khrushchev’s own state of mind in the crucial ninety-six hours between the start of the quarantine and his agreement to remove the missiles is now quite clear—he was horrified at the prospect of war and decided very quickly that the game was not worth the candle.
The whole crisis, and the degree of risk it entailed, thus hinged on a paradox.
But had the Americans also known how many armed nuclear missiles the USSR had already installed in Cuba—and how reluctant Khrushchev was actually to fire them—the temptation to act first and talk afterward might have proven irresistible.
This situation might have been made worse by Khrushchev, who, with his missiles securely in situ, could have been tempted to push his advantage well beyond what was prudent; at best he would then have suffered a reversal even more humiliating and public than the one he accepted on October 28.
Given Khrushchev’s decision to place nuclear missiles in Cuba , an international crisis of some kind was thus unavoidable.
If it took the unnecessarily terrifying form that it did, this was in large measure because of a simple American misunderstanding that can stand as a metaphor for much of the early cold war.
The officials in Washington thought that their Soviet opponents were playing a complicated game of diplomatic chess, with the various pawns on the international board—Czechoslovakia, Korea, Germany, Egypt, Indochina, and now Cuba—being subtly moved around to the calculated advantage of the Moscow principals.In fact, however, the Soviet leaders—first Stalin, now Khrushchev—were not playing chess.
The outcome of the Cuban crisis would not have been very different if the Americans had realized sooner which game they were in; but the risks encountered along the way would have been much reduced.Poker and chess have this in common, however—that their outcome depends more on the nerve, character, and intuition of the players than on any formal disposition of resources or rules.
And the more we learn of the Cuban missile crisis the more we must come to appreciate the two men who held our fate in their hands in those days.
Having made a major miscalculation he resisted the temptation to raise the stakes.
When Kennedy imposed a quarantine and demanded the removal of the missiles from Cuba, the Soviet leader could have responded by threatening nuclear retaliation if Soviet ships were intercepted or Cuban territory attacked.
That, after all, was the logic of the missile emplacements in the first place—the threat of a nuclear response to deter the United States from aggressive moves in the Caribbean.But Khrushchev never even considered such a challenge.
As he explained on October 30 to a disappointed Castro, who would have preferred an armed confrontation with the Americans, “There’s no doubt that the Cuban people would have fought courageously or that they would have died heroically.
All the same, it was Khrushchev whose decisions defused and resolved the Cuban crisis, and history owes him that much recognition.
His own posturing, no less than that of Khrushchev, got the United States into its Cuban imbroglio in the first place, and it was in large measure Kennedy’s need to seem strong, his concern for “credibility,” that fueled the rhetoric swirling around Washington in the autumn of 1962.
He was a young president, under great pressure to do the “right” thing, possessing imperfect information about a possible threat to his country’s security, and advised by a mixed group of men who had in common only their frequently reiterated awareness that this was a major crisis and that the fate of the world hung upon their decisions.And yet The Kennedy Tapes reveal a remarkable coolness in John Kennedy, a willingness and a capacity to listen, question, absorb, weigh, and finally adjudicate in extraordinary circumstances.
At each turn in the proceedings, Kennedy chose the most moderate available option, sometimes against the specialized advice pressing in upon him.
Instead of an invasion he favored an air strike on missile bases; instead of a blanket air strike he favored selective strikes only; he insisted that no strikes, however selective, should happen until warning had been given.
He opted for a naval blockade over immediate military action, and a partial naval quarantine over a blanket blockade on all shipping.It was at Kennedy’s insistence that an innocuous ship of non-Soviet registry was targeted for a symbolic exercise of the quarantine and he pressed his staff to obtain all possible legal and international support in advance of even that limited action.
He ignored suggestions that the United States might take advantage of the quarantine to seize Soviet ships carrying missiles in order to learn more about the Soviet weapons program.
He rebuffed all pressure to respond aggressively when Captain Rudolf Anderson’s U-2 was shot down over Cuba on October 27, and repeatedly postponed the confidential deadline after which the countdown to United States military intervention would begin.
He welcomed the opportunity to use the Jupiter missiles in Turkey as a secret bargaining ploy and even authorized his secretary of state to have the United Nations urge him publicly to accept such a trade if all else failed.
Of course Kennedy’s motives were never unmixed, and like any politician he sought to turn his management of the affair into a political asset.
Stevenson, it was hinted, had been “soft” during the crisis, favoring negotiations and a missile “trade,” in contrast to Kennedy’s own firm, virile position.
The implication—that Stevenson had been unwilling to “stand up to” the Soviets and that Kennedy had been uncompromising and unyielding—was doubly misleading; but after Charles Bartlett and Joseph Alsop published it in their “inside” account of the crisis in the December 8, 1962 issue of The Saturday Evening Post , the damage was done.
It is a grimly sobering exercise to insert into The Kennedy Tapes some of JFK’s recent successors and guess at their likely conduct under such pressure.
One of the side benefits of the Cuban crisis is that none of them has ever had to face similarly trying circumstances.
January 13, 2011 issue More by Tony Judt Edge People November 7, 2013 issue On Intellectuals and Democracy Intellectual activity is a little bit like seduction.
A History of Europe Since 1945, Ill Fares the Land, and The Burden of Responsibility: Blum, Camus, Aron, and the French Twentieth Century, among other books.
Under international law and the Rio de Janeiro Treaty of 1947 Cuba, like other states, had a right to obtain and install defensive weaponry so long as it did not threaten peace in the region.
He was perhaps wrong—but his error was crucial in sparing Kennedy that decision.
But he nonetheless instructed the Soviet Presidium to approve their removal, which it did on November 16, despite Mr Mikoyan’s prior assurance to Castro that the Soviet Union would not concede on this point.
The Last Testament , it is clear that Khrushchev was obsessed by Soviet strategic vulnerability; hence his refusal to accept any test ban agreement that required on-site inspection.
The logic of Khrushchev’s thinking was not lost on some United States policy-makers well before October 1962.
The Turks had no objection to exchanging Jupiters for submarine-based Polaris missiles, but since the latter would not be available until the following spring they were reluctant to agree to anything until then.
This was one of the most serious charges against Khrushchev when he was deposed in 1964.
But the editors of The Kennedy Tapes, like Dobrynin in his memoirs, play down this cloak-and-dagger aspect of US-Soviet relations and the purported role in the resolution of the Cuban crisis of privileged American journalists, Soviet secret agents, and Washington barmen.
Khrushchev’s own secrecy, the fact that he had taken none of his own messengers into his confidence over the missile emplacements, undermined their credibility; the fact that Khrushchev had used confidential channels to lie to him was what most offended the President.
In any case, the shock of coming so near to the brink radically altered the rules of the game thereafter.
A hotline was set up, Ambassador Dobrynin became the main interlocutor, and confidential “feelers,” and “back channels,” real or imagined, lost their significance.
Kennedy’s other senior advisers were unaware of it at the time and for decades afterward.
In fairness to Castro, he too had been misled by Soviet nuclear posturing into believing that the strategic balance favored his Soviet protectors.
But despite a certain romantic, rejuvenating enthusiasm for their energetic and idealistic young Caribbean clients, the aging Kremlin leadership had taken the measure of Castro from the start; the missiles in Cuba were always kept under exclusively Soviet command and control.
But the President himself thought otherwise—once you declare war you will be compelled to invade, he warned them, and that is just the outcome the blockade was intended to help avert.
Email* InterestsNews about upcoming issues, contributors, special events, online features, and more.
