And despite Obama’s recent “bumps in the road” gaffe, these events are serious.
In view of the burgeoning and imminent nuclear threat from Iran–clearly delineated recently at the United Nations by Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu–either Obama or Romney will be on the hot seat.
To be sure, the rough-and-tumble of being president means dealing with huge crises and heavy lifting.
Pushing, shoving and sharp elbows needed to get elected pale when compared to making life-and-death decisions for America in the Oval Office.
For example, who can forget Hillary Clinton’s biting “3m.” campaign ad in 2008 featuring sleeping kids, which took Obama to task for his inexperience.
Whether it’s someone who already knows the world leaders and knows the military.
For stone-cold political junkies such as this writer, the back-and-forth of national and international politics often is the essence of such intrigue.
One of the most memorable examples began 50 years ago this week and lasted 13 days–Oct.-28, 1962.
As a devotee of vintage films, I love those detailing political machinations.
So as we await the Nov. election, let’s look back at “The Missiles of October” –one of the all-time best examples of what it means to be president.
But first, a quick review of the tense situation that came to light on Oct., 1962.
President John F Kennedy was shown U-2 spy plane photos detailing hard evidence that the Russians were installing offensive missiles with nuclear warheads on Fidel Castro’s island of Cuba–the Communist stronghold a short 90 miles from our shores.
At that time, everyone was terrified that the Cold War between America and the Soviet Union would become hot.
Thus, using Cuba as a staging area for an attack on the United States or invasion in the Western Hemisphere–despite Khrushchev’s insistence the missiles were defensive–could not be tolerated.
JFK and the executive committee of the National Security Council met many times and he learned the missiles would be ready to fire in two weeks.
After serious and contentious debate, the president and his team voted to impose a naval blockade by warships–preventing Soviet vessels from delivering additional weapons and other military supplies.
He said there are Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba, he had imposed a quarantine of offensive weapons coming to the island and an attack on America would be met with a full retaliatory response against Russia.
Making “The Missiles of October” even more engrossing was casting lead roles with astounding look-alikes.
Rudolph Anderson’s U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air missile, prompting an angry outburst by Khrushchev against his own military.
In the end, of course, Khrushchev–in return for Kennedy’s pledge not to invade Cuba–ordered that Soviet nuclear longand medium-range missiles, surface to-air missiles and rockets be dismantled and destroyed.
Khrushchev’s request that America’s obsolete Jupiter missiles in Turkey also be withdrawn was rejected by Kennedy.
