In October 1962, the world watched perilously, as U S. president John F Kennedy warned his people of the amalgamation of Soviet arms in Cuba.
Kennedy refused to accept “offensive” Soviet artillery in such close proximity to the U S. , but Soviet chairman Nikita Khrushchev had already planned a stealthily build-up.
For several days, as two of the world’s superpower’s refused to meet an agreement, the world faced the daunting and horrifying prospect of a nuclear war.
With the Soviet exodus from Cuba, President Kennedy’s popularity had risen sharply as journalists labelled him the “architect of a great diplomatic victory.
In a diametrically opposed view, conservatives assert his actions were not decisive enough in securing America’s national security.
Yet, it appeared at the time that the build-up of arms within Cuba was not only a confrontation to the U S. , but a direct threat to national security that was felt and feared by both the public and leading politicians.
Both these accounts demonstrate the extreme severity in which Congress perceived the Soviet threat.
Congress that action needed to be taken upon the build-up of nuclear arms in Cuba.
Furthermore, having missiles within Cuba allowed the Soviets to bypass the U S. warning radars, especially the Ballistics Missile Early Warning system, which was stationed in the North Pole.
By bypassing the U S. warning radars, it certainly amplified the risk of a surprise strike upon certain American air bases and important command posts.
S. government were taking in order to protect itself from an offensive attack from the Soviet.
It was quite clear from these precautions that the impending nuclear threat in Cuba threatened the lives of American civilians, troops, and government officials.
Fortunately, the Cuban Mission Crisis never escalated this far, as Kennedy maintained control of the situation and eventually caused the Soviet’s to retreat.
In the first ExComm meeting, evidence was presented of medium-range missiles in Cuba that had the potential to hit Washington, Dallas, St.
Soon after, further evidence was presented to ExComm of the development of 1,000-mile medium-range ballistic missiles and 2,200 mile intermediate-range ballistic missiles.
It was also predicted by the experts presenting this evidence that forty nuclear warheads had the capacity to hit targets as far as Wyoming and Montana.
Robert Kennedy had predicted that these arms had the power and potential to kill as many as eighty million Americans.
The quarantine was a first step that involved confiscating all offensive military equipment that was being shipped to Cuba.
If, in the event Khrushchev refused to remove Soviet missiles, John F Kennedy promised “further action” would be taken.
As the leaders of the two superpowers stood eyeball to eyeball, and the world braced itself for a possibility for a thermonuclear war, Khrushchev had agreed to ithdrawal weapons that Kennedy had deemed offensive, while Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba.
The U S. response, in the form of a blockade was a wise choice as it applied the greatest level of force upon the Soviet Union while minimizing the risk of a thermonuclear war.
Sorensen, a traditionalist, who was also an advisor to Kennedy, believed that Kennedy responded superbly to the crisis, as he conducted himself in a responsible and composed matter throughout his confrontation with Khrushchev.
Sorensen also noted the fact that Kennedy had not just national interests in mind but, civilians in other countries.
It appeared that through Sorensen’s recount of the events leading up to the peaceful resolution of the Cuban Missile crisis show admiration for Kennedy’s actions, as he believed Kennedy remained in control of events, despite being constantly provoked by Khrushchev.
Sorensen also highlighted the Presidents poise in the confrontation, as he refused the temptation of making a reckless decision to attack Cuba and thus start a nuclear war.
Furthermore, McGeorge Bundy, another traditionalist member of Excomm, praised President Kennedy for “his personal management of the nuclear confrontation.
It is quite clear through these personal recounts of Bundy, Sorensen, and Kennedy, that there was a consistent view across Excomm and the traditionalists that President John F Kennedy demonstrated decisiveness, intelligence, and compassion while seeking to mitigate the risk of war by causing Khrushchev to compromise.
A This was evident in the aftermath of the Cold War that saw an installation of a phone link that allowed direct communication between Russian and American leaders, along with the signing of a nuclear test ban treaty which endorsed a harmonious coexistence between the two superpowers.
Within the waves of praise towards the United States President for his dealings with the Soviets, there were also few individuals who voiced their concerns over certain decisions Kennedy made.
Following questionable decisions by Kennedy that led to the Bay of Pigs fiasco, the U S. policy within Cuba only consisted of diplomatic and economic means, and only until later were trade restrictions forced.
Using this word “defensive”, the American President was justifying and legitimizing the build-up of arms in the backyard of the U S, as it allowed Cuba to asseverate itself as the hemisphere’s third largest military authority.
By Kennedy’s failure to initiate an intrusion upon Cuba’s burgeoning military at an early, yet critical point, it communicated to the Soviet’s that there was possibility for them to upset the balance of power within any country, as long as they were granted authorization by local governments.
By not invading Cuba, the Soviet’s and Cubans proceeded to integrate armed forces that had the potential to cause serious damage upon Western civilization, power and influence.
In addition to failing to stop the military build-up in Cuba, there was also controversy in Kennedy’s decision to implement a naval quarantine in Cuba.
Kennedy’s choice to quarantine, rather than imposing a full air-strike upon Cuba had its weakness.
The moment of crisis, the threat of communism, along with the risk of perhaps disruptive world peace all suggested that Kennedy could have caused a decisive answer to the problems escalating in Cuba.
Kennedy’s government, instead of quarantining Cuba from naval imports, could have forcibly demanded the departure of Russians, along with their weapons within Cuba altogether.
S, but could have also provided the Cuban people with a democratic republic that consisted of free elections under UN supervision.
Kennedy instead, elected for a naval blockade, which could have potentially left open a possibility for the Soviet’s to import arms via the air.
In addition to this, the blockade failed to give the U S. any assurance or certainty that the Soviets would retreat from Cuba.
If, however, Kennedy elected for an invasion and demanded Khrushchev to leave, it would have eliminated all doubt of a Soviet retreat and ensured the protection of America’s national security.
In deciding on implementing a naval quarantine around Cuba, Kennedy avoided an airstrike and possible invasion, by giving his opponent time to reassess his actions.
Through constant pressure from Khrushchev, Kennedy stood decisive and resolute, as he resisted the temptation of gambling with the safety of the world and continued to monitor the sea and intercept suspicious naval activity around Cuba.
Kennedy proceeded and continued to implement the blockade, which was clearly an attempt to avoid any direct military means, by providing Khrushchev with a threat of danger, yet also allowing him with the option to retreat.
Although this was seen as “weak” from conservatives, it is important that Kennedy always continued to pressure his Soviet counterpart whenever he sensed hesitation or deception.
Kennedy never wielded from his objective, as he forced a peaceful resolution that left his colleagues in awe of his poise and determination dealing with such a crisis.
President with the ultimate accolade that if he “had been in the White House, instead of the Kremlin, would have acted like Kennedy.
Raymond Garthoff, “Memo on the Military Significance of the Soviet Missiles Bases in Cuba,” October 27, 1962.
Why Did John Proctor Decide to Rip Up His Signed Confession in Act 4 of the Crucible Essay type Research John proctor is a good man.
Despite his confessions to the court they continue to question him and leave him With 2 choices, to Confess to witchcraft or stay true.
John F Kennedy and Yellow Card Man Essay type Research One day in his class he assigns an essay topic ""The Day That Changed My Life"" One student named Harry Dunning writes about the night hls father murdered his mother.
John F Kennedy the Space Exploration Essay type Research James Moyer Mr Sims U S History Period 3 16 May 2012 John F Kennedy – The Space Exploration I Introduction A Background Information All honor and respect lies within.
