HISTORY AS POINTS AND LINES by Yuri Tarnopolsky and Ulf Grenander Manuscript 1998-2003 Yuri Tarnopolsky and Ulf Grenander, 2006 2 Foreword Most of this manuscript was finished by 1998.
In 2001 the world entered a turbulent transition state toward an unknown future.
Facing global uncertainty from many directions—climate change, energy constraints, new forms of warfare, borderless world, incompetence of governments—we need to look for a scientific consensus on complexity, as opposed to the divisive political, moral, and religious approaches.
Testing the ideas of this book against the dramatic beginning of the twenty-first century, we feel confident that the pattern view of the world can be an effective way to understand the developing systems of unprecedented complexity.
The intent of this manuscript is to attract attention to Pattern Theory as the science of complex systems.
The style reflects our desire to educate, stimulate, and entertain, while introducing the reader to new and little known or forgotten ideas.
The manuscript does not reflect the recent developments in non-numerical Pattern Theory, among which Patterns of Thought by Ulf Grenander should be mentioned in the first place.
How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed approaches the subject from a different angle but remarkably close to the spirit of Pattern Theory.
Our manuscript is a register of questions rather than answers, but, as the history of science demonstrates, the right question is half the answer.
History is the most dangerous product developed by the chemistry of the intellect.
History seems to be of no immediate practical value—a dynamic society buries the dead and goes on.
History is art, with Clio as its muse, and mathematics is notoriously dry.
Since Pitirim Sorokin filled the four volumes of his Social and Cultural Dynamics with numbers attached to events of the past, scores of textbooks and papers on quantitative methods in history have appeared.
There are sites on the World Wide Web on the use of computers in history, college courses, software for historians, and scientific societies.
This book, written by a mathematician and a chemist, is an experiment, as we hope, in fusion rather than confusion.
It is definitely neither about history of mathematics nor about chemistry nor about numbers and calculations.
We are not going to do any historical research, for which we, due to our backgrounds, are not equipped.
Our sources on history are mostly textbooks and selected books for general audience.
Our knowledge of the subject, except for the events of the twentieth century that we personally witnessed, is secondhand.
At this point we are not much interested even in the historical truth itself.
The reasons for such an apparently radical statement will be explained gradually.
We might have overlooked some sources that expressed similar or same ideas in the past.
We cannot provide any consistent review of the literature, the volume of which enormous.
We take fragments of historical knowledge without critical assessment and use them as experimental material.
The purpose of our experiment is to place history on the examination table of a certain apparatus which works like an X-ray machine or CAT scan.
It is called pattern theory, a new area of mathematics that was developed by one of the authors and accidentally discovered by the other.
We want to take a look at history not because we search for any hidden defects, but because we can place under scrutiny of pattern theory literally everything.
Automatic target recognition, body movements, behavior, mathematical logic, growth and decay, language, human and animal skeletons, grammars, mathematical functions, automata, industrial processes, weave patterns of fabric, molecules, handwriting, spectra, cockroach’s legs, human hands, the crust of the earth, genealogy, plots of novels and fairy tales, archaeology, motion of planets, kinship relations, botanical taxonomy, scientific hypotheses, social dominance, language, anatomy, and much more—actually, anything.
We can examine with X rays a multitude of totally unrelated objects as different as live human hand, Rembrandt’s painting, Egyptian mummy, horse’s leg, and the suitcase of an airline passenger.
What we see in each of them is a black-and-white shadow with very little resemblance of what is seen on the surface.
It can be easily scanned and reduced to a long sequence of numbers stored in computer memory, each presenting the darkness or brightness of a certain point.
All X ray photos, so put it bluntly, are made of the same black and white stuff, although they are derived from strikingly different objects.
What unites all those heterogeneous objects is that they are complex and have structure invisible by a naked eye.
Not accidentally, the application of pattern theory to understanding medical imaging is one of the fastest growing.
Here we are attempting to apply the same principles to the body of historical narrative.
Following this analogy, we will first try to show how to produce the image of the skeleton, and, secondly, speculate on how to understand what it tells us.
If it turns out that a historical narrative and events behind it cast the same shadows of the wall of the Plato’s cave as horse, suitcase, and chemical reaction in a test tube, this would mean that history, regardless of its content, joins the world of dissimilar objects built along similar principles.
Of course, history is such a colorful subject that we will not resist the temptation to put some flesh on the mathematical bones.
If, however, it stimulated a historian to repeat it in a professional fashion, we would say that our expectations were exceeded.
The general mindset of pattern theory is not alien to modern culture and we believe that the reader will easily recognize its relation to past and current trends.
The second half of the twentieth century was deeply imprinted by a dichotomy that Charles P Snow had attributed to the contemporary culture.
He saw an impenetrable divide between people living in two immiscible media—natural sciences and liberal arts.
The slow process of fusion goes on in the new century and in quite unexpected directions, as the recent The Sociology of Philosophies by Randall Collins illustrates.
At present, both opposites—digerati and literati—are separated by a very diffuse border.
And yet driving along the less traveled route from Physics to Poetry, we feel how the landscape, vegetation, the color of the skies, and the language of aborigines changes, and somewhere after the exit to Psychology and passing the exits to Sociology and History, we arrive at a different world.
Among the major changes, we would certainly notice the fading presence of mathematics , the growing presence of images and metaphors, the declining 9 power of logic, and the rising spontaneity of self-expression.
The mathematician calls many things with one name, while the poet calls one thing with many names.
The simplified truss bridge in the picture presents a simple pattern of identical triangles with joint edges.
We can describe the pattern of the bridge in a few words of common language, extend it in any direction, and apply to indefinite number of similar bridges.
When we looking at the world as a collection of patterns, it loses most of its color, smell, weight, texture, beauty, and other material and spiritual qualities.
We can code the skeletons of things in sequences of numbers, as in digital photography, but the core of what they tell us can be expressed in points and lines.
For some readers points and lines may invoke the childhood’s nightmare of a geometry textbook.
The image of history which is one for everybody, like the multiplication table, could be terrifying.
It would be only natural to doubt whether we can gain anything by applying any stem ascetic approach to liberal arts such as history, flapping in the transient winds of today’s political weather and full of life, color, mood, and bias.
It was this kind of mathematics that Spinoza tried to apply to philosophy in his Ethics.
But with a mutual curiosity on both sides, computers are the most powerful marriage brokers of our time.
Our primary goal here is to draw attention of new intellectual adventurers to pattern theory and provide them with the basic tools that one of the authors developed.
The “atoms” of pattern theory are called generators and “bonds” are called bond couples.
Pattern theory is a fonnal mathematical theory of all such objects, including real molecules.
Some bonds, therefore, are “stronger” than others, and some configurations are more probable than others, which translates probability into energy.
Some configurations are stable and lasting, others, like the 24 hours of the day of Presidential Elections of 2000, are unstable, fuzzy, transient, and short-living.
This seems like a very intangible kind of discussion, especially if we are frustrated by the TV reports from the hot spots of the globe.
To give an idea, we do not offer a new theory of history, but, rather, try to generalize how events happen, whether real or imaginary.
For example, Romeo and Juliet and West Side Story are two different stories, but when one story is transformed into another, the pattern is preserved.
Our approach is more general than that of a historian and it may raise some eyebrows.
If this is a theory, then it is a theory of histories, as a theory of folk tales is not a treatise on the properties of dragons and magic swords but an analysis of what remains constant when we jump from tale to tale.
The reader who wants to understand this book has to follow the authors all the way.
In first fifteen chapters we browse through some episodes of history, share some observations on the use of geometrical imagery in the works of historians, and prepare the reader 13 to handling a few basic mathematical, physical, and chemical ideas such as binary relation, graph, transformation, group, atomism, and principles of thermodynamics.
We want to show that most of those ideas have always been secretly present in works of historians and sociologists.
At the same time we want to locate our own place among different views of the world.
We formulate the ideas of generator, bond couple, regularity, bond relation, transformation, etc., certainly, with much less rigor than it is done in original sources.
Next, we add more examples and look into dynamic aspects of regularity and structural change, and the phenomenon of catalysis which is more general than chemists and stock market veterans might believe.
In Chapters 22 to 25 we apply our tools to some large historical developments and fonnations.
We wish history did not give us an opportunity to add Chapter 28 prompted by the tragedy of September 11, 2001.
It was, however, a typical case of transition from one configuration to another, which is essentially the subject of this book.
We would like to take this yet unfinished transition as another illustration of our approach.
We assume that most readers are very far from mathematics, physics, and chemistry.
The following Chapter 1, for example, helps the reader to notice the persistent tendency of our mind to find connections between different things and ideas.
Post hoc, ergo propter hoc The title of this chapter means “after this, therefore because of this” It is the Latin tenn for a common logical error of concluding that if one event precedes another, it causes it.
Very often it does, and the lightning causes the subsequent thunder, but it would be erroneous to conclude that it also causes the rain to follow.
The logical error turned to be very productive at the very dawn of the human understanding of the world because it had shaped the very concept of cause and effect.
The world appeared not as a flurry of sensations, but as a system of lasting links and pennanent bonds.
Human knowledge became to grow and evolve as a tribal hut grows when branches are tied together in a stable structure that can be changed, repaired, or abandoned altogether.
The hypertext link of the web page is significantly “dematerialized” because it is a state rather than physical body and to establish or break it requires a very small amount of energy.
Apparently, an idea, for example, causality, truth, or guilt, has a similar fragile nature in our brain, but this is not so simple.
It is equally easy to type a word into computer memory or erase it, but to make people abandon their ideas or acquire new ones is a hard work.
Looking at an iron bridge, we can clearly see its structural elements and the way they are riveted, bolted, or welded together.
Since the very beginning of history people believed that some ideas would stick together and some would not.
They used to build models of the world basing on some assumptions about their properties.
From the start of human quest for understanding the surrounding world, it was very important to find some guidelines to distinguish the observations that have some affinity to each other from those that do not want to be close in any sense, as well as from those that have no apparent preference whatsoever, like the content of computer memory.
Thus, ad hoc ergo propter hoc was an obvious way of driving a rivet through the right hole while building the structure of knowledge.
Although the lightning and the rain do not always follow each other, it happens often enough.
Pre-scientific ideas often express the belief that similar acts are in some way attracted to each other so that if one act is performed, then the other is likely to follow.
This underlies the imitative magic whose basis is therefore more theoretical than empirical.
In Thiiringen the man who sows flax carries the seed in a long bag which reaches from his shoulders to his knees, and he walks with long strides, so that the bag sways to and fro on his back.
In the interior of Sumatra the rice is sown by women who, in sowing, let their hair hang loose down their back, in order that the rice may grow luxuriantly and have long stalks One of the principles of sympathetic magic is that any effect may be produced by imitating it.
The modem burning of the flag or the enemy leader in effigy, as well as the revulsion toward burning the national flag, seem to come from the same ancient belief.
The search for rules or regularity in establishing li nk s goes back at least six thousand years, as the rich written heritage of Mesopotamia testifies.
The people there made their conclusion basing on extremely superficial similarity, sometimes based on the sound of the word.
The following illustration may seem too technical, but it gives us a unique opportunity to look right into the mind of ancient people; Moreover, it seems that such observations must have led them to wonder to what extent the following events could not have been not only preceded, but also announced by the 18 antecedent ones, precisely because of the idea that they had of both the role of the gods and of the mysteries of their writing system.
Once more, if the fact is authentic, we would have a double reason to relate the two oracular elements, the omen and the prediction, to each other.
James Frazer’s famous book was first published in 1890 and after many subsequent editions is still in print.
The identification of two fish with two fingers of the hand was probably the very beginning of mathematics.
We can see the same trend of connecting identical or similar things in the ancient practice of magic, divination, and astrology, still in demand, and still influencing the travel schedules of an occasional American president.
His parents consulted the prophets and were told that Marius “was fated seven times to hold the supreme power and authority” (Plutarch, 1988, 50) Marius was a Roman general and consul.
After his sixth consulate the circumstances made Marius a fugitive, powerless, in great misery, with the family myth as the only source of strength and will.
To Plutarch’s credit we must say that, as any modem scientist would do, he gathered all the available evidence for and against this story, including the biological fact that the eagle rears not more than two eaglets.
Nevertheless, the fact is that Marius returned to Rome, took a bloody revenge over his enemies, and died seventeen days after he became consul for the seventh time.
Both Plutarch’s suspicion about the whole story as well as the attention he gave it were well founded.
Marius’s success in the form of his seventh consulate, unprecedented in the history of Rome, needed an explanation.
The driving impulse behind the human attempts to find the link between similar things was to overcome the isolation of facts and observations, to find regularity in the endless flow of sensations, and extract order from the surrounding chaos.
One s even sticks to another seven, as 20 the holes in the liver stick to the holes in the wall of a Mesopotamian city.
How successful this method was, the fate of Octavius, the defender of Rome against Marius, illustrates.
Here we can see scientific thinking right in the moment of its birth from superstition.
Plutarch noticed that two implications of the same “theory” were leading to a contradiction and the theory did not hold water.
Plutarch and other thinkers of antiquity explored li nk s not only between objects of the external word, observable with the senses, but also between ideas.
They did it by the same rules as we do, following Aristotle who lived almost half millennium before Plutarch and twenty-three centuries before us.
Some ideas linked naturally, as a bird and its nest, and some did not, as a lion and a fire.
Prophesy and prophesy stick together, but he did well and he was destroyed do not stick.
In the search for regularity in these relationships, Aristotle created formal logic, and the newborn science found a firm ground under its feet.
A more intricate systems of parallels may lie behind the Biblical concept of origin of species or the New Age belief in the power of a crystal pyramid.
Since the Earth was “the measure of all things,” it did not need any solid of its own.
For Kepler’s contemporaries and historians of science it was a daring and elegant construct.
The scientist needs to hold on to something in his or her perpetual climbing the vertical wall, and in Kepler’s time, the number of hooks to affix a conjecture was too limited.
The difference is, however, that they know both empirical and theoretical justification of the rule.
Science had been driven toward a minimum of contradiction and disharmony in the picture of the world.
While it is possible to make people believe in two contradicting things by propaganda, it requires substantial efforts and constant work.
American teenagers believe that if they have the same basketball shoes as a sports star has, they will play as good as he and make the same career.
The stars aside, a teenager boy wearing the same clothes as his peers does not feel isolated any more.
A newcomer to the world, linked to it by the shoestrings of his sneakers, he is as comforted as Marius, former six times powerful Roman consul, hiding in the woods on a hostile coast, exhausted and hungry, was comforted by the mysterious number seven, which he believed would pop up again in his life.
Humans came to this world with tools, aware of the physical bond between the arrowhead and the stick, mallet and its handle, thread and needle.
This kind of link can be explored in all detail and reproduced many times.
At the next step of evolution, the ancient observers of the world noted that there were invisible immaterial li nk s between objects and 23 events, some easily understandable, like the bonds of kinship, and some mysterious, like the bond between the rain dance and the rain.
The sun always rose after the Aztec human sacrifice, and even, defiantly, without it.
Today, the link between smoking and lung cancer is established by using statistics in tandem with the principle ad hoc, ergo propter hoc.
When two events always or very often occur together, there is, probably, a positive link between them.
If two events never or rarely occur together, there is, probably, a negative link between them.
To evaluate probability, however, requires accumulating a database for statistics because probability makes sense only over a multitude of observations.
The old Latin warning simply means that a single coincidence does not constitute a causal link.
In criminal justice, to show how the crime was committed, the prosecution must demonstrate the causality in the sequence of events, similar to showing how to tie the arrowhead to the arrow and head the thread through the needle.
This complete sequence of causal li nk s is called mechanism in chemistry as well as biology, history, economics, and engineering.
We will return to mechanism in Chapter 14, Fermentation in Wine Barrel and Society.
The thrill of both detective story and science comes from the effect of the missing link of the mechanism.
Justice may fail because some incredible things happen with a low probability, but a detective story does not work if it is too predictable.
The clockwork mechanism embodies the principle of the perfect causal link, which we can trace from the spring, pendulum, or battery to the movement of the clock’s hands.
The realization that our world is not as perfect as the clockwork was quite traumatic when physics 24 discovered the world of elementary particles.
Since history seems to be built of unique cases, there is no statistics of American or French revolutions in the sense that we have a multitude of them.
An important question is whether such mechanisms can always be established.
Even if we pool together all the revolutions in the world, we may not be able to arrive at a generalization for the causal link of revolutionary terror.
As a preliminary observation, we need to apply efforts to keep in the mental picture some elements that repel each other, while others are naturally attracted.
We have to spend energy to break the seemingly superstitious associations—they might turn up not so false after all but simply ahead of time.
We will return later to the probabilistic interpretation of a link and its connection with the concept of energy and affinity.
Evolution of human knowledge started with recognition of separate elementary objects and observations and establishing links between them.
With time, natural sciences, religion, arts, and humanities went their separate ways.
Here we regard any particular work of a historian, from Plutarch to Niall Ferguson, as a doctrine,e., a system of statements about the world, regardless of whether it is true or not.
Be it the story of Marius or of World War I, we do not try to prove it, criticize, or find the truth, but are more interested in the internal structure and properties of a doctrine, and if it is a story, we are interested in the mechanism of its unrolling.
Our secret and, probably, at this stage unfounded hope is to find the general rules of structural change regardless of the particularities of the structure.
The fact has no lifetime warranty and it may turn out a hoax or an illusion.
If we have a set of something presented to us as facts, we are not trying to verify them but take them for granted and examine how they fit the doctrine.
Naturally, having been spectators and participants of the history of most of the twentieth century, we might have our own idiosyncrasies.
Atomism The examples in the previous chapter—just a few from an endless list—can be formally represented by lines of two kinds:-for attraction and <> for repulsion . long hair-long rice five Platonic solids-five planets he did well <->he was ruined smoking<->good health Similarity of different things, as we have seen, is a very ancient observation.
Most fish are similar in the outline of their body, and so are birds, conifers, and many other groups of objects.
Yet the ancient people went much further in the interpretation of similarity.
The ancient belief that similar attracts similar reveals the idea that certain things are connected and others are not, and the connection has something of an attraction of a mother to her child, a lion to a 27 tethered goat, or a piece of iron to a magnet.
One needs to do some physical work and exert energy in order to separate all those couples.
The next step in establishing connections was to recognize the importance of dissimilar or even the opposite phenomena, which may struggle and annihilate each other.
God and Devil in Christianity, Truth and Lie in Zoroastrianism, Yang and Yin in Chinese Naturalism, and earth, air, fire, and water of Aristotle.
In other words, certain things in nature and human mind have affinity, while others do not, and some even repel each other.
Thus, fire scares off night predators, the cross keeps off the devil, nature is afraid of void, garlic scares off vampires, and macho behavior intimidates the rival.
His follower and popularizer Lucretius wrote a large poem On the Nature of Things.
But powerful in old simplicity, Abide the solid, the primeval germs; And by their combinations more condensed, All objects can be tightly knit and bound And made to show unconquerable strength.
Be it otherwise, Nor could the generations Kind after kind so often reproduce The nature, habits, motions, ways of life, Of their progenitors.
For were these shapes quite infinite, some seeds Would have a body of infinite increase.
For in one seed, in one small frame of any, The shapes can't vary from one another much.
To choose the building blocks is a crucial and difficult step 29 when building a representation.
No simple recipes can be offered; only some general and necessarily somewhat vague advice.
The development of the atomic theory of matter can point us in the right direction and we are indebted with that to Democritus and Lucretius.
After them the theory then had become dormant for a long time until it was revived and deepened by Dalton and other chemists in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century.
Far from believing in the real existence of atoms, even as late as the 1900's, prestigious natural philosophers preferred to think of the concept as a hypothesis, useful but not established.
While Democritus in the fifth century B.C. believed that only the atoms and void were real, Ernst Mach ca 1900 regarded atoms only as a postulate.
In a naive view the atoms could be thought of as small rubber balls bouncing against each other and the containing walls, resulting in an irregular motion otherwise called heat.
Based on this assumption the discipline of statistical mechanics was developed and used as the theoretical underpinnings of thennodynamics, one of the great success stories of modem science.
We will talk more about thermodynamics later, but here we would like to note that it is much more than a chapter of physics.
In spite of the triumph of science, one could still question the physical reality of atoms, especially as quantum mechanics, emerging in the 1920’s, replaced the classical view of material particles by a less intuitive one.
Some would argue that the concept of atom is just a shorthand description of certain measurements that differ from one element in the periodic system of 30 Mendeleyev to another.
In other words, atoms were man-made concepts, extremely useful but not as real as the rubber balls.
The subsequent developments of science left no doubt about the existence of atoms.
In the most recent time we have even learned to see and move single molecules and manipulate matter atom by atom, as we move word by word with the word processor.
The analogy between atoms of matter and more abstract building blocks of the world should not go too far, and yet in the same way as physics initially perceived atoms, we shall think of our building blocks, to be called generators, as man-made, designed by a researcher for a specific purpose, whether they can be attributed existence in the real world or not.
Their purpose is to help in organizing a body of knowledge, to make it appear simple, and to make it cohesive.
Sometimes it is obvious how to create useful generators, other times it will require a deeper understanding of the domain of knowledge.
Remarkably, all modem science looks for the relations between apparently disconnected things as diligently as the ancient fortune-tellers looked for the relations between the entrails of the sacrificed animals and the outcome of a marriage or war.
Edward B Tylor, one of the founders of cultural anthropology, and J.G.Frazer, the author of The Golden Bough, both interpreted magic as pseudo-science.
Anthropologists differ in their interpretation of the subject, but if we consider the search for bonds, links, and regularities as the driving force of understanding the world, we can trace the origin of science from mythology and magic to present.
The pieces of each new picture of the world stick together as long as they stick with the world itself, and if not, they are rearranged, new pieces added, and the general cohesion tested.
Ptolemy suggested that celestial bodies were moving along perfect cycles with centers moving along other cycles centered at the earth.
The Ptolemaic system of epicycles may seem clumsy and unnecessarily complicated to today's critic but at its time it was based on accepted principles of geocentric Aristotelian world, and it worked.
Modified forms of Ptolemaic systems were in use in navigation long after the Copernican system had rearranged the same celestial pieces in a different way.
Copernicus himself had to use a system of epicycles in his calculations.
The great attraction of Ptolemaic system was that it dealt with the visible surface of the world.
Only the advent of satellites and the Global Positioning System put it to honorable retirement.
A complex area of knowledge of obvious importance to everybody was medicine, where ambitious attempts were made to systematize the existing lore according to what was supposed 32 to be laws of reasoning.
These four cardinal humors interact, too little or too much of one causes a specific disease, and the aim of the physician is to restore the balance, for example, inducing a vomit or employing bloodletting.
It is the same as to say that they transformed the relation between the Aristotelian elements, leaving its geometry unchanged, but renaming the elements.
Rules of transformation from philosophy to seasons to humors to temperaments to organs , preserving the correspondence between dry/cold, earth, autumn, black bile, melancholy, and spleen and along other columns, in short, similarity.
Aristotelian theory of medicine What the blocks mean is stated explicitly.
The outcome of the comparison will detennine the health status of the patient.
What is important, both blocks and lines that connect them have identities of particular objects and relations between them.
The today’s weather forecast and traffic report are ephemeral pieces of infonnation that are dead next day or even next hour.
A doctrine is a more complex and long lasting representation of knowledge.
We find in ancient doctrines a structure common to all systems of knowledge, and it is the structure that we are interested in.
We will use the term doctrine for all systems of statements about certain properties of the world, whether they are religious systems, myths, scientific theories, empirical rules, irrational beliefs, or even hearsay and advertisements.
By this we want to emphasize that we do not care much about their truth value but look for a certain system of relations,e., structure they describe.
For example, a mini-doctrine may state that brushing your teeth with a certain brand of toothpaste is good for you, while any other brand is not as good.
From the initial stages of the development of knowledge to its modem overwhelming exuberance, one thing remains unchanged.
It is meant to be applicable to a number of situations not even known in advance.
For a doctrine to be useful it is necessary that it can be applied repeatedly in circumstances that are similar but need not be identical in time, place or other incidentals.
What constitute an incidental will depend upon the doctrine and its specification is indeed crucial.
But if the logical system only served to explain a unique event, impossible to repeat even in principle, it could possibly be classified as a miracle but not as a doctrine in the sense we have used the term.
A reader may object that the Big Bang theory of the creation of the universe would then not qualify as a doctrine but that is not so.
The Big Bang would be repeatable in principle, unless the ultimate physical laws were suspended momentarily at the time of creation and only once.
This principle of minimization is ascribed to William of Ockham, a logician of the fourteenth century.
It has always been considered strictly intuitive and could not be reduced to other principles.
In earlier history a doctrine often became popular because of its simplicity, geometrical symmetry, and beauty, as it was the case with the Aristotelian doctrine, Ptolemean system of astronomy based on perfect cycles, the symmetry of the double predestination, and the opposition of City of God and City of Evil of St.
Augustin, the pyramidal hierarchy of the Eastern Roman Empire, and the parallel between objects and ideas in Spinoza’s Ethics.
The intuitive beauty of a scientific theory has been an ideal and a proof of superiority for scientists up to present.
The development of mathematics and physics in the twentieth century seemed to confirm, however, that the goal of a complete perfection of a scientific system was illusory and any such system had small defects.
Curiously, in the traditional esthetics of Japanese 37 art small imperfections were highly praised.
The above diagrams can be said to be representations of the knowledge incorporated in the doctrine.
Whether the knowledge represented by a diagram is true or not is another matter that will have to be decided empirically; let us leave this topic until later.
We can also employ written or spoken representations, but since most of our sensory data come to us in visual form, the diagram is an effective means of communicating knowledge, so that we shall often employ such configuration diagrams in the following.
The diagrams like in Ffigures 2. and 2. are actually points connected with lines.
Epistemology, the study of knowledge and its limitations, is a time-honored field of philosophy, and often it is a good idea to go back to Aristotle to find out what he said.
According to himself, what we know concerns only certain categories and knowledge can be represented by them.
These ten categories, intended to classify the main aspects of reality, both universal and real, were used by Aristotle to criticize Plato's theory of forms.
In Plato's view our knowledge is based on the imperfect impressions our senses give us of the world of ideals, the Platonic forms.
For both philosophers, knowledge is built from such primitives by connecting them together.
When we say “atomistic,” we mean not only that there are standard blocks in any knowledge representation, but also that a certain combination of the blocks is somehow held together in a stable structure, “tightly knit and bound” like atoms in a molecule.
The structure itself can be applied to a multitude of real or imaginary situations and it can be stretched within certain limits.
If one accepts this view, the next question is how should the primitives be joined together in a meaningful manner so that the resulting structure can serve as a representation of knowledge in a specified discourse.
In the epicycle theory circles are the primitives and the rule says that circles roll along each other.
All doctrines in the world form a superstructure, but it is so large that each individual doctrine may be as lost in the overall web as an individual molecule in a glass of water.
Nevertheless, certain regularity can be clearly seen even in such a big structure best of all represented by a tree-like system of library catalogue or Internet search engine.
It is regular to find cats and dogs side-by-side in a doctrine about pets, but it is irregular to find dogs and differential equations in the same topic.
To summarize, the atoms or primitives of knowledge,e., points of our diagrams, are connected with lines according to certain rules, so that some are connected and some are not.
Thus formed configurations can be changed by adding new atoms, taking away others, recombining the atoms in a different order, or even changing the rules.
This is a combinatory view of knowledge representation and it will lead us to the regularities that will be used to describe our various attempts to know the world.
The primitives are the logical objects, the building blocks, and we shall discuss in detail how they can be modified by transformations when they are viewed by an observer, a bit like when the Platonic forms are changed in the way they correspond to sensory data.
But the transformations shall be constrained to leave certain fundamentals unchanged, to allow for invariances, for some stability and some, perhaps very limited, degree of predictability.
A cube remains a cube whether it is a solid block or a model made of twelve thin sticks.
Even disorder shall be subject to laws and invariances, all the more, any natural chaos is never perfect.
If the world were completely chaotic, it could not be understood in any operative sense.
Science is to a large degree a search for invariances, say patterns, and the same is true about other human quests for knowledge although in a less rigid fashion.
We will have much to say about how to do this, and it should not surprise the reader that terms like probability and variance will occur many times in the following.
The “tightly knit and bound” structure has a high probability to exist and not to slip easily into another, more probable structure.
The structure, therefore, carries some indications of its possible fate.
This Demon is assumed to be able to observe without error the position and velocity of every atom in Newton’s universe.
Therefore the Demon can calculate, using the laws of Newton’s mechanics, the state of the universe at any future time so that perfect prediction would be possible, for example in the stock market.
The Demon could also compute backwards in time and see whether the beauty of Helen of Troy really motivated a thousand ships to be launched.
The Demon caused much headache to the natural philosophers of the 19th century—for us he should serve more as a warning against scientific hubris.
Uncertainty plays an important role also outside quantum mechanics and should be accounted for in any theory of knowledge representation.
Laplace, contrary to his mechanistic fame, was, actually, one of the main founders of probability theory.
The purpose of this book is to demonstrate that it is possible to use its concepts and methods also in non-numerical contexts.
Moreover, here we attempt to use the apparatus of pattern theory to X-ray such an apparently anti-mathematical subject as history.
Epluribus unum The common way to proceed is to advance into the subject systematically and gradually.
Pattern theory, however, is so young that some pranks can be tolerated.
Let us plunge right into the middle of a historical metamorphosis, the American Revolution, where we may find not only George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, but also some major protagonists of pattern theory.
Its motto, e pluribus unum, means “from many, one” and is a metaphor for the essence of the opening events of the Revolution, as well as the inscription on a penny.
In short, by 1775 there were thirteen British colonies in various degree dependent on the British Government, but in fact self-ruled, not always democratically.
Some, like Rhode Island, were, actually, republics inside the Empire, others were owned by a single man, like Pennsylvania by William Penn, and some, like Virginia, belonged to the Crown.
Although the colonies managed their internal affairs themselves, the British Government legislated some 44 The chronicle of the Revolution and War comprises innumerable original documents written by the participants, secondary documents in the fonn of the analysis of the primary ones, and tertiary documents in form of review and analysis of the secondary ones, plus the art inspired by the events.
Historians and fiction writers are capable of tracing the chain of causality and explain in most cases what event was result of what.
Each such piece of research, scientific or fictional, deals with concrete place, date, location, and cast of characters.
The American Revolution called to the foreground a cohort of extraordinary and colorful personalities whose voices still reverberate in national memory.
This is the live body of history, however strange it may sound when said about the long gone past.
The motto “from many, one”, however, as any metaphor, works for scores of other unrelated situations such as clenching fingers into a fist, bird flocking, collecting antiques, assembling a car, calculating the bottom line of a budget, and founding the European Union.
The Seal is a configuration of generators that could be arranged in a different way.
By changing the shape and position of the components of the Seal and adding or removing some of them we would still stay within a certain pattern.
Pattern is, in a sense, a group of configurations, but the word group has also a mathematical meaning to which we will return later.
In everyday speech we would say that “from many, one” is a pattern covering a whole lot of different but in some aspect similar events.
This turns out to be yet another pattern covering an even larger 45 collection of various things.
In history we discover the dissolution of Roman, British, and Soviet empires, as well as the split of former Yugoslavia.
Playing with both patterns, FMO and FOM, we may wonder whether their alternation FMO-FOM-FMO-FOM-... is also a pattern of a seductive regularity, and if we do not find it in history, it could be hiding somewhere in the future.
Some philosophers believed that our knowledge was the only primary reality, while others regarded the knowledge as secondary to the world.
It all started with Plato and his mental experiment with people confined in a cave, their backs to a fire, and judging the real world by its shadows on the wall.
Obviously, the numbers do not matter much, but mathematics is not only about numbers.
Geometry deals with points and lines, mathematical logic plays with propositions, and set theory , comprises everything we can imagine.
The historical transition started with the formation of bonds between the colonies.
Bond is a binary relation, it requires two participants, and a line connecting two dots is a convenient, although not the only one, way to graphically represent a binary link.
The bonds turned out to be strong enough for the colonies to act as a whole on some issues, for example, on foreign and military policy.
In tenns of diplomacy, the two-arrow line means negative relation, while simple line signifies a positive one, e., mutual gravitation.
Remarkably, the bonds between Britain and USA have been friendly after the peace treaty up to present.
The 47 relationship with the other continental neighbor, Spain, was complex and mostly antagonistic.
The Union and its external links We do not want to go into the particulars of the relationships between Spain and other European denizens, but by no means they were friendly, and for that matter hardly any relations in Europe were.
Concerning this subject, Crane Brinton wrote a book appropriately entitled From Many One.
Half a century before the event, it predicted the formation of the European Union.
Crane Brinton analyzed the situation when several sovereign entities give up their sovereignty to fonn a union.
And there is the process by which a number of units get together voluntarily and agree to merge themselves in a larger whole; thus A, B C, and D will unite to form E This 1 shall call the method of federalism.
Now imperialism and federalism are in these senses mere abstract polar concepts, useful to us in ordering our thought, but by no means accurate descriptions of how political units do get integrated.
Pure force or pure consent, pure imperialism or pure federalism, simply do not exist on this planet.
The conqueror always finds among the conquered some who had been won to his cause in advance.
To use the language of our own times, there have always been quislings.
Nor does the best of federal unions evolve from unanimous consent and without frustrations.
The United States were formed, without losing identity of the federates.
When an empire fonned by absorption splits, it rarely returns to its original constituents, as the fate of Austria-Hungary can illustrate.
The Soviet Union, formally a federation, had always been closer to an empire in its power structure.
When it split in 1991, the important Crimean Peninsula was lost because in 1956, when nobody could imagine the future, it had been transferred to the administrative jurisdiction of Ukraine If the United States ever splits, we can only speculate whether it will happen along the interstate lines.
In fact, there could be more subtle structural differences in the pattern of unification.
It can be a cooperation of several equals with one single selected entity, union of equals, hierarchy of domination, and union of the unequal, as well 49 as a lot of combinations, most of them not yet explored in the course of history but more viable in economic relations.
To the structural variety of unification we have to add much finer quantitative differences.
What we are concerned with here is the process by which once ""independent"" or ""sovereign"" states yield, voluntarily or involuntarily, that independence or sovereignty to some other political grouping.
Yet since the word ""sovereignty"" is a notably complex word, charged with centuries of debates among political philosophers, and since the process as above outlined sounds a bit mechanical, 1 should like to translate it into the language of human emotions.
About 1100 A.D., for instance, it was sweet and fitting for a man from Normandy to die and kill for his duke, and for a man from Paris to die and kill for his king.
Subinfeudation may have confused many good men in this matter of ultimate loyalties, but they all thought the ultimate loyalty could somehow be found on earth.
Within a few centuries, Normandy became, as we say coldly in the textbooks, a part of France; Normans became Frenchmen, and no longer legally killed Frenchmen.
Answering the question “why do they hate us,“ we can only point to the persistent historical pattern.
Regardless of international relations, it is hard to build any meaningful social structure without recurring to forces of opposite sign.
That observation stimulated the development of structuralism in studies of culture, especially, anthropology.
As modem history and current events confirm daily, a redrawing of the map commonly leaves an area with a lot of bad blood between inhabitants, prompting further conflicts and wars in which the sides look for ideological friends and relatives.
It looks like the mathematics of history is closer to geometry than to calculus.
In fact, our dots are nothing but points because their shape and size does not matter.
We give them various names, but there are no nameless points in geometry, either.
Unlike geometry, however, we are not concerned with the length, angle, and distance.
The more abstract world of binary relationships is called topology, formally, a branch of geometry.
They can form various bonds, can carry some labels and even have a fine structure of their own.
We can supply the line between the two objects of mutual emotions not only with a sign but also with an indicator of intensity.
The line, therefore, will have something of a length, bringing it even closer to the Euclidean geometry.
Line is an all-or-nothing binary relation that is either there or absent.
Line with a quantifier, whether by a number or just by words “much” and “little” or “strong” and “weak” is a different mathematical object.
With all its simplicity, it gives an access to describing objects of great complexity and realism.
Very strong bonds are commonly attacked and broken in chemical reactions by 53 tricks reminding of the Trojan Horse.
Love, politics, and economics are pattern relatives of chemistry, some examples to be soon presented.
As same meaning can be expressed in various languages and styles within the same language, there is no single way of portraying the type of bond between two entities, although the meaning remains the same.
We use small circles as symbols of pre-revolutionary colonies and subsequent states, limiting their number to three just to save space.
We will use large circles for such entities as Parliament of Britain , Continental Congress and the national United States Congress that took over.
We do not claim allegiance to exact detail, and our description should be regarded rather as related to events on a planet very much similar to our Earth and during a historically similar period, but not exactly same.
To learn how the Revolution actually happened, one should turn to books of historians.
To learn how everything can happen and what everything is ... well, let us wait until Chapter 15.
The pattern of the American revolutionary transformation displays between the initial state K and the final state Q History is a continuous process and of course the terms initial and final correspond only to a certain segment of the process.
The initial state K is the array of disjoint colonies dominated by Britain.
Next, in M they develop a common legislating and coordinating body, the Continental 54 Congress.
From domination to independence The entire pattern K possesses a high generality.
Here is a short list of some possible initial situations with the same pattern of change.
In our simplified presentation of the American Revolution we use only three small circles for the initial colonies, but we could use ten or thirteen, the pattern would not change.
If we substituted symbols for the words Britain, British, French, and colonies, nobody could guess that the subject was history.
We use here the terminology of our point-and-line pictures and, hopefully, this language does not sound completely alien.
Note also, that the pictures themselves do not provide a clue to the answers.
Intuitively, we can guess that the 56 answers would have something to do with the strength or other properties of the bonds, some of which are broken and other established.
Our questions may rise new questions of epistemological nature,e., questions about asking questions.
This question does not make sense unless we have something like the laws of nature for human society.
No wonder, history is a fertile soil for all kinds of arguments and antique theories.
At this point we are asking more questions than we can answer, but a good question is half an answer.
Although history never repeats literally, we can clearly see some patterns.
If we focus on the reign of Henry VIII, with all his extravagances and unfortunate wives, there is little we can leam about world history.
We leam much more about monarchy when we rise above some details and we leam even more about history when we follow the rise and decline of European monarchy from the early Middle Ages to its demise in the national revolutions.
We have to stay at a certain level above the detailed historical narrative, to be on target.
The confusion between unavoidable explanation and indispensable narrative is closely connected with another equally natural terminological confusion between generalizing and theorizing.
This implies that he helped himself to a cigar, bit off the tip, or cut it off, or merely punched it; he struck a match or somebody offered him a light; he puffed several times, and uttered a little sigh of pleasure as he took out the cigar and looked at its farther end; meanwhile, he expelled several distinct clouds of smoke.
The narrative would never reach its end if it had to enter into these details, every single one of which can in turn be analyzed into further details.
What we are probing here is a symmetrization of history to cover not only the past but also the future.
To be on the safe side, we use the question marks like an excessive postage.
We can certainly ask those maniacal questions, but the answers would not help us.
Making history always takes at least two interacting sides, for example, “us” and “them,” and the outcome of every such struggle is rarely predictable.
History, running as we speak, still retains some characteristics of a sports game where everybody plays by the same rules but, nevertheless, only one side wins.
Unlike the game of football or chess, however, nations and their leaders can also play by the rules of their own.
We do that by describing the structural aspects of events in tenns of variously labeled points and connecting lines.
Those are our Platonic shadows of the colorful and vibrant reality, and we are ready to experiment with them and give them a gift of life of their own.
Next, we would like to extract some regularity from the complex and confusing picture.
Inventing a new philosophy of history would be no better than any other philosophy.
Instead, we would like to show that the chosen way to treat historical transfonnations brings them in a much wider family of natural and artificial phenomena, which all could be treated the same way.
Alternatives and altercations In this Chapter we are looking for evidence of confusion, uncertainty, and excessive imagination in history.
In order to prove that we are not driven by arrogance or critical itch, we need first to gather some factual and counterfactual material.
For most of us, non-historians, the French Revolution is mainly what is written about it two centuries later.
Textbooks and other historical narratives describe the Revolution in terms of social and economical condition, fate of a leader, movement of a group, military campaign, massive human loss, rearrangement of social roles and interactions, and extraordinary event.
Studying the texts, we immediately find out that the narratives by different authors can be different and even contradictory.
The distance in time does not explain it because even the contemporary observers and participants, for example, Robespierre and Marie-Antoinette, could have very different perceptions.
The French historians—more than anybody else—had a lot of arguments about their own history.
Among recent historians, Francois Furet wrote at length against politicizing the French Revolution.
He noted that every historian in France carried a label of royalist, liberal, Jacobin, anarchist, or libertarian.
Had it been otherwise, there would be one historian laureate for all humankind at any given time.
We all have a complete and absolute record on Hamlet from the Shakespeare’s text, but scores of interpretations of Hamlet’s character have been accumulated until present, with no end in sight.
All contemporaries and historians consider Louis XVI weak, but maybe he was just too human to be the king.
Though fat and clumsy, he developed real skill at his favorite pastimes of hunting and locksmithing.
Considering Hamlet, at least the text of the play is a firm ground on which multiple interpretations can be built.
Conflicting opinions may clash even around facts, not just interpretations.
Revolutions were always confiscated, their principles denied or diluted.
They were always the agents through which an authoritarian, centralizing regime seized power.
There was some doubt even about whether Napoleon was born in 1768 instead of 1769.
The year of 1768 would mean that he was not born a Frenchman because it had been before Corsica became part of France.
But even if he was formally bom a French citizen, he spoke French with an accent.
The most common problems with facts are that there are too few or too many of them.
If the latter is the case, any historian who writes about a subject has to perform a selection because of the limits of space.
Facts and opinions compete for the space of the page like the rainforest plants for sunlight.
As result, a vertical hierarchy of facts develops, and only the top facts see the full light of the day.
Three or four hundred years ago to study history meant to read Plutarch who on many pages described the life of Scythians in fascinating detail.
The following classical story was often mentioned in history textbooks as an example of ambiguity of oracles.
When Lydian king Croesus asked the Delphic oracle whether he should march on the Persians, the answer was that he would destroy a mighty empire.
Croesus felt encouraged to march, only to leam later that the empire to be destroyed was his own.
The cautious Croesus consulted the Pythoness again, asking whether his kingdom would be of long duration.
It turned out later that the mule the oracle meant was Persian king Cyrus who was of a mixed descent, from Median mother and Persian father.
The story of the unhappy fortune-telling goes for pages, with many quotations of the oracles.
Naturally, all that has been lost in modern books, and for good reason.
A lot of what we find in Herodotus looks like pure fiction inspired not by Clio but by Calliope.
To us this esoteric subject seems to be of no relation to history as we understand it today.
We mention it as an introduction into the topic of prediction, to be revisited in Chapter 27, History and Computers.
We can only guess how much of the material has been lost with every new quasiOrwellian repackaging.
Similarly, a writer selects a fixed and limited sequence of words from a practically infinite stock of meaningful combinations.
Had Britain stood aside—even for a matter of weeks—continental Europe could therefore have been transformed into something not wholly unlike the European Union we know today—but without the massive contraction in British overseas power entailed by the fighting of two world wars.
Perhaps too the complete collapse of Russia into the horrors of civil war and Bolshevism might have been averted.
Though there would still have been formidable problems of rural and urban unrest, a properly constitutional monarchy (following Nicholas IPs probably inevitable abdication) or a parliamentary republic would have stood more chance of success after a shorter war.
There is a sequence of ten events that might have or might have not happened.
Then the probability of the complete scenario starting with the Britain’s standing aside would be 0.
If we take the probabilities as 0.2, the ultimate probability will be one in ten millions.
Of course, this calculation is flawed because the outcomes are not independent, but it shows how improbable every extended scenario could be.
At the first glance, whether we describe the American Revolution verbally or in point-and-line symbolism, it matters little, if at all, regarding these questions.
It has always been typical for historians of the past and we can find innumerable examples.
If they had brought plenty of supplies with them, and had persevered in the war without scattering for piracy and agriculture, they would have easily defeated the Trojans in the field, since they could hold their own against them with the division on service.
The things could be different if De Launay, the governor of the Bastille, did not lose his head and order to fire on the group of militia who came to ask him for gunpowder.
Napoleon could have won the battle of Waterloo if he was not physically exhausted, or, according to Duke of Wellington, did not use his usual well known tactics of head-on assault.
As it turned out, Louis had many opportunities in the next years to retain important powers for himself as a constitutional monarch.
Suspected by both sides, Mirabeau dragged out the last few months of his life in a pretty complete political impotence.
His fate suggests the limitations, during so unusual a time as that of the French Revolution, of even extraordinary political sagacity.
In sci-fi stories, the time-travelers into the past inflict catastrophic changes in the future by a minute action.
In fact, history tells us how difficult it is to change the course of history in the long run.
The battle was full of errors on both sides and if not for the timely appearance of Bliicher’s army it could be lost by the coalition.
With a tortuous twist of mathematics, probability was even used as a political weapon, and for Stalin’s henchmen, it was no coincidence that the “traitor” Leon Trotsky happened to be in Berlin when other enemies of the people were there.
We are not historians and we have had no chance to acquire even a small part of the knowledge a historian possesses.
Not being historians, we cannot repeat their work and we have to choose a limited number of sources among the incredible abundance.
Finally the time has come to explain why, contrary to what the reader might have expected, we are highly sympathetic to counterfactual history in spite of its improbable conclusions.
The counterfactual experiments may seem just a mind game, but a chemist would easily find a kindred spirit in a counterfactual historian.
When a chemist explains why a chemical reaction takes the observable turn, the explanation consists in making up the list of all other possible directions, comparing them, and showing that the observed one had some advantages over the rest.
The chemist builds a tree of alternative outcomes and let them compete—in his mind or, more often today, in a computer—for the highest probability Some pharmaceuticals require ten and more steps of the synthesis.
Suppose that the yield, e., the percentage of desired molecules among byproducts and non-reacted starting material is 50% at each stage.
However improbable, the chosen sequence of chemical events may be incomparably more probable than other pathways to the product.
Besides, the chemist 69 possesses some tools and tricks of the trade for pushing the process in the desired direction, very much like a skilled politician running the election campaign.
The formulas of organic chemistry look conspicuously like points connected with lines.
The same structural meaning is expressed in different symbolic languages.
The two structures, A and C, have differently looking points but the same 70 connecting lines.
The chemist tries to imagine all possible intermediate structures X between A and B and then ranks them according to some criteria, from least probable to most probable.
A —> Xi, X 2 , X 3 ... —> B The common criterion is energy, which metaphorically and poetically can be presented to hard line non-chemists as tension, discomfort, or frustration of the molecule.
A similar way of thinking is involved in answering the question why A turns into B at certain conditions.
The chemist tries to imagine all other virtual outcomes C, D, E ... etc., and ranks them by probability.
For each couple A —>B, A—>C, A—>D..., the chemist builds the intermediate states and ranks them again, to arrive at the final conclusion, which is always probabilistic.
A -> X t , X 2 , X 3 ... —> B A —» X l5 X^X^-^B A —> Yi, Y 2 , Y 3 ... —> C A —> Yi, Y 2 , Y 3 „. —» C A —> Zj, Z 2 , Z 3 ... —> D A —> Zi, Z 2 , Z 3 ... —> D Different final states can have the same transition state, which complicates the picture even more.
For example, C and D could be highly improbable and only B was to be expected, or, C and D could be expected with ratio 2:3, etc.
The question we could ask at this point is whether A, X, Y, Z, B, C, and D could be something other than chemical structures.
Remembering the invocation of rain by sprinkling water, we may try social structures and situations within the same framework of the diverging transition and final states.
It is the same branching tree of outcomes that we find in counterfactual history.
The question how chemistry can not only be possible at all but also very successfully navigate in such complexity—as it certainly can—exceeds the scope of this book.
Our secret desire is to make chemists and historians look at each other with a new kind of curiosity and sympathy.
In chemistry, where a large number of molecules can take part in all possible transformations, the outcome is a mixture of all possible products.
Society, on the contrary, exists in a single copy and only one transition really happens.
For comparison, when an individual makes a decision, only one action can take place, but the alternatives are repeatedly replayed in mind, see Hamlet , the classical treatise on human chemistry.
If we add to the above that chemical structure is also visualized by points and lines, our rain dance may seem something more than an extravagant act of entertainment.
Formal presentation of historical knowledge in terms of “atoms” and bonds between them.
Fonnulation of criteria of choice between various structures,e. what makes some structures more probable than others.
Throughout centuries, historians and philosophers gave over two hundred reasons for the fall of the Roman empire.
The reader can offer his or her own solution of this historical counterpart of Fermat’s Last Theorem in mathematics.
A conciliatory chemist would wisely say that all those reasons, and probably more, contributed to the outcome, each with its own weight in the total, some significantly, some little.
A vague parallel between chemistry and history in terms of points and lines, almost a metaphor, was for many years a guiding idea for the author-chemist of this book.
For the rigorous pattern theory created by the author-mathematician, chemistry is just one of many applications or embodiments of pattern transformations, and history, as far as it can be presented as points and lines, is yet another one.
In the reception room of pattern theory, history and chemistry humbly sit side by side with other applicants.
The reason why the witnesses of the demise of Robespierre did not remember the weather of that day could be just because of the general excitement of the moment.
It is well known that people in the state of agitation and anxiety can have contradicting views of the fast moving events.
Many hundreds of people witnessed the assassination of President Kennedy and still there was a wide range of testimonies.
Revolution and war involves high emotional temperature, and temperature is the measure of chaos and inherent deviations from the statistical mean.
If a chemical reaction is conducted at a high temperature, it runs fast, but usually gives a larger variety of undesirable products.
We would like to find a place for our ideas among other intellectual currents of the modem era, as we have already found it among doctrines of antiquity.
Three views of the world There is an immense literature on most general aspects of history.
It starts with mythology that explains the present state of the world by unique events of the past, which can never be repeated.
They belong to scientists working in particular areas, far from history, as well as from each other.
We would roughly characterize them as substance philosophy and process philosophy.
We must say from the start that we have no bones to pick with either view.
The legacy of Enlightenment is the belief that entirely on our own we can know, and in knowing, understand, and in understanding, choose wisely.
We can understand what people most need, and how they go about getting it, from their biological and social nature defined to a great extent by genetics.
The world according to this picture looks comprehensible, capable of stability and balance, and not quite responsive to the whim of individual desire and will.
This is the classical picture of the world, going back to the French Encyclopedists, Newton, and further back to Galileo.
We would compare this world with a palace or labyrinth which, however large and intricate, can be explored and mapped.
Every floor of the world, usually inhabited by a particular science, can be understood in conjunction with both upper and lower floors.
Its evolution points in the direction of human society, greatly influenced not by winds and earthquakes but by ideas generated in human heads.
The floors communicate through staircases that connect each floor only with one floor up and one floor down.
For example, from the molecular level we can go up to minerals or down to 78 atoms along the same stairs.
If we are pros in molecules and get interested in life, we have to change the staircases because there is no direct connection between molecules and life unless we take to account the properties of the earth surface.
Life is a peculiar kind of a mineral, a nonperiodic crystal, as Erwing Schroedinger prophetically noted in the 1940’s.
The concept of reductionism itself has been evolving for centuries and there could be multiple perceptions of what it means.
As another illustration, we shall compare two discourses that exemplify the latest concept of reductionism pertaining history.
The answer to this first why is the obvious military advantage of Pizarro with his steel, armor, horses, and guns.
Jared Diamond points to some preceding events, including civil war among the Incas, as well as an epidemic of smallpox.
The answer is that he had command of the Spanish maritime technology combined with state organization, while the Incas had no such means.
Because he did not have correct information about the Spaniards, their power, and intent.
Jared Diamond further traces the chain of causation deeper and deeper back into the past, for about ten thousand years, until there is no answer.
Because light has certain wavelength and its interaction with matter is selective.
Because photons, the particles of light, interact with atoms, which can be in discrete states.
Because of the wave properties of electrons “vibrating” at certain frequencies.
Because elementary particles are combinations of quarks, etc, until there is no answer.
The first discourse is a continuation of the second one, although in a very different logical key.
The problem is that there is a gap, about one hundred million year wide, between the chalk, which consists of remains of simple microscopic organisms, and the emergence of human beings with their tools, gardens, and livestock.
Even wider gap exists between the physical and historical approaches, and Steven Weinberg is well aware of it, not to mention the abyss between creationism and evolution.
At the other end of the spectrum are the opponents of reductionism who are appalled by what they feel to be the bleakness of modem science.
Understanding the behavior of an electron or a quark is one thing; using this knowledge to understand the behavior of a tornado is quite another.
While a small system just goes straight through its limited number of states, passing them many times, like a car cruising the streets of a small town, only a very large system is capable of a unidirectional irreversible evolution when only a small part of the system changes at a time and the possibilities of change are uncountable.
Whether we call it evolution or history, it seems to be an inherent property of all large and complex system, including galaxies and the Earth’s crust This is where the second world view steps in.
It is less interested in how the world is built than in why it is as we know it.
It comes from Ilya Prigogine, a scientist who contributed much to expanding foundations of physics beneath systems similar to life and society,e., evolving systems with the past, present, and future.
In short, some phenomena, like society, life, and weather, belong to so-called dissipative systems.
They are in perpetual change and never reach equilibrium because they consume energy, fdter order out of it, and dissipate chaos as heat.
They are subject to large catastrophic changes resulting from small causes.
Charged with energy, such systems are capable of dramatic amplification of small fluctuations.
Not only the future is unpredictable in principle, but the past, too, may not have a rational causal explanation.
Ilya Prigogine made a decisive contribution to the area of non-equilibrium thennodynamics, for which he was awarded Nobel Prize in 1977.
Unfortunately, we cannot dwell here on Prigogin’s arguments, and can only refer the reader to his remarkably rich books.
We can only slice off a thinnest layer of his ideas, but with a thick sauce of interpretation.
Nature, following our analogy with building, according to Prigogine, is not the building but the process of its construction.
It is much less organized, however, than what builders do on the construction lot.
The unfolding of history is similar to repetitive rolling and folding a piece of dough.
Both authors of this book, one, an ardent home baker, and the other, a new convert, can confirm this observation.
Ilya Prigogine uses this so-called baker’s transfonnation to illustrate the inherent instability of social systems and the particular kind of time in them.
The once popular concept of “punctuated equilibrium” falls into the same general framework of alternating stability and instability.
We start with a piece of dough with two raisins, dark and light, side by side, and flatten this piece down to half its initial height (A and B) and twice its length.
This operation of mixing will unavoidably separate the raisins, more and more with each new stage.
A tiny difference in initial conditions leads to a big and in principle unpredictable difference in potential results.
Neither Prigogine nor Wilson discuss problems of history in any detail, and their juxtaposition, as well as the following reasoning, is entirely authors’ responsibility.
An apple, according to a myth, caused the Trojan War in the twelfth century BC, and the murder of Archduke Francis Ferdinand in Bosnia 83 on June 28, 1914 ultimately caused two world wars in a row.
One might say that if not that accident then something else would trigger the war and set free the accumulated energy of both weaponry and nationalist passion, but this assumption would be beyond any test.
The example with the raisins means that a transformation of a system can be so drastic that it does not preserve topology,e. the general shape of things.
Applied to historical configurations, it means that two close points have high chances to be separated during the evolution of the system.
The latest example are Germany, Vietnam, Korea, and China divided by the Cold War between Capitalism and Communism.
The two still separated Koreas, in spite of the large body of common language, culture, and history, are, in a sense, two raisins touching each other but divided by an impenetrable wall of political topology, as if we folded K into M, A similar wall was forcibly removed by the North Vietnam and spontaneously by the two Germanies in the twentieth century.
The great movements of people throughout history also remind dough kneading, which we can trace by language.
Thus, people speaking Finno-Ugric languages are encountered in disconnected areas spanning from Hungary to Baltic Sea to Eastern Siberia.
Altaic languages cover even a longer stretch of Asia between its Mediterranean and Pacific coasts, scattered along the routs of westward moving Huns and Mongols.
As far as the Basque language is concerned, we do not even know whether the other raisin has ever existed and where to look for its seeds.
In the course of historical kneading, most kings and queens got separated from power, and some of them even lost their heads.
Monarchy, the common way of governing society in the 84 seventeenth century, became a symbolic link with the historical past and part of cultural heritage, even more secure and respected than in times of absolutism.
The view of the modem version of reductionism seems to find support, too.
We can trace the roots of the inherent internal stress in the Southern Slavic region of the former Yugoslavia back to the great contest between the descendants of the Roman province Illyricum and the advancing Ottoman Empire.
Subsequently, this area was kneaded, stretched, folded, rolled, and tom apart by many hands, as well as by internal fennentation.
It was initially formed and kept together by the authoritarian force of Serbian king Alexander I and Croatian Communist Josip Broz Tito while both leaders were alive.
Following the concept of consilience we may hope to explain the violent nationalism by the genes and modes of behavior inherited by humans from their animal predecessors.
In our explanation we would have to turn to social psychology and its studies of liking, frustration, and displaced aggression.
We should take to account the unique peculiarity of the Yugoslavian territory populated with people of four different religions and three alphabets, and with historically alternating record of domination of one nation over the others.
The fact that all of them, except for ethnic Albanians, speak identical or very similar languages and have a strong feeling of belonging to the same family of Southern Slavs, is a certain prerequisite for the family being dysfunctional.
From this point of view we would probably conclude that the recent situation was by no means accidental and could not be any different.
When Father West had taken up the paternal authoritarian role played previously by Alexander I and Tito, his Serbian stepson displaced his aggression onto his brothers and sisters.
We suspect, however, that this kind of research could resurrect the pattern of Giordano Bmno and zealous political correctness.
The people of fonner Russian Empire mostly neither spoke the same language nor were pressed to, and neither knew any other dominant nation except Russians nor had any big internal ethnic conflict on their historical memory, with the exception of some small Caucasian nations like Chechens and Circassians in the nineteenth century.
One sees the world as a layered cake, the other sees it as making the cake.
The dynamic, “processual” and static, “substantial” points of view are evidently complementary.
Some philosophers and scientists mean by reductionism any impersonal, scientific explanation.
We must acknowledge our debt to reductionism which has created the largest and the most widely used in practice body of knowledge.
Reductionism, especially, as refined a concept as consilience, “interlocking of causal explanation across disciplines” , is the very spirit and flesh of modem science.
As result, we can see both the remarkable continuity and diversity in patterns of culture around the world.
We all knead the same dough but bake our daily bread in different shapes every morning.
Both points of view are difficult to dispute, but none has ever been tested on particular historical events.
Most of very general statements are true even if they exclude each other.
There is one thing, however, that points to a substantial void in the complementary union of two points of view.
The past as distant as that of the Bible, not to mention the past as young as several hundred years, is still capable to shape history of a region.
The initial conditions are lost in baker’s transformation or in another mathematical model known as Markov chain (the next moment events depend only on the cast die and the events the previous moment, but no further back), but they are not lost in historical records and national memory.
Prigogine concentrates on the problem of time and change, while the resilience of memory seems to be left on the wayside.
Each eddy is a coordinated and organized movement of large numbers of individual molecules of water.
It looks chaotic, but it is full of order because the eddies have a certain average shape and size.
According to R.G.Collingwood , the historian’s task is to show how the present has come into existence.
There is a difficulty of the transposition of the concepts derived from 87 the behavior of continuous fluid bodies to the social structures that behave more like solid bodies of a particular and intricate design (compare with the Crane Brinton’s image of history as network), which from time to time lose and acquire some parts and rearrange others.
Collingwood himself saw in history the transformation of ideas, to which neither physical continuity nor classical thermodynamics could be applied.
The central concept of Prigogine’s thermodynamics—the emergent behavior—was further explored by the team of the Santa Fe Institute of Complexity on non-physical discrete models.
Order comes from chaos when certain parameters reach critical levels, which is exactly the essence of turbulence.
The works of Stuart Kauffman and other authors united around Santa Fe Institute of Complexity is a very big topic with history of its own and we can only refer the reader to the sources.
He contributed the powerful idea of selection of configurations known in details ,e., structures, to the more diffuse thermodynamic picture.
For a chemist, water is not just zillions of molecules dashing in a table spoon of clear liquid but an immutable structure built of two atoms of hydrogen connected at an angle to a single atom of oxygen.
This is what water has always been since it first formed in the universe and this is what it will be forever while the universe lasts.
In the peculiar and unique view of the chemist, water is not the drinkable liquid but its individual molecular pattern made of two atoms of hydrogen and one of oxygen.
Paradoxically, the chemist perceives the molecule of fluid water as a flexible but solid body.
Plato and Spinoza would say that the chemist deals with the idea of water.
The body of a molecule, although subject to internal movement such as vibrations and deformations, cannot be described in terms of collisions, ensembles, dynamics, and mass 89 statistics.
Society, too, reminds a solid body, a crystal, with most atoms moving only within a certain limited space.
The structure of an individual molecule changes in the course of chemical reaction once and forever as a unique catastrophic event, overshadowed by the statistics of a macroscopic amount of matter.
The V-shaped molecule of water can be stretched and bent, but it remains water, unless broken.
It breaks like a solid body and can be resurrected from the same pieces, if we manage to catch them while they scatter around like frightened mice.
We omit here an important but technical subject of reversibility The closest parallel with molecule is a three-dimensional geometrical figure, such as, for example, Platonic bodies: tetrahedron, cube, etc., only it is not typically symmetric.
A mobile sculpture, like that in Logan airport in Boston, has a lot of internal motion, but remains itself.
They change atom by atom, connection by connection, and we can imitate this structural change by small balls of modeling clay and cocktail straws, or simply, as chemists still do, with pen and paper.
Structural chemistry is a science of the individual object, not the crowd.
Yet making cake is also within the chemist’s expertise, and it means fermentation, the subject we will touch upon later.
It grew, however, from different roots, planted by Democritus, and perceives the world in terms of atom-like blocks 90 arranged in a certain order.
In short, it is about structure, usually shunned by physics and taken as granted by reductionism.
History, from this point of view, is always a concrete arrangement of such blocks as particular, not abstract, event, person, idea, territory, power, relation, etc., which changes according to certain rules and laws, whether smoothly or catastrophically.
Believe it or not, the same holds for chemistry, but the computers are really a big help.
The third view notes a certain similarity between ancient kings, modem dictators, and even the charismatic CEOs.
It understands the phenomenon as pattern,e., a property of human society that is neither accidental, nor completely reducible to any lower level, but akin to the way water vapor crystallizes into different snow flakes, all having the symmetry of the six-ray star.
As we promised, we will introduce elements of a much more general and abstract mathematical approach, for which chemistry itself is just an illustration.
Next we are going to explore mathematical objects somewhat similar to molecules but more abstract.
The constructs made of points and lines are subject of the area of mathematics called graph theory, and we need to take at least a superficial tour over its terrain before entering the realm of patterns.
In each intersection of a column and a row the unity means a certain relationship between two points, and zero means its absence.
The matrix only looks like a square, but in fact we can cut it out and roll into a cylinder along the rows or columns.
We can now cut this cylinder along a generatrix between any two rows and any matrix will represent the same graph.
It is a mathematical object reflecting an essential aspect of what is commonly understood as structure.
The arcs may mean lines drawn by a pencil, or telephone lines, or friendships, or anything else, totally invisible, as long as there are a set of nodes and a binary relationship between all or some or none of them.
Arc, therefore, is a representation of a relationship, and whether we portray the arc with thin, thick, long, short, straight, or curved line, it does not matter because all of them simply mean that two nodes are linked in a relationship.
Graph as matrix of incidence In simple graphs all nodes are equal and so are all arcs.
Thus, the structure of the interstate commerce in the United States is a full graph on 50 nodes, all states having potentially same ties with each other, indiscriminately.
Not accidentally, the first thirteen stars on the American Flag were arranged in a circle.
We can invent a variety of more complex graphs by allowing more diversity but less equality.
They can also be drawn as one way street, 94 with a direction from one node to another.
For example, in a graph of subordination within an organization, which normally looks like an upside down tree, the link goes from the superior to the inferior.
Our illustrations will consist mostly of points and lines, but we will not deal with simple graphs.
The real world does not know either zero diversity or absolute equality.
We may portray points by dots of different size and shape and fill them not only with black paint but with their names in Latin letters, and distinguish between different kinds of arcs by drawing them with different types of lines.
Graphs and triangles The relation of being neighbors, or, more generally, being in a relation, is the essential subject of the mathematical discipline called topology.
Topology as science takes a set of objects, for example, points on a surface, and for every pair decides whether they are neighbors or not.
Thus, when we have an orange made of modeling clay and make a cucumber out of it, topology is preserved, but if we make a donut, formerly close neighbors become separated.
Taking another example, basketball and American football have different shape but the same topology, while bagel and muffin are worlds apart, although they are both as American as apple pie.
If we cut it, the relation of closeness between some points will be lost, unless we glue them back.
In political terms, topology is preserved in a transformation without revolutionary scissors and authoritarian glue.
Graph is an example of a topological set because it is a binary relation between every two nodes that are either connected or not at all.
However, Euclidean geometry, unlike topology, takes to account angles and distances, and if those are changed, the new triangle is different from the old one.
What is of interest for us here is the common property of all triangles, their pattern of “triangularity” or “triangleness,” preserved under all transformations.
Some triangles and other figures possess the mystical property of symmetry.
For example, we can rotate the triangle in the upper row around its vertical axis until it falls back into the plane.
This new triangle is not the same because we have changed vertices B and C When we repeat the same operation again, we come back to the initial triangle.
We can also rotate the triangle around its center for 1/3 of the full cycle.
If we label the vertices, we have to do that three times in order to come back to the beginning.
Symmetry operations with triangles The transformations of triangles invite us into a different hall of mathematics called group theory, and we will enter it in Chapter 8 plainly called Groups.
The King and the Pear It may seem that an impenetrable divide exists between geometry of triangles and the fabric of social and personal change.
We would like to provide more illustrations of the evasive property that falls within such overlapping terms as invariance, regularity, order, and structure.
In general, this property is something that is preserved under spatial, temporal, or other transformations.
Not everyone is aware of mathematics’ ability to deal with objects that seem to inhabit the mysterious realm existing without space and time.
Thus, the “triangularity” described in the previous chapter had nothing to do with either the ruler or the clock.
However strange it sounds, operations can be applied not only to connected points, as in the previous chapter, but also to disconnected objects.
The transformation of the head into the pear preserves the pear-like shape.
The picture illustrates one-to-one correspondence which allows for establishing similarity between different sets.
Transformation in changes one discrete set of figures into another one, so that there is one-to-one correspondence between the two sets.
One example of this transformation is a remake of a classical play where characters of a Greek or Shakespearean drama are transferred into contemporary surroundings.
Every epoch, up to our times, made the reverse transpositions of the immortal patterns.
The figures of set a have a difficult-to-define similarity to their counterparts in set oti when only considered through visual associations between the pawn and the slouching man, the bishop and the woman in a skirt, the rook and the square outline of a jacketed man, and the king and symmetric wide sleeves of a woman in a robe.
A small violation of this rule is noticeable as an extra vein on the left side, and we do not know whether it was intentional or just the manifestation of a universal chaos.
Thus we can regard stagnation, equilibrium, evolution, and revolution as something that does not change during transformation from one society to another.
This concept of regularity as invariance of transformation constitutes the core of the mathematical apparatus of pattern theory and establishes a close relation between pattern theory and geometry.
Here is a totally different example of invariance, however, which is also taken from a book on mathematics.
The two meanings are tied together by the common “X eat more than Y” in the same way the rain and the rain invocation ceremony are linked by the sprinkling of water.
For example, a bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade during the Kosovo conflict in 1999 was perceived as an accident by NATO and a barbaric act by China.
The similarity of the situation with that of a pun is that both Ai and A 2 are logically compatible, e., an order to commit a barbaric act could be made by accident.
Yet in international relations this pattern is a typical source of conflict and by no means a joke.
Emperor Ch’ien Lung, sometimes compared regarding his grand style with that of Louis XIV of France, denied the request.
Moreover, our dynasty, swaying the myriad races of the globe, extends the same benevolence toward all.
But your Ambassador has now put forward new requests which completely failed to recognize the Throne’s principle to ‘treat strangers from afar with indulgence’ and to exercise a pacifying control over barbarian tribes, the world over.
Nevertheless, 1 do not forget the lonely remoteness of your island, cut off the world by intervening wastes of sea, nor do 1 overlook your excusable ignorance of the usages of Our Celestial Empire. have consequently commanded my Ministers to enlighten your Ambassador on the subj ect, and have ordered the departure of the mission.
Conceivably, the reader might say that perception and culture may be different, but common sense and reason that allows people to understand one another should not.
The reader could look for an answer not in history, but rather, along the reductionist principles in psychology.
Emperor Ch’ien Lung of the Ch’ing dynasty ruled China for sixty years, , and by the end of his rule showed signs of impaired judgment.
The old Chinese pattern could be called Cinocentric, similar to the geocentric pattern of Ptolemy, with the Emperor ruling the Earth under the mandate of Heaven and all the peripheral Barbarians as his tribute-paying satellites.
In the span of fifty years, the self-image of China and her image of the world was to be crushed in the Opium War , but a century later the West entered a long process of reeducating itself about China, sending new missions, losing wars, and learning the language of humility and apology.
Modern physics, however, understands symmetry with a much wider perspective than that of a traditional view stemming from antiquity.
Physicists describe these two properties of physical laws—that they do not depend on when or where you use them—as symmetries of nature.
By this usage, physicists mean that nature treats every moment in time and every location in space identically—symmetrically—by ensuring that the same fundamental laws are in operation.
The question arises, therefore, whether a transfonnation should necessarily have a mathematical expression.
In fact, the translation of a joke from one medium to another is not what would have been considered mathematics in the nineteenth century.
Today, however, mathematics also embraces algorithms,e., systems of clearly defined instructions of any kind, even with elements of randomness and uncertainty.
The long and explicit instruction would include everything concerning the art of playing both instruments.
Electronic musical instruments can do the same using built-in algorithms.
There is little need to argue whether the hardly definable translation of a pattern from one culture to another should be considered mathematics; the body of mathematics is changing before our eyes.
Entrusted to the massive power of computers, more and more often simulation takes precedence over mathematical inference on a piece of paper or blackboard.
Classical mathematics was the drive of mathematicians to test the limits of their imaginative power and to see what heights the human mind could achieve, while the brutal force of computing is commonly assigned to do what the human mind is powerless to accomplish, limited by its very nature.
They preserve the property of being a polygon, and the number of edges, but nothing else.
It is hard to ignore that what some people expected to happen in the future—for example, the end of the world—has never happened, while that which has really happened on earth no one could have foreseen.
With some interruptions and interregnums, this rule by the strongest became the normal pattern.
So it was in medieval France, where the Carolingians displaced the Merovingians and were pushed aside in turn by the usurper Capetians.
In Japan, however, the solution was not to dethrone and expunge the dynasty but to immure it.
What is preserved is the pattern of the rule of the strongest, with a slight deformation concerning the means, not the ends.
To summarize, there is a great variance of changes falling under the notion of transformation, deformation, or operation while clearly leaving something unchanged.
Both the change and the pennanence are sometimes hopelessly difficult to define.
But the changes that leave something unchanged constitute one of the most important mathematical subjects that we shall discuss in the next chapter.
Groups Deformations and symmetry operations with triangles point to another important field of mathematics, reaching far beyond geometrical figures.
The concept of deformation or, more general, transfonnation, or, even more general, operation, attracted a lot of mathematical attention and is the subject of group theory.
The founder of group theory, Evariste Galois tried in vain to publish his discovery.
On the eve of a duel he wrote notes about his work and was killed next day at the age of twenty-one.
One of the pioneers in exporting the ideas of group theory to the world outside classical mathematics was D’Arcy Thompson, author of the influential and widely quoted book On Growth and Form.
Ill This process of comparison, of recognizing in one form a definite permutation or deformation of another, apart altogether from a precise and adequate understanding of the original ’’type” or standard of comparison, lies within the immediate province of mathematics, and finds its solution in the elementary use of a certain method of the mathematician.
We start with any primate and use the shape of its scull as a template,e., a selected starting point.
We can obtain any other scull shape by deforming the template while preserving its topology.
Moreover, as follows from the concept, we can infer the scull shapes of primates that have never existed and, by employing a template with a different topology, we could infer entirely new species and families.
Concerning the soft tissues, such details as ears, eye sockets, etc., have their own groups of transformations, so that we can fantasize over the shape of an eye and overall appearance.
Scores of sci-fi movies and animations, for example Star Wars, old and new, show various aliens and creatures that look very much unlike our earth forms or their hybrids with inanimate things.
If we look closer, however, all we can see is a deformation of the human form.
This is the only template available to us without the actual contact with other worlds.
If an artist invents something completely out of this world, the viewer may not even recognize it as a form of life.
The computer-generated aliens undergo further transformations that make them turn and move around without losing the identity.
Group theory is a basic component of mathematical apparatus of pattern theory.
While usually we perceive such phenomena as singular and distinct, the structuralist idea was to turn from their uniqueness to their ordinariness as members of a class.
Instead of explaining properties of each element—it became possible only century later—he showed how such properties could be derived from all the rest of elements in his system.
The idea of structure borrowed from the group theory invaded anthropology, linguistic, sociology, and other humanities, and, as any aggressive invader, created a resistance movement in the competitive atmosphere of humanities.
Groups, like graphs and other mathematical creations, are abstract objects.
To discuss the difference between graphs and groups could help understand both.
As we know, graphs are completely defined by a set of elements and binary relations between them.
An example is the square table of who is acquainted with whom , added to the list of guests at a wedding reception.
The elements of a group are operations that convert a pair of elements into a third one.
As an example of group, we take a set of all integers and operation of addition.
The table is infinite and its extension would accommodate all the positive integers.
This group tells us something about the structure of the Euclidean space.
Coming back to wedding reception, it can be exemplified by changing the sitting order of guests at a table.
All those transformations preserve the property of being a triangle, and some of them, like rotation, translation, and symmetry, preserve the property of being a particular triangle.
While graphs can be easily interpreted and illustrated with ® examples trom everyday life, it is more difficult to do with groups.
Groups may show some properties of the world that are hidden and it can take some effort to uncover them.
Obviously, groups of translation, rotation, and symmetry reflect those properties of the world that allow us to rearrange furniture in the room without destroying it, while stretching is something we can do with only few things made of latex.
Changing both shape and color, for example, turning black square into white circle.
Here change of wetness/dryness and temperature are basic elementary operations of the group.
That was the idea of structure as system of relationship that was borrowed by classical structuralism of Claude Levi-Strauss from mathematics.
Structure in structuralist sociology and anthropology consists of binary relations called oppositions.
Structure is a combination of relations and it can be traced trough various cultures.
Plus means positive, respectable, or tender relationship, while minus denotes antagonism.
Levi-Strauss noted that in each system the four relations fell into two pair of oppositions, and there were exactly two positive and two negative relations in each system.
The structure of kinship, therefore, is not a particular distribution of relationships in a family but the statement that out of four relations, husband—wife, wife—brother, brother—son, and son—husband, two are positive and two are negative.
Structures of kinship We find a somewhat similar structure in literature, an evolutionary successor of mythology, along with history.
The pattern of tragedy Here, however, we have three positive relations and one negative.
In other words, it is a property of a system that is not that conspicuous on the surface.
In fact, all mathematics is about structures, invariances, and regularities, of which group is only one example.
Graphs embody the idea of structure as an arrangement of constituents, some of which are connected and some are not.
A graph cannot portray a shape, such as human face, but it may serve as a starting system, as simple circles and lines for children learning to draw.
The graph is an embodiment of chemical and architectural concept of structure.
In essence, it is the hidden “physical” order of things that could be explored by transfonning one thing into another.
We cannot even ask, however, why one structure changes for another on its own unless there is an additional principle similar to a physical law.
The world of groups is the world of common sense, without miracles, catastrophic losses, and staggering innovations, the predictable world of mechanical motion, solid objects, and conservative properties.
It is the world of individual creations of the mind comparable with a collection of crystals, in a museum-like atmosphere.
The wireframe shape, used, for example, in computer animation, is a combination of a metric 3D graph-like structure with a group of its transformations consistent of stretching and compressing of arcs.
When mathematical ideas of structure were introduced into humanities, the next step was to tie the stability of a structure to the internal tension created by negative relationships and compensated by affinities.
By looking at the individual graph of relations we could in principle make a transition to problems of dynamics.
The fundamental idea of sociology, anthropology, and chemistry was to evaluate the overall stability of a structure by scanning its elements.
This idea of additivity of positive and negative increments of structural elements into an overall non-structural value is, therefore, something very general and it opens a way from classification to dinamics.
In case of Romeo and Juliet, we could ask what could happen in this situation.
Outcome happens if R and J can produce enough energy to compensate for the repulsion of C and M Obviously, is out of question.
The conclusion is that this situation is equivalent to the superposition of two opposite forces on R and J, which causes their elimination, the ultimate outcome of a tragic human conflict.
For example, the group of transformations of the wireframe describes a moving dinosaur but has nothing to do with the prediction whether the beast will be killed or, on the contrary, happily feast on a human.
To put it differently, we can discuss the differences between a Neanderthal man and Homo Sapiens but not the evolution of primates from the first mammals.
The quest of cultural structuralism for a social physics was not finished.
The lack of evolutionary dimension and the absence of time from the picture was another shortcoming.
The main threat to structuralism came not from internal difficulties, however, but from the explosion and outside invasion of postmodernism.
As Crane Brinton noted, revolutions always change less than they leave unchanged.
History of structuralist ideas that independently originated in sociology is an interesting subject, from both theoretical and personal perspective, but sociology is an immense subject, in many aspects similar to chemistry, and neither one nor the other can be reviewed here.
Note that the typical features of the primate scull can be described directly, without any coordinates.
Note also that ideas of group theory are basically non-numerical, which facilitates their export and reimplantation on alien soil.
Note also that as Columbus did not find pepper, cloves, and nutmeg in the “India” he discovered, structuralism did not bring the intellectual spices for everybody’s use as it promised, either.
Yet the intellectual sailing in humanitarian seas by the mathematical winds is far from over.
In the next chapter we shall give the tired reader some verbal potion to ease the mathematical seasickness.
To understand the world The quest for knowledge has been driven by many forces, one of which is the craving for power.
Knowledge can be used to control the future, to influence the behavior of the enemy, perhaps even the gods, it can be exploited to improve one's health or success in love, it can make the clever rich and the adventurous victorious.
To achieve this, princes employed astrologers to study the motion of the planets and republics had asked augurs to examine the entrails of animals before important decisions were made.
The curious mind searches knowledge for its own sake, for the pleasure of discovery, to find beauty in order, to find truth.
When Pythagoras had discovered the theorem to be named after him, his happiness was so great that he ordered a hecatomb of oxen to be sacrificed; little did he anticipate the future practical use of his lovely find.
Today science depends on money and the money is hard to get if the scientists do not show the practical importance of their work, whether true or imaginary.
The scientist cannot refer to Democritus who said, “It is not in strength of body nor in gold that men find happiness, but in uprightness and in fullness of understanding.
Science and politics proclaim themselves extremes, but the extremes meet.
Whatever motivates the search for knowledge, the explorer must start from a belief that knowledge is possible and that the world can be understood.
An underlying assumption, perhaps made tacitly, must be the tenet that there is some order hidden under what at first seems like chaos.
For millennia people managed to understand the world around and survive in a hostile environment without literacy, education, and any notion of order and chaos.
Animals do the hard business of survival every day with even scarcer educational background.
What we intend to do here is to understand some aspects of understanding itself.
We cannot do that by just throwing words around, and since we mentioned order and chaos we need to give some idea of what we mean by that.
In the twentieth century, chaos stepped into the line-up of the most fundamental scientific concepts.
The inconvenient thing about chaos, however, is that it escapes universal definitions and is regarded as absence of order.
As soon as we notice such links, we begin to see the underlying order of the world.
In fact, this view is not too far from the physical perception of chaos of molecular movement as the absence of interaction between individual particles of gas moving completely independently of each other.
The broader view implies that there are stable particles, components, blocks, units, cells, atoms, primitives, etc., in any object, and chaos means that they are not connected in any way, whether they move or not.
We can get some taste of static chaos from a text in a totally unfamiliar language, especially, in a non-Latin alphabet.
We simply cannot comprehend anything in a Chinese, Hebrew, or Hindi text, unless we know the language, and neither can we imagine how it sounds.
We are hardly capable of imagining a larger world without relations and connections.
If we look at the string of alien characters, we can in most cases split the line into separate characters, identify their sequence, recognize some identical characters, and even standard elements of Chinese characters, not knowing what they mean.
When we look at a picture, we immediately distinguish between left and right, top and bottom, close and distant details, etc.
When we want to walk across a road, we look for the incoming cars because there is a link between the car and danger.
Animals can probably read the book of nature better than we, but their world may have no links with our world.
Each spring and fall, driving on country roads, we can see carcasses of small animals hit by cars.
Despite their excellence in the art of survival, a squirrel or a raccoon have no links with the small but fast growing object looking like no familiar predator.
The lethal experience does not give the animal a second chance to establish the relation between the object and danger.
The stretch of the highway is for them like a line of text in an exotic language for us.
All we know is that it has been presenting a constant challenge for schoolchildren as well as to distinguished scientists.
Now we have a powerful scientific apparatus for discovering the regularities of the world, from the link between nutrients and health to the dependence of economics on political decisions—none of them faultless.
If people had a picture of nature long before any science, we cannot blame them for a strange fantasy or a ridiculous blunder.
It may be very difficult to find a connection between events even in somebody’s own life, not to mention the events involving large numbers of people, which is exactly the subject of history.
One can only speculate how early humans began to observe order in Nature, but one of the first discoveries was likely the regularity of the changing seasons, how summer is followed by fall, day by night, how the length of the day increases and decreases in a periodic manner that makes it possible to design calendars.
Ancient astronomical observatories all over the world witnessed the dawn of natural science, of course intermingled with magic, beginning a long history of uneasy coexistence with religion, but also of undisputed practicality for agriculture and commerce.
It is the connection between two disparate entities that we call an atom of knowledge.
What has no link to something else is either chaos or it does not exist.
Hodja Nasreddin, the legendary sage, trickster, and preacher of Central Asian folklore, was said to promise fierce Tamerlane to teach his donkey to read in twelve years.
From Augustus to Nero We have already met the first points and lines which we are going to make work for history.
By no means we claim to be the pioneers in this field, however, Graphs have a common, although less illuminating, presence in works of historians.
They are often used to show the structure of kinship in royal families, genealogy, and subordination in social institutions.
Such graphs seem static, but they can be useful for portraying evolutionary change.
We have enclosed men in rectangles, women in ellipses, highlighted the names of emperors, and succumbed to the temptation to show how violent death descended on the family of Octavian Augustus.
The chart shows couples (Augustus and Scribonia, Tiberius and Livia, Anthony and Octavia, etc.), their children, and the children of their children.
The junction is used as a way to show that the children are connected to their parental couple as a whole and have links to both parents.
The subject of genealogy used to be a serious matter and its differing interpretations were often a reason for starting medieval wars, for example, the Hundred Years’ War.
Edward III, the love child of Isabella and Edward II, the descendants of two rival nations, was a destabilizing factor.
The War was precipitated by the dispute over the French throne between Edward III of England and Philip VI of France, nephew and cousin of the deceased, respectively.
Since the royal genealogy of Europe used to reach far across state borders, it was both the instrument of peace and war, depending on the circumstances.
There were periods, for example, after the defeat of Napoleon, when the monarchs cooperated well.
Still, from early Middle Ages, in spite of the ongoing royal intermarriage, the history of Europe up to the end of the WWI was a record of wars.
The French appealed to a law denying the succession trough a female line, but the English did not accept it.
The subsequent hundred years of history of France had their share of insanity and murder.
Genealogies do not seem to attract any significant interest of modern historians, but they commonly illustrate the narrative.
We see in them a graphic way to express the link over time between mundane events without much effect for contemporaries but with dramatic consequences in later times.
Here the square dot means a marital union between the parents that resulted in progeny, the round dot means a person, the in-arrow means spousal bonds, and the out-arrow means a parental bond.
What we can see from the graph is the divergence and subsequent convergence of two lines of kinship, which is an evidence of inbreeding through marriage between relatives.
One continuous string of arrows goes from the parents of Augustus to Julia, Agrippina S , to Aggripina J ., while the other makes the same connection through Octavia, Antonia, and Gennanicus.
The reason for this is that there are two or more somewhat independent layers of relationship, for example, spousal and paternal.
Cycles of kinship are indicated by shadowed areas; emperors encircled; ■ means birth therefore, to use either two types of arcs or two types of nodes.
If we wanted to emphasize brother/sister relationship, we might need a third type of arc.
Here mother-child and father-child relationships are marked by separate arrows.
In some primitive cultures, as we have seen, there are even more important layers of modes of relationship, like uncle—nephew, for example.
The need to graphically express multi-layered kinship was one of the stimuli for the development of structuralism.
We need them only as exercise and illustration to more important matters of representation of knowledge as structure.
As a preliminary conclusion, even in rather trivial cases knowledge can be very complex, and its representation even more so.
In our further exploration in this direction we shall look for ways to simplify complex structures.
Maximus, Avitus, Mqonan, Severus, Anthemius, Olybnus, Glycenus, Nepos, Augustulus.
Normally, genealogy is a branching tree, but it could include cycles when relatives marry, and any culture allows certain minimal blood distance between spouses.
Theodosius I was the last emperor to rule both halves of the empire, but he split it between his sons, Arcadius and Honorius.
The two lines of inheritance crossed in the marriage of Valentinian III and Eudoxia.
Twenty years, nine emperors, and many a colorful detail after Valenitinian III, the Western Empire ceased to exist amidst constant squabble between the halves of the diagram.
The names in bold print belong to three women who had the real but disconcerted power during the final act of drama.
The appearance of the philosopher’s name carries some information, too, and the filled areas indicate schools.
Dozens of such diagrams in the books portray the networks of philosophers all around the globe from the very beginnings of philosophy to almost present, creating a captivating threedimensional picture.
The originality and significance of Randall Collins’ work extends far beyond the illustrative apparatus, but we cannot dwell on it here.
The only thing we would like to mention is his perception of history of philosophy as a natural process in which philosophers, aware of each other’s intellectual presence, compete for the limited space in the focus of attention.
It would be possible to add yet another dimension to the picture by introducing the evolution of philosophy in terms of doctrines, and Collins gives important hints how it could be done.
He clearly sees competing philosophical doctrines as combinations of blocks, some of which are simply negations of blocks in rival philosophies.
The use of lines in genealogies helps find the particular system of lines that we call connector.
As everywhere throughout this book, line is not a geometrical object but a symbol for CAMBRIDGE Trinity Coll.
We encounter a problem of similar kind in language, where meaning can be expressed in a variety of forms.
But the decline of Rome was the natural and inevitable effect of immoderate greatness.
Syntax and semantics The beginnings of history come to us in pictures in caves and on rocks.
The text of a narrative is a verbal representation of historical knowledge.
It is nothing but a string of words equally suitable for communicating the most mundane and transient situations in life of teenagers as well as the decline and fall of Roman Empire.
This is the form in which history is recorded, stored, and accessed, and since the reader may be confronted with the question what points and lines could add to it, it seems worth spending some time on language.
The study of meaning drew attention of both philosophers and non-philosophers early in the twentieth century and it stimulated the study of structure in general.
Structure is a central concept in such technical areas of human activity as chemistry, construction, and engineering, where it is clearly visible to everybody.
There is hardly any place for meaning, except for architecture where one may ask about the meaning of a Gothic Cathedral or Eiffel Tower.
The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure was especially influential in the structural study of language that later spilled over to many other areas of humanities.
Claude Levi-Strauss, the leading figure in structuralism, never stopped reiterating the influence of Saussure.
Probably because of the circumstances of its own genesis, the Course remains as open to interpretations and heresy as a dark sacred text.
The Course seems to be written not just about language but about structure in general.
With its examples taken from chess, finances, and biology, it could be about chemistry, as well.
Chemical series compared with lexical “associative series” of Saussure Moreover, it could be written about history, as some remarks in the Course confirm.
The Course regards the language in a strikingly atomistic fashion as a system of units connected with li nk s and changing over times through a sequence of steps.
Even more important from our point of view is the observation that the changes in such complex system are usually local and small, leaving the rest unchanged, similar to chemical changes in big molecules.
The paradoxical, much misunderstood, and debated conclusion of Saussure that language as system does not change at all seems to contradict the time dimension that he himself granted to language.
For us it means that the most abstract patterns of change work the same way throughout history.
For the chemist it is the same as to say that the laws of chemistry do not change.
Basing on his “chemistry” of language, Saussure was able to make some linguistic predictions that were confirmed after his death on the example of Hittite language.
Within a certain language, sounds are distinct entities that combine with each other in certain ways and not in others, words and their parts behave likewise, and deeper under the surface structure, which can be perceived and characterized in all detail, lies a level of concepts that manifests a different kind of structural order, more difficult to define.
For example, whether the sentence “A dog chases a cat” is spoken or sung, written in bold typeface or in italic, and even translated into French, it has the same meaning.
If we lose a knight from a chess set, we can substitute any small object for it and play chess anyway.
Meaning, therefore, is a pattern, like the melody played in different keys and on different instruments.
Life would be much simpler and history more peaceful, however, if meaning was not so often evasive and slippery.
It can be distorted not only at translation but even between the speakers of the same language.
As the Murphy’s law goes, whatever your intent is, somebody will misunderstand you—and we, the authors of this book brace themselves.
There are meaningless combinations, but meaning can come with time to what was considered meaningless, for example, “This Toyota has a fuel injection” would be meaningless in the twelfth century, and “Alex has two mothers” would be meaningless two decades ago.
In other words, the meaning is tied to a contemporary body of knowledge.
We cannot dwell here on the amazing intellectual creation of Saussure, however, and have to move on.
What is hidden behind the string of words is a branched structure with the actual words hanging from the branches like apples.
The sons of Japhet; Gomer and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
In order to travel in the semantic dimension we do not need to thoroughly follow the grammar.
The meaning of a sentence is commonly portrayed by a part of semantic network, a graph where the labeled nodes are connected with arcs symbolizing certain binary relations such as “is mother of,” “is a historian,” “walk,” “have,” etc.
Instead, we can use terms of grammar such as S, sentence, N, noun, NP, noun phrase, VP, verb phrase, V, verb, PP, preposition phrase, and conjunction N This is a typically mathematical way to deal with large sets by naming them all with one name.
All possible nouns, therefore, are N, whether it is a Roman emperor or a cat.
This graph contains information about which words are syntactically connected and which are not.
It is nothing but a formula, similar to formulas of mathematics as well as chemistry, while a biologist may recognize in it a certain type of a plant root, again, in a very general fonn, or an overturned plant, such as cactus, or an evolutionary tree of certain species.
Syntactic structure window, photo, computer, microphone, typing, chair, sitting, staple, stapling, stapler, etc.
All those objects, things, people, and actions can be used as labels for nodes of a certain graph.
In the English language the difference between a tenn and a relation is often blurred because the same word can be used as verb, noun, and adjective.
War is not only a term, but also a relationship and it connects two enemies, like Rome and Cartage.
End is a term, and also a relationship between an event and a point in time.
Even if the names Rome and Carthage do not ring the bell, the chart tells something about a deadly accident at the intersection of their historical pathways.
If we include the episode of spreading the salt over the ruins of Carthage, we can smoothly pass a bridge from history to chemistry.
Simple illustrations in textbooks on semantic networks are confusion-free.
Nothing contributes to our appreciation of plain language as much as trying to convert a piece of text into a semantic network.
Equivalent semantic networks could be built in different ways, and there is no standard one.
For example, we can connect Scipio and Carthage with the arc destroy or we can do it as Scipio—^Destruction— > object —»Carthage.
Instead of the frivolous is a we can use the more ponderous is a member of the set of.
One may ask why do we need to bend, warp, and torture our written and spoken language that is so delightfully linear.
The whole problem arose from the subject of knowledge representation in both humans and computers in the domain of science called artificial intelligence where the natural language, naturally, sounds pretty artificial.
A semantic network built upon a text means a fonnal representation of a piece of knowledge.
Knowledge is represented inside the computer not as a picture but rather as a graph in its matrix fonn.
We can, of course, use various kinds of labels for binary relations, but it would not really matter much for the structure.
However we link Scipio and Carthage, destruction will always be lurking nearby.
The semantic network, with all its fuzziness, has a certain topology, therefore, reflecting some important properties of the real world.
This cohesive influence of the world on its reflection in a semantic network is very typical.
There could be no one-to-one correspondence between words and their meaning, as Noam Chomsky illustrated with the sentence Visiting relatives can be a nuisance.
It has two meanings, but they are in fact very close and converge on the association between relatives and nuisance, which may not be the case in a more functional family.
Similarly, Revolution is a blessing and Revolution is a tragedy converge in Revolution is blessing for some and disaster for others.
As it is always the case in humanities, there are two opposite opinions on whether history has any meaning, with a stack of intermediate views in between.
The Enlightenment saw history as a natural process driven by properties and aspirations of human nature.
Some historians believed in a historical determinism driving civilizations through cycles of destruction and rebirth.
Karl Marx noted the role of production of inanimate things in the social evolution— an opinion that is difficult to discount in the modern industrialized world obsessed with production and consumption.
In general, the more a body of knowledge grows, the more there is to deny.
The thrown stone first flies up and ahead, then down and further ahead, following a specific parabolic curve.
The task of science was to look behind the appearance and represent the event in different tenns, such as mass, acceleration, velocity, and force.
Thus the French Revolution can be represented as a series of slides or momentary shots showing a certain structure in the process of change, geopolitics of a continent must reflect the changing borders and a nation in a series of conflicts.
The charts, graphs, and semantic networks concerning particular events do not appear to reveal much of order and regularity.
If history followed strict formulas, we would be much less interested in it because we would know what to expect.
An important property of this chart is a certain force acting upon its elements, like the force of gravity that pulls the stone toward the ground.
Thus, the noun phrase attracts the verb phrase, a noun ambushes an adjective, and a verb lures and adverb, while several conspired nouns pull in the conjunction and.
Although in some languages, like German, the linked words could be separated by a very long chain of other words, the long-distance interaction is not typical, and connected words stay close to each other.
It looks like some mutual attraction, affinity, or repulsion exist between certain elements of a structure, but not others.
Geopolitics of Europe Along with genealogical trees, maps are essential non-verbal illustrations of history.
Up to present, history has been a series of map redrawings and it seems to be so in the future.
In a more distant past, the changes followed conquest and expansion, as well as destruction and demise, while in our times they are mostly related to the ongoing national self-determination.
We can portray an essential part of geopolitical infonnation by connecting two neighboring countries with a line symbolizing a common border.
This border could be a strip of water, as between England and France or Sweden and Denmark, and all maritime nations are, in a sense, neighbors.
In the second half of the twentieth century air and space made all nuclear countries watchful of each other.
Among various pattern projections, global topology has a history of its own, shaped exclusively by weapons and communications.
Geopolitical transformation of Europe Graph is a topology because it defines a binary relation between every two nodes that are either connected or not at all.
We can see at once how much information is lost in the geopolitical topology as compared with the actual map, but a lot of the topological infonnation remains intact.
Geographically, England is not connected to anything over the land, and we cannot tell from the graph whether it is closer to Italy than to France.
Britain was close enough to Russia during the Crimean War when her troops fought on Russian soil.
Waterways have been preferred channels of conquest since ancient times.
Vikings used both waterways and land most extensively and efficiently in their invasions because they could not only transport horses on their ships but also portage the ships between the rivers.
We can find this nautical topology where everybody is connected with everybody also in a circle of friends, an economical or political alliance, and even in a living organisms where biochemical messengers produced by some cells circulate all over the bloodstream in search for their receptors.
Maps challenged topology with the famous mathematical problem: what is the minimal number of different colors to color a map so that no two neighboring countries are painted with the same color.
The difference between the graph and the map or any other drawing is that the graph does not have metrics,e., distance, even though our drawing of a graph has lines of certain length.
Yet even this limited symbolism makes possible to portray important historical changes.
A Here Czechoslovakia is not yet split into Czech Republic and Slovakia.
Diagrams of this kind can lead us backwards in time to the Roman Empire.
Change of the border structure is an essential element of history, along with changes of institutions, ideas, and technology.
Soon what was to become France shrank and instead the Holy Roman Empire grew in Europe.
The geopolitical activity has been coming to a halt in the Western Europe, while there are areas of volcanism in the Eastern Europe.
Formally, nothing prevents us from attributing a label or even a number to an ark of a graph.
Such graphs are called colored, although the property of an ark can be anything, for example, the driving distance on a road map.
On the topological version of a map we can indicate, for example, the relationship between two neighboring countries.
This particular information would certainly be of little value in modern times when practically all nations are diplomatically connected.
Considering ancient empires, we cannot speak about the borders in modem terms.
One of many projections of history, therefore, is, first, the rise of the metrics of a two-dimensional map and, subsequently, the devaluation of distance not only due to means of transportation and communication but also due to the topological revolution in relations between national states.
The space where we think, however, is not metrical in the same sense because we cannot measure the distance from the idea of cat to the idea of dog with a measuring tape.
Although these numbers are hardly meaningful for a historian, from all the above examples we can derive a notion of discrete metrics significantly different from the one usually associated with geometry and the measuring tape.
Matrix B shows not only the connectivity of the graph but also the actual distances between the nodes, with the side of the hexagon as the unit of measurement.
Metrics To generalize this idea even more, we can write any symbol, or word, or even a whole story as labels of the binary relationships.
One important class of values is probability of transition from one state to another or the probability of connection between two points.
We started with simple graphs and carefully proceeded toward more exotic square tables in order to demonstrate that a whole bunch of cardinal mathematical ideas developed in large branches of mathematics such as group theory and topology stem fonn a single general idea of a set with a binary relation defined on it.
The binary relation in a fonn, say, of a love story between Romeo and Juliet might look very frivolous even to some mathematicians, but it is still a binary relation, and, therefore, a mathematical object.
We have taken to such length in preparing the reader to the concept of pattern in order to soften the non-scicntific reader’s possible prejudice.
Mathematics is just as much a product of human mind as belle lettres, and may have as much artistic beauty.
The moat separating them is at some spots so narrow that we can easily step over it back and forth.
For example, we can attribute to each arc of the Augustus-Nero graph a number expressing the degree of their mutual attraction or hate.
Agrippina Junior was said to murder Claudius with poisonous mushrooms, and she was in turn assassinated on orders of her son Nero, who also had all three of his wives killed and finally killed himself, but an ultimate proof of love is more difficult to get.
We can also rate the relationship between neighboring European nations on a certain scale, and no doubt, over some long historical periods the rating would be pretty low for FranceGermany, France-Britain, Sweden-Denmark, and Poland-Russia.
Moreover, it can be positive or negative, and the history of Europe has been a history of not only disputes but also working alliances.
Switzerland, as it is well known, has managed to stay away from open expression of both love and hate to her neighbors for about half a millennium, which gives us a reason to call her bonds with them neutral,e. neither positive nor negative.
To summarize the important concept of metrics, it is any property of a bond between two structural units that can have a numerical expression of value other than 1 and 0 or yes and no.
Even if the individual bond can have only two values, 0 and 1, a certain metrics is possible for the structures.
Thus, the genealogical distance from Augustus to Caligula is longer than from Augustus to Julia, while he is not related to Claudius at all.
Not surprisingly, the distance of this kind is important in biology and genetics, but has little value in history.
By metrics, therefore, we shall mean a varying property of an individual bond, with the geographical distance as the closest visual analog.
What we can often do is to compare two values and in this way tell which one is more than the other.
If one bond is stronger than the other, then the weakest one will probably break down under stress.
Nevertheless, we have a good reason to expect that, in the new globalized and computerized world, the non-geometrical bond values could be somehow measured more or less accurately.
For example, the higher the trade between two nations, the more positive the bond, while the more skewed the trade balance, the more probable a conflict.
In Chapter 27, History and Computers we will discuss it in more detail.
Our very first steps on the pattern terrain seem to carry a promise that as soon as we outline a certain social, national, or geopolitical structure, for example, in terms of points and lines, and rate them along a certain scale, we will be able to look for some kind of physics that governs its possible change, similarly to the way molecules undergo chemical transformations according to the laws of nature.
Former Yugoslavia, united under Yosip Broz Tito, split after his death into independent states and plunged into bloody conflicts with Serbia trying to prevent by force its own further split.
The question that we are interested in here is the relationship between the patterns of unification and split.
The process of consolidation has been going on since then, entering now the stage of the European Community.
The unification requires the reconciliation of border conflicts, quenching the aggressiveness of the nations hurt by the consequences of wars.
In pattern theory a subconfiguration under certain conditions can be considered a single generator.
Formation of a new generator from a subconfiguration It is exactly the internal stability achieved by European countries (nobody knows for how long) that created conditions for an attempt of unification.
The united Germany was possible only because of the internal instability of its Eastern part.
Prophesying the European Union half a century before the actual event, Crane Brinton noted, France has been, especially since 1189, so nearly the complete nation-state, so nearly unified in culture and habits, disunited only in the half-unreal struggle of party politics, that we are likely to regard her building-up from these medieval fragments as somehow predetermined, ""natural,"" and therefore inevitable.
It seems impossible that France could ever have been other than she is.
We are coming closer to a new alternative view of structure, which was only very briefly mentioned in Chapter 5, Three Views of the World, and is related to the way chemists view the world and its transformations.
There is one remaining preliminary topic, however, that preoccupied scientists concerned with most general problems of change.
In the next chapter we shall continue our search for points in lines, alias, binary relations in history.
Two velvet revolutions To find the points and lines lurking under the surface of a historical narrative, let us compare descriptions of two oddly sub-violent revolutions.
He was too harsh in his suppression of a revolt by James Scott, Duke of Monmouth , in 1685; he created a standing army; and he put Roman Catholics in the government, army, and university.
In 1688 his Declaration of Indulgence, allowing Dissenters and Catholics to worship freely, and the birth of a son, which set up a Roman Catholic succession, prompted James's opponents to invite William of Orange, a Protestant and stadtholder of the Netherlands and husband of the king's elder daughter, Mary, to come to safeguard Mary's inheritance.
Parliament in 1689 gave him and Mary the crown jointly, provided that they affirm the Bill of Rights listing and condemning the abuses of James.
James II of England suppressed the revolt of Duke of Monmouth, created the standing army, put Roman Catholics in the government, army, and university, allowed Dissenters and Catholics to worship freely, and so antagonized his opponents.
The main cause of the July Revolution was the reactionary policy followed by Louis XV11I and his brother, Charles, who had become king in 1824.
Two classes, the nobility and the clergy, foes of democratic progress, were shown special favor.
These favors included partial payments for lands the state had confiscated during the French Revolution; readmission of the Jesuits, who had been driven out of the country during the Revolution; and clerical control of education.
In March 1830 the Chamber of Deputies, the lower legislative house, demanded the dismissal of several of the king's ministers.
The king ordered new elections, but the results indicated that the new legislature would be even more strongly opposed to the policies of Charles than its predecessor had been.
On July 26, a few days before the new legislature was to meet, the minister of domestic affairs issued ordinances completely suspending the liberty of the press and declaring the new elections null and void.
The people revolted, and rebels took possession of the municipal government in the city hall.
By July 29, after three days of fighting, the entire city was in the hands of the workers and the middle class.
The workers advocated a republican form of government, but the liberals, supported by statesman Marquis de Lafayette, favored a limited monarchy under Louis Philippe, due d'Orleans.
In short, Charles II of France suppressed the liberty of the press, nullified elections, readmitted Jesuits, reinstalled clerical control over education, repaid the confiscated property of nobility and clergy, and so antagonized his opponents.
For that purpose, we rename the terms, using the following more abstract terms in the descriptions.
LEADER A OPPONENTS LEADER B Actions : ANTAGONIZE OPPONENTS REVOLT FLEE OFFER CROWN TAKE CROWN The action ANTAGONIZE OPPONENTS includes a series of actions such as SUPPRESS , SUPPORT , NULLIFY , etc.
This gives us a set of terms belonging to a certain fonnal language suitable for describing similar historic events separated in time and space.
The two narratives look similar because there is a hidden structure of the formal language behind them.
It generates fragments of historical descriptions by substituting particular words for general terms.
Stimulated by the study of fonnal languages by Noam Chomsky , the task of generating phrases, statements, and texts out of modular elements was widely explored in linguistics and artificial intelligence.
According to the principle of the final state language, the generation of a text is regarded as a sequence of steps between the beginning and end.
After each step there is a selection of blocks to be chosen and so-called rules of rewriting.
They are somewhat similar to mathematical variables, for example a, X, etc.
Rules of rewriting, otherwise called production, from more general to more concrete structures.
NOUN —» cat Grammar, therefore, is regarded as a kind of a machine producing phrases according to some rules of connection.
Various recipes can be generating by rewriting the general pattern, specifying sweetener as sugar, honey, molasses, or saccharine, etc., adding optional fdling, which also can be rewritten as jam, currants, nuts, etc., or specifying the shape of the cookie-cutter.
This imaginary machine—which is a non-numerical mathematical object known as algorithm—can generate grammatically correct stories, whether real or totally unreal.
As far as history is concerned, such machine can not only write various “what if’ scenarios but also expand the counterfactual history to accounts of completely fictional events.
In the same way, by combining standard blocks of narrative, one can write novels, scripts, and fairy tales, and the whole process can—and has been—computerized in games for children.
It is appropriate to point here to an analogy with the development of a multi-cellular human organism from a few identical cells of an early fetus.
There must be a universal grammar in the developmental mechanics of cells to guide the subsequent expression of the genetic code into a unique organism.
We start with the initial state 1 and generate the first block containing the name of a historical person, which brings us to the state 2.
The same grammar can generate an utterly fictional revolution resulting in the displacement of an unfortunate king Aspirinos by his lucky rival king Ibuprofis.
OPPONENTS INVITE LEADER B LEADER A FLEES Here is how a narrative could be generated by simultaneous unfolding of the hidden structure, according to another type of formal language with the so-called context free grammar.
Catholic James alienated his Protestant opponents and lost the crown to Protestant William.
Catholic James alienated his Protestant opponents by creating a standing army, putting Catholics in the government, army, and university, and allowing Dissenters and Catholics to worship freely.
He lost his crown to Protestant William who was invited by his opponents, landed, and took the crown.
The achievement of structuralism was not just the analysis of the combinatorial nature of human social and cultural life.
Another equally fundamental and complementary—but less remembered—idea was expressed by Claude Levi-Strausse, who noted that a great variety of actual attitudes of people toward each other were covered by a limited number of kinship relations.
A few further remarks here may underline the striking analogy between the development of this problem and certain stages in the evolution of linguistic theory.
The variety of possible attitudes in the area of interpersonal relationships is almost unlimited; the same holds true for the variety of sounds which can be articulated by the vocal apparatus—and which are actually produced during the first months of human life.
Our sketch of the historical development of the avuncular problem is at precisely the same stage.
Like language, the social group has a great wealth of psycho-physiological material at its disposal.
Like language too, it retains only certain elements, at least some of which remain the same throughout the most varied cultures and are combined into structures which are always diversified.
The central idea here is the concept of the structure that limits the possible combinatorial explosion of human imagination and variability, so that only certain structural types survive.
The world selected, however, opens a passage into a completely different world, which we will visit in Chapter 18, Conflict.
As a preliminary remark, there must be some non-structural criterion, value or parameter which is extremal—either minimal or maximal—for the selected structures.
When the cultural tide turned against structuralism, it was trampled by the new wave of post-structuralism.
A champion fisherman is selected by the highest weight of the caught fish, and the runner is selected by the shortest time of the run.
Neither of the types of structural analysis that we described above provided a sufficiently convincing solution of the problem of selection.
Here we would like to add an example of a somewhat different version of structural approach.
Struggle for power sides of the conflict are involved in a tug of war with the outcome depending on some kind of force exerted by the sides.
In both revolutions we have a transfer of a bond between a person A or B and the position of leadership L The diagram shows not only the initial and final states of the transition but also the brief and full of uncertainty transition state between them.
An organic chemist would recognize in them two basic mechanisms of chemical substitution.
The basic sequence of events is rarely disputed by historians, especially, if it was chronicled by contemporaries.
History happens in a certain undeniable way, although we may differ on some points.
Historians can fiercely disagree, however, on the explanations why it did not happen otherwise, and they rarely have a common ground for a dispute.
There is a notable difference between formal linguistics and classical structuralism, on the one hand, and the transition state analysis, on the other hand.
Moreover, looking back toward the past, we cannot even ask why Mary and John did not rent a house instead of buying it.
All we can say is that they could not buy the house they had already bought, or to sell somebody else’s house.
In the language-generating grammars, the basis for choosing the next word is not any real Mary or Russia, but just the statistics of the language, in other words, some artificial reality, that neither God, nor hidden laws of history, nor just pure chance, but we alone create.
Conventional plot structure The grammars described above are called formal because the texts they generate cannot be subjected to tests of realism, feasibility, and truth.
Genealogical background of the Glorious revolution The chart could be regarded as another instance of unfolding the basic structure through rewriting, as well as a seed of a Hollywood script.
This fuzzy parameter of tension is not structural and we can suspect that in almost all historical events the structure is characterized by some semiquantitative value that detennines, to some extent, the direction of change.
If we were not, it would be just a statement of physics with energy as the parameter.
Real events, as witnessed by contemporary observers, also have a similar non-structural dimension of suspense.
Not surprisingly, it was a family conflict—still felt in Northern Ireland.
In Chapter 18, Conflict, we shall look for the pattern roots of conflicts.
Our current objective is to cautiously outline some topics of pattern theory without formalizing them.
We want to show that some important structural ideas have been gradually developing in humanities.
Next, since we have drawn a parallel between history and storytelling, it may be enlightening to listen to a great storyteller’s view of history.
The fermenting sugar splits into fragments like AustriaHungary after the World War I, British Empire after WWII, and USSR and Yugoslavia after the Cold War.
As far as fennentation is concerned, we can translate this process into a series of changes in the chemical structure.
The transfonnation is always the same whether it takes place in wine cellars of Bordeaux or California.
In fact, between the initial and final states lies a multitude of intennediate steps which can depict the process in its dynamics as movie frames do.
The chemists call this sequence of stages mechanism and it has a close analogy in history.
The decline and fall of Roman Empire, described by Edward Gibbon in his monumental book The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, is also a sequence of steps in the mechanism of the process.
Sulfur dioxide or strong alcohol are used to kill the yeast cells and stop fennentation.
Scores of people had lost their heads, but the books of Henri Rousseau did not lose a word.
He had a very critical frame of mind and was iconoclastic on almost everything, including Shakespeare.
He went as far as to suggest surrendering Russia to the Japanese when the Russian-Japanese war began in 1904.
A person of his caliber could be an idol on the American campuses of the 60’s and a leading dissident in Russia of the 70’s.
Tolstoy was bom in 1828, long enough after the French Revolution and Napoleonic wars.
He had witnessed profound historical changes in Russia and her entrance into the new age, which soon would be interrupted by the Russian Revolution.
Several times it moves eastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward.
In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, with remarkable symmetry, a countermovement occurs from east to west, attracting to it, as the first movement had done, the nations of middle Europe.
The countermovement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the west—Paris—and subsides.
During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left untilled, houses were burned, trade changed its direction, millions of men migrated, were impoverished, or were enriched, and millions of Christian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew each other.
As a possible response to the questions how that could happen, Tolstoy offers a parody of a typical historian's approach.
Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man; he had such and such mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled France badly.
At the end of the eighteenth century there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about all men being free and equal.
This caused people all over France to begin to slash at and drown one another.
Tolstoy ridicules historians because, he says, they answer questions nobody has asked.
He is not satisfied with the view that the circumstances produce a historic character who exerts power to cause events.
He believes that the fact that Napoleon was produced by the Revolution contradicts the fact that he suppressed it.
He refuses to see how ideas, for example, Le Contrat Social by Rousseau, fit in the causal nexus with the resulting drowning of Frenchmen by each other.
Tolstoy understands historical process as a continuum made up of infinitely small actions and events, with no beginning.
Only by taking infinitesimally small units of observation (the differential of history, that is, the individual tendencies of men) and attaining to the art of integrating them (that is, finding the sum of these infinitesimals) can we hope to arrive at the laws of history.
Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes it is due to the fact that when the event has taken place and out of thousands of others those few commands which were consistent with that event have been executed, we forget about the others that were not executed because they could not be.
He comes to the conclusion that the conception of a cause is inapplicable to the phenomena we are examining.
A philosopher would object that the opposite of freedom is not necessity but constraint.
But a modem scientist can understand Tolstoy by just recalling what the opposite of necessity is.
What Tolstoy meant by freedom was chance, as his other remark illustrates.
Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual we may consider, we always regard it as the result partly of man's free will and partly of the law of inevitability.
In modem language, Tolstoy refers to ordered chaos, about a century ahead of time.
He mentions the laws of statistics describing the number of births or crimes, to leave no doubt that he means probability.
Wells’ novel was seen as a fuzzy shape when his skin was covered with dust or rain droplets.
Tolstoy in his essay about history obliquely showed us a dim figure of an invisible force moving the nations throughout history just by the way it pushes everybody around.
The later developments of science have been filling the nebulous shape if not with live flesh then at least with some bones.
Breakup is a pattern of events common for history, when a voluntary, enforced, or historically developed complex of geopolitical and ethnic entities dissolves itself into its constituents.
There are some bonds between the entities at one moment, and they are broken in the next moment.
For a chemist, however, the process of breaking up a bond and establishing a new one is not trivial.
It occupied the minds of philosophers from Heraclitus to Hegel to Sartre.
The condition for considering the problem of a historical change as a natural process subject to the basic laws of nature is to see it as a change of a configuration fonned by certain atom-like parts and bonds between some of them.
Some bonds are getting weaker, and some new ones are getting stronger, and this is how it all goes.
Imagine someone who is a compulsive borrower and goes from friend to friend asking for money.
The shorter the time for which a friend can lend him money, the larger the loan he seeks.
Borrow and return, borrow and return—over and over again with unflagging intensity he takes in money only to give it back in short order.
Like stock prices on a wild, roller-coaster day on Wall Street, the amount of money the compulsive borrower possesses at any given moment goes through extreme fluctuations, but when all is said and done, an accounting of his finances shows that he is no better off than when he began.
The invisible walls of events We have already seen that some historians are inclined to replay history in their minds and see where else it could go.
Adolf Hitler could have eked out his life as a mediocre postcard painter and a fulfilled old soldier in a German-dominated Central Europe about which he could have found little to complain.
This question is better to address to generalized kinetics, which is based on thermodynamics with some additional assumptions.
Unfortunately, there is nothing in physical sciences to address this question because they are devoid of the dimension of history.
Physical scientists do not pay much attention to the historical aspect of the process,e. its particular position on the universal timeline.
A physicist could not seriously say that the stone fell to the ground because Galileo dropped it from the top of the Tower of Pisa.
A chemist could not say that the paper bums because Lavoisier ignited it in a closed vessel.
A historian of science would say that we know about free fall and oxygen because of Galileo and Lavoisier.
They belong to the history of science but not to the scientific explanation itself.
In our discourse on history we must always be aware of the place, time, and the acting individual.
Evolutionary sciences, like astrophysics, geology, origin of life and species, history, and biography as study of individual life, have not yet consolidated into a general abstract theory because of the enormous complexity of the material and difficulty of its representation.
Any physical law, like that of universal gravitation, is a powerful statement.
In social sciences, however, saying that nations have always been engaged in wars is of no value.
Historians study a particular war by tracing the sequence of events and establishing causal links wherever possible.
There are also historians that analyze the pattern of war or revolution by discovering common properties of a set of such events.
What we want to do is to look from a certain distance at the similarities between war and chemical process rather than at their obvious worlds-apart differences.
We regard both as natural processes of transition from initial state to final state and link war and fire by more than just a metaphor.
Energy is what changes during any process, from evolution of stars to understanding a mathematical equation to following the plot of a novel.
They have less energy at the foot of the tower than at the top and energy is needed to haul them back to the top.
As soon as we distinguish between positive and negative bonds, energy comes to the podium because the difference between attraction and repulsion amounts to the sign of energy.
We can simply say that energy is what it takes to break bonds between relatives, friends, and allies, or to maintain order in a dysfunctional family, hold together the Tito’s Yugoslavia, maintain productivity in a troubled company, keep peace in a region with ethnic tensions, unite the Congress split over an issue, and command the NATO alliance built of nations always disagreeing on something.
This tells very little about the nature of energy, but we do not need more depth at this point.
All we need to know is that energy of a system can increase or decrease.
Not only there are definitely more or less “tense” and “frustrated” societies and smaller groups, but there are more or less “tense” theories, statements, texts, and even the whole fields of knowledge, in short, societies of ideas.
Moreover, there are more or less “tense” pieces of art, whole artistic works, and even whole periods in a national culture, more or less contradicting or conforming to the current canons and to internal principles.
We can see that the tense society or area of science is usually unstable and undergoes evolution.
Art loses its revolutionary fervor either because of the loss of novelty or because of transformed rules.
We need, therefore, to acquire some means of measuring the “tension” at least in a non-quantitative way.
It simply means that, looking at any two configurations, we need to be able to say which one is tenser or whether they are equally tense.
This is how we can approach the problem of evolution of complex patterns.
We start with situation A, where generator M is bonded to Y but not to X As result of a transformation, it becomes bonded to X and the link between M and Y disappears.
When pattern theory relaxes the rigidity of the bond couple from yes-or-no to maybe, it means variance, and variance can be measured by probability.
If a bond couple between generators is improbable,e., its probability is less than 0.5, it means that it will take some work to keep the couple together.
Therefore, probability 0. separates connected and disconnected states, but when you deal with probabilities, everything is possible.
Referring to probabilities gives an answer to question 3, but it is a weak answer, more like a subterfuge.
The causal approach would describe the sequence of events leading to the accident, without referring to other accidents.
When somebody breaks a twig, we explain its destruction by an intervention which is external to the twig.
The idea of God punishing some nations and rewarding others is, in this sense, a scientific explanation, or at least a valid hypothesis.
Yet in the case of fennenting grape juice— with all due respect for the god Dionysus whom the Greeks assigned to control it—we rely more on yeast than on any deity.
He was the first to establish the composition of water and he baptized its elements hydrogen and oxygen.
He was the first to explain what happens when something bums in the air.
He introduced the fundamental concept of chemical element, made chemistry a quantitative science, and actually fonnulated the law of conservation of matter.
In chemistry he was of the stature equivalent to that of Copernicus and Darwin.
When he was guillotined at the peak of the revolutionary terror in France, his head fell into the basket certainly not on its own and not because of the gravity.
On this gmesome example we can see the difference between the physical and historical explanations.
On the contrary, the Revolution was not brought to France on the bayonets of invaders.
Chemistry borrows the answer to the question how anything happens in its own from physics.
If there is a system that can be in several possible states, all its states can be rated by their stability.
The stable states are surrounded by invisible walls protecting them from sudden spontaneous change.
The height of the wall is measured in terms of energy and the additional push is needed to overcome the wall.
It seems that physics, as if following the advise of Edward Gibbon, found the secret of change in the reasons for stability.
When we contribute energy to a twig, we break it, and if we do that to a stone, it flies away.
When we contribute energy to a system, it rises above the invisible walls and jumps over to a new stable state.
The energy of the bird comes from food and it is stored in a ready to use fonn.
We may need energy to contain the bird and prevent it from escaping by surrounding it with the walls and ceiling of a cage.
Energy of a system, therefore, can greatly vary and even change its sign.
A system with negative energy is in a pit, and the walls of the pit prevent the system from transformation.
What matters is the sign of the change of energy when the system goes from one state to another.
Live systems, including society need to consume vast amounts of food and fuel to maintain their balance, while the rocks in a valley can stay there for millennia.
In the case of chemistry, we raise energy of a system by heating it or irradiating with light.
Deprived of the source of energy, a higher organism usually engages in a sort of gambling.
Social energy, like physical one, is an ability to generate change or prevent it.
This is all we need to know about it without any further speculation how to measure it and in what units.
It might be a task of social sciences to analyze the origin and transfonnation of social energy from food and fuel into specific actions.
Unfortunately, physics of society as natural system is underdeveloped, but it would take a whole book to explain why.
IB, K does not simply jump into M First, it has to reach a certain intennediate unstable state L, which is high enough above the wall.
The intennediate state L is called transition state and it is the key to understanding how anything happens in chemistry and material world in general.
To apply the concept of transitional state to any system is, with hindsight, not such a big achievement.
What is less obvious, the initial, transition, and final states can be portrayed and discussed in terms of configurations and patterns.
This could be a radically new idea in humanities, and it seems to have genninated independently in a few places, aside from structuralism of Levi-Strausse.
His books A Decade of Revolution and The Anatomy of Revolution, as well as chapters in A History of Civilization co-authored by Brinton, are among our main sources of factual material.
As an American historian, Crane Brinton was little biased by European nationalism and political disputes.
The fact that the American Revolution was supported by both the King of France and people like Lafayette favors objectivity.
As the following examples illustrate, he compared society with a building and noted the limited character of change produced by revolutions.
We may take instead an analogy from the human nervous system, or think of an immensely complicated gridwork of electrical communications.
Society then appears as a kind of network of interactions among individuals, interactions for the most part fixed by habit, hardened and perhaps adorned as ritual, dignified into meaning and beauty by the elaborately interwoven strands of interaction we know as law, theology, metaphysics, and similar noble beliefs.
Now sometimes many of these interwoven strands of noble beliefs, some even of those of habit and tradition, can be cut out, and others inserted.
From Alexander Alexander notes that a designer of an object, whether building or tea kettle, has to meet a set of requirements.
For example, the simplicity of design enhances jointing, while decreasing performance.
The sum of all conflicting and cooperating requirements represents the stress of the design, which is synonymous with abstract energy as we understand it.
Therefore, the entire process of design looks like movement from the initial predesign state to the final design through a highly stressed transition state.
Clearly, this concept is widely applicable to building such political and economic entities as international coalitions in times of war and peace, European Union, corporations, political parties, and underground terrorist networks.
Some diagrams seem to define overall pattern properties of the form, like being circular, being low rather than high, being homogeneous.
They define pieces of which the whole form is made, like a diagram defining the street as a piece of the city, or the handle as a piece of the kettle, and so on.
Actually the distinction between pattemlike and piecelike diagrams is more apparent than real.
But the plan’s being circular may also be guaranteed by a surrounding wall or boundary of some sort.
Subjectivity seems to be one of the causes of the chasm between sciences and humanities.
Dealing with life in its animal and human form, we can hardly expect the same level of predictability that we have in physical sciences.
Nevertheless, we accept the imperfect way natural sciences predict the weather, and we would not mind having even half of that prognostic and interpretive power for the events behind the horizon of time.
We cannot expect, a skeptic could say, to find anything about history with new tricks that the good old common sense would not tell us.
It is obvious that although graphic presentation of a genealogical tree can save a lot of space and be very helpful in understanding complex kinship, it does not convey any new information as compared with a methodical verbal description.
If we are going to use dots and lines for historical representation, they should help us understand something that we have not known or did not pay attention to, or at least add some fun to studying history.
We call it energy because it is similar to physical energy as far as transition from one structure to another is concerned.
We realize that there is a big theoretical gap in our understanding what this energy is in social systems and historical transitions.
Nevertheless, although it cannot be calculated in any absolute terms, unlike the energy of the falling stone, there could be means of discussing relative energies of two structures or their components in tenns of which is larger that the other and with what probability.
We will further have more opportunities to present the reader with additional evidence that this general concept is by no means alien to social sciences and humanities in general.
Build possible transition routs from the initial state through transition states toward final states.
Look for the transition states with the highest probability and find the most probable final states following from them.
If the final state is known, the most probable route speaks for itself as an explanation.
While predictions of mechanics are deterministic, predictions in biology and, all the more, social sciences, are probabilistic.
Of course, we have an obligation to comment on the connection between physical energy and social one.
The fact that the horse is a vegetarian and has a good appetite contributed to the genesis of the feudal society with knights sitting on significant pieces of land that only all the king’s men together could protect.
A human is omnivorous, requires much less space to feed himself, and, unlike the horse that needs to be taken a good care of, can somehow get away with a meager sustenance.
The use of mineral energy has been the driving force of the last two centuries and it brought about an immense amount of historical change.
If this trend continues, they could put the humans in the position of the horses.
We can already see that the current process of globalization, with both positive and dangerous consequences, has been driven not by annies and heavy machinery but by computers and communication lines.
There is no direct dependence between the consumed food and human energy.
The concept of energy is more complicated than it seems at the first glance, however, and we will come back to it in Chapter 26, Chaos-order, heat-cold.
This can be done within the framework of pattern theory, for which we have finally made all gradual preparations.
The next chapter is, probably, the most technical, and the reader who feels that the intuitive idea of pattern is clear enough, may surrender to difficulties.
Generators, configurations, patterns Unlike such mathematical tenns as graph, topology, and group of transformations, the word pattern is widely used and its meaning seems to be more or less clear from its everyday usage.
To avoid the ambiguity of “more or less” we shall try to give an idea of what pattern is in pattern theory.
It seems that neither graphs alone nor groups alone are sufficiently rich structures to extract the regularity from the complexity of the real world with its irreversible dynamics.
Pattern theory is algebraic in the sense that it manipulates symbols according to given rules.
It is compositional in that some of these manipulations consist of combinations of simple parts into more complicated ones.
It is metric in that it measures the plausibility of such combinations in terms of probabilities.
The starting point of pattern theory is the creation of its simplest building blocks, the generators, a bit like in chemistry.
They can be visualized as atoms capable of forming certain bonds with each other and produce “molecular” structures capable of change.
An important property of chemical atoms is that they have selective affinity to each other, and they have strong preferences regarding what kind of bonds, what number of them, and with what other atoms they can fonn.
They fonn configurations which on the surface look like graphs, but this is only part of the picture.
Generators are placed in the nodes of a connector graph, and they belong to the same family of objects described by square tables as graphs and groups.
There is so much of other data that could be written into the cells, however, that to use tables makes little sense.
In the most general view, generators are a set of objects with rules for connecting them.
From the point of view of pattern theory, chemistry is just one of many illustrations of pattern theory.
Although we compare generator with an atom of knowledge, this atom, like the physical one, is not simple.
Generators have identifiers labeling them as distinct from one another.
Identifier is, actually, a name, and a generator may have several names, all arranged hierarchically, like first name, middle name, and last name.
The half-circles at the distal ends of the bonds are added to visualize the connection or coupling of generators, symbolized by a complete circle.
The lower part of the figure presents the same connection without mathematical symbolism.
Regular connection between generators The connections between the bonds can be regular or irregular, as compared against the standard bond relation set as regular.
We may say metaphorically, that the bonds of the same value have an affinity for each other and stick together as if their half circles were covered with glue.
We started our discourse in Chapter 1 with similarities attracting each other.
Like the Toradjas of Celebes, who believed that a bone of a deer would attract the live deer, we make the bonds with same bond values to attract each.
We can set the bond relation as UNEQUAL, for example, so that all bonds but those with the same bond values are allowed to couple.
We select the rules of regularity in order to give the simplest mathematical representation of the object.
Regularity and oriented bonds Bonds can also have direction, for example, outbound and inbound ones.
A regular connector could be defined as having or lacking some topological elements, for example, any graph with outstanding bonds or without cycles.
We can set a condition of regularity as the same generator subspace, as with members of warring clans, Montegu and Capulet.
Finally, regularity includes similarity transformation S, which defines how we can deform a configuration without violating its regularity.
We increase regularity by imposing more and more limitations on what is possible in four domains of pattern definition.
This configuration will be locally regular with bond relation EQUAL, and we do not even need to specify the connector.
We can obtain all pear-like closed curves by taking any of them as a template and deforming the arcs by changing their radii, length, and shape.
We can, therefore, synthesize a series of configurations of the same pattern, starting with any of them, and applying a group of transformations.
Of course, first we have to analyze a couple of particular configurations in order to define their generators.
Pattern analysis results in defining regularity on the basis of selected observations of images and configurations behind them, while pattern synthesis generates regular configurations—whether familiar or never observed—from the definition of regularity.
Using this we can also evaluate the degree of irregularity of a configuration.
For example, we can define the regularity of an X-ray image of the nonnal stomach and recognize an abnormality on a new image never seen before, or measure the irregularity of potato shape picked by a digital camera.
It is a complex mathematical discipline and all we can do here is to present its basic ideas in a simplified fonn.
We had to spend some time on such things as topology, graphs, groups, and probability to demonstrate that they were not as intimidating as they might seem and the humanities had been playing with them for the entire century.
From the densely mathematical atmosphere of pattern theory we make our cavalry raids into the open spaces of history, looking for its big potatoes and pears.
We would like to convey to the reader a realization that some most fundamental mathematical concepts may hover like Valkyrias over the battlefields of history, street barricades, and signing ceremonies, as well as over the routine of our everyday life.
This is why the mathematical apparatus of group theory can be widely used there.
In order to analyze a pattern, we may need to define the similarity transformation, but not necessarily in an analytical form,e., as formulas and equations.
To calculate area of a plot of land, we apply operation of multiplication to the length and width.
It is easy to do starting with the portrait of Louis Philippe, filling up the picture with ink, turning it into a silhouette, smoothing the contour, and then removing the fill.
It is very difficult, however, to make it the other way around and transform a pear-like closed curve into either a human portrait or a pear unless we already have the pictures available for copying.
We cannot imagine an avocado if we have never seen it, although it has the shape of a pear.
There is some uncertainty, therefore, whether similarity transformation is always a group, but the assortment of groups is as stretchable as that of the binary relations.
Pattern is a set of building blocks, rules to connect them, general architecture, and changes that are allowed.
In fact, there are many other subtleties which we omit for the purpose of this book.
It is worth mentioning, however, that along with configurations and patterns there is another class of objects, images, which can be compared with perceptions of a situation by different observers.
Thus, Edmund Burke and Thomas Paine had significantly different views of the French Revolution, but we could reconstruct some information about it even if we had no other sources than their books.
While a configuration is an abstract representation of knowledge, an image is what is observed, not necessarily by the eyes, for example, a historical document such as the Declaration of Rights.
One configuration can project different images, like a body casts different shadows, and several configurations can be perceived as one image.
Pattern theory attempts to formalize the hierarchical relation between sets of configurations identified as images, and sets of images identified as patterns.
Pattern theory, similarly to thermodynamics, harbors both order and disorder, but does it in the way that is complementary to the structure-blind thermodynamics.
If this highly simplified picture still seems complex, it is because pattern theory is designed for mathematical representation of complex objects.
As compared with nodes and arcs of graphs, generators and their connections are much more specialized and we have much less freedom in handling them.
This is exactly what they need to serve as building blocks of organized structural complexity.
Here we come to an important difference between the classical structuralism and pattern theory.
What the pattern theory uniquely offers is the possibility to include irregularity and dynamics into the general picture.
In other words, which should not be taken too seriously, we have a chance to reconcile structuralism and postmodernism by allowing relaxed regularity as, so to speak, natural phenomenon.
Yet we could relax regularity and allow occasional imperfection with a certain probability over a multitude of configurations of the same pattern.
This can be visualized as a pattern swinging between the two extreme states, dwelling 80% time in one of them.
The very notion of nature seems to preclude any irregularity because the variation and deviation from the average is the law of nature and exception is the rule.
Regularity and irregularity, like order and chaos, heat and cold, are not two but one concept, which splits only in the everyday human language and relativistic experience.
Irregularity As order and chaos are just different degrees of each other, irregularity is just a lower degree of regularity and regularity is nothing but a degree of order.
In pattern theory it can be done in a specific way, as local and global regularity.
Pattern theory is capable of dealing with just a few structures, as well as ensembles.
Irregular things happen all the time in history of civilization, and no evolution, not to mention revolution, can occur without breaking the rules.
Any picture of the world would be incomplete without rendering this inherent tolerable chaos.
The ability of pattern theory to take into account and express the degree of regularity gives us a powerful tool to bring all kinds of configurations and patterns into the same family with physical objects.
As we shall see, we can do something like that also regarding energy and even temperature.
Law and disorder The culture of so-called primitive societies displays a diversity of customs, beliefs, and mythology so diverse as if their building blocks had a complete freedom of combination.
At a closer look, however, the universal patterns of culture over time and space become evident.
Moreover, they are products of evolution of earlier patterns and thus even less arbitrary than they might look.
Among those opinions which are produced by a little knowledge to be dispelled by a little more, is the belief in an almost boundless creative power of the human imagination.
The superficial student, mazed in a crowd of seemingly wild and lawless fancies, which he thinks to have no reason in nature nor pattern in this material world, at first concludes them to be new births from the imagination of the poet, the tale-teller and the seer.
But little by little, in what seemed the most spontaneous fiction, a more comprehensive study of the sources of poetry and romance begins to disclose a cause for each fancy, an education that has led up to each train of thought, a store of inherited materials from out of which each province of the poet's land has been shaped, and built over, and peopled.
Mythology starts, as is appropriate in historical context, with some doctrines about the creation of the world and in particular the beliefs about the first human beings.
Most mythologies assert that it all started with a man and a woman, as Adam and made of his rib Eve of the Bible.
Ask and Embla in Nordic mythology were both made by god Odin from ash and elm.
In Hawaii the ancestors were Wakea and Papa, who in southern Polynesia were gods of heaven and earth.
The large circles with names are generators and the bond couples are formed by fusion of small half-circles.
The function of the bond is, just as in chemistry, to regulate which generator can be connected with which, according to the doctrine being formalized.
Only combinations M-F are allowed in our mythic examples, so that one male and one female “atom” of genesis can form a bond couple.
If we label the generators gi, g 2 , g 3 , and g 4 and go no further, it seems that Adam and Embla can form a couple.
We cannot couple characters from different mythologies, however, unless in Hollywood movies.
We need some means to keep reasonable order among the members of the ancestral club.
First, we distinguish between Biblical, Scandinavian, and other mythologies, using label C , which can take values such as b , s , etc.
In common language it means that both should have opposite sex and belong to same mythological system.
The answer is that plain English may be fine for mythology and something else, but mathematics is about everything.
Since antiquity science have been driven by the search for universal principles and universal language and had to pay for that with exhausting search for minute detail.
It will now be useful to abstract from the incidental to the fundamental and this we do now and in the following by using systematic notation.
After Fernand de Saussure demonstrated the distance between the signifiant (the sign) and signifie , notation itself may seem to be of little importance, but that is not so.
The reason why it is important is not so much the choice of signs and symbols in a notation, but the decision of what to signify.
Our choice in this simple case reveals the structure of the object, as well as the approach of pattern theory.
Generators are abstract mathematical objects and the circles are strictly for pictorial symbolism.
There are two of them, each with its name a and bond value p, and the rule that establishes regularity.
This arcane notation can be fully appreciated only in dealing with the entire overwhelming complexity of the world.
While the pattern man-woman is typical, in Zoroastrian mythology, the first couple was not man and woman but the man Gayomart and his ox.
A tree grown for Gayomart’s body split into the first couple Mashya and Mashyane.
One of the men made a statue, the woman turned the statue into a girl, and so first two couples appeared.
The first Pawnee Indians were the daughter of Morning Star and Evening Star and the son of Sun and Moon who became the first human parents.
In a Talmudic story, Samael was a fonner angel whom God wanted to be the first man.
Next came Lilith, who refused to submit to Adam and so could be regarded as the first champion of women’s rights.
The concept of chaos/order seems quite a useful tool for political and social studies.
Designers of a better car engine and a better social order, however, may not realize that they deal with the same kind of objects as anthropologists, even though the engineer calls chaos heat and the politician means by heat an embarrassing situation out of control.
We can now say that the ideal of totalitarian society as well as of bureaucracy is absolute order, which is something very far from the nature of things in society, as well as in transportation.
We can index now all mythologies as 1,2, 3..., and we do not even know where the list ends because we may discover a new myth tomorrow.
Here let the generators be denoted abstractly by gi F , g2 F , ••••> giw, g2M, ... so that we can fonn the set G of all generators, the generator space, that contains the primitives created so far.
Permutation means that we can change 1 to 2 everywhere we encounter 1, and vice versa.
As long as two generators are indexed with M and F, the connection is regular.
The similarity transformation that identifies all regular couples as a pattern preserves the mythology index.
In other words, we can go from mythology to mythology with the same pattern on the banner.
Note that pennutation here is a very simple and clearly defined transformation, very similar to the translation of a triangle in a plane, which changes all coordinates by adding or subtracting the same number, one for all points.
We perform translation by moving a book around the table without rotating the book.
Here we come to a very important moment for understanding the core idea of pattern history.
It alone was not sufficient for analysis of historical change that could be compared with a change from one geometty to another.
Abstract algebra deals with a set of objects S and a finite set of operations.
Thus understood, mathematics offers a handshake to humanities and the offer was accepted by structuralism.
Mathematics studies a general design of the world, whether real or imaginary.
There was, however, a serious reason why the structuralism of Levi-Strauss was as static as crystallography.
Levi-Strauss studied a narrow class of primitive and apparently unchanging cultures subject to rigid rules.
He drew a line between the static culture and the dynamic civilization, and his groups of transformations were designed for the former.
The deeper we go into the mythological woods the less regular it looks, far from the order of crystal lattice or plant nursery.
There are also other kinship relationships between the characters of a certain pantheon, most important of them are brother-sister and parent-child links.
We may add an additional condition that there is no brother-sister kinship between the husband and wife, which is common for all modem societies.
Then we can either conclude that our idea about what is regular was too rigorous or we can say that the regularity was somewhat relaxed.
We can even measure the degree or “strength” of the regularity in percentage—probability, to be accurate—of irregular cases, and if this degree looks high, we have to change our perception of regularity.
There should not be a brothersister kinship between husband and wife, but Jupiter and Juno are children of Saturn and Ops and, therefore, brother and sister, as well as husband and wife.
However, the similar cases of Osiris and Isis in Egyptian and Ynti and Qulla in Peruvian Inca mythologies show that there is some degree of regularity even in this apparent deviation.
We can mention also the eternal conflict between generations, as in the bloody murder of Uranus by his sons Titans.
Brothers do not always get along either, like good Glooskap and evil Malsum, sons of the great Earth Mother in Chippewa mythology, and Abel and Cain in the Bible.
We have made the very first simple steps toward pattern examination of mythology, the most ancient study of their own history by humans.
We see a simple pattern of coupled male and female at the very start of social evolution.
By repeating similar steps, we can explore the whole intricate webs of tribal mythologies and discover new regularities.
The inherent irregularity of factual anthropological data, we may guess, anticipated postmodernism, which differs from structuralism only in focusing on disorder instead of order.
We shall take every opportunity, however, to emphasize that chaos and order are not the opposites but, in mythological tenns, the two faces of god Janus.
What we can do with patterns is to study their evolution, competition, and selection.
Of course, this kind of professional work in anthropology is beyond our abilities, but we hope to stimulate somebody’s imagination.
In tenns of generators and their bond couples, society is made of the same stuff as molecules, ornaments, ballet figures, etc.
This realization may encourage us to import and export knowledge across the borders between scientific domains.
The colorful metaphoric language used by physicist Brian Greene for describing quantum fluctuations to a lay reader is an example of such exchange.
Metaphor and imagery are no more contained to be the utensils of fiction.
The Pursuit of Power is meant to be a twin to my earlier book, Plagues and Peoples.
The latter sought to discern major landmarks in the interaction of human populations and microparasites, paying special attention to the relatively abrupt niche changes that organisms undergo from time to time when some new mutation or penetration of a new geographical environment allows then to escape briefly from older ecological limits.
This book undertakes a similar inquiry into changes in patterns of macro-parasitism among human kind.
Disease germs are the most important microparasites humans have to deal with.
Our only significant macroparasites are other men who, by specializing in violence, are able to secure a living without themselves producing the food and other commodities they consume.
Hence a study of macroparasitism among human populations turns into a study of the organization of armed force with special attention to changes in the kinds of equipment warriors used.
Alterations in armaments resemble genetic mutations of microorganisms in the sense that they may, from time to time, open new geographic zones for exploitation, or break down older limits upon the exercise of force within the host society itself Unlike consilience, with its limited communication between the adjacent floors of knowledge, pattern theory treats all areas of knowledge as interconnected global community.
But we need other complementary views of the world to understand the place of the phenomenon in the universe.
Globalization of knowledge is as much a sign of our times as globalization of economics.
Here we would like to refer to Vilfredo Pareto, a highly original Italian sociologist of the first half of 19 th century.
Crane Brinton thus compacted some of his ideas in a historical context.
What does move men in society, and keeps them together in society, says Pareto, is the residues.
These are expressions of relatively permanent, abiding sentiments in men, expressions that usually have to be separated from the part that is actually a derivation, which may change greatly and even quickly.
Pagan Greek sailors sacrificed to Poseidon, god of the sea, before setting out on a voyage; Christian Greek sailors a few centuries later prayed, lighted candles, and made vows to the Virgin Mary just before sailing.
The derivations are the explanations of what Poseidon and the Virgin respectively do.
The believer in the Virgin thinks his pagan predecessor was dead wrong.
Both the pagans and the Christians have the same social and psychological needs and satisfy them in much the same ways, though with very different explanations of what they are doing.
Two of the major classes of residues Pareto distinguishes stand out, and help form his philosophy of history.
These are persistent aggregates and instinct for combinations This passage could be taken for yet another example of similarity transformation from the pagan to the Christian system of beliefs related to the pattern of securing a safe venture.
It leads us further, however, to an idea that everything in society is regular until a change comes, which breaks up the former pattern and establishes a new one.
Front a distance in time, we pay more attention to the persistence of the pattern, but we could be equally fascinated by the catastrophic change that the transition from paganism to monotheism meant for those who experienced it.
We can actually see how the stability of some patterns helped to maintain balance when others changed.
We can see a similar situation in one of the most catastrophic revolutions of the twentieth century, the Russian Communist Revolution.
It apparently succeeded in a complete destruction of the centuries old patterns of absolute monarchy and values of a peasant state, physically destroyed the old social generators, but quickly rebuilt the patterns of worshipping the leader with absolute power, centralized system of government, and submissive attitude toward it.
Discrimination of women had been regular for most of the twentieth century, but it became an irregularity during the century’s last quarter, when the pattern changed.
For most of the century, it was unthinkable for business competitors to help each other, while now we witness the phenomenon of bailing out the sinking rival economies at home and abroad.
This brings us to the view of evolutionary irregularity as a deep deformation of social template under stress and its subsequent rearrangement.
A configuration can not only jump from one connector to another but also oscillate between two patterns, as it was with monarchy and republic in France after the Revolution.
When the defonnation changes the radius of a circle, it preserves the form.
Even the transfonnation of a circle into a triangle preserves some topological properties.
It was regular for feudalism to provide military service to the king in exchange for the right to possess land and have individual protection.
Monarchy as power became irregular after a series of European revolutions and world wars, but monarchy as a national institution stabilized.
This is how historical patterns change, and the patterns of national mentality are among the slowest to change.
Cartoon by David Low Pattern history, therefore, is as much history of regularity as of its reformulation.
Both countries had very hostile relations that changed overnight with the signing of the Hitler-Stalin Pact.
The following small detail illustrates how much the precious flavor of history is beyond any theoretical grandeur.
During the love affair, right before Hitler attacked Russia, Stalin agreed to pay Gennany $7. million dollars in gold to keep a tiny piece of land in Lithuania that the treaty assigned to Gennany.
It was also reversible, as the Gennan invasion of Russia on June 22, 1941, confirmed.
A similar automorphic transformation was mentioned in Chapter 3 in connection with the incorporation of Normandy into France.
Those are patterns of resolving a conflict by initiating another conflict.
In the Glorious Revolution, the parliament disposed of James II by arranging the conflict between him and William.
In the Gulf War, Kuwait easily got USA on its side against Iraq and the Albanians of Kosovo invoked the intervention of NATO against Serbia.
In all such configurations, hardly any two sides feel any love toward each other.
Some participants of the anti-terrorist alliance of 2001 found themselves locked in the same triangle.
Both conflict and dysfunctional marriage are as much repulsion as attraction.
In the Muslim world, the draw to American way of life, movies, and pop music easily gets together with political animosity.
Conflict is a permanent dimension of history, and we will examine it in the next chapter.
Conflict On the scale of decades and centuries, we perceive history in such terms as big movement of anned people, development of institutions of religion and government, long-time cultural change, modernism of the twentieth century, and life cycle of large ideas such as capitalism, socialism, and individualism.
On the time scale of years and decades, history is a sequence of changes more localized in time in space.
Some of them are important peaceful reforms that look as easy as rearranging furniture in a room, while others are conflicts, some as mild as the family arguments about furniture, some deadly.
If Plautus is right and man is a wolf to any other man then human relations can often be expected to be antagonistic.
Human history is indeed full of tales about hostile encounters between individuals, classes, and nations, in which rivalry and envy have led sometimes to violent revolution, sometimes to reconciliation.
They start with drawing a line in the sand between themselves and end with the recognition of a winner.
From the pattern perspective, conflict is a bond couple, although it may look that the conflicting sides do all they can to break up.
The violent conflict usually ends with an elimination of the adversary, which during most of human history used to mean death, slavery, or captivity.
If there is a fonnal draw, it rarely means a complete equality of the outcome for both sides because any peace treaty leaves the sides with unequal frustration and desire to replay the game.
Family conflicts can often take extreme forms exactly because the participants, roped-in by the ties of kinship, cannot leave the ring.
Interested observers of close relationships, as most of us are, are often peiplexed by examples of apparently mundane events triggering serious interpersonal conflicts.
Historical changes include emergence and elimination of building blocks and whole structures, down to individuals.
Conflict does not always involve ill intent, but on the bloody stretches of history, in secret political decisions, and in criminal novels elimination is a euphemism for death.
In international conflicts, elimination may mean total occupation, seizure, subjugation, and acquisition of territory.
In our times it is equally difficult to destroy a national spirit, although nations can fuse, hybridize, and split.
Competition and selection occupy the center stage in Darwinian evolution, economics, politics, and personal relations.
It happens in lottery, when the selection of winning tickets is done at random, in creative games like chess, where it depends on the skills of the players more than on chance, in awards, like Nobel Prize and Oscar, and in all cases of political and economic competition where there the number of prizes is less than the number of contenders.
We might blame animals for the conflictive nature that they passed onto humans, but, for better or worse, competition in its many forms is inherent part of modem life.
Elimination, therefore, or narrowing the set, is the very essence of competition.
There should be a general mathematical description for this general phenomenon.
Yet we can only say that, mathematically, the essence of the competition is that a subset of a larger set is selected thereby falling into a vicious cycle.
The causality of the elementary act of selection seems to be beyond mathematics.
First, somebody must cast a die, and then the mathematics can say something about it.
One was to narrow the base of competition and select very few from a few.
The development of modern democracies initiated an opposite trend, so that a few can be chosen from a very large base.
This expansion of the eligibility to compete at the high level has been the major trend in the West since Britain’s Bill of Rights.
We can see the same modem principle of broadening the selection base implemented in the ancient Chinese democratic system of exams for administrative positions.
We tend to perceive the broad eligibility to social competition as a manifestation of moral progress and good will, but it can be also a simple consequence of the economic independence.
A voting slave is a contradiction in terms because he depends on his master.
We can conclude that the trend to level the playing field is the general trend of the last millennium as a whole.
For example, social promotion in schools is an attempt to limit competition, and quotas are aimed at warping the game field to achieve certain social effects.
The idea of equal opportunities can be pushed even further to the idea of equal results.
This is the old Communist and, probably, even original Christian idea, never implemented in practice, but theoretically possible in a society of clones.
Not accidentally, enonnous efforts were made in Communist countries to standardize individuals by indoctrination, force, and controlled consumption.
The word bond associates with a mutual attraction, but the sides of a conflict are bound with the desire to destroy or damage each other.
The absence of bond means that the sides are not aware of each other’s existence.
Symbols of conflict We have already mentioned the distinction between positive and negative bonds.
The role of both for maintaining social structures was elaborated by cultural anthropology and social psychology.
In our terms, positive bonds require energy or effort to break, while negative bonds need the same to keep the two generators together.
Neutral bonds require a very low or no energy to either break or establish.
However paradoxically it may sound, conflict is a bond and we have to find an appropriate symbol for it.
Negative bond means that the generators split as soon as there is nothing to keep them together.
When one side of the conflict retreats, however, the other one pursues it with double energy.
This range comprises the whole Cain-Abel conflict, although we know only about the beginning and the end.
When Cain saw that his sacrifice was not as well received as that of his brother’s, he slew Abel, resolving this conflict was resolved by a violent action.
In the traditional English story, for example, the first-bom son of the owner of the estate is going to inherit it the principle of primogeniture.
Not surprisingly, the second son is dissatisfied with this state of affairs and decides to change it.
Jealousy genealogy and kinship created conflicts and “eliminations” in earlier history.
The One Hundred Years War can be reduced to the general pattern of kinship conflict represented by the Abel-Cain story, if we consider the stable sub-configurations of entire houses of Valois and Plantagenet as separate generators.
We have no approach, however, to find out why Cain was aggressive and Abel was not, or who was the most probable winner of the One Hundred Years War.
It is not clear how ambitions can change structure and it is hard to see at this point how such concepts as energy, effort, and work can be defined in the structural framework of pattern theory.
Here we would like to indicate that a dynamic pattern has a set of specific dynamic generators, which can be regarded as operations on patterns involving the change of the connector.
REPLACE, which changes one generator into another, for example in royal succession.
Note, that all of them manipulate with a single entity, either identifier or a bond couple.
In this way, we can significantly simplify the problem of transfonnation and analyze it one operation at a time.
We may assume that every step of a transformation of a complex social configuration is mostly local.
If stages of complex social processes are really sequences of very simple elementary changes localized in a few generators and bond couples at a time, similar to mechanisms of chemical reactions, we would find the Ariadne’s thread leading us out of the labyrinth of complexity, and, probably, right into the perils of oversimplification.
Although we follow the sources (Grey, 1960, Hatton, 1968, Scott, 1988) our construct should be regarded not as historically true but, to use the correct pattern tenn, an image.
What we attempt to assemble is a piece of semantic network translated into pattern terms, and, therefore, we have to start with a short narrative.
The theater of war stretched across the entire Eastern Europe from Sweden to the Balkans.
It was as much a war of diplomacy as of destruction, treachery, and deceit, and as much a war of joint interests, alliances and propaganda as of weaponry, clever military engineering combined with the tactics of scorched earth, fierce attacks spaced by long idleness, and a medieval mix of both chivalrous respect and grisly cruelty toward the enemy.
Even France had some hand in the events by prompting the unwilling Turkey to go to war to Russia.
Charles XII, the teenager King of Sweden, Augustus, the King of Saxony-Poland, and Peter I, the Czar of Russia.
Peter I remains one of a few central figures of Russian history, whose heritage is clearly sensible even today.
We also have to add to the royal company Johan Patkul, a Livonian baron, descendant of the Order of Teutonic Knights, mistrusted by Peter, betrayed by Augusts, and cruelly executed by Charles.
He made his mark on the European scene, even though at the end of the seventeenth century it was crowded with outstanding men and women.
Handsome, powerfully built, and possessing a strong personality as well as great courage and energy, he was a dynamic figure.
He spoke several languages, could write gracefully in Greek and Latin, and was learned in the sciences of war and politics, as they were then known.
A fundamental history of Russia written in the Soviet time did not mention him at all.
Instead of a customary map of the northern skies crossed by meteors and comets, we use a graph reflecting the earthly topology of the various protagonists of the war, and if it looks complex, this is exactly the point.
Europe in 1700 was charged with mutual mistrust and animosity and temporary peace was possible only because of the balance of power.
Russia was beginning to emerge as a leading power in the region, pushing westwards toward the Baltic, of course, opposed by Sweden with its territories in Finland and Courland.
Denmark was also opposed to Swedish interests, especially after Hedvig, sister of Charles XII, had married Fredrik, the duke of Holstein.
Topology of Northern Europe in 1700 Holstein cut Denmark off the rest of continental Europe.
Sweden, across a narrow strait, was the second of the two close neighbors of Denmark.
To complicate the picture, August II, prince of Saxony and elected king of Poland, wanted to incorporate Livonia in Poland.
Prussia coveted the Swedish part of Pomerania but stayed away from alliances.
Russia, with her czar obsessed with shipbuilding after years spent in Holland, was shut off the access to the Baltic Sea by Sweden and to the Black Sea by Turkey.
His marriage with Sophia Hedvig of Denmark was postponed until the end of the war, and Sophia never married.
The first stage of the war was as victorious for Charles as the second one was for Peter.
The elements in the fonn of snow and frost helped once Charles, and once Peter.
Between the two stages of war, Saint Petersburg was founded as a new capital of Russia.
The Northern War is a dramatic, complex, and fascinating chapter of European history, which can be fully rendered only in a bright dynamic narrative.
More specifically, we are interested how a complex situation can be dealt with in pattern terms.
We have already seen that semantic network can be extremely confusing and overwhelmingly complex.
Russia -Poland The list of all interested sides is incomplete, but since it would include almost entire Europe, we have to limit our entries.
Lutheran, Orthodox, Roman, rule, absolute, parliamentary, strong, covet.
In 1699 Hedvig Sophia of Sweden, sister of Charles XII, marries Frederick IV of Holstein-Gottorp, so that Sweden and Holstein-Gottorp are linked closer, which Fredrik IV of Denmark perceives as a threat.
We can see the new bond couple of marriage in the left part of the picture.
The strained relations between Denmark and Sweden are shown by the double line.
He initiates what in our time could be called shuttle diplomacy, representing interests of Livonia.
Sweden under Charles XI started there confiscating the land of nobility.
Patkul tries to build an anti-Swedish alliance including Saxony-Poland, Denmark, and Russia.
Transformation ADD Frederik of Denmark is allied with Peter and August in a powerful alliance; they agree upon war against the seventeen year old Charles who has no allies except tiny Holstein.
England was interested in the peace in the Baltics and opposed Sweden in the beginning of the war.
The state of conflict of interests, true or imaginary, turns into war when Augustus invades Livonia and Fredrik of Denmark invades Holstein.
This view of the event sees Charles as the young hero with no aggressive intent, treacherously attacked by his rapacious neighbors.
The patterns generalizing the above configurations are common among the nationalistic historians.
It would be of interest to compare them with other doctrines for similar events, to see what differences would be needed for those representations in terms of generators and transfonnations.
Thus, the Russians saw Sweden not so much as a sworn enemy but more as an obstacle on the way toward the Baltic.
The bulky configurations represent only a small part of all infonnation about the disposition in Northern Europe in 1700.
As we anticipated, however, the changes occur only in a small part of generators and bond couples.
This general property of the evolution of complex systems—the locality of change, first noticed by Saussure, greatly simplifies the picture.
By the same token, the principle, which seems so self-evident, allows chemists to anticipate behavior of very complex molecules.
The opposite approach to history amounts to search for some general laws specific to history.
Next time we can simply omit the parts of the configurations that do not change.
Paraphrasing Rudolf Virchow, who formulated the basic postulate of biology as “every cell comes only from another cell,” we can say that every change comes from another change, which in our days is called the domino effect.
The war begins The question remains, however, why some wars happen and some not.
One way to explain it is to take sides, attribute ill intent to one of the sides, and call it evil.
Another way—we cannot be serious about it unless we give full statistics and a complete reductionist explanation—is to note the close blood relations between the monarchs of Denmark and Sweden, which usually spells trouble.
In 1675 Charles XI, the father of Charles XII, married Ulrika Eleonora of Denmark.
The marriage was carefully arranged to establish peace between two rival kingdoms, but a war followed next year.
We can only guess what would happen if Charles XII married princess Sophia Hedvig of Denmark, as was at some time planned, and the two archenemies were tied by multiple bonds of kinship because the royal spouses would be also cousins.
Yet another way is to reduce the explanation to psychology, physiology, and particular life circumstances of the evil person.
The events of September 11 rekindled a new interest in political psychology regarding the aggressive and destructive personalities.
Yet another approach is to use the concept of amplification of accidental events in the atmosphere charged with tension.
A different explanatory strategy is to regard a conflict as natural process described in structural tenns.
Finally, we can get out of the labyrinth of complexity, disentangle the semantic net, and look for a set of simpler blocks in intricate historical pictures.
It seems that Leo Tolstoy was right in his desire to reduce history to elementary acts.
We can study the snapshots and lasting structures of society, but they may not reveal why and in what direction the change will follow.
The occasional pilgrimage of humanities to oracles of natural sciences has not yet brought any magic solution because the questions asked were either static or dynamic.
After residing in the agitated state for a while, the system rolls down to the final state C, in which one of them lies on the floor, while the other triumphantly raises his hand.
You cannot step in the same ring twice, and shaking hands again, they are crumpled, bruised, and sweaty.
Historiophysics of conflict History of ideas in sociology and social psychology presents many illustrations of such recurrent concepts as stability, frustration, tension, anomie, dissonance, and other counterparts of energy in chemistry.
The main idea is that there is a measure of the tendency of a structure toward change which is its overall extensive parameter.
In chemistry, it is often the chaotic energy of heat or radiation that raises the energy of a system to the level of the transition barrier that separates initial and final states.
The states of a system are separated from each other as valleys by mountain ridges.
In the physics of quantum objects, for example, radioactivity, the events seem to happen on their own and the decay of an individual atom is unpredictable.
In fact, there are metastable states when only a slight excessive force is needed to start a transformation.
A rock on the very edge of a precipice is in metastable state, and a push can send it tumbling down.
Heat is chaotic, blind, and destructive while work is creative, selective, and organized.
Our next task is to show how pattern theory performs the synthesis of the split identity.
To summarize the previous chapters, the development of a unified view of the world, since its Greek inception, has been moving like trains on parallel tracks along the thennodynamic and structural lines, with only occasional exchange of whistles.
The only science where both views were integrated has been chemistry , too selfcontained to launch any mission outside its borders.
Neither pattern theory borrows anything from chemistry, nor vice versa, but chemistry, as we have noted, is a good model for some ideas of pattern theory.
Chemistry somehow integrates both structure and thermodynamics in a very simple and efficient way.
Our advance in pattern theory up to this page has prepared us to a very abstract way of thinking and we can now overview some chemical concepts not so much for the sake of chemistry as for the purpose of pattern illustrations.
Energy is the measure of the ability of the system to change spontaneously.
The higher the energy, the more probable that the system will drop lower on the energy scale.
It can be closed with release of energy and broken with absorption of energy.
The products of the break-up store the consumed energy, and, therefore, are highly unstable and inclined to get rid of it, which is possible if they recombine in the original or a new way.
Chemical transfonnation reminds a business cycle when money is borrowed in the bank, invested, and returned with either profit or loss, without the entire loan being transferred as bags of cash.
Besides, the chemical reaction, like history and evolution of life and language, consists of steps that are mostly strictly local in space and follow each other one at a time.
As soon as the system is at the foot of the hill, the energy is returned, usually, with a surplus or deficit.
Since there are many molecules taking part in the chemical reaction, the whole enterprise looks even more similar to the way banks do business by keeping a smaller amount of cash for holding huge accounts in the fractional reserve system of banking.
The problem with chemistry is that in most cases it is impossible to deliver energy to an individual molecule or its selected part (it happens, however, in biochemistry and some other areas of chemistry) and, in the language of banking, open an individual molecular account.
The pattern message of chemistry was first noticed, not surprisingly, by the Gennan poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.
Goethe was a great universalist in the sense that he, like Leonardo da Vinci, could freely breath the air of both sciences and humanities.
But this assertion is also reminiscent of the language of statistical mechanics, a part of mathematical physics related to thennodynamics.
A weak bond is more probable and a strong bond is less probable to break.
A superhero often takes a beating in a movie, but his final defeat is certainly improbable.
So far, we have only insisted that the configurations should be meaningful but we have not said anything about how much we believe in them.
If we accept a configuration as regular, we ought to believe that it describes a situation which is at least possible in principle.
That does not mean, however, that we think of it as necessarily true or even likely.
In the natural sciences we can express evaluations of likelihood through probabilities for which there exists a centuries old and well established theory.
Although the philosophical issues in probability theory are far from being resolved to everyone's satisfaction it nevertheless serves as an indispensable tool in the everyday practice of science.
When it comes to social science and humanities it is less clear what the tenn ""likely"" should mean.
Let us see how probabilities are understood and operated in the natural sciences and technology where they are fractions from 0 to 1 and can be estimated, at least in principle, by repeated observations.
Say, we are interested in some event E, for example that it rains in Providence, Rhode Island on June 15.
If we have access to observations of the weather for that day from several years, we just calculate the percentage of days that it rained and get some number, perhaps 17% or 0.17.
Then this is an estimated probability and may have its uses when we decide on how to dress on the morning of June 15 this year.
Consider two particles, let us not specify what sort, just enumerate them as i and j, and let Ey denote their combined energy.
Of course, Ey will depend upon their velocities, the distance between them as well as on other characteristics.
The energies fit the already familiar square table of binary relations, similar to graphs, with the energy values written into the cells of the table instead of 0 and 1.
Here i means any particle and j means any different particle, so that by varying i and j we run through all possible pairs.
In such a case, it would be impractical or impossible to follow every particle as it moves through the container.
The physicist is therefore forced to give up the Laplacian determinism and take recourse to a statistical mode of thought.
Starting with Boltzman and Gibbs, the discipline of statistical mechanics was developed and applied to an abundance of systems.
A remarkable and mysterious relation between energy and probability permeates this theory.
Hence, systems prefer to be in states of low energy since they are the likely ones.
Instead of energy, which can be in many forms and which is usually measurable only in physical systems, probability is universal and is equally applied to all systems—quantum, inanimate, alive, manmade, social, economical, and mental, if they satisfy certain conditions.
Thus, opinions on an issue can be measured by a poll, and economic data are processed statistically.
The conditions require a large number of entities that can be different in a certain aspect, but otherwise probability is as object-blind as any number.
It was used to signify the ability of elements, for example, sulfur and iron, to react vigorously with each other.
Later it meant the ability to fonn a strong bond, and today can still be found occasionally in the literature.
For example, electron affinity is a term that has survived in chemistry and semiconductors and it means the energy released when an atom gains an electron.
Speaking poetically, it is the measure of the atom’s love for the electron—some atoms love it, some hate, and some are indifferent.
History keeps records of many human affinities that greatly influenced the course of events.
Mary Stuart and Lord Bothwell, the Russian Empress Catharine II and Prince Potemkin, Napoleon and Marie Walewska.
Sometimes the historical affinities were not much elective, as between King Charles II and Nell Gwyn, for example.
Let us think of some recent affinities that are still fresh in memory but with all their emotional overtones are already history.
Note that this is also the case of competition and it ends with the elimination of Captain Hewitt from the picture.
We would feel that the breakup would be very likely, while some other observer of English royalty might feel equally certain that the liaison would last the year out.
It can be done, for example, by a public poll, and in Chapter 26 we will return to this idea.
The fact that two observers of the same event come to different conclusions is not troublesome by itself since that would actually make sense if they had access to different sources of information and hence operate within different knowledge domains.
Yet very few were prepared for the actual tragic end, although some could have prophesied even that.
We still do not know how the stressed configuration is going to behave in the future but stage D remains an option.
The fleeting pattern in a young White House intem’s imagination influenced the actual dramatic events.
Relationships in a family, however tangled, are not as complex as in large social systems, and this is why their breakup can be mended.
The important thing is that it would not be unreasonable to say, within one knowledge domain, that one outcome was very probable, or not probable, or that one event was more likely than another.
In such a case, we do not attach numbers, percentages, to the probabilities but make less precise statements.
The system of school grades, before multiple choices had been introduced, was an example of an approximate measuring without any scale or gauge.
Instead of absolute value, percentile scores could be used to rank the objects without attaching an absolute value of something that has no objective means of measuring.
Percentile scores express the position of the value among other values.
Currently, quantitative history comprises mostly research based on statistics or converting one format of data into another.
The calculations showed, to no surprise, that the area per slave was usually five to six sq. ft., much lower than the eight square feet decreed by law.
The actual purpose of Sorokin’s grandiose undertaking was, apparently, to show that as long as the system of values within a society is clear and coherent, the society is in peace.
This is why he needed a quantitative measure of social and international turbulence.
Extrapolating Sorokin’s approach to the modern period, the advent of which he witnessed before his death in 1968, we could probably say that we had a good chance of global peace, both international and social, because the whole world seemed to embrace the unifonn system of values where nothing but money matters.
A remarkable personal story is as good a representation of history as painting, novel, or memoir.
The clash of the runaway history with a creative person ended tragically in the case of Antoine Lavoisier.
Pitirim Sorokin, an active anti-Bolshevik during the Russian Revolution, was luckier.
He was committed to the prison at Veliki Ustyug and fully expected to be executed any day.
Instead, he was released on December 12, 1918, on direct orders from Lenin himself.
A few days earlier, writing in Pravda, Lenin had announced a major change in the government's policy concerning the intelligentsia, arguing that it was important to gain the allegiance of the educated, especially those from the peasant strata who had now turned against the new regime after valiantly having fought against the Czar.
The Communists should cease to persecute them, Lenin argued, and attempt to convert them into allies.
It was in pursuance of that new directive that Sorokin was released and sent to Moscow.
It turned out that one of his former students, now a Commissar, had pleaded with members of Lenin's cabinet who knew him well.
Notwithstanding sociological applications, Sorokin’s idea is a helpful illustration to our qualitative mathematics where the exact numbers do not matter.
What matters is that any two entries in the list have either MORE or LESS relation.
In the language of mathematics, the entries in Sorokin’s tables form partially ordered sets.
The mathematical notion that underlies this sort of reasoning is called a partially ordered set.
For some pairs, however, we may be in doubt, because “size” is somewhat subjective property.
The result of our evaluation will be not a sequence of individual apples but a row of piles within which the differences are not observable.
The largest piles will be in the middle, the smallest in the beginning and the end, conforming to the bell curve of natural distribution.
Now let us generalize and consider the pattern, not the particular configuration in the examples.
Then it is no longer seems sensible to ask for probabilistic evaluations.
Indeed, it seems presumptuous to assume that we know so much about human nature that we can rationally evaluate or compare the likelihood of different events in such great generality.
Actually, in our own endeavor we run the risk of trying to become too general, too allencompassing, and we shall continue with the caveat that our discussion be kept as concrete as possible.
We have offered only a very brief and superficial glimpse of the way we can talk about the counterpart of the thermodynamic energy or bond strength as applied to patterns.
We can summarize now the entire approach in the following recapitulation.
Equip generators with bonds in order that rules can be stated allowing some generators to be glued together.
Define a bond relation that will rule whether a combination is locally regular or not.
Express the over all logical architecture, the global regularity, of the doctrine by a family of graphs, a connection type.
Form the configuration space of all configurations that are both locally and globally regular.
Applying the similarity transformations to the configuration space, induce patterns to express the constants of the doctrine.
The last point means that we differentiate between more strong and less strong bonds or, to put it differently, between different degrees of affinity and repulsion.
The remaining problem is how to reflect the dramatic interaction of what people have in their minds with what they historically have been doing to each other, from self-sacrifice to royal and presidential scandals to wiping millions of people from the face of the earth.
To approach this difficult subject of relation between human ideas and actions in a historical aspect, we need to pay more attention to the structure of energy itself.
History is as much about actions as about thoughts that prompted people to act.
Of course, sometimes we are irrational, act first, think afterwards, have second thoughts, or meditate and not act at all, but in history of civilizations, simple ideas, such as, for example, that there is only one God, the monarch can rule with the consent of people, all people are not only born equal but are equal, or that the pursuit of individual happiness is the ultimate meaning of life, brought about major social transformations.
A full range of views has been expressed in the literature on the relation between the hidden thoughts of the leaders and masses and their actions.
The parallel between social sciences and chemistry is based on the somewhat superficial similarity between large ensembles of interacting but otherwise free molecules and large ensembles of interacting but otherwise partially free individuals.
Cognitions bound together in a complex latticework of social communication.
From Newcomb Chemistry turns to atoms for reductionist explanation and sociology turns to psychology for the same reason.
This is not a social structure but a network of cognitions,e., such mental units as idea, belief, opinion, knowledge, conviction, etc.
We also suggested that the more information held about a complex or inclusive object, the more numerous and varied are the cross-referencing ties that organize it with respect to other cognitions.
These ties might be thought of as something like those that link balls in lattices, in models of the arrangement of atoms in complex molecules.
He may quit for a week and then resume smoking for a couple of day, and so keep swinging between the two states, each of them giving only a short comfort.
For example, the relation of liking between a student, a teacher, and a certain object, fits one of eight configurations, two of which are shown in figure 21.2.
It may not be quite clear why a student who likes the teacher, but not the object of liking by the teacher, should feel any discomfort or why the student who dislikes both feels much better.
The one-way relation of liking is not what we regard as positive bond couple but simply a link in a semantic network.
The reason why we mention this class of theories is because in our language they all imply the varying stability of a configuration as function of the bond couples.
We find in social psychology counterparts of many basic chemical ideas.
Chemists call them antibonding and non-bonding molecular orbitals), but atoms without a positive bond together can be immediately separated by molecular chaos.
Consistency theories derive their name from the end states that individuals are presumably seeking to attain.
When one looks at the antecedents of consistencies, however, then these theories are all conflict theories.
By that we must mean that all consistency theories have one basic conceptual property in common—they must invoke at least two elements that stand in opposition to each other.
Turning to sociology, we find a clear parallel with chemistry in Robert K Merton’s theory of net balance of a social system incorporating positive functions that keep the system together, dysfunctions that are counterproductive, and, most remarkably, nonfunctions which are irrelevant, probably, like a second spout would be in a kettle.
The degree of discomfort or frustration, F, is plotted against X, which is a non-numerical axis of progressing change.
It depends on the relative degree of discomfort in both S and Q If we take one thousand smokers who want to quit and actively try it, then, probably, a significant part will achieve the goal.
It would mean that for them the discomfort of Q is lower that that of S, as the diagram shows.
T of such attempts over the population would give teacher, S student, O object, + like, dislike. us the actual heights of S and Q, quite useless in any individual case, and the statistics over the individual over time would give another estimate of S and Q, probably, also useless in the long run.
The process goes through the transition state of high discomfort D, where the two opposite ideas do not fit the same personal doctrine and are logically incompatible.
The degree of D may be so high, that some non-smokers will never try to smoke and some smokers will never try to stop.
If not for the intermediate state of a great discomfort D, the smoker would be able to quit immediately and as easily as to drop a match burning his fingers.
As soon as we smoker’s dilemma present thoughts as configurations, however, the parallel with chemistry becomes very close.
It must be struck,e., elevated to the transition state D Of course, the reverse transition from the smoke and ashes to the match is impossible.
The diagram does not forbid it, but it would require immense scientific and technological efforts to recreate the match, not even exactly the same, from the smoke and ashes.
As an example of social re-interpretation, S is the state of the British colonies in America before the revolution and Q is the state after their independence.
It then entered the period of bloodshed, after which the energy was released and the independence established.
It may seem now that the movement for independence had such a powerful momentum that the opposite route to the colonial state was impossible.
The similarity of the mind of the undecided Americans with the torments of a smoker is obvious.
This time the pattern transformation , but not the vacillations of the mind, is observable.
While the colonists lost their doubts in one generation, the history of the French people trying to quit their addiction to absolute monarchy and indulge into the newly found fascination with republic is remarkably similar to the smoker’s behavior.
Another example is the long traditional split between the pro-westem and pro-Slavic gravitations of Russia, which can be followed from Catherine the Great to the present Russian Duma.
In pattern terms, if chemical configurations are regular in stable state, they become irregular in the transition state.
The transition state in chemistry is short-living— fractions of a millisecond.
Nevertheless, chemists can in many cases draw a rough sketch of its configuration, which is very different from the state of a chemical quietly sitting in ajar on a lab shelf.
Power struggle in the mind the same reaction and predict which one is more probable.
While GOOD and BAD are ideas nowhere to be found in a physical fonn, SMOKING is both idea and behavior.
While the struggle with the pun is resolved with laughter, the predicament of a smoker or a split nation is by no means a joke.
In pattern terms, cognitive dissonance means a presence of strong negative bonds in the unobservable transition configuration.
It is the hidden process of thinking that lies between the two observable actions.
Yet we, like chemists, can speculate on what people thought before acting.
This kind of mental transition state is typical for wars and reforms, while the latter, more complex, protracted, and largely observable, is typical for revolutions.
The mood of the crowd or legislative assembly, however, can also change dramatically through a transition state initiated by an eloquent speech or a charismatic act.
Idea influences behavior and vice versa, often in very roundabout ways.
Only psychologists know how it happens, but the historians are well aware of the result.
X Jldea Ideology Behavior zsi Social action lldeas Circumstances B Ideas and circumstances are the two ends of a stick.
If our ancestors believed that similar attracted similar, there could be something to it.
The next question we want to pose is the key to the problem of interaction between thought and action from the pattern point of view.
We have nothing to say about its psychological or physiological mechanism and we in no way encroach on the territories of hard sciences.
One reed is easy to break, while a bunch of them can be strong enough to build a raft and travel over the ocean.
Among historical examples, mediation of an international dispute is good for strengthening the ties between the sides because it adds another tie.
All this could be interpreted in tenns of probability as well as energy.
Configuration M, in other words, has internal stress, it is not too probable, and its energy is high.
Next, we want to compare this picture to something very much alike in chemistry.
We have to emphasize, however, that we do not derive our vision of history either from chemistry or from mathematics.
If both history and chemistry look similar as points and lines, it is because we illuminate them with the same light of pattern theory.
Thus, both cucumbers and oranges are red in the red light or blue in the blue light and all the cats are gray at night.
After the bond has been fonned, the catalyst can disengage and be available for another pair A and B Its role can be compared with a clergyman who performs the marriage ritual on many couples.
A chemist may not notice a contradiction in the previous paragraph because it is visible only in the pattern light.
If A and B are capable of forming a regular positive bond, it means that the probability of the bond is already high and it can hardly be increased by the catalyst.
For the same token, a couple who wants to marry will do it anyway even without the religious ritual.
It is based on the properties of physical energy, which follows from the properties of the physical space very distinct from the “historical” space.
Chemical particles can form connection only if they are at a close enough distance D and are oriented toward each other in a favorable for connection way.
The catalyst holds the particles together at a distance close enough to fonn the connection and at a favorable orientation and so increases the overall probability of the bonding.
More precisely, in terms of energy, the transition state, which is the complex of the catalyst with both A and B, has a lower energy than the transition state in the absence of the catalyst.
Obviously, a catalyst that contributes a negative bond increases the transition barrier and is called inhibitor.
In the world of generators, we cannot draw too close parallels with the physical world because the abstract configuration space has no metrics and no physics.
All we can say about positive bonds is that the bonded state has a lower energy than the non-bonded one.
The configuration of disconnected A, B, and Catalyst, therefore, has a higher energy than A-Catalyst-B, and the final triangle is even more stable.
The question is how C can get out of the picture after it has done its job The chemical explanation involves the concept of equilibrium.
In most historical cases, it simply fades away due to the non-conservative properties of the pattern world, becomes irrelevant, is forgotten, or is overridden by a new, more powerful catalyst.
While matter and energy are always preserved, information in general is not.
There is yet another important difference between the physical and pattern world.
In chemical events, the rate of the transformation from S to Q depends on the height of the barrier D, while its final result—equilibrium—depends on the difference between energies S and Q If Q were much above S, then there would be no stimulus to quit smoking, and if the difference were negligible, there would be no discomfort in making a choice.
This is almost always true in chemistry, but never true in life and society where all the processes are irreversible in the sense that the return to the preceding state is impossible.
Even if it seems that history makes a step back, the transition pathways for direct and reverse transformation are usually different.
The counterrevolution is never the videotape of the revolution run backwards.
The best source for explanation of the difference between classical and non-equilibrium thennodynamics, physical world and the world of life, can be found in books by Ilya Prigogine.
The almost millennium old monarchy in France was overthrown by the bloody revolution of 1789-1799.
Napoleon Bonaparte simply proclaimed himself an emperor in 1804, and the new monarchy was approved by popular vote, and not by another revolution or counterrevolution.
Monarchy was restored by the allies in 1814 after the military defeat of Napoleon.
Louis XVIII, a brother of the executed king, was theoretically a monarch as absolute as Louis XVI, but in fact, major accomplishments of both the revolution and Napoleon were preserved.
The new revolution of 1848, again, through the bloodshed, overthrew Louis-Philippe, but the popular vote elected Napoleon’s nephew who in 1851, through a bloody coup d’etat proclaimed himself emperor.
In 1870, after the insurrection in the besieged by the Gennans Paris, in view of a military defeat, the provisional republic was restored.
We will return to the above record of swinging between monarchy and republic through the excited transition states of war and revolt in Chapter 23.
A similar roller coaster could be appropriate to characterize the ridden with inhibitors Israeli-Arab and US-Soviet relations, the swings between reaction and progress in Russian and Latin-American histories, and, arguably, the history of internal American politics.
In chemistry, most reacting molecules do not reach the energy of the transition state.
Among those that do, only a part rolls over it to the final state, while the rest falls back and then tries to climb back.
Most important, we see history as a natural process based on the same foundations as the material world.
Chemical events in a living cell remind the real roller coaster of an amusement park.
In the biochemical version of the roller coaster, the energy of food or light brings molecules to the upper level, from which they roll down through a series of smaller bumps.
On a larger scale, the turnover of matter repeats in the entire biosphere.
Catalysts in power struggle In history, unlike the amusement park, there is no return to the previous point, and one cannot have a second ride.
It was the deep mistrust of republicanism in France, as well as the memory of the imperial glory of Napoleon, that made the road of history so bumpy for France, with the jolts reverberating throughout Europe.
The role of the catalyst in this framework is to decrease the free energy (discomfort, agitation, tumult) of the transition state,e., to lower the barrier between the start and finish.
The social catalyst, for example, propaganda, works globally over the entire society.
This is a cardinal distinction and we still have no satisfactory social thennodynamics.
Enhance a transformation without changing itself Obviously, all mechanical and infonnational tools fit this pattern, too.
They play the same role in the evolution of society as enzymes do in the evolution of life.
What is reversible to a certain extent is the transformation of patterns.
While the overall complex configuration of society can never be restored, partial social patterns, such as rise and decline of culture, democracy and despotism, hot war, cold war, trade war, code of law, nihilism, separatism, cooperation, etc., may be reversible.
Wade, affirmative action, capitalism and socialism in Russia, nationalization and privatization of industry in Europe, etc.
The reason for the frustration of the smoker is that both struggling sides—GOOD and BAD—are of an equal or close strength.
Be it otherwise, an action toward the most stable state would quickly follow.
There is also the antagonistic influence of pleasure, which comes not from any idea but from the act of smoking.
This picture portrays the transition state displaying inside the smoker’s mind, and the upper part of the drawing symbolizes the shift of balance that triggers the action.
As soon as the balance is shifted, the frustration eases and action follows.
The following example illustrates the ways of decreasing the frustration of he transitional state in decision-making.
It is probably difficult for him to convince himself that either his pacifist attitude or his act of joining the Marines is unimportant.
He may decide that joining the Marines is a way of defending his country and the free world.
This belief is consonant with the act of joining and would educe the total amount of dissonance in the situation.
If he has been offered a bonus of $10,000, special training in electronics, and a high rank, these also are good reasons for joining and are consonant with the behavior.
His act is still inconsistent—dissonant— with his belief in pacifism, but the total amount of dissonance he feels is reduced.
When he discovers that the car is uncomfortable, he experiences dissonance.
If, however, the car handles extremely well, is economical, and attractive, these consonant elements reduce the amount of dissonance he feels.
What is going in somebody’s mind is as much hidden from us as the transition state of a chemical reaction.
The information about the lung cancer or artery constriction plays its role and is not needed after the stable state is achieved.
Like the promise of a politician, it can be easily forgotten after the election.
This pattern is very general and applies to any decision making, including political decisions, effects of propaganda, change of allegiance, voting and consumption patterns, etc.
We would like to emphasize the ability of pattern approach to see how the li nk s between generators transcend the borders between ideas, actions, and circumstances.
This is crucial for history where the invisible acts of mind are as important as the movements of people, new institutions, and even the atmospheric extremes.
While the French Revolution was neither planned nor started by a single mind, Russian revolution, Nazi aggression, and modern terrorism were strongly personalized.
The decisions of the leaders are still a powerful factor of history, but they can be shifted by the catalytic effect of events that are insignificant on the historical scale.
We cannot dwell here on the relation between probability and infonnation.
We will touch only upon the definitive property of information to change the probabilities of events.
Imagine a situation when members of a family discuss plans for vacation.
Trips to Yellowstone Park, Grand Canyon, Florida, and Alaska are being considered as options.
The opinions of the parents and children are split and the debates are hot.
The family has decided to toss a coin when a TV news report about the Yellowstone fire comes on.
The bit of information that changed the outcome of the discussion worked only once.
For a couple weeks, the media keep reporting on the fire, but there is no relevant information because information, by definition, can only be new.
Paul Goebbels, Hitler’s Minister for propaganda and national enlightenment, believed that a lie repeated many times would become truth.
It seems to contradict our thesis that the repetition of a statement does not add any information.
The effectiveness of the totalitarian propaganda, however, is increased by the absence of alternative and conflicting information which otherwise would shift the trust into the propaganda.
This is why in the Orwellian world the sources of information and history in particular had to be constantly rewritten.
In Soviet Russia, even the historical photos in archives had to be reworked after the next purge.
If we believe that the probability of the stock market rising next day is over 0.5, the information about a high-scale terrorist attack brings it down close to zero.
If we expect the improvement of US-China relations within two months, the information about the bombing the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade or landing an American spy plane in China drastically decreases this probability.
It all translates into the energies of the corresponding bond couples in the configuration of international relations.
If there are good reasons for the improvement of US-China of US-Russia relations, they will be improved sooner or later.
The ideas of the French philosophes existed before as well as after the Revolution.
Taking the example of Glorious Revolution, the birth of the royal infant was a catalyst that was thrown into the historical test tube, but then was eliminated from it.
While social psychology helps us join two spans of the pattern bridge—from chemistry to human actions and further to historical transformations—it does it very differently from reductionism.
We completely omit genetics, physiology, brain chemistry, geography, and economics.
Nothing can substitute for reductionism as the hard scientific explanation.
It only means that along with the theory of chaos and emergence of order there is an additional angle of view, the mathematical one, which humanities have been trying to bite anyway.
This book may or may not be such catalyst, but the authors hope it will.
In the next chapters, we will approach some large historical events and institutions as patterns.
A protracted modem war is in itself a transition state from the pre-war to post-war state.
On the one hand, it is natural to regard WW1 as a transition state from the self-confident pre-war Europe to the weak and disillusioned postwar one.
On the other hand, the entire period from WW 1 to WW2 is a transition period from the “age of innocence” to the nuclear age.
In this chapter we are interested not in the course of war but in the transition state from peace to war, similar to our experiment with the Great Northern War in Chapter 19.
WW 1 is a classical example of a complex and still debated maze of motives and reasons for its outbreak.
The concept of transition state as applied to history is very relativistic.
We have some reasons to regard the entire history, unlike any chemical reaction, as a transition state to yet unknown future.
Here by transition state we mean anything that happens between two stable states about which we have sufficient infonnation.
In practical tenns, transition state is a quickly changing and somewhat fuzzy situation where the developments can take various directions, and the overall instability is in the air.
It is essential that the transition state requires an increase of energy called stress or tension, which is difficult to measure quantitatively.
In Chapter 26, Chaos-order, heat-cold we will discuss how it might be done.
By analogy with a chemical reaction, we can regard the yet unfinished Industrial Revolution as the transition state between the steady states before and after having all mineral fuel of the earth burned up.
The First World War was the conflict that signaled the beginning of a dramatic transformation of the world into a global civilization.
The globalization of the world went on for the entire twentieth century in the areas of military strategy, transportation, communication, politics, ideology, economics, and culture.
We understand globalization not as unification but rather as the constant decline of the geographic factor,e., speaking mathematically, reduction of the topology of international relations to full graph.
Speaking technically, it is the topology of the Internet where anybody can connect to anybody.
It simply means that all—or almost all—nations are neighbors and have direct access to each other, regardless of distance and fonner spheres of influence.
War is a process running along with its own regularity, very much pre-determined by the initial conditions, like the quantity of heat and light energy obtained from a candle is detennined by its size and shape.
Thus, the outcome of the American Civil War was in agreement with the larger resources of the North.
There is always room for chance, as in any game, for error and good luck, but in big and protracted processes it is rarely significant.
The contemporary perception of initial conditions, as well as all subsequent developments, strongly depend on the bias of the sides, and any consensus is possible only after the conflict is over.
Contrary to popular belief, history is made by historians, and not by people like you and we.
After WW2, in a new kind of war with politicized ends and means, resources do not matter anymore, and the very notion of victory and defeat becomes ambiguous.
Examples are wars of major powers in Vietnam, Afghanistan, Chechnya, Persian Gulf, and Serbia.
Historians usually note the spirit of doom and tension in Europe on the eve of WW1, like heavy clouds before a thunderstorm.
If we compare the accounts of contemporary and later historians, the former are inclined to see the war as inevitable.
For obvious reasons, they were tempted to judge the sides in terms of guilt and responsibility, often influenced by the preexisting nationalistic penchant.
The view of later historians might be influenced by new geopolitical antagonisms.
Any dominant point of view in humanities sooner or later generates a dissident opinion.
In his book Why Nations Go To War, John G Stoessinger, denies the historical fatalism surrounding the perception of wars, and especially WW1.
He focuses on the microscopic view of events between the historical accident, murder of the Austrian Crown Prince by a Serbian nationalist, and the formal declaration of war by its major participants.
He is most interested in the transition from the state of peace to the state of war.
His main theme is how self-image and the perception of the adversary push the sides to a conflict, only to be changed by new facts.
The gap between things “as they are” and their perception is a millennium old philosophical problem.
It has been also an issue in mathematical logic, a study of a mathematical formalization of reasoning.
But Tarski had shown how the notion of 'truth' as being applicable to statements that correspond to facts could be saved by speaking of both statements and facts in a metalanguage, which specifies the conditions under which statements do correspond to facts.
This metalanguage, however, is not available to the sides of the conflict.
Creating the United Nations has been an attempt to use such a political Esperanto.
It can probably be developed only by a historian who is not personally involved in the conflict or its aftermath.
Until the full story is known, we cannot understand it and, besides, understanding alone, as we saw on the example of the smoker, is not enough.
Even if we understand that smoking is harmful and the casino always wins in the end, we may engage in smoking and gambling for the irrational reasons that Vilfredo Pareto called residues.
In tenns of energy, the initial pre-war state of Europe was clearly stressed, so that the relative height of the transition barrier did not seem too high.
Concerning the transition state, war has always been essential part of European history, and there was no reason to fear the next one more than any of the previous ones.
The wars always ended with peace, the fields were somehow tilled, and the stock of cannon fodder somehow replenished by the European women.
The stress of the pre-war situation was a result of the preceding formation of the united and powerful Gennany, united but not strong enough Italy, diminished Austria-Hungary, and weak Ottoman Turkey.
The last big European war was fought between France and Prussia in 1870-1871, and it ended with the fonnation of united Germany.
The balance of power was shifted as result of the Franco-Prussian war, 1870-1871.
Germany claimed superiority in Europe and the world, which the Communist Russia claimed later, America apparently does at present, and China is a promising candidate to claim it in the future.
The chain of events culminating in the transformation of Gennany and her claim for dominance is fascinating in itself, but cannot be considered here.
WW1 was the first big war after the technical revolution, with high concentration of destructive power, mobility, and momentary communications.
For the first time the military technology included chemical warfare, automobiles, tanks, submarines, airplanes, and telephone on the mass scale.
A layer of professionals was firmly positioned between the masses and the leaders whose white horses were reserved for parades.
The ideological arsenal included monarchy, nationalism, ambitions of world power, Slavic solidarity, all still alive and well one hundred years later, with monarchy in the form of authoritarian rule.
There was a strong network of positive bonds in Europe based on historical, cultural, and dynastic links.
There were old cultural links between Russia and France, which survived the Napoleon’s invasion and the Crimean war and were strengthen by financial links, while Germany and England were clinched in global rivalry.
King Charles of Rumania was Kaiser’s relative, wife of Greek King Constantine was Kaiser’s sister, and he himself was of a mixed Danish and Russian royal descent.
Alexandra, widow of Edward VII, was from Schleswig-Holstein, annexed by Germany.
Frederick of Denmark and King George of Greece were brothers of Edward’s wife Queen Alexandra.
King Ferdinand of Bulgaria was a prince of the house of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, bom in Vienna.
Czarina, bom Alix of Hesse-Darmstadt, was Gennan princess and Edward’s other niece.
It was not for the family matters, however, that Europe had climbed into a metastable state.
The speed with which the events followed was, likely, due to the long advanced planning of the war, the clear intent, and the high impetus of imperialist expansion.
As a new factor, the nationalist tension could be quickly raised by propaganda spread by the newspapers.
High-speed communication via telegraph, telephone and emerging radio allowed for fast exchange of information so that events could trigger each other like chain reaction.
The factor of speed, probably, played an important role in preventing the gradual dissipation of energy.
Instead, the stress was released as mass hysteria and destructive power of explosives.
William II and Nicholas II exchanged telegrams after the Serbian crisis, trying to find a way to prevent the total war.
With ah the differences between the rational, focused, matter-offact William and the emotional, wimpy Nicholas, the telegrams show a clear intent to stop the thrown stone right in its flight.
Peter's Court Palais, 29 July 1914 Sa Majeste l'Empereur Neues Palais Am glad you are back.
I foresee that very soon I shall be overwhelmed by the pressure forced upon me and be forced to take extreme measures which will lead to war.
To try and avoid such a calamity as a European war I beg you in the name of our old friendship to do what you can to stop your allies from going too far.
July 1914 I received your telegram and share your wish that peace should be maintained.
But as I told you in my first telegram, I cannot consider Austria's action against Servia an ""ignoble"" war.
Austria knows by experience that Servian promises on paper are wholly unreliable.
I understand its action must be judged as trending to get full guarantee that the Servian promises shall become real facts.
This my reasoning is borne out by the statement of the Austrian cabinet that Austria does not want to make any territorial conquests at the expense of Servia.
Of course military measures on the part of Russia would be looked upon by Austria as a calamity we both wish to avoid and jeopardize my position as mediator which I readily accepted on your appeal to my friendship and my help.
Willy We can only hypothesize that the fast exchange of messages created an amplification instead of relaxation, like the positive feedback in a microphone.
With every mobilization, energy goes up because a mobilized army is like a compressed spring.
It seems that Russia entered the war exclusively for sentimental, humanitarian, and ideological reasons.
There was a moment when Kaiser asked Moltke to stop the movement of the troops toward France.
Moltke refused to reverse 11,000 trains and direct them against Russia.
General von Staab, the chief of the German Railway Division, wrote a book after the war proving that it could have been done.
Besides, it is much more difficult to reverse several actions simultaneously.
Confrontations between a statesman and a general were typical in the breaking war.
The French Commander in chief Joseph Joffre refused to follow the attempt of French Premier Rene Viviani to stop the war by unilateral retreat.
Similarly, the American defeat in Vietnam had the same imprinting effect on the subsequent United States military strategy.
Assasination of Franz Ferdinand, the Austrian Crown Prince, by a Serbian nationalist.
German Pledge of Niebelungtreue support,e. unconditional obligation of support to Austria.
Serbian response, rejected in less than 30 minutes, and, probably, misread.
Kaiser reads the Serbian response, is satisfied, and attempts to restrain Austria.
In contrast with the lively Willy-Nicky correspondence, we shall try now to represent some aspects of the transition to WW1 in the language of patterns.
The entire conflict flares up because of an internal stress created by accumulation of attraction and repulsion.
Seen with an eye of a chemist, it could be taken for a transfonnation of a geopolitical molecule.
The double arrows signify negative relations, the solid and broken lines symbolize positive and neutral bonds correspondingly, and the opposing arrows mean the state of war.
The murder in Sarajevo destabilized the situation due to its catalytic effect.
We attribute it to Serbia and mark by a star, although it happened on the territory of Austria-Hungary.
The shots shifted the balance of indecision toward clear division into friends and enemies.
The barrier between peace and war was high because there was no strong immediate motive to start a war.
An act of an individual, although directed against a prominent figure, was physically (not ethically) insignificant in itself, as compared with all the physical energy and millions of lives wasted during the subsequent war.
This act, however, strengthened the negative links in the configuration of mutual perceptions.
It is my conviction that, during the descent into the abyss, the perceptions of statesmen and generals were absolutely crucial, for the sake of clarity and precision, 1 should like to consider following dimensions of this phenomenon: a leader’s perception of himself; his perceptions of his adversary’s character; his perceptions of the adversary's intentions; his perceptions of the adversary's power and capabilities; and a leader's capacity for empathy with his counterplayer on the other side.
All the participants suffered from greater or lesser distortions of their images of themselves.
They tended to see themselves honorable, virtuous, and pure and the adversary as diabolical.
The leaders of Austria-Hungary probably provide the best illustration of this.
Berchtold and von Hotzendorff perceived their country as the bastion of European civilization.
The possibility of losing prestige and of sinking to the status of a second-class power was anathema to Austrian leaders.
Hence, they perceived as essential the need for a firm and fearless stand that, in their minds, would make a potential enemy back down.
We could show all that by building more detailed configurations for all the participant nations, like we did it for the Great Northern War, but we already know that decisive events are always local.
We use the names of the countries as labels of generators in our diagrams.
Strictly speaking, we cannot substitute terms Gennany, Austria, and Russia for the paranoid attitude of Kaiser Wilhelm to the Slavic people, German and Austrian contempt for Russia’s military power, Austrian demonization of Serbs, as well as Russian despise for Austria and fear of Germany.
Not accidentally, all three were authoritarian monarchies with voiceless masses.
Our labels for the generators in the configuration do not identify the leaders with the people but simply reflect our distance from the detail.
Interestingly, we can see the ominous Montegu-Capulet-Romeo-Juliet rectangle in configuration 2.
The conflict between Austria and Serbia might not have violated the peace for many years, but the instability of a single person made Russia and Germany active, instead of passive, enemies.
This is the typical irregularity of the transition state reconciling opposite forces.
We associate the pre-war hysteria with the rising temperature, and, therefore, high rate of chaos and impulsive decisions made in the heat of the moment.
At the same time, the invisible walls of the transition became lower because the new information—the terrorist act of a Serb—made guns even more appealing.
People make decisions in many ways, but most often they are driven by the image of themselves enjoying the result of their actions.
Next the neutral bonds within Entente become positive because of the activated treaties.
The black wedges symbolize the big split and the state of war in the Eastern part of Europe and the following war on the western front.
In configuration 6, Russia withdraws from the war as result of the October Revolution.
The barrier to the revolution was lowered by the war and the information about Russian defeats.
The Bolsheviks lowered the transition state further by the promise of the peace and prosperity, but the Russian Revolution is a different story.
The narratives, however, are different for all conflicts on earth, while the patterns are much more general.
The interpretation of the transition state as the final state perceived by the sides of the conflict is, probably, not too original either.
It lies within the boundaries of social psychology, and theory of cognitive dissonance, in particular.
WW2 was the first war of modem times fought over ideology, not just the spoils of war or mutual misperception.
It was not the first time that abstract ideas were moving people toward war, but in earlier times it was about religion, as in the Crusades of the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
More than any other modem war, WW2 was triggered by a single-minded decision.
William L Shirer in The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich lists many cases of the opposition, sometimes effective, of Hitler’s generals, for whom the potential barrier on the way to war was much higher than for the Fiihrer.
We still do not know how much of the Nazi drive toward WW2 could be attributed to the paranoia of Hitler and how much to cold calculation.
As we have said many times, our goal is not the factual truth but a possible vehicle to reach it.
We are tempted to characterize Hitler’s imagination as inflamed, but his pattern temperature was below freezing point.
Hitler was bom in 1889 and wrote his Mein Kampf in 1925 as a program that he followed till his end with a remarkable rigidity and consistency.
He regarded Russia as the direction of expansion, and this mental configuration finally pushed him against his own doppelganger Stalin despite all warnings of history.
The pattern of the absolute dictator in this transitional period of European history was fatally complemented by the pattern of totalitarian structure of society, giving the dictator a historically unprecedented power.
The concepts of victory and defeat are linked as all polar opposites, so that the vision of the German defeat in WW1, which greatly depressed Hitler, activated the easily imaginable image of victory.
If it is possible to lose the modem war (which means somebody’s victory), than it is possible to win it.
The image of victory was a comfortable promise to restore the imbalance caused by the defeat in WW1.
This pattern of rather artistic then rational approach to war seemed to be followed by some charismatic leaders of Northern Africa and Middle East, and, probably, even by the United States in the Far East after the defeat in Korea.
Anyway, since perseverance is an individual virtue, it is hard to deny it to anybody.
Their perception was influenced by the historical pattern of a strong and unified national state capable of expansion and guarding its possessions.
The tempting pattern of an ancient empire anned with modern weapons has been an inspiration for many dictators.
Most West European nations, as well as Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Egypt, Poland, Lithuania, Russia, and Israel, had sweet historical memories of greatness going far back in time.
Similarly, the unique place of China in the world can be strongly defined by history, size, and memories of greatness and humiliation for a long time.
The absolute majority of old European nations, as well as the offspring of WW1— Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, new Balkan and Baltic states, and Austria—were still in the aftermath of WW 1 and were weak economically and politically.
Paradoxically, as it may seem from today’s view, the absence of a strong will, personified by the absolute monarch, was also a contributing factor to weakness.
The Gennan society worked smoothly as a computer with all the bugs extenninated.
We can see how the whole structure of the Nazi ideology was built from simple straight rods.
In both Germany and Russia the combination of three factors created historically unique conditions for the amplification of an individual will against the background of developed industry and technology.
Historically new apparatus of a single and unopposed political party with military discipline, free of the election headache.
In Orthodox Christianity, the Czar is not only the political head of state but also the head of the church and the father of the people.
It is a literal translation of the medieval idea of caesaropapism ,e., combined secular and spiritual power.
Czar-father or the Gennan Fiihrer is the national leader who personifies not only power but also the right way of thinking and behavior and who actually owns the lives of his subjects.
Stalin’s name was, too, combined not only with “leader” but also with “father” and “teacher” by the Soviet propaganda.
In the fin-de-siecle American politics, the President was expected by some to be not just the chief executive officer of the federal government, administrative head of the executive department of the government, and commander in chief of the anned forces of the nation, but also an infallible squeaky-clean role model,e. a man with qualities attributed to a moral leader of the nation, which in the democratic outdoors makes the leader a moving target on the shooting range.
Britain and France, both national states, declared the war when Hitler invaded Poland.
The Nazi scenario failed from the start because the flagrant aggression mobilized resistance and made the national states strengthen their bonds in triangular patterns.
In WW2 the aggression was predictable, one-sided, but spread over time, so that it provided some relaxation and adaptation, as well as plenty of time for the Europeans to vacillate before the anti-Nazi coalition was created against all odds and despite the isolationism of USA and alienation of Russia.
To summarize, the configuration of WW2 was very archaic, as far as its motives and outbreak were concerned.
It followed the prehistoric pattern of aggressive attack, invasion, conquest, and plunder that dominated ancient and medieval history as well as epic mythology.
Every empire grew in this way and was beaten in the same way either by Hyksos, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Vikings, and Mongols or by another empire.
In looking back on these events, one is struck by the private and personal nature of Hitler’s war against Russia.
WW2 was, probably, initiated in the dark nature of the powerful absolute dictator more by the internal tensions and historical and mythological catalysts than by anything else.
As we believe, WW2 illustrates the timeless vitality of patterns that can survive in an encapsulated fonn in the historical soil for long periods of time and then spring up as an epidemic, the situation described by Albert Camus in his parable The Plague.
Britain, USA, and Russia by that time were free of major internal stress—the result achieved by different means in Russia than the other two.
As a counterexample, the Western Roman Empire in her last century was tom apart by internal hostility between the privileged and impoverished classes.
Most important, contrary to expectations, Britain, USA, and Russia were able to form a temporary military coalition despite their ideological rift.
The initial result was not only the breakup of the colonial system and even some nations, but also the polarization of the entire world between capitalism and Communism.
The Cold War was presented by propaganda as a typical metastable state because of the fingers on the nuclear buttons, but its energy was dissipated in enormous military spending instead of a world fire.
The top point of the transition barrier had not been reached and the hot WW3 never happened not because the barrier was too high.
As we believe, it was an excellent example of the power of historical experience as well as of direct interactions of patterns of ideas with patterns of action.
Both leaders, John Kennedy and Nikita Kh rushchev were WW2 veterans (Khrushchev was veteran of two world wars and one civil war) and had unlimited power in military matters.
At the same time, it was still the period of the Soviet thaw, when the autocratic pattern of Stalin’s rule was denounced and there was a kind of collective decision-making in the ruling oligarchy.
The thaw ended in 1965 with the first political trials of dissident writers.
For the first time the big gun smokers were tonnented by the terrible smoker’s dilemma.
In the entire previous history, war meant either victory or defeat or a draw.
Therefore, the WW3 was averted because of an extremely high transition barrier in combination with the democratic or quasi-democratic pattern of society where the leaders could not simply follow their basic instincts.
The liberal Kennedy was forced to be tough and militant Khrushchev, not a hawk by his nature, was forced to be weak.
However it might be true that the Stoessinger’s empathy is a recipe against the war, the good old self-interest works well, too.
If WW1 could be considered a historical accident, two such wars in a row were already regularity.
They caused even more fragmentation in the world, but the fragments started moving toward a new integration and a new geopolitical topology, with charismatic leaders playing less and less role in history, for better or worse.
The charismatic leaders are now presidents and CEO’s of companies, often in charge of resources comparable with resources of many nations, and with income well above those of state leaders, while very few of them try to run terrorist corporations.
In this book, however, we deliberately evade the extremely important economical aspect of history because of our limited qualifications.
It could be a rewarding terrain for a pattern historian to compare patterns of classical heroes and villains with their modern transplants into corporate life sanitized by the spray of democracy.
Researchers in history of modern corporations may find someday that the pattern of world wars was repeated on a smaller scale by large corporations, and Microsoft comes to mind first.
World markets seem to be still in the “medieval” pre-United-Nations stage when territorial conquest is possible.
Looking back at the twentieth century, we may see it as the century of the single Antiwar Revolution, comparable to the Industrial Revolution.
Our major objective in this chapter was to show that the pattern paradigm, even without going into detail, provides some means to shuttle between major components of historical process—actions and ideas—without changing the tenninology.
To be seriously explored, the concept of transition barrier and the factors that influence its relative height needs professionals and not amateurs like ourselves.
Finally, without claiming any prophetic powers, we would like to share the observation that each of the three pre-world-war situations were preceded by a new major factor of radical historical novelty.
It was the new military technology and means of communications before WW1, the modern totalitarian apparatus before WW2, and nuclear weapon before the aborted WW3.
If we are destined to face WW4, albeit on a mini-scale, we owe it to wireless phone and Internet.
Whether the next phenomenon of electronic globalization can lead to the next crisis, shall be seen, but history sadly teaches us to keep the reconciling distance and beware of your own kin.
Conflicts are less probable if the overall level of social frustration is low, if the sides are not constrained by uncomfortably tight bonds and bear hugs, and if there is neither czar nor father of the nation, nor, most important, a combination of both.
The main conflict of the revolution is that between the leaders and the masses, which we are going to explore on the example of the French Revolution.
It means anything from short and fast-pacing violent event within national borders to a fundamental change, not necessarily violent, toward a new stage in the course of global evolution.
Examples are as different as the religious revolution of Akhenaton in the fourteenth century B.C., the Iranian Revolution of 1978-79, and the Industrial Revolution spanning over centuries and still going on in some countries.
The term was also applied to almost any modem change, such as sexual, technological, information, computer, Republican, and other revolutions, sometimes, tongue in cheek.
The overall pattern of radical change repeats itself not only in history of nations but also, on a smaller scale, in the life of institutions, corporations, and even families, sometimes, violently, as divorce, bankruptcy, loss, takeover, etc.
On any scale, only the revolution of 1640-1660 in England can match the French Revolution.
The Industrial Revolution, not a violent disturbance, had even greater magnitude.
In the twentieth century, the Russian Revolution, decolonization of Africa and Asia, emancipation of women, and information revolution are the top picks.
Russia, America, and China knew only one successful social revolution each.
Gennany is relatively young as a unified nation, and Luther was, probably, the greatest revolutionary, humbly called reformer, of the Gennan-speaking people.
The French Revolution, however, meant not only a cardinal cataclysm of social structure, but a series of events involving large number of people over long time and considerable distance from Paris.
Big and dramatic changes initiated from the top are usually called reforms, not revolutions, but the rule of Emperor Meiji who transfonned Japan into a modern state, holds both titles.
Political revolutions do not prove anything and rarely accomplish their goals.
After the Lutheran Revolution, Catholicism underwent a self-purification and revitalization.
After the Communist Revolution in Russia, Communism became discredited all over the world.
After the French Revolution, monarchy was not only restored but invigorated by Napoleon.
We can only guess how the spirit of American independence is going to survive the tests of global economy and global threats and whether the spirit of Communism is going to be resurrected when energy, food, and water become scarce in the world.
All that time it has been a matters of controversial historical interpretation, less so in America.
The nations whose fonnative revolutions have not failed tend to be sympathetic to all revolutions.
On the one hand, the French Revolution was a relatively short sequence of violent acts within a nation, and on the other hand, it was a process with global consequences and major aftershocks in other countries for over more than a century.
Most revolutions increased freedom and made the bond relations more relaxed.
But the revolution itself cannot happen unless a certain degree of chaos is not already present.
Le bourgeois gentilhomme by Moliere, written a century before the Revolution, may serve as an illustration of the comic aspect of the relaxation of the rigid structure of the estates.
September massacres National Convention France is declared a Republic 1793 Execution of Louis XVI War against Britain, Holland, and Spain Organization of Committee of Public Safety Arrest of Girondins Reign of Terror Decree of levee en masse 1794 Fall of Robespierre.
We should fully appreciate the art of a historian who reads the hard beads of facts on the string and turns them into a captivating narrative.
Here is our own extract of many thousands of pages written about the ten turbulent years.
By the end of the eighteenth century, France, an absolute monarchy plagued by many long-term and accidental problems, entered a crisis which took a form of a violent conflict.
First a constitutional monarchy and later a republic were proclaimed, the King was beheaded, a succession of more and more radical and violent groups and individuals came to power, more and more heads were chopped off, until at the peak of the terror moderation took over and, in a sequence of steps, not without violence, monarchy was restored, while the dynasty and the overall social system were not.
Unlike seasonal flood, epidemic, forest fire, or disease, however, the system that produced the catastrophe is forever changed.
The Black Death of the fourteenth century had killed at least 25 million Europeans but it did not change Europe politically, while the French Revolution with its 40,000 victims meant a radical turn for the continent.
We may regard the entire decade between 1789 and 1799 as a transition state between two monarchies.
Each shorter event within this period, for example, the stonn of Bastille or the period of Jacobin terror, could also be split into initial, transition, and final states.
Historical events have the same fractal character as many other natural phenomena.
The horizontal axis is the historical time measured not by the clock and calendar, but, in the spirit of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Ilya Prigogine, by the sequence of events, so that if nothing happens, the time does not move.
The energy profile of the French Revolution The vertical axis means abstract temperature or degree of chaos.
What is important, regularity is relaxed at high temperature, positive bonds tend to break up, and negative bonds, for example, law and order, are difficult to maintain.
If normally regicide is an extraordinary and unthinkable event, the fatal decision can be made easier in the heat of the moment.
Thus, the agony of the Great Depression lowered the windowsill for the desperate.
Although France was a monarchy in both 1789 and 1799, the two situations were radically different.
The process of the transition was violent and intense, culminating in the inhuman, cruel, and apparently irrational Reign of Terror.
The words like “inhuman, cruel, irrational” make sense only in the modem interpretation.
We do not allow public executions and cruelty to animals, but the physical elimination of the enemy has been a norm throughout millennia.
The French Reign of Terror, so repugnant to many of us, was highly praised in Communist Russia and a copycat Reign of Terror was established after the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917.
Many streets in Russian cities were named after Robespierre and men were named after Marat.
The origin and evolution of patterns of cruelty could be an important subject in our times when they resurface time and again.
Looking for reasons of the terror, historians often address, and with good reasons, the personalities of such people as Robespierre, Hitler, and Stalin, but we cannot dwell on that.
The barrier from a peaceful life to terror seems extremely high and difficult to overcome.
While an average person cannot jump over ten steps of a staircase, everybody can walk it up step by step.
During a stepwise ascent through intermediate steps, each smaller step is separated from the next with a low barrier.
The Jacobin terror could not start right after the beginning of the Revolution because the jump would be too high to accomplish.
What would seem unthinkable after the peaceful beginning could be natural against the background of the previous tumultuous state.
Thus, the Reign of Terror under Robespierre was just another increment over the terrors of the war and the atrocities of the Montagnards under Danton.
This phenomenon is known as escalation, and history of modern time contains many examples of it, as well as that of de-escalation.
The rise of Nazism, the Vietnam War, the violent rise of Communism and its long decline, break-up, and return to a quasi-bourgeois state also fall into this category.
The gradual pacification of the Middle East is another example of a stumbling de-escalation.
The anti-American and world terrorism, too, present a perfect case of escalation over three decades.
A series of successes in acts of increasing magnitude encouraged the Islamic extremists to scale up the destruction.
Everybody had to make his or her own decision during the fast pacing times.
Both those who voted for the death sentence and against it were signing their own sentence and were punished later at different moments as sympathizers of either monarchy or republic.
No doubt, many voters had anticipated the double outcomes and the National Convention made its difficult decision only by a narrow margin.
If the spontaneous stonn of Bastille can be described in terms of generators and bonds, those would rather be the stones, bricks, and mortar, with hardly any social structure involved, more like breaking glass or melting wax.
The spontaneous mass movement is rarely structured but it raises the energy of participants to a height not achievable in normal life.
The fact that the social energy can be both constructive and destructive, like work and heat in physics, gives more substance to our vague understanding of energy in pattern transformations.
The diagrams in figures 23. and 23. tell us something about the transformation and its direction but not about what is transformed.
Our next objective here is to express the narrative in terms of generators, bonds, configurations, and patterns.
When we built the semantic network for the Great Northern War in Chapter 19, we did it from our general knowledge about the subject and the result was hard to manage.
With striking awkwardness, the government offered with one hand what it withdrew with the other.
Tax-reform efforts, never completely carried through, offended privileged groups without pleasing the underprivileged.
The bonds are oriented and the bond values are indicated on the arrows.
For example, “offend” applies to the outbound bond and it means “offended by” for the inbound bonds.
From the short piece of the narrative it is impossible to tell whether the intellectuals and progressives are components of “France” or just belong to a common social group, etc.
Turgot was part of the government, but our text keeps silence on this matter, as well as on many other things.
In a larger context we could find the link “approve” between tax-refonn and intellectuals, but there is no such hint in the piece of the text.
We include progressives and intellectuals into “France,” but this does not follow from the text, either.
This clearly shows, as we have already noted, that semantic networks are confusing and inappropriate for historical analysis in pattern terms, and, by the way, so could be their original narratives because of the brevity, or internal contradictions, or gaps.
Anyway, we can see that the number of bonds is the highest around the “measure by the government,” and this is where everything starts.
What follows from this observation, is the possibility of fonnal approach to evaluating political situation.
Generators with the largest number of bonds could be the focuses of attention and possible sources of controversy.
We will talk more on that, as well as on the ways to measure political temperature, in Chapter 27, History and Computers.
A to E we present configurations of selected stages of the revolution, basing on our textbook sources.
After our pattern experiments with the Great Northern War, we already know that the basic pattern change takes place locally,e., in small subconfigurations.
The simple picture does not reveal the extreme feudal complexity later to be simplified by the revolution.
Three areas of internal stress depicted by negative bonds are those between the tax burden of the Third Estate and tax privileges of the nobles and clergy, the inequality of land ownership between the two groups, and the innate dishannony between them, exacerbated by unequal representation.
One of them was the idea of equality of all people before the law, implying equal representation, taxation, and the right to own land.
That idea implied a kind of regularity incompatible with the existent pattern.
The Old Regime The ideas of philosophes —mental patterns, we should say—were by no means new by 1789.
B A society can live with uncomfortable ideas for a long time because of the transition barrier between thinking and action.
The temperature here is rising as the flames burn at particular points.
In this picture we can see a new generator—Estates-General—which only adds to the internal tension because of the inequality of representation.
We probably have to go back to his childhood, upbringing, heredity, physical problems, and influences in order to get more information, but the element of chance is always present.
In France the years preceding 1789 are marked by a series of measures which united previously antagonized groups.
With striking political ingenuity the government passed a set of profound reforms.
They decreased the power of privileged groups and improved the position of the underprivileged.
Turgot’s attempted introduction of laissez-faire failed, but his overall success reconciled both the intellectuals and the progressives with him.and each other.
Exactly because it required a high efficiency of the government, which was not the case, as we saw.
If in 1788 we expressed the above statement as a political prognosis, it would contradict the facts.
The entire system of our knowledge would be stressed, “frustrated,” like the poorly designed kettle, according to Christopher Alexander, and made unstable by negative bonds in its configuration.
Let us consider this as an illustration to the problem of truth that we have been avoiding until now.
Truth is a representation of knowledge, facts, opinions, and theories with minimal overall number of contradictions.
Taking to account the dynamic nature of social and individual patterns, the truth has a limited life.
Assumption and facts There are usually good reasons why history takes its course.
We can imagine a plausible counterfactual scenario, but this would require an alternative previous state, which in turn would make us play mental games with its previous state, and so on.
Instead of a glorious and velvety resolution of the conflict, France moved another level up on the scale of energy and ladder of violence.
The unsettled question of how to vote, by estates or by individuals, separated the Third Estate from other estates and made it the dominant force.
More tension, more heat Therefore, the power shifted from the King to the Assembly and the mob.
The exodus of the fonner privileged estates and an attempted flight of the King ended up in the outbreak of popular hostility toward him.
The king was executed, the reign of terror began, and Robespierre moved closer to dictatorship.
At this stage, without monarchy, the pattern of despotism in France dominated despite the presence of the National Convention and the most democratic Constitution of 1792, postponed by the Convention.
The real power was in the hands of the Committee of Public Safety, aided by the Committee of General Security and Revolutionary Tribunal.
If we refonnulate “the age-old French principle” as pattern, we can vividly see it twisted and torn by powerful invisible hands to be reshaped into a completely different template of equality and representative democracy.
Even though we see the republic on the surface, however, the new despotism grows underneath.
France was destined to swing between both for two more centuries until, after many painful experiments, the contemporary hybrid of strong executive power with democratic elections was achieved.
We can see the same evolutionary struggle of traditional centralization and new democratic forms in the history of Russia in the twentieth century, with the centralization taking fonn of Stalin’s despotism.
Russia started to swing between freezing and thaw, with declining amplitude, along the timeline of Stalin— Kh rushchev—Brezhnev—Gorbachev—Yeltzin—Putin, trying to reconcile democratic and authoritarian principles, but still moving through the erosion of despotism toward democracy.
They are still complex, involving many bond couples and simultaneous events, but at the same time, to be understandable, they need a lot of explanations outside the pictures, actually, the full narrative.
Pattern theory, because of its atomistic nature, regards revolution as a sequence of small elementary steps, almost as Leo Tolstoy would like to see history, but by no means infinitely small.
The quantum of history is a change in single generator or a single bond couple.
When we start minimizing the configurations of the narratives and excluding the subconfiguration that do not take part in a transformation, we come to a few elementary generators of transformation.
In a dramatic play, even of Shakespearean magnitude, the characters practically never talk all at once.
In opera more than four voices rarely sing different parts in an ensemble.
Similarly, both historical and chemical transformations, however complex, are in fact sequences of small-scale events which can be perceived one or two at a time.
As Jose Ortega y Gasset said, “ ...if the world is composed of things, these will be given me one by one” This kind of simplification by breaking a complex whole into fragments is analysis typical for natural sciences, from calculus to chemistry, biology, and sociology.
Pattern Theory, with its focus on interaction of fragments and the concept of global regularity, combines both analysis and synthesis.
Structural changes can be compared with hiking from one valley to another on a certain energy landscape with the valleys of stable states and the crests of the transition states.
From every point of the valley there are several possible passages to various nearby valleys over the separating ridges.
The analogy, however, should not be taken literally because the energy landscape does not exist in the 3D background space.
Any planning—economical, political, military, or personal—involves a mapping of alternatives.
Usually not only most of the alternatives are unknown before the action, but every move may instantaneously change the landscape if we act against adverse circumstances or an intelligent adversary whose logic we cannot comprehend.
He imagined individual development of an organism as a ball rolling over a descending landscape.
Landscape pattern shallow terrain makes a change of direction or divergence more probable.
The developmental topography of human behavior is enormously broader and more complicated, but it is still a topography.
If he starts with the genes or other early physiological influences that predispose him to the left hand, that branch of the developmental channel can be viewed as cutting the more deeply.
If no social pressure is exerted the ball will in most cases roll on down into the channel for left-handedness.
But if parents train the child to use the right hand, the ball can be nudged into the shallower channel for right-handedness The landscape for schizophrenia is a broader network of anastomosing channels, more difficult to trace, and the ball's course is only statistically predictable.
Social psychology also provided a lot of insight about the intimate mechanisms of social pressure.
In the game of chess, where the role of chance is strongly minimized, the player can see a large area of the energy landscape, and each neighboring valley means the opponent’s possible response to the move.
Theoretically, the entire landscape of the game pre-exists, but it is so large that even a computer cannot see it all.
In the modern science of history it is usually a good style to outline major historical alternatives.
Since history is made not only by masses and historians but also by individuals and their choices, each historical development is an interaction of the crowd with its outstanding participants.
In the language of natural sciences, history displays in a chemical substrate where some molecules have no duplicates and their behavior can be described only in quantum and probabilistic terms.
There is a multitude of exciting—as well as eternal—questions, which are mostly a matter of definitions.
Patterns do not take to consideration the difference between masses and individuals, things and ideas, nations and chemical substances.
The enemies attempt to move strictly along the valleys, although they may not have the right map.
In the revolution, the high temperature pushes the society to the unstable position on the edge of a plateau, from which there is more chance to fall down than scale another height.
The pattern of authoritarian rule emerging from a mass revolution plays the same role as the equipment of a mountain climber—chokes, hooks, and ropes—to secure the position.
Thermodynamically speaking, the authoritarian rule uses energy in the form of work for freezing its own pattern, preserving it from defonnation by the chaotic heat of spontaneous discontent and organized work of the opposition.
How far this use of society as a refrigerator can go we will see from the next chapter.
The fall of the Soviet Empire Russia of the last decade of the twentieth century seemed to confirm its reputation of a nested doll of mystery, conundrum, enigma, riddle, and puzzle.
Although our primary interest is limited by the title of this chapter, a brief historical overview would be helpful.
Two lively books by David Remnick, Lenin ’s Tomb and Resurrestion , seem to be the best American account of the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Russia entered the twentieth century as an ossified absolute monarchy with no parliament and civil liberties whatsoever.
Ironically, czar Alexander II, who since 1855 had made important steps toward liberalization and introduced a representational system of local government, was killed by revolutionaries in 1881.
Lenin’s brother had been executed as a co-conspirator, which greatly contributed to the shaping of Lenin’s personality.
For the west-oriented Russians, autocracy and czar were blood enemies, and for the self-oriented ones the strong centralized power was the foundation of society.
The murder of the czar had derailed reforms, and the subsequent history of Russia of the twentieth century unrolled as a “what if’ spin-off from the French Revolution.
The unlimited political power and spiritual authority was combined in the person of the czar.
After Peter the Great, the Russian nobility as a whole did not try to limit the power of the czar, and the clergy was no rival either.
This pattern explains the famous Russian patience and stoic acceptance of fate, as well as the rebellious spirit compensating for the compliance.
A Russian, treated by the authorities like an immature teenager, combined obedience with suppressed anarchy.
The instinctive challenge of law and order has been wide spread at all levels of society, which contributed to the post-Soviet disarray.
The Russian peasants and craftsmen unknowingly implemented the Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s principle of general will.
The education of the upper class stood out against the illiteracy of the peasants.
Nobility and peasants in Russia could be taken for two different nations, so different their culture and even language were.
A sharp contrast between the upper and lower classes, combined with ethnic diversity, was a pattern shared by Russia with the late Roman Empire.
A handful of domestic Russian philosophes used to be punished for dissent by the czars and later by the Communists.
With time, the patriarchal traditions of the Russian society were eroded by socialdemocratic ideas and progress of bourgeoisie in the Western Europe.
By the beginning of the twentieth century, Russia swarmed with a wide range of democratic, socialist, anarchist, and terrorist organizations, with Bolsheviks among them.
It took a couple of powerful detonators to overcome the height of the transition barrier of the first ever Russian revolution of 1905 and trigger explosive developments.
Second, it was a bizarre massacre of a peaceful demonstration of Saint Petersburg’s workers by the czar.
Spontaneous strikes and riots followed and the first Soviets,e., municipal councils, were organized in major cities.
The czar responded with a Manifesto promising a constitutional monarchy with civil liberties and a representative Duma ,e., legislative assembly.
The revolution followed the path of the French Revolution but with much less success.
The actual control was in the hands of the czar who had the right to dissolve the Duma.
Russia was moving toward both industrialization and a new political crisis.
From that relatively stable period between 1905 and 1914, the next most probable outlook of Russia could be a vigorous European democracy.
The second Russian Revolution of 1917 got a boost from the ongoing WW1.
Russia, populated mostly by peasants, became a democracy, although only for several months.
The experience of both French revolution and the Commune of Paris of 1871 was a pattern template consciously used by the Bolsheviks led by their charismatic and talented leader Vladimir Lenin who referred to French history on many occasions in his strategic and tactical works.
His way to power was in many aspects different because the Bolsheviks had been in the underground for many years, and were banned even after the overthrow of the czar.
The Marxist ideas and goals pursued by the Bolsheviks were alien to the absolute majority of Russian people.
The promise of land distribution an peace in WW1, however, attracted the majority of peasants.
While the French Revolution at its Thermidor stage rejected the communist ideas of Gracchus Babeuf, the Russian Revolution proclaimed abolition of private property as one of its goals, which was later accomplished at the cost of great bloodshed and suffering.
The first practical steps taken by the Bolsheviks were to end the war, consolidate power, get rid of their opponents and fonner allies, feed the population, teach literacy, and restore the nationalized industry.
We venture to suggest that they won not only by cruel repressions but also because the program fit the Russian pattern of patriarchal centralization and dependence on the master.
Lenin considered the weakness of the terror the major flaw of both the French Revolution and the insurrection of the Commune of Paris in 1871.
Only twenty years after the Bolshevik Revolution, the Soviet Union was ruled by a dictator in command of a military-style party organization controlling all aspects of life in the country.
This social pattern known as Russian Communism was new and unprecedented in history because the elimination of private property, most often together with the fonner owners.
Every resident of Russia received his or her sustenance from the government that de facto owned the giant country and controlled the movements of any person.
The pattern was partially familiar for Russia with its experience of serfdom.
In modem language, Russia was a combination of a perfect welfare state with a perfect police state.
Nevertheless, the rulers sincerely wanted to improve life of their subjects and achieved significant success.
By no means the population was unhappy, taking hardships with the traditional resignation.
The internal tensions in Russia were minimal and limited to the struggle for power in the ruling elite.
The overall pattern of the Soviet life was, paradoxically, very close to the pattern of a large, privately owned, and paternalistic American or Gennan corporation, with the hierarchical structure of subordination, monetary compensation, pension plans, vacation vouchers, separate cafeteria for the top management and the workers, and work as the only meaning of life.
While an American corporation is often a rigid pyramid, the Soviet system allowed a small degree of fluidity and initiative inside its units.
This is why a typical conflict at a Russian institution could be a conflict between the superior and his subordinate, totally hopeless in America and modem Japan but typical for feudalism.
Since the production unit was property of the government, various levels of management had a chance to prove their points to a higher authority, something like going to the suzerain’s court.
The Soviet writers, also members of a production unit, were even officially encouraged to take the vertical conflict as a plot for a novel.
Type I presumes a relatively free horizontal interaction, type II makes vertical interaction possible, at least, theoretically, and type III forbids any horizontal interaction of subordinates.
Antagonism and dissent were kept in control by simply eliminating generators with negative bonds—as in a typical Western corporation.
The connector graph was a tree of subordination with the leader and the small group of his top deputies supervising the lower levels organized along territorial and industrial principles.
In the Soviet Union this tree of subordination was doubled and tripled.
The dominant system of command was the party represented in any enterprise, organization, and locality, including science, education, and arts.
The party perfonned the function of a powerful enforcement of the existing social configurations.
Its main goal was to take care of the posts and beams of the social structure, inspect it daily, test the material strength, change the defective parts, and tighten the loose nuts.
The second hierarchy was the government,e., the system of professional management in industry, services, education, arts, and entertainment.
Two sergeants, one from the party, the other from the management, were barking commands down the soldier’s neck.
The third and less conspicuous system was the State Security that also tried to penetrate every unit of society through their agents recruited from all groups of society.
The three systems were designed to prevent any irregularity in the social functions and turn society into a clockwork mechanism set by the Politburo.
It can be, for example, a system of metal-producing plants, or a system of higher education, regardless of location, or civil administration of a reion.
This means that every party organization of a certain region covers also all the other industries in this region, plus local government, medical service, education, media, and arts.
It would be difficult to draw the complete three-dimensional social structure of Soviet Russia.
Everybody is watched by the omnipresent State Security organized geographically.
A person in the Western society also can have two allegiances—as an employee of a business unit and as a resident of a locality—and must obey two sets of rules, but the pyramids of subordination are small and independent, the allegiance can be easily changed, and one can be self-employed and live in a boat.
In the Soviet society, all the allegiances converged to the single top leader who could decide the fate of any single individual, and in fact did.
As result, the society was tied together by an unprecedented in history sponge-like multitude of li nk It was a huge muscular body with a small head where all major decisions of economical, political, and ideological nature were made and where a certain level of uncertainty, intrigue, competition, and action was carefully shielded from the public eye.
An approximation of the social connector oriented toward victory at any price.
In view of the redundant engineering of the society, the fall of the Soviet Empire came as a great surprise.
There was no mass discontent, no organized opposition, and all dissidents were exiled or imprisoned.
The system had no visible signs of internal tension, no hunger, riots, and no spontaneous drive for ethnic independence, except in the Baltic republics.
With any dissent punished as a severe crime, the army under the party control, and civil war excluded, the USSR seemed to be in a deep pit of stability.
No wonder, very few Russians could imagine that the collectivist system where even prices and salaries were fixed would ever collapse.
The rigidity of prices and salaries had its historical precedent, however, that could reveal a much finer similarity.
One of the earliest examples is the Roman Empire under Emperor Diocletian whose main goal was to cool down the Empire overheated by invasions of Barbarians, famine, riots, and exorbitant taxes.
Diocletian fixed prices of commodities, wages, and cost of transportation by an edict, and some historians compared his rule with totalitarianism.
For comparison, in the former USSR all teachers of any subject were allotted same salary, the salaries of high school teachers, physicians, and lawyers were among the lowest, but the cost of public transportation and apartment rent was merely symbolic.
Diocletian pursued an absolute order, declaring the priority of the state over individual and using even a kind of secret police, but he did not go as far as to abolish private property.
He was draining the resources of the population, while the Soviet system assumed that the government had to provide meager food, clothing, and housing for everybody, whether they produced anything of use or not.
As a remarkable parallel, Diocletian tied the coloni, the tenants of the landowners, to the land, turning them into serfs.
Moreover, he expanded the serfdom to basic professions and made them hereditary.
Stalin did the same by withdrawing the internal passports from the peasants and establishing control of the residence of every citizen so that the unwanted movement from one city to another in search of better life was prevented.
Yet, at most, his program arrested the decline for a time but did not reverse it.
The novelty was that all the divisions were equal and none of them, even Italy, the birthplace of the empire and its metropolis, had a fonnal advantage over any other.
Moscow was the dominating metropolis and the rest of the country was a quasi-colony.
In frozen authoritarian systems the temperature is the highest at the top where not only all decisions are made but also a perpetual spectacle of power struggle, intrigues, rivalry, and perfidy is staged.
The frustration, limited to the ruling class, was intensified by the war in Afghanistan and the American Strategic Defense Initiative that could potentially make USA secure against a possible Soviet missile attack.
About five years before the change, the party, for whatever reason, started a campaign against corruption, which destabilized the ruling elite.
Mikhail Gorbachev experimented with easing the monopoly of power and opening a crack in the door to free competition for power and ideas.
In fact, as soon as the new Soviet leader made clear that freedom of thought might not be punished by prison, the internal rifts crisscrossed the political configuration.
Configuration A shows symbolically the two duplicate connectors of government and party.
He made peace in the Cold War, limited the terror of the State Security, and encouraged some civil liberties.
The government remained in place, and since the elite ( nomenklatura ,e., list of top people with special entitlements and privileges, like the nobles and clergy in old France) had a double allegiance to both party and government, it could easily capture some key positions in the government.
From the very beginning of the historical transition Gorbachev and Yeltsin had been locked in a conflict of demonic proportions, which once again illustrates conflict as a bond couple.
Their personal battle had gone on for so long and contained so many seriocomic incidents that they seemed paired in eternal tension and dependence.
The party pyramid was thrown away like a scaffold after the completion of the building.
The building without the scaffold, however, was on the verge of collapse.
For the first time in over half a century, the apparatus of power accumulated internal tensions.
It was a velvet revolutions of a kind, compare with other two in Chapter 13, Two velvet revolutions.
Self-beheading of an empire Gorbachev was the leader of the USSR consisting of fifteen republics.
Formally, the Russian Republic and USSR were different hierarchical entities.
The Russian Republic within the Soviet Union, in spite of its domination, had a historically confused legal status.
For a long time Russia was the Soviet Union with all the other republics as walking distance dominions independent de jure but not de facto.
Only during the last decades of the USSR the Russian Republic was given a kind of nominal self-government.
The central fatal circumstance for the pattern of the collapse was that Moscow, the center of power, was the capital of both USSR and Russian Republic.
Whoever was on top in Moscow, was on top within the borders of the USSR, and the essence of the conflict was competition for the capital city.
The location of the American capital seems from this perspective very wisely chosen.
The one thousand year long existence of the Eastern Roman Empire was, probably, made possible by the administrative reform of Diocletian that equalized the components of the empire.
As we will see in Chapter 25, The circuitry of Imperial China, the same wisdom might have preserved the unity of China for thousands of years.
In the imperial Rome it would be equivalent of scraping the position of the Emperor and removing the Roman provinces from the empire.
In American terms it would be equal to the unanimous vote of the Congress to dissolve the Union by eliminating the Federal Government and the Congress altogether.
On the one hand, the coup boosted Russia in the transition state in which all kinds of previously unthinkable actions were possible.
The Soviet Union was dominated by the Russians and after Stalin no other ethnicity was allowed to the very top.
The dissolution of the USSR increased the number of top positions from one to the number of spin-offs.
The self-beheading of the Soviet Union was originally agreed upon by the leaders of three Slavic republics—Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus.
Unbelievably, it did not contradict the Constitution, which had a clear and fateful provision about the voluntary character of the Union.
As far as we can judge, the voluntary character of the American Union is not that unambiguous.
In the large scale historical terms, the Bolshevik Revolution was a change of dynasty, while the Gorbachev-Yeltsin revolution finally accomplished the transformation of Russia into democracy, however imperfect.
This elegant transformation, driven by the quest for power, was completed without a shot.
The dissolution of the Soviet Union eased the competition for power because it gave uncontested power to fourteen more leaders, who used it in different ways.
Some resurrected the totalitarian pattern, others turned to nationalist or pragmatic democracies.
The transformation did not bring peace to the new Russia because some of her ethnic provinces, like Chechnya, claimed little pyramids for themselves.
This time, however, the land was disputed by nested dolls and not by neighbors.
The transition barrier toward total internal bloodshed was too high for him.
His indifference and weakness meant that the upper structural elements of the system could be treated as neutral bonds and they were disassembled quietly with a wrench and not a sledgehammer.
The pattern of the cutting the top of the pyramid worked all the way down through the floors of the building, and following the same pattern, the system of business management was split along territories and industries, with many of fonner nomenklatura becoming mini-czars in their areas.
Russia, the biggest chunk of the former Soviet Union, stepped on a new path with great hopes for mass prosperity but without the tradition of the rule of law.
Free elections changed the political system, but the pattern of thinking in terms of pyramid remained.
Immediately, Yeltsin, the man at the top found himself fighting opposition, being unable to destroy it, similar to the position of an American president in a conflict with the Congress.
The social pyramid in Russia is gone but it sits in the national memory as a persistent pattern, catalyzing new attempts to restore it.
To compare with ancient Rome, both empires were melted by a hot external source.
For Rome it was the invaders, for USSR it was the pressure of the West waging the Cold War and waving the nuclear stick and the technological carrot.
In both the subversive carriers of new ideas joined the governments in the end.
Next we would like to compare Russia and USA with China, the biggest and oldest authoritarian system ever known.
The circuitry of imperial China In Chapter 7, The King and the pear, we have already touched upon some roots of past tension between China and the West.
Here we are interested in some internal patterns of old imperial China, and as everywhere, we emphasize the tentative and abstract character of our constructs.
They should be regarded as an exercise in pattern thinking and not in history of China, which should be left to professional historians.
Our almost exclusive source here is Charles O Hucker where we found some interesting diagrams.
China knew alternating periods of fragmentation and unification, numerous wars, some victorious, some lost, as well as occupation and liberation.
For most of its life span China was a vast unified empire which in modem language could be called an absolute totalitarian state.
That was one of the ideas of Confucianism, the most influential traditional ideology of China.
If we wanted to look for a polar opposite to Marxism, with its idea of class struggle, Confucianism, with its idea of harmony and the Middle Way, would be the best candidate.
Indeed, even if the country prospered, their duty was not discharged; morality had to be ensured as well.
Thus what modem Westerners think of as welfare-state ideas were commonly preached, accepted, and put into practice in Chou China.
The ruler was administrator, military leader, judge, manager of the economy, priest, educator, and moral exemplar.
As the Cultural Revolution in China demonstrated, the same correction was made in Maoist China.
The list of Confucian virtues might present a problem for a loyal Chinese because of a possible conflict between, say, loyalty to family and loyalty to the ruler.
And yet we know that terrible situations when a choice had to be made were typical not only for both cultures but for practically all dictatorial regimes.
We are tempted to recur to a “patternization”—being fully aware of its ultimate vulgarization—of the classical Chinese philosophy.
Taoism, which we would simplistically characterize as cultivating neutral social bonds, and Legalism, which meant maintaining order through the law, under the threat of punishment,e., by enforcing negative bonds.
The legalist idea asserted the primate of the state interests over the individual ones as consequence of the inborn faultiness of humans.
In practice, the three concepts could be compared with the three basic colors that being mixed in varying proportions produce all the other colors and hues.
While Confucianism regarded people as basically good, Legalism saw them as basically bad.
The former Soviet society relied on both the law and the standard of thinking, unknowingly imitating the Chinese pattern of mixed Legalism and Confucianism.
Europe, with its competitive geopolitics, has always had a traditional glue of positive bonds in the form of nationalism.
American society does not seem to care much about ideology, except individual freedom.
We can certainly see elements of legalism, without its philosophical generalizations, in the Western idea of law and order.
In America it struggles with the individual, corporate, partisan, ethnic, feminist, adolescent, and scores of other visions of order.
We would half-seriously characterize the American society, with its reliance on law, as Legalist-Taoist—a somewhat stressed combination.
To ease the stress, the society lets the lawyers fight legalism with its own weapon.
The goal was achieved by increasing the number of bonds in the connector,e., the same way as in the Soviet system.
Thereafter all imperial governments resembled a pyramid, with the emperor at the apex and groups of ever more numerous agencies in central, regional, and local strata under him, each level of the pyramid having three faces—one for general administration, one for military command, and one for censorial surveillance.
The three-faced pyramid is remarkably similar to the triple pyramid of the Soviet system.
Note that the circuits were the units of the central government, not local one.
The local power started below the double line, was distributed geographically, and had a tree-like connector.
The local share of power was limited because of the large number of local units and, therefore, their small size.
Chinese government on former Han times By the end of the Early Empire, large regional rulers, similar to governors, evolved from circuit intendants.
The borderline between the central and the local governments moved up one step, to the double dotted line , and the circuit intendants became powerful governors.
The intermediary zone between prefectures and the central government—the trouble zone from which regional governors and warlords had repeatedly gained autonomy during the early imperial age—was kept under firm control by the later dynasties.
Government of China in T’ang times The main obsession of the Chinese concept of the government was the reliability of the system and the control over the reciprocity of the obligations of the ruler and his subjects, which makes a cardinal difference from the Soviet or Roman systems of domination.
The system of censorate was, ideally, independent from other government agencies and worked both upstream and downstream.
System of Chinese government in Sung times The system of circuit intendants, functionally different and territorially overlapping in different ways, was employed so that no one could monopolize power.
The connector of the enonnous government, however, looks overwhelmingly complex.
The administrative division of the later imperial China displayed at the lowest levels of the governmental pyramid, so that the distance between the imperial government and local events was minimal.
The Chinese connector was not pyramidal, and there were no leaders of the next down level.
After this superficial description of the old Chinese system of government it is reasonable to compare it with the Soviet system, which had fifteen republics—a number comparable to the thirteen Chinese provinces.
It was the pattern inherited from the old Russia with governors appointed by the czar.
At every level there was local government that had all the power over the lower levels, and it was duplicated by party offices.
System of Chinese government in Ming time Like the imperial China and Diocletian’s Rome, the USSR was a conglomerate of nominally equal republics, but the dominant Russian Republic was much bigger than the other fourteen combined and the balance of power was skewed.
Dozens of largest territorial units in Russia of the czars were comparable in resources.
Peter I and subsequent emperors could not anticipate Lenin and Yeltsin, however.
The former added yet another level, the republics, to the pyramid, and they used the fatal imbalance to undo the empire.
The numbers are approximate Yugoslavia, although different in nature, were stimulated by the same imbalance between the industrially developed and densely populated Serbia and other less developed or less Panslavic regions.
Once bom, patterns do not die, which follows from the very nature of patterns as abstract mathematical constructs.
Fatalistic platitudes, however, would not help us recognize when one pattern is ripe to undergo a metamorphosis and what is going to crawl out of its dead skin.
There must be some basics of pattern transformations independent from their particular structure, and if so, we could use them for incubating the desired patterns and refrigerating the unwanted ones.
In this chapter we return to such aspects of pattern dynamics as energy, temperature, heat, work, and other parameters unrelated to structure.
We have already encountered them in Chapter 15, Invisible walls of events.
The problem is whether the use of the thermodynamic terminology to something as immaterial as patterns is legitimate.
In Chapter 20, Probability and energy, we drew a parallel between probability and energy of patterns.
We borrowed it from statistical mechanics, an area of mathematics applicable not only to physical but to abstract systems as well.
In all such systems we have a very large number of independent and interacting microscopic entities, each with its own tiny value of a certain changing parameter.
The total energy of the ensemble is the sum of all its microscopic values.
Examples of large collections of microscopic entities are molecules, insects in swanns and colonies, and humans exchanging money and work in national and global economy.
Spherical particles of molecules of gas moving chaotically and exchanging energy at each collision are pretty close to this model.
Neither are they in the equilibrium required for the statistical model.
Nevertheless, we can accept the classical thermodynamics as a crude approximation, especially if we never lose from sight the non-equilibrium properties of real systems, the slow pace of their change, and the typical for complex systems phenomena pf memory and locality of change.
The idea of the statistical approach to physical systems was to calculate macroscopically measurable values of energy, pressure, and other parameters not by following the position, velocity, and mass of each particle and then adding the individual values, but from statistical averages over the entire crowd.
We do not derive social energy from physical one, as we do not derive a human from an ape, but regard them both coming from a common source.
We must make sure, however, that those concepts do really apply, and this is where we encounter multiple problems.
To speak about probabilities, we need a reproducible system in which a large—the larger the better—number of events with different outcomes can be observed and counted.
For example, if the event is tossing a coin, then in a very large number of tosses heads and tails fall out equally often,e., their probabilities are close to 0.5.
For example, the probability that the coin falls flat is 1, which means that no matter what, either heads or tails always come out.
This is not so simple when tossing a coin over sand where it can not only fall flat but wedge into the sand.
We cannot use a rigged coin in statistics, but humans in the small leadership groups, which are usually responsible for historical decisions, are always bent on something, and, worst of all, like Louis XIV, sometimes fall neither heads nor tails but on edge.
When we attribute a probability to a bond couple in quantitative applications of pattern theory such as image processing, the probabilities can be calculated by observing a large number of images.
One of the oldest examples is the analysis of the frequency with which a certain word follows another word in the text.
To obtain these numbers, many chunks of text should be statistically analyzed and to speak about probability is perfectly permissible.
In pattern history we deal with unique events that can never be repeated.
Strictly speaking, there is no place for probabilities, unless we have statistical averages, and often we indeed have them.
The statistics of divorce, one-parent families, and domestic violence, taken over a large population at different moments in time, tell us about the average strength of family bonds.
We feel uncomfortable, however, speaking about the strength of the bond between the king and his subjects in terms of probability.
Yet the kings and dictators themselves had no qualms about that and kept a mental index of probability of the associate’s betrayal, taking preventive measures if the index spiked.
Of course, we could keep silence about probabilities and talk only about the strength of bonds, as historians do, but with the kings and their subjects, as well as with presidents and democracies, chances are that our predictions will be proved wrong.
Nevertheless, when we have a certain pattern of past behavior, based on an extensive record, there is a good chance the prediction will come true.
That was certainly the case when political analysts had predicted before the first term elections that Bill Clinton as president could flip on his words.
Strength of any physical bond can be expressed through the probability of its breaking under stress.
Usually the material strength is expressed in the minimal load that breaks it.
We cannot escape probabilities even using the tempting euphemism of bond strength.
Nevertheless, without any intent to undennine the foundations of science, we can make a wild conjecture that the strength of the bond couple is a more general and universal concept than probability of its breakup.
We must acknowledge that we are at the starting point of the evolution of our understanding how social patterns develop and we cannot satisfy even most liberal requirements of scientific theory.
We have to remind again that we are not developing a sociological theory.
What we are trying to do is to find a way to speak about society in terms equally applicable to any natural phenomenon.
In the following quotations from a reference book on physics, the italics are ours.
Energy is a certain abstract scalar quantity that an object (either matter or wave) is said to possess.
It is not something that is directly observable, although in certain cases, the behavior of the object possessing a particular amount of energy> can be observed and the energy> inferred.
In more complex processes, which may involve mechanical as well as thermal interaction, the heat transferred is more difficult to identify.
In fact, much of the history of thermodynamics concerns the slow evolution of clear concepts of heat, energy’, and entropy, and of the distinctions between them.
Not only that, but statistical physics feels uncomfortable about macroscopic values, too.
If we calculate the pressure of gas in a corked bottle from its temperature, we do not have a multitude of bottles with gas.
This is why the physicist says that the pressure is an average over many imaginary bottles identical with this particular one.
To construct an ensemble for a particular calculation, we consider an arbitrarily large number of independent replicas of the system, which satisfy the same macroscopic constraints as the system but may differ in their microscopic states We used a similar cop-out when presented our pattern history as related to an imaginary planet like ours.
Indeed, since we are not historians, we say that our England, France, Russia, and China are to be found as independent replicas on other planets similar to our Earth.
In fact, the sociologist Peter Blau , illustrated his concept of sociological structure with the help of an imaginary society on the planet Stellar 8R populated by the Aytars that come in two colors, blue and green, vary in height from ten to thirty inches, and have neither sex nor age.
Nevertheless, these simple beings developed an amazing social complexity.
And so we decide to simply cut the Gordean knot, use probability and strength interchangeably, and do what we intuitively consider right.
The next problem is that in physics the distinction between two forms of energy, heat and work, is cardinal.
Work is the transfer of energy from one object to another by a force from one on the other when that second object is displaced by the force.
Often the nature of the first object need not be specified if the force doing the work is known.
The work can be calculated without knowing anything about the person pushing.
Heat is chaotic energy which rattles all bonds indiscriminately and tests their strength.
In times of war and revolution, or in a state of agitation, people act as they would not under normal circumstances.
The individual development of a human being from egg and sperm is a lot of work and no chaos.
Social construction, too, needs a certain mechanism, which is what the society is all about.
In times of social chaos this machine functions with deviations from its expected performance and can break down.
In pattern terms, we say that the rules of regularity change and we have to look for a new pattern and a new template.
The similarity between society and machine is the cyclical character of its function.
Like the crankshaft of an engine, it makes a daily turn and comes to the almost the same state next morning.
The difference is that the machine needs a source of energy and the universe goes on its own.
It is much more difficult to do complex job a state of agitation or under barrage of irritating impulses.
The negative bonds require complex and organized efforts to stay in lock.
On the contrary, the long-time systematic trends of society, like the movement of the American frontier westward, when the railroad system grew, the industrialization of England, urbanization, growth of working class, and the subsequent improvement of its miserable conditions, were driven by systematic work at a low degree of chaos and along conscious patterns.
In the process, some bond couples are locked, some broken, and some made neutral.
We start with a simple triangular pattern (it could be a love triangle), with three generators and three positive bonds between them.
To show different strength of the bonds, we use lines of different thickness.
During this process, politicians can counteract the action of other politicians and working on the same nut with two wrenches in opposite directions.
In 2001, the terrorists clearly wanted to trigger national psychosis and break down the mechanism of normal life.
The United States counterattack in Afghanistan used the relentless bombardment to break down the cohesion of the Taliban.
In terms of Nietzsche’s Apollonian-Dionysian dichotomy, we can call pattern work Apollonian and pattern heat Dionysian.
If social thennodynamics is to be developed, Nietzsche will be remembered as its founder.
In a more or less stable—Apollonian—world, some probabilities should be close to one and some others close to zero.
For example, in our real world the probability that our mail with bills and checks will be delivered on time and to the right address is pretty close to 1, while the probability that an asteroid collides with our planet tomorrow is rather low.
The probability of the Earth being hit by an unknown near-earth-object 1km or greater in diameter within a year, according to some estimations, is roughly one in 100,000.
If two airplanes strike two skyscrapers within two hours, there is no place to chance and there must be a lot of careful work behind.
Yet there is a non-negligible probability of an accident tomorrow in which both improbable events can happen.
We decrease this probability by increasing our attention while driving, which in a dense traffic or poor weather can be an exhaustive work, as we all understand without any physics.
By driving carefully, we in fact increase the strength of the bond between the wheel and the car and keep the bond between the door edge and the body neutral.
We increase the probability of the accident by reckless—Dionysian—driving and maximize it by literally Dionysian drinking.
The Nietzschean thermodynamics is an interesting subject in itself, and the original text gives a lot of material to a pattern sociologist, but we have to move on.
Therefore, we should specify that work is capable of creating order at constant temperature.
A social revolution has a good chance to win when the government is weak or separated from the army.
The state of war was often used by both dictators and democracies to freeze the society, limit the degree of freedom of speech and movement, control consumption, etc.
This may seem to contradict our interpretation of war as a heater for society.
What we mean is that the government needs the martial law to cool down the military machine so that it could function reliably and win the war.
The propaganda li nk s the desirable victory with the need to sacrifice the benefits of peace.
During the unpopular Vietnam War even harsh measures could not maintain the link between the war and the justification of sacrifices.
The plight of the ethnic Japanese in USA during WWII drew little attention because the war was popular.
Since the Industrial Revolution, our civilization has been driven by our ability to burn fuel and to convert the chaotic energy of heat into organized forms of energy capable of perfonning work.
The use of energy in the form of heat, cold, mechanical work, electricity, and food is the ultimate source of social life.
Limited to food as the only source of energy, the society can revert to its tribal forms.
We cannot say whether social energy is conserved or not because we cannot measure it.
What we borrow from physics is the consequence of the principle of conservation.
If they initially have different energy and are isolated from the rest of the world, the principle of conservation says is that it is impossible for both of them to increase or decrease energy simultaneously because it would change the total quantity and violate the conservation principle.
This principle, however, does not tell us that this would indeed always happen within certain time.
There is a gap in classical physics because life and society had never been its objects.
Thus, we can convert B into A by placing the refrigerator in the wall between chambers so that it heats one chamber and cools the other.
Not all systems are capable of exchange of energy at a simple contact but only those that store it in the form of movement such as heat, radiation, or mechanical impact.
Living organism is the only natural invention of this kind to transform the energy of food stored in chemical bonds into work of walking, hunting, and thinking.
What follows from the tendency of all systems to equalize their energies at contact, provided they can exchange energy, is the direction of a spontaneous process,e., the one that is not induced from the outside.
On its own, a system tends to decrease its energy by transferring it to another system with lower energy.
Why this does not happen had been a mystery for physics until the concept of entropy,e., measure of chaos, was introduced only a few years after Darwin’s On the Origin of Species by Rudolf Clausius and Ludwig Boltzmann.
In short, the conclusion of the enriched classical thennodynamics was that in an isolated system the degree of chaos could only increase.
In order to maintain order in a dynamic system, energy in the form of work should be spent constantly.
Society is a system that indefinitely postpones the fulfillment of the prophesy of classical equilibrium thennodynamics.
It is often symbolized as G, from the name of J.W.Gibbs who introduced it around 1870.
It is the free energy that always decreases when an isolated system spontaneously changes, and G is minimal when it reaches the state of the “non-change,” the physical Nirvana of equilibrium.
From the modem point of view, the fundamental discovery of Ludwig Boltzmann was the link between energy and probability, further elaborated by Willard Gibbs and much later by Ilya Prigogine.
In short, although most imaginable changes in the world were impossible as spontaneous processes, humans and other living beings—and nobody else—could perform improbable changes by spending free energy.
Both biological and social evolution, therefore, are records of improbable events made possible using the energy of food (i.e., transfonned energy of sunlight) and mineral fuel.
The requirement for such course of things, as we know, is the absence of equilibrium.
The changing seasons, day and night, tide, climate, winds, volcano eruptions, etc. were most probable sources that kept evolution awake, far from the mortal sleep of equilibrium.
There had always been plenty of turmoil on earth even without the restless humans.
An important conclusion for a pattern historian could be that the energy of food and mineral resources could be spent by the social engine in two basic ways.
One is to change its temperature in either direction,e. freeze the society by more regulations or heat it up by more freedom, and do it indiscriminately.
The work of a politician is to fonn new bonds in new alliances and to break others that stand in the way.
We hope that our illustrations helped to clarify the difference between social heat and social work without making it too clear to be a target of devastating criticism.
We must say that the parallel between thermodynamics of an engine and a social system is extremely limited.
Thermodynamics study systems full of constant internal movement and capable of coming to equilibrium very quickly.
A very slight jolt knocks the system off and it falls down, releasing its energy.
Living systems are rich with locally metastable states, especially in muscles and nerves, kept in the state of readiness and capable of firing at any moment.
After discharge, they are pumped up back to the previous state by biochemical mechanisms.
A living system as a whole, however, may stay metastable for a long time, as a snake waiting for prey.
Physics has no means to predict when a metastable system will release its energy because physics is outside history.
Metastability could be illustrated by two examples, curiously, at the same geographical location.
One is the San Anreas Fault, a stressed geological formation capable of releasing its energy in an earthquake.
Society, as any living system, is not governed by the laws of classical equilibrium thennodynamics, and not even by the non-equilibrium thennodynamics of fluid systems, because of the phenomenon of memory.
All we wanted was to offer some ideas how both aspects could be combined in the concept of “solid” but labile pattern subjected to uncertainty and change.
While using physical tenninology we always need to keep in mind the limitations of our analogies.
Answering the question of legitimacy asked in the beginning of this chapter, we would say that the world as a whole, comprising physical, biological, mental, social, and computer phenomena, probably, preserves the laws of thermodynamics as invariance under a certain transformation.
It is hard to define what kind of transformation it is, but in a tentative manner, it is from one pattern system to another.
We do not need to go into further details because we neither identify social energy with physical one, nor can present any quantitative data without which there is no science.
Until then, all we can do is to paint a cubist, metaphoric, and blurred study for a picture that could be completed by future enthusiasts.
Its mapping on pattern theory is an enormous and exciting subject that by no means can be reviewed here.
The mutual echo of Max Weber’s “ideal types” and our snapshot diagrams can be heard, for example, in Chapter 19, Testing the Ariadne’s thread, while there is a more than visual similarity between George SimmeTs ideas of distance and our bell curves of transition state or the importance of triangle in his microsociological patters.
It is a relatively short review that combines both conceptual and evolutionary projections of sociology with clarity and attractive organization of the material.
It pays attention to concepts off mainstream and offers a rich collection of sociological building blocks.
The reader could find there a history of sociologists’ intuitive drive toward the principles that govern society as natural system.
One could see many of our pattern bones underneath the textual flesh of sociological constructs.
The question is why the borrowings from mathematics, physics, biology, and even chemistry have never produced a satisfactory and universally acceptable sociological paradigm.
The answer is, probably, that theory in natural sciences is inseparable from its predictive power and experimental test.
It is a different and yet unclear problem where the limits of predictability are.
In the next chapter we will discuss the possibility of expanding the limits.
There are Association for Computers in Humanities, The Journal of the Association for History and Computing, journals History and Computing and Computers and the Humanities.
Among the suggested directions was creating virtual historical reality to familiarize the students with art and culture of the past.
In this chapter we would like to suggest some new ways to refresh the marital routine.
Historians agree that such technological inventions as stirrups, gunpowder, book printing, steam engine, telephone, contraceptives, TV, etc., changed the course of history.
Technology is a powerful, if not the most powerful, factor of modem history.
Industrial revolution was, probably, the largest twist of history on a large scale, comparable with the emergence of primates in biological evolution.
To give an example on a much smaller scale, the advent of television was considered largely responsible for the victory of telegenic John Kennedy over somewhat less handsome Richard Nixon in the presidential campaign of I960, as well as for the public opposition to the Vietnam War, the bloody images of which were brought by TV in the American living rooms.
The apocalyptic TV images of September 11 had a different effect, generating a unified response at all levels.
On the bright dawn of the twentieth century, radically new technology used to create euphoria and complacency.
Artists may come who will portray the marvel of the wires that quiver with electrified words, and the romance of the switchboards that tremble with the secrets of a great city.
Not long after this amazing prophesy, Francis Poulenc in fact composed an opera basing on the drama La Voix Humaine by Jean Cocteau.
On the stage a young woman was saying the last adieu to her lost lover who was inaudibly cutting the remaining threads of hope over the telephone.
She and the apparatus were the only visible characters of the opera, and with the sound of the replaced receiver came the final dead silence.
Already in the twenty-first century, the discovery and publication of the tapes of yet another American President revealed a drama of national deceit.
Computers, unlike the previous radical inventions, were ushered into the limelight with a warning from Norbert Wiener, the creator of cybernetics, who thought about a possible domination of computers over humans.
His cautionary parables influenced a non-stop flood of sci-fi books and movies, and the fragments of the tenn he coined were used as building blocks for cyberspace and cyborg.
Computers are not the only major invention that has irreversibly changed our life.
The difference is that computers do not just perfonn a certain ancient social function, like calculation, communication, and transportation, but stick to literally everything and penetrate every human occupation, including that of historian and writer.
Computers are increasingly becoming an omnipresent pervasive aspect of civilization.
When we are talking about global economy, it is perceived as a fluid aggregate of a multitude of interacting business entities.
Other components and functions of society, such as national government, education, religion, business, institutions, culture, are also globally multiple, fragmented, variegated, competitive, and localized.
There is no single company controlling global communication, transportation, education, health, and finances.
Computers, however, are fonning a single uncontested global system, resurrecting, in some eyes, the totalitarian utopia on a global scale.
We euphorically expect computers to bring the entire world to our senses and fingertips.
As the backside of this achievement, they established themselves as a two-ways interface and, conversely, they can bring our individual life to somebody’s ill eyes and fingertips.
It is simply another way to say that probabilities of some events may change the probabilities of other events or information may change behavior.
Note, however, that bonds in the outer world require “real” energy to be changed or maintained, while the electronic bonds between the generators of the inner circle are all close to neutral and need a merely symbolic quantity of energy to change.
This gives an unprecedented social power to the mediator as collector, processor, and distributor of information.
Possible configuration with Even the human brain does not have this kind of a mediator power over the body because with all its biochemical efficiency it requires a lot of energy and time to select a task, acquire infonnation, develop strategy, follow its execution, and discard the outdated knowledge.
At this point we cannot say that the brain has opened its loft to consciousness, but the subconscious basement is up for rent.
In a sense, computers have increased the distance between us and the real life, making more room for a shadowy world where abstraction, fantasies, and facts could be difficult to discern.
The acceptance of what is seen on the surface, the sign, as the only reality is typical for the postmodern culture.
It is commonly believed that computers assist our logical thinking, but, as it turns out, their combinatorial potential is equally great in creating monsters and chimeras.
The computer anthropologist Sherry Turkle in her Life on the Screen describes the imaginary world of collective computer games over the Internet where a young person can develop a virtual personality different from his or her own and live in a surrogate of real life.
There is a certain parallel between the new, still off-mainstream, cyber-culture and the postmodern trend of smearing the razor-sharp dichotomy between true and false, fact and fantasy.
Our task in this chapter is not speculation on the future of humankind, however, but some insight on a specific role that computers may play in pattern history.
A sudden wealth can fall from the skies and a nuclear accident can devastate a large area.
A war with the participation of Switzerland or Sweden is improbable, while violence between different ethnic and religious conclaves in close contact is on the cards.
Post factum, historians would find dozens of reasons for what had happened indeed.
On the one hand, the very act of a collapse of an empire is a typical act of history which has been repeated throughout millennia.
It is as typical as the fonnation of an empire, and we can say about any political and industrial empire that it will end badly.
The dubious property of computers to create virtual reality may come very handy for pattern history where we need to compare arrays of final states and transition pathways to them.
If the world is driven by divine will, it is only natural to look for some signs of it, like we read the mood by facial expression.
Oracle, diviner, augur, clairvoyant, astrologer, reader of tealeaves and bird entrails, and their modern counterparts have been performing a certain social function up to present.
Ambiguous and enigmatic, it did very well because of the incompleteness of its predictions.
The American historian Crane Brinton right after WW2 predicted the unification of Europe basing not on any pragmatic considerations or wishful thinking but on the long-tenn European pattern of unification that could be traced through its history.
European nations were reminded that they belonged to a larger entity and were not allowed to kill each other.
The other prophet was Andrey Amalrik, a Russian dissident who, in 1969, when the Soviet power was at its peak, predicted the dissolution of the Soviet Empire along the ethnic cracks.
The time of evolution, as Ilya Prigogine argues, has nothing to do with the clock and calendar, yet this is exactly what we want the oracle to tell us.
We associate science with a set of established principles that can be tested experimentally or by observation of predicted phenomena.
We can successfully formulate the laws of history as a sequence of banalities, like any empire is doomed, or any political leader is a liar, or Eastern ways are different from Western ones, or a mass discontent ends up in a revolt.
If we want to go beyond the all-I-need-to-know-I-learned-in-the-kindergarten type statements, we need to specify time and place.
By definition, however, universal principles have little to do with the need of the moment and the immediate future because they are too general.
We tend to think condescendingly about our ancestors thousands of years ago, afraid of the world with its frightening gods, and trying to solicit their benevolence with sacrifices.
Not long ago educated people of Europe and America used to call the tribes without metal tools, agriculture, and literacy savages.
As and example of an apparently wrong prediction, not long before the WWI, in 1910, a book was published— The Great Illusion by Norman Angell—in which the author argued against the possibility of a prolonged and destructive war because it would have no winner.
It was achieved, however, and in fact, it was so high that Europe easily slid into the next war.
The prediction was wrong concerning WWI, but it was prophetic regarding the world after WW2, when the nuclear weapon, as many believe, started playing a deterring role.
We do not have a proof and the situation may quickly change if the weapon proliferates among relatively small states under dictatorial rule, but the prophet was right, as far as reasonable people were concerned.
Niall Ferguson starts his The Pity of War with the analysis of pre-WWl prophetic literature.
Right before the French Revolution one Danton changed his name to d’Anton, and one Derobespierre turned into De Robespierre.
A less trivial example is quoted by Feon Festinger in his book on cognitive dissonance.
During World War II, some Japanese in the United States, when given the opportunity, requested that they be repatriated to Japan at the end of the war.
For all of them, citizen or not, the request for repatriation was an irrevocable act.
Apparently one major difference between the many who did not request repatriation and the few who did was the belief they held concerning the outcome of the war.
If it were, the two Frenchmen could just look at the gauge and see that the time was not right for snobbery.
The picture of tomorrow immediately influences our decisions to accept or to avoid it.
Barometer was invented in Italy 1643 by Evangelista Torricelli, Galileo’s secretary and successor in the Florentine Academy.
Aided by new technology and computers, the art of predicting a catastrophe such as hurricane or earthquake has been slowly developing, and we may wonder whether the social prognosis could follow meteorology.
With hindsight we understand that the escalation of Islamic terrorism was heading to its catastrophic culmination in Manhattan.
With so many social functions perfonned electronically, someday we may be able to click on the Internet button of the world social weather.
We certainly do it today by accessing the news button, watching TV, or reading the newspaper.
For the entire twentieth century, the gauge to measure the tension in the air has been the font size of front page headlines.
One of them, the Worldwatch Institute, publishes periodical data about the vital signs of the earth.
We leam from them that the production of automobiles, bicycles, spending on advertisement, use of wind power and solar cells, life expectancy, and number of wars are growing, while the production of automobiles, spenn count, grain harvest, and nuclear arsenals are on decline.
The statistical data indicate the parameters of a quasi-equilibrium dynamic system with large number of interacting entities, as if it were a fluid.
We cannot conclude from them what is going to happen next year in Yugoslavia or Namibia.
Stratfor is a private global intelligence company that issues political forecasts.
On one hand it will be a period of unprecedented global economic prosperity and growth.
On the other hand, it will become a period of increasing fragmentation and tension in the international system.
As in the period prior to World War I, prosperity and instability will go hand in hand.
Russia and China will be moving into a closer, primarily anti-American alliance in 1999.
Singapore and South Korea will show the strongest tendency toward recovery.
China will try to contain discontent over economic policies by increasing repression not only on dissidents, but the urban unemployed and unhappy small business people.
Asian economic institutions, like an Asian Monetary Fund, will emerge in 1999.
The Serbs, supported by the Russians, will test the United States in Kosovo.
There is increasing danger of a simultaneous challenge from Serbia and Iraq, straining United States military capabilities dramatically.
The predictions about Kosovo and economy of Japan came true, but the decisive way NATO responded to Kosovo was not foreseen.
The Chinese government in fact responded with repressions to Falun Gong movement.
Russia is preoccupied with her own problems and is not interested in China.
The turn of events after September 11 changed the overall picture dramatically.
Like the atmospheric conditions are driven by the inequality in distribution of land, water, mountains, plains, and solar radiation over the surface of the world, the social, cultural, and economic non-uniformity of the world generates the historical climate and weather.
The general trend of the twentieth century has been toward narrowing the gap between the tribes of Amazon and residents of Paris, but the difference remains enormous even among the latter.
What we can imagine is applied history which could, with some degree of accuracy, like meteorology, tell us what is going to happen within a particular time and space.
While the yesterday’s news are synonymous with irrelevancy, the pattern survives in the information dust not in the sense that the same pattern will be repeated again—some will be and some will be not—but in the sense that the change and evolution of all patterns can be described in the same terms.
In other words, we are pointing not to particular patterns of history but the pattern paradigm as a possible platform for the applied study of complex evolving systems.
The paradox in our attitude toward history is that what is predictable is either of no importance or within our power to prepare to it and either welcome or to prevent the change.
After Charles Darwin and Gregor Mendel it became an explanatory science based on powerful hypotheses without the exact knowledge of the mechanisms of evolution and heredity.
The long gone ammonites, dinosaurs, and Neanderthals are history in the same sense as the Roman, Austro-Hungarian, and Soviet empires, but for a paleontologist and evolutionary biologist they all lit the same evolutionary paradigm, whether we know which species originated from which or not.
In the second half of the twentieth century, biology is a truly experimental science intervening in the genetic code and creating new organisms.
Gregor Mendel was measuring the numbers of pea flowers of different colors and Antoine Lavoisier weighed the candle before and after burning it in a closed vessel.
Scientific meteorology started with measuring temperature, atmospheric pressure, and wind velocity.
For us the weather forecast ""70% chance of rain tomorrow,"" is an understandable expression but a mathematician could be uncomfortable with this statement.
If we had a thousand planets like Earth, with a thousand of identical situations, then probably on one of them the same inefficient government would manage the appropriate reforms due to some accidental set of circumstances.
But we never have any statistical ensemble of social transfonnations from the same starting conditions.
It may seem that Pitirim Sorokin’s tables of wars and calamities offer such statistics, but they comprise different conditions, times, and places.
The media present locally a daily list of events and current forecasts.
The problem with the media is that what is not in the news does not exist for the reader or TV-watcher.
Starting from the twentieth century, the previously voiceless masses have been heard through the opinion polls.
Their most intimate desires can be registered in consumption statistics, not to mention fear, hope, and stock market indices.
They pull the levers of the society by voting or non-voting, not always with anticipated results.
In the twenty-first century, whether the masses want it or not, their behavior, urges, impulses, hopes, and fears will be most probably pooled in the ocean of global information.
The simple fact that the modem telephone system automatically records the date, time, and connection between two numbers plays an increasing role in criminal and political investigations.
Nobody, not even the United States President, is free from this Orwellian watch, which would be impossible without computers.
Web filters can be used for both discarding the undesirable information and fishing out the desirable one.
Historians seem to have abandoned search for the timeless laws of history and global regularities as eternal and powerful as the laws of physics.
Such laws are of little practical use exactly because they are timeless.
Instead, there is a possibility that the flow of events can be monitored and prognosticated on a constantly updated basis as we do it with the weather.
Social, economical, and political factors can be compared with the outline of continents, only the fonner change constantly and discontinuously.
With all the differences between fluid weather and structured history, a computerized global model is needed for both.
In the developing World Wide Web we have an emerging computer model of the world without even having asked for it.
The Web is usually regarded as a new convenience, providing information and assisting trade.
We pay for the information on the Web, however, not only with money, quite modest at present, but also with our identity, address, telephone, social security and credit card numbers which are part of our unique individuality.
For the first time ever this model has a potential for representing both thoughts and actions of people in a quantifiable way, locally and globally.
What the computers bring to history and sociology can be compared with the microscope in biology, balance in chemistry, thermometer in physics.
Unlike the current use of computers in history for data processing, computers can accumulate quantitative historical data without the participation of the sociologist or historian.
Note that non-numerical evaluations are built into the common historical narrative.
This is not what is called a historical happening, but rather a semi-quantitative measurement which allows for building a scale of efficiency similar to the Sorokin’s register of calamities.
In other words, it tells us something about the generalized energy of historical configurations.
Simply speaking, the above Brinton’s statement attributes a high tension to the pattern of French government on the eve of certain events, which could only mean a high probability that the government would not survive.
This quasi-numerical scale has been widely used in social psychology and sociological polling.
It is the bond relation that asks for quantification in the first place.
We can also observe the dissolution of bond couples and the development of new social affinities and idiosyncrasies.
It requires some level of creativity to specify the similarity transformation that links the old and new structures, although the problem here is not that much a lack of imagination as its possible hypertrophy.
The major difficulty, as we see it, is the bond relation expressed statistically.
Age 1970 1998 Never married male: 20 to 24 years 35.8% 83.4% 25 to 29 years 10.
The natural conclusion of a pattern historian or sociologist, as well as a person from the street, could be that the bond of marital attraction between sexes is getting weaker.
One explanation of this weakening of the marital bond could be attributed to the rising social temperature due to uncertainty, changing condition, higher mobility, catalytic influence of the hedonistic culture glorifying the ephemeral at the expense of the pennanent, and general chaos of life leading to nervous breakdown, not to say marital catastrophe.
Another possible explanation is that the other types of bonds that people form are getting stronger, so that the total energy of the configuration remains nearly unchanged.
We do not need to look far in search for the object competing with humans for human attention.
We do not know the answer, which is up to professional sociologists, but we would recommend a statistical monitor that makes distinction between temperature and work.
For example, if we find that the average time of owning a certain thing goes down (and it looks as it does), the reason is the rising social temperature.
If the general number of things in possession goes up , it means that they are winning the competition with family and friends.
We are flooded with statistic in the form of Nielsen report, electoral and exit polls, crime and roadway statistics, Internet polls and countless others.
We can argue about their reliability and accuracy, but it can be improved and standardized.
But they are an excellent way to share your views on the issues of the day.”), are not statistically valid.
Nevertheless, they contain some infonnation about the father-child bond among not too busy Internet users on a day in mid-June 1999, to a possible envy of Sigmund Freud and James Joyce.
Internet, therefore, appears as a potential model of the world, possibly, distorted, but with a chance to account for the distortion.
The emphatic intensity of the language in quotations from leaders and rank and files can also be measured and used as indication of the temperature.
The prophesy of the poll about Bush and Gore, which was mostly intuitive, seems less remarkable than the subsequent shift of the balance to a draw by the heavy propaganda dumbbells put on the balance of the campaign.
The prediction like the following, for example, can be made quantitative by monitoring the level of discontent, repression, unemployment, and general unhappiness.
Whether the tensions in fact rise or not, comes always, like the chances of rain, with a random component.
And yet if there is any identified contribution to the rise of temperature, the chances are good that the tension will rise.
Stratfor, the company offering the above prediction, generates its forecasts by, among other sources, analyzing email and Internet information.
The major idea that we want to express here is that instead of probabilities and philosophical difficulties connected with the definition of probability, as well as the need of a large number of samples and the principal impossibility of applying probability to unique events or small groups, the statistical data, however limited, can be interpreted in terms of affinity or strength of a bond couple.
We are far from thinking that such industry of a somewhat Banthamian-Orwellian brand would be good for anybody.
It simply happens, and next day the historians have to rewrite their books.
As we believe, knowledge offers us an advantage in standing against any dictate, even that of history itself.
It seems like a long shot, but the Y2K problem came sooner than everybody expected.
Theoretically, USA, where the mutual obligations of government and population are secured not by mentality but by law, is not immune to separatism.
In practice, none of the states has resources comparable with the rest of them.
Modern USA seems to feel an increasing stress between the pattern of equality that presumes distinctive components and the pattern of the melting pot that is supposed to blend the separate components.
There are always at least two ways to compensate for cognitive dissonance.
As Heinrich Heine once said, everybody can be virtuous alone, but for the vice you need two.
The immiscible components with high melting points are, probably, the best candidates for the generators of future conflicts.
Thus, any bilingual or multilingual tendency raises the melting point of the components.
Whether the melting pot can liquefy even the pattern heritage of those Anglo-Americans who designed this unprecedented social configuration, is a politically charged question and we better stop here.
Today we think about a historian as somebody researching the past, often very distant, at best through field work, but not on the battlefield.
In the very beginning of history as art and science, Thucydides and Flavius Josephus chronicled contemporary events they witnessed and took active part in.
Who knows, maybe history, armed with computers, will make a full circle.
It is not accidentally that nowhere in this book we gave a definition of what we understand by history.
The concept of history, as both events and their description, past and present, and present and future, evolves and changes.
History is kneaded and baked every day, like bread, and it comes in a wide variety of shapes.
A sunny day in September The terrorist attack on America on September 11, 2001 made the portentous words history and historical sound commonplace.
History became a way of life—something that happens only a few times in a century, and the century was not even one year old.
In November, 2001, while this line is being written, even the human dimensions of the attack are not fully estimated and most of the thousands of the dead are not buried yet.
It is a good time to use lofty words but not a good one for a cool-headed historical account.
The counterattack against terrorism is in progress and nobody knows how long it will last.
The innocent far away are hit with one hand and fed with the other hand of the same unifonned body.
We can see how understanding is slowly crystallizing from chaos but it cannot be completed until everything is over.
Even if it is over, it will be revised and reinterpreted, both factually and counterfactually, as we saw on the example of WW1.
Counterfactually, we already can see how easily the disaster could have been prevented or how it could be much worse.
The transition barrier on the fatal day was very low and the array of final states very wide.
In the Prologue we promised to demonstrate an apparatus for looking inside history.
What we can do is to search for the patterns of the past that seem to be recognizable in the fragmentary picture.
September 11, 2001 was preceded by a decade of economic growth, uncontested superiority, and untested complacency.
On a smaller scale, with higher resolution, we can see the end of industrial growth, collapse of the “irrational exuberance” of the stock market, and an apparent turn of economic tide.
The American society was (and remains) incredibly open and unrestricted as compared with most of the world.
New local gradients create forces and flows that tend to restore the previous state of the system.
Thus, as a curious example of the generality of abstract thermodynamics, the flows of money and alcohol in opposite directions across the New Hampshire-Massachusetts border tend to minimize the local gradient created by the absence of sales tax in one of the neighboring states.
As result of the flows of refugees to Western Europe, the tensions decrease in the source countries but somewhat increase in the recipient countries.
The sharp contrast between the openness of the United States society and the tightly built restrictive societies creates a similar gradient across the permeable United States borders.
The conflict in another part of the world can be easily transferred on the United States soil.
In response, it can be transferred in the opposite direction, as it happened many times, at a high economic and social cost of a military conflict.
In spite of all the political diversity, various internal conflicts, local tensions, and the existence of two mutually unfriendly political parties of approximately equal weight, American society has been successfully maintaining a very low level of social anxiety.
The change of the internal structure of American society toward a more restrictive one would face a very high transition barrier because of the general satisfaction of the society with the current way of life known simply as freedom.
It was economical and political freedom that made America a deep attractor on the landscape of the troubled world.
The Islamic world is in a stressed position, closer to the transition barrier.
It may be a far-fetched comparison, but the Western ideas start playing a role similar to that of the French philosophes in France of the eighteenth century.
The voices of the Islamic clerics, however, have been much louder, better amplified, fortified with oil money, and the message much simpler.
In search for familiar patterns on a smaller scale, we may note similarity between radical Marxism and radical Islam.
In Among Believers, he sees the same pattern of the dogmatic search for justice in both Marxist and Islamic revolutions.
Contrary to popular opinion and as one of the authors can testify, a totalitarian state in a period of stability is not necessarily a gloom world of mass suffering.
It may look bleak for a visitor from the free world, but its inhabitants can laugh, sing, create, and feel happy as much as people in the free world.
The American writer William Saroyan once noted that the loudest laugh can be heard in prison.
The secret of well-being in a totalitarian state is the code of behavior.
It allowed a significant degree of personal freedom, encouraged personal achievements, equality , and did not intrude into personal matters.
It was, probably, a much more liberal atmosphere than in the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Nobody can control what people think and what they say to each other in private.
What they say in a narrow public circle can be controlled by informers.
The code of behavior enforces the unity of the society as much as military unifonn strengthens the unity of anny.
Any fundamentalist ideology, whether religious or secular, creates a close quasi-military cohesion between followers by controlling selected aspects of behavior, from appearance to rituals to obedience.
It does not necessarily mean that the cohesion will be abused and aggressively misdirected by the leaders.
It only means that people are expected to follow the leader or leadership by their unifonn and enthusiastic behavior.
It seems that the radical and violent interpretation of Islam follows the same pattern.
The need for self-sacrifice was justified by the good of the future generations.
If so, the same forces that over centuries guided and pushed the Puritan Yankees toward modem American way of life will work on fundamentalism around the world.
Pattern of ritualistic control of behavior The Soviet ideology right after the revolution was extremely militant.
We remember that militant radicals inside the Soviet leadership were contained for a long time after the experiment with Cuba.
They won on the question of Afghanistan invasion, only to be completely ousted from power later.
The monolith Marxism that set the goal of violent destruction of capitalism split immediately after Marx’s death.
It generated the whole gamut of shades from liberal revisionism to militant Communism.
The relaxation of the militant and xenophobic drive may be the most probable future for Islam as well.
The great paradox of fierce and entrenched conflicts turning life into a permanent transition state and taking all nonnalcy away from life, as in the Middle East, is that each side expects the enemy to be smarter, learn faster than itself, and ask for peace as result.
By definition, transition state is fluid and changing right before the eyes of the observers.
It started as an external shock that sent the national adrenalin sky high within a few hours.
The fact that the attack did not quite fit the known pattern of Pearl Harbor could only add to the anxiety.
The initial stress gradually subsided, however, from apocalyptic to pragmatic level, and the national leadership clearly played important role in this process.
It is possible that in ten years history will have a much downsized perspective of the current conflict.
The next “bad news” does not hike the temperature to the previous highest level, while the next “good news” brings a mixture of some concern with much enthusiasm.
The high energy of the transition state comes not only from its high temperature and ensuing chaos, but also from its configuration.
Many of its Eastern participants—Pakistan, Iran, Indonesia, and Saudi Arabia—are itself highly stressed by internal and international conflicts.
Japan and Germany are constrained by their historical memory, while Britain is encouraged by her own.
The ties with Russia and fonner southern Soviet republics are strengthening right before our eyes.
The ongoing transformation of the configuration, strikingly similar to a mechanism of a chemical reaction, is what we have seen in the French Revolution, WW1, and the collapse of Communism.
Looking through the tiny peephole of the media, which is all most of us can do, we may not see the complete picture.
The President, apparently, gets the best view of the transition state while it twists, stretches, and quivers, as desert mirage, but not the whole truth either because there is no such thing as “truth, the whole truth, and nothing but truth” in the transition state of a complex system.
The perspective may be very different, of course, depending on what country shoots and edits the documentary of the events and how much fiction it adds to the final film.
The points and lines of the title of this book do not mean that every statesman, analyst, or historian has to draw diagrams made of circles and fancy lines to justify his or her salary and confirm prestige.
Historical narrative, fiction, nonfiction, textbook, memoir, movie, diagram, animation, semantic network, production grammar, pattern dynamics, presidential library, tape recording, secret files—all those forms are representations of knowledge, best suitable for different particular purposes.
What we are saying is that behind each such representation we find a set of generators, rules of regularity, configurations, and behind some sets of configurations we find patterns.
They pennit us to study all of them in the same language under the all-encompassing aegis of however incomplete thennodynamics of non-equilibrium systems.
They can be visualized, if needed, by points and lines, but the mathematical abstraction itself is not its visualization.
On the one hand, the flow of dollars for the Saudi oil, Egyptian position in the Middle East conflict, and Israeli defense created a high concentration of energy in the area and permanent high temperature.
On the other hand, the most ambitious terrorists seem to be in unrequited love with the Great Satan.
They are locked up in a deadly embrace with the West who makes it easy for them to increase their personal influence and send tremors all over the world.
It is the ancient pattern of the quest for world domination that drives large scale conflicts, and we may wait some time before the true intentions of the sides become clear from historical studies.
Finally, we want to refer the reader to Chapter 21, Ideas and actions and the role of ideas in history.
In the exchange of goods and ideas, the flow of soft drinks from West to East vastly exceeded the flow of democracy and civil liberties and the flow of oil in the opposite direction notably surpassed the flow of information and cooperation.
Once again, this should be seen as pattern-dynamic view, not political.
It is in the future and impossible to visualize, but history tells us that war always ends with peace and, unfortunately, vice versa.
The answers to questions of this kind cannot be found in pattern theory.
They cannot be found in abstract chemistry, either, because chemistry is overwhelmingly based on the idea of equilibrium.
If there is a mathematical source of answers, it is the science of complexity, itself very complex and controversial because the distance between computer simulations of simplified systems and real life is immense.
A future pattern historian would carefully reconstruct the configurations before and after the conflict, as well as plot the transition state as a sequence of snapshots (as it is done in the war documentary animations), and subtract what remained unchanged, which is most of the picture.
Today we, the authors, cannot do it, not only because we are in the middle of an uncertain and fluid situation which is not yet history, but, mostly, because we are a chemist and a mathematician, and not historians, political analysts, and strategic planners.
This is why this chapter is so sparsely embellished with points and lines.
If it is ambiguous, the enlargement of the picture and a look at the subtracted details may give more accurate evaluation of the bond couple strength.
For example, as first approximation, we see Taliban and al-Qaeda as monolith, while a closer look of a historian might reveal internal tensions and rivalry.
Future memoirs of American statesmen and generals may disclose the same internal processes in the political and operative planning of the war.
To list the alternative configurations of the final state, we have to look at all the stressed bond couples in the transition state.
Even the dependence on foreign oil could persist because a very high transition barrier stands on the way of change.
What can change more easily is the immigration and visa policy, as well as international relations.
The main potential change that can happen and last significant time is the deformation of the pattern of civil liberties.
These are just imaginary examples of a possible post factum analysis in a historically distant future.
The templates of carelessly open society and its paranoid opposite are completely different.
Remarkably, the computer simulation of an abstract model shows the reversible transition from one to the other when temperature reaches a certain level.
At lower temperature, only one template is trapped in the thermodynamic valley.
The experiments of this kind are valid only for a closed system, however.
In open non-equilibrium systems, the energy profile constantly changes.
It can automatically sound a loud shrill if a similar pattern of escalating terrorism is recorded in measurable units.
It could be as mandatory to take certain actions, following the already known historical pattern, as to use a fire extinguisher on a kitchen fire.
It would be a pity to delegate part of human control over human destiny to computers with a mind of their own.
But the logic of history tells us that humans would do whatever it takes to sleep quietly on their soft mattresses and not on anything as harsh as the terrain of Afghanistan.
From the point of view of thermodynamics, the accidental disaster will happen sooner or later, but “later” is indefinitely far away and “sooner” is tomorrow.
The gun cannot fire on its own, it needs a finger on the trigger, and sooner or later somebody will pull it.
The accumulation of metastable states is in itself a contemporary pattern and nuclear stockpile is an extreme example.
Potential and kinetic energy is being accumulating in taller buildings, faster and larger planes, larger and heavier cars, larger oil tankers, guns in private possession, oil and gas storages, and even in the woods surrounding the houses in the suburbs.
Moreover, it is accumulating in masses of people who live in poverty and with the sense of injustice.
It is not generally recognized that biological weapon also uses the energy stored in human body.
From a distant pattern perspective, terrorism, whether of Timothy McVeigh or Osama bin Laden brand, is a social mutation.
The love of the young man Werther to Lotte, a betrothed woman, ended with Werther’s suicide because his love was rejected.
Goethe, who was 23 at the time, woke up famous next morning and his novel became not only an international bestseller, but initiated a wave of commercialization of all things a la Werther.
Unfortunately, the pattern of eliminating the object of love, that of Desdemona and Carmen, does not even need any catalyst.
Another easy switch in an inflamed imagination It comes as a surprise of our postmodern era that the extreme patterns of human personality are still little explored by science.
We have mentioned, half seriously, a possible pattern shift in Hitler’s mind in Chapter 22, Three World Wars.
Idea and its negation, thesis and its antithesis, victory and defeat are always close in the mind and the bond couple can swing from one position to the other, as a pendulum, confusing the border between reality and dream.
The age of social psychology could come next after the age of molecular biology and financing psychological research might be a good investment into national security.
Americans were shocked by the suicide mission of the terrorists, not all of whom were destitute people.
The mass suicide of the Heaven’s Gate cult and the murder-suicide of the Columbine High School had been forgotten.
There are very few things we can predict with certainty about large and complex systems.
They are of thermodynamic nature, and of no immediate use because thermodynamics is beyond time.
On the contrary, kinetics is about time, but it is applicable only to known structures.
Yes, it can if we see a pattern of a larger scale, on a higher level of abstraction, but with a limited range of transformations,e., alternative configurations.
What we gain is that instead of the branching tree of alternatives in a sequence of detailed patterns, we have a more manageable list with just a few.
The more abstract the pattern, however, the little use of it today, especially in hedonistic societies which care little about future generations.
The fall of the Twin Towers seems to follow the same historically new pattern.
Taking the second snapshot in April, 2002, we can see the events of September 11 already taking up a patina of history.
Instead, a new high energy transition state in the Middle East, which was initiated much earlier and independently, brings all the involved participants in the situation of high uncertainty with a multitude of possible final states discussed by an army of political analysts, as well as government advisers, experts in history, culture, and psychiatry, and talk show hosts.
The least expected expert to see on the podium is a natural scientist, least of all, a mathematician or a chemist, as if we still believed that an invisible supernatural hand moves the nations and people.
The overall picture, however, remains more intricate because, in order to evaluate the probabilities of different pathways, we need a wider range of factors to be taken to account.
It is still incomparably smaller than the entire picture and comprises the neighborhood of the focal point of change.
In the end, instead of a doctrinal reiteration of main points, we will attempt to answer the question we have already asked on two occasions in Chapters 3 and 17.
Historians and laymen have been speaking about patterns in politics, culture, and history for a long time without any mathematics.
The dictionaries give us such meanings as model, archetype, specimen, which means a composite of features characteristic of a certain entity.
The word pattern in common language means a persisting behavior, form, or property that we can recognize and label as distinct from another pattern.
For example, we can speak about a pattern of evasive behavior, or totalitarian society, or imperial collapse, or patterns of American and French political attitudes.
We used to understand pattern as what makes events different, specific, and unique.
In common perception, dictatorship as pattern is the opposite of democracy.
In pattern perception, both are structures that have the same pattern elements and can turn into each other at certain conditions.
There is neither absolute democracy nor absolute dictatorship as there is no absolute order and chaos.
When they fight, we may choose our political allegiance, but if they are in our lab in cages, taken to an X-ray test, we may give them both a pat on the back.
Thus, the Soviet and Imperial Chinese systems exemplified absolutism, but even they had some elements of feedback and freedom that democracy had, while democracy may harbor pyramids of absolute subordination, charismatic cults, tyranny of party discipline, and obscurantism shielded from the world by iron minicurtains.
Pattern apparatus, therefore, is a tool of unification rather than classification.
It views as pattern, actually, any general shape, idea, formula, and principle.
Since its ancient mythological predecessor, history has been part of culture and ideology because it provides a corporate—national, ethnic, religious, professional, etc.—identity, inspiration, and value and tells the students what is good and what is bad, whom to love and whom to hate, what is reaction and what is progress, what is disgrace and what is glory, what is oppression and what is joy of freedom, what is white history and what is black history.
This is why history as knowledge is revised time and again, itself a part of history as process.
It offers a circus for ideological gladiator fights, creates and updates modern mythology, and is always partial.
History in its second role is, ideally, science that asks questions and answers them without moral qualms and prejudices.
This history, ideally, can be no more partial than quantum physics, which does not mean it is free of debate.
We are not qualified to join the debates but another quotation could be to the point.
The macrohistorical vision of the engine of human history was thus a vision that conformed to an ancient realism about the human condition, namely, that progress had a price, and that human nature had a dark as well as a light side.
Rousseau's vision of how evil entered into history was that one man fenced a field and called it his.
Science becomes a collective enterprise of a community of scientists when it acquires a common, concise, and unambiguous language.
If we measure separately the volumes of one gram of hydrogen, sixteen grams of oxygen, and fourteen grams of nitrogen at the same pressure, their volumes will be the same.
This statement can be tested anywhere in the world where we can weigh gas and measure its volume.
We are very far from offering such a language in a finished fonn, but we believe that the pattern approach is worth trying as a possible contribution toward history as an objective science of past, present, and future.
Geology, which perceives sand as fonner rock, a rock as future sand, and the present moment as a clash of tectonic plates, is an example of this kind of science.
Reductionism, science of complexity, and patterns could be mutually complementary components in such history.
Of course, history is unthinkable now without economic and technological aspects of social evolution.
These days one cannot take over a free nation with impunity, but one can perform a hostile takeover of a corporation.
Third, we would like to stress that patterns are not exactly points and lines but abstract mathematical objects describing regularity of observed objects.
On the surface we can see either narrative or diagrams, or a combination of both, or even a movie.
Representations of history, its events, and actors, come in many forms.
There are also the pictorial representations as in the paintings of Gericault and David.
There is the French Annales school with its emphasis on everyday life, demographic and economic statistics, represented by Braudel and Le Roy Ladurie.
A pictorial representation certainly brings the viewer closer to the history it depicts.
What we have in mind is also a representation of history, not in pictures or words, but by logical diagrams, geometry of relations and changes.
Hence we use pattern theory as a mathematical tool, but not a numeric one.
Mathematics is not only about numbers, its domain of discourse is vastly richer, and our aim has been to illustrate this in the context of history.
Patterns are hidden behind the images and pattern theory studies how they can be inferred from images and configurations and how the reverse process of generating images and configurations from patterns can be done.
Whether we throw a stone or launch a missile, the laws of Newtonian physics are there.
We can toss a pebble without knowing the laws of physics, but for launching a missile we need physics indifferent to who throws what and why.
The Ptolemaic system of celestial navigation based on what was visible in the skies was in use up to 1980, when the satellites made the Global Positioning System possible and the Nautical Almanac, indifferent to the historical dispute between Ptolemy and Copernicus, antiquated.
Yet the system of Copernicus had been there for centuries and it was used for the spacecraft calculations when the time came.
Whether we speak in plain words or draw diagrams and charts, patterns are there.
The star found in the closets of nations, to be called, clad in flesh and armor, into the fighting ring.
It is to the plain words that the traditional historical narrative owes its everlasting appeal and power.
Hopefully, once we see the skeletons of events with pattern vision, they will always benignly haunt us.
Burke, E Reflections on the Revolution in France, by Edmund Burke, The rights of Man, by Thomas Paine.
Herodotus , The History of Herodotus , Thucydides, The History of the Peloponnesian War.
William Benton, 1955 Holmes, J and Murray, S.L. , Conflict in Close Relationships.
Of the Nature of Things / translated into English verse by William Ellery Leonard.
