Said that capitalism exploited the workers to make the rich even richer.
The state should take control of the economy and run it to benefit everyone.
It was agreed that the USSR would help defeat Japan, that all allies would work for democracy in Europes and that the UN would be set up to promote peace.
Decisions were made on what to do with Germany: prosecute Nazis as war criminals, reduce the size of Germany by a qaurter and divide Germany up temporarily into French, British, United States and Soviet quarters.
Reparations to be taken from each zone. 2 of 13 The Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan The Cold War was a battle of ideologies not armies.
The USA was determined to stop the spread of communism, and the USSR was determined to defend itseld against Western attack.
In many countries people had no money, no jobs and were feeling hopeless 3.
Many in Eastern Europes had been liberated from Nazi rule by the Soviets 5.
Countries like Poland, Romania and Bulgaria had already has communist governments forced upon them.
Communism was a bad thing as it meant poeple could not be free and so the USA must try to contain the spread of communism.
At the Yalta and Potsdam conferences, the USSR agreed to free elections in the countries in its sphere of influence.
The USSR thought people would choose communism in free elections however, most did not.
The bearu organised all the communist parties in Europe and arranged their leadership so they would do what Moscow told them to.
Cominform got rid of any opposition to the USSR's control in satellit states.
It encouraged communist parties in Western countries to block Marshall Plan assistance.
Comecon included the USSR, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Albania and, from 1950, the German Democratic Republic . 4 of 13 The Berlin Blockade 5 of 13 The Berlin Blockade The United States wanted Germany to be a strong, capitalist and united country to trade with and prevent the spread of communism.
However, the USSR wanted Germany to be weak, communist and divided so that it would never be able to attack the USSR again.
The USSR blocked all supplies into Berlin to show it had the power to stop a divided Germany from working.
It looked like the Western powers would have to pull out of Berlin that would look weak; undermining the USA's image in particular.
So Western powers responded with an airlift thousands of tonnes of supplies were flown into Berlin.
The Berlin airlift made the USA appear peaceful and generous but it made the USSR appear aggressive and threatening.
In September 1949, West Germany is officially formed with United States support.
In 1949, Western Europe countries and the USA set up NATO to counter the Soviet military threat.
By 1956, USA and USSR has hydrogen bombs and USA didnt want to risk war.
Soviet control tightened across Eastern Europe. 7 of 13 A Divided Berlin After the war, Germany and Berlin was divided into four zones.
The USSR had developed a H-bomb Reasons for not attacking West Berlin:1.
The Soviets couldnt continue to allow Germans to leave East Germany through Berlin.
They announced in November 1958, that berlin was East German and that the western powers must leave the city in 6 months or else.
June 1961 The first two summits went fairly well, though nothing was agreed.
However, the third summit was a disaster a United States spy plane had been shot down over the USSR and Eisenhower refused to apologize and the summit collapsed.
The final summit was only agreed because there was a new United States president but neither side was willing to back down.
Khrushchev backed down as he knew he couldnt win a nuclear war, so the western powers stayed in Berlin.
Anyone who tried to escape was shot at and many were killed it stopped East Germans from leaving for the West which solved a crisis.
Before 1959, Cuba was very closely linked to the USA, for example, there were lots of United States owened businesses.
Then Cuba had a socialist revolution in 1959 and the USA refused to deal with the new government.
Instead, Cuba started to build economic links with the USSR , by trading Soviet oil for Cuban sugar.
Bay of Pigs Incident 17th April 1961:The CIA told Kennedy that the invasion would look like a Cuban revolt and that they had trained Cuban exiles and disguised old United States planes as Cuban.
They also said that Castro's control of Cuba was very weak and that many Cubans didnt like Castro.
What actually happened was that the planes were recognised as United States planes and were photographed with the information being published.
Also, Castro knew of the invasion in advance and 1400 United States backed troops met 20,000 of Castro's troops the United States backed down.
Aswell, most Cubans didnt want their old leader, Batista, back again, because he had been corrupt.Overall, the chance of a friendly USA-Cuba relationship was ended.
Cuba saw the Soviet missiles as a great way to prevent the USA from invading Cuba again.
In September 1962, Soviet ships carried nuclear warheads and missiles to Cuba.
Then in October 1962, United States spy planes photographed the Cuban missile sites.
The United States public learned that they were now in range of Soviet nuclear missiles and there was panic.
Do a deal and get the USSR to withdraw from Cuba in return for the USA withdrawing from one of its missile bases close to the USSR 3.
Blockade Cuba to stop any more missiles or equipment coming from the USSR 6.
It could be done with airstrikes and so wouldnt need nuclear strikes or a land invasion 7.
Tweet Combine this resource with othersUse this set whenNearlyVisible { googletag.cmd.push { googletag.defineSlot.addService); }); googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); }); Comments No comments have yet been made Sign up to Comment Related discussions on The Student Room Post-revisionist and New Cold War Interpretations » History Cold War » Cold War 20 marker » AQA A2 History 3N: Aspects of International Relations, 1945-2004 » Edexcel History iGCSE 2017 » Obamatron to start WW3.
