NACA is capable, by rapid extension and expansion of its effort, of providing leadership in space technology.""National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics Director, Hugh Dryden, 14 January 1958.
Personally I think that the only reason why a civilian agency was even mooted was to make the proposal palatable to the United States Congress.
Kennedy I think was very much scared about the possibility that the Soviets intended to do nasty things to the USA.Less than three months after Kennedy assumed the Presidency in April 1961, he ordered the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion in Communist Cuba.
US-trained force of Cuban exiles were to invade southern Cuba with support from United States government armed forces to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro.
The Cubans themselves were backed by the Soviets.In September of 1962, Nikita Khrushchev agreed to place nuclear missiles in Cuba; these facilities were discovered by U-2 Spy Planes, and by about October 8 the world probably came very very close to nuclear war.
It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union.""John F Kennedy, October 22 1962.
I also think that ""beating the Soviets"" given the events that immediately preceded the quote of November 21 1962 was inexorably bound up with ""defense, the top priority of the United States government""Money after all is said and done is merely a tool.
If nuclear war actually had broken out, then I shudder to think what would have happened.
Probably nothing.The soviets couldn't get their act together to ever send a man to the moon.The United States was well placed in Europe to attack the USSR and had submarines and aircraft and IRBM located in Great Britain, Turkey and Italy.Plus the United States was and still is the only country in the World to use Nuclear Weapons during a war.If anyone should have felt threatened it was the USSR.The moon programme did not mean the Cuban missile crisis was resolved it was over before the announcement anyway intelligence, communication, discussion and staying firm did.
Even though I can't see how the United States justified stopping the USSR placing Missiles in Cuba when the the United States was so entrenched in Europe.
To me it was hypocrisy of the highest level.But by standing up to the USSR over missiles in cuba then it was probably the turning point that ensured that the USSR kept their distance and never again directly threatened the US.What the moon programme did do was divert great amounts of money that could have been spent on other science.
And we have no idea how many 100's of millions of people have died due to that.
