The New Red Scare beginning in 2010 however is vastly more dangerous as it is flying mostly under the radar and is supported by several government agencies and some of American’s most prestegious institutions.
This series of five annotated research review articles begins by very briefly introducing the concepts and roles of alternative media and alternative news in society as compared to mainstream media and news.
Following that several clusters of American alternative news publications are reviewed including Black, Hispanic and Asian news media leading to a general discription of and societal need for the group of publications referred to herein as Social Justice/Anti-Empire Alt-News publications.
In this series of articles political/economic motivations for United States government/corporate suppression of this group of alt-news publications are explored as are methods used by government/corporate entities to prevent American voters learning about a) the largely unseen and often very illegal acitivies of their own government in addition to b) legitimate viewpoints of people and journalists in other countries.
This suppression of alternative news is illegal due to First Amendment rights and numerous Supreme Court decisions.
The real underlying currency of our world is narrative, and the ability to control it.
Blaming the foreign “other” came later but proved a remarkably convenient scapegoat for repression of workers’ efforts to get fair pay and legal protections.
At the dawning of the 20"" century the American press was relatively free and grassroots movements had a healthy amount of social influence.
Unfortunately, due to the digitalization and weaponization of everything in the USA at the dawn of the 21°t Century, mainstream news media has consolidated into a small handful of corporate controlled entities, and grassroots movements don’t usually go very far because people find it much more convenient to rely on corporate produced electronically delivered media.
In every society there are going to be individuals and groups who see and experience things differently from the majority.
The ability of minority individuals and groups to express their viewpoints in the USA is supposed to be protected by Constitutional law, however that has rarely been the case.
What can be found, if one looks for it, is massive government and corporate suppression of alternative news.
Although that suppression has always been there, from 2010 this suppression has gone very high-tech and turned into an enormous and highly secretive industry flying under the flag of “national security,” exactly the same as it did during the First and Second Red Scares.
In a nation guaranteeing the right to free speech and free press, alternative news media has a right to express alternative views along with fair opportunity for those views to be heard by the public.
Freedom of opinion and expression are fundamental rights that contain both a personal and a social dimension.
In addition to a swarming effect by government and corporate generated propaganda oriented fake news, the voice of the alt-media has been suppressed for the past several years by legislative rules (e.g., FCC reclassification of the internet from a “common carrier service” to an “information service,” effectively killing net neutrality) thereby giving Google corporation the illadvised opinion that it can suppress free speech and press with impunity via bias built into its algorithm and/or pre-processing filters.
Suppressed publications include those from nations targeted by the American Intelligence Community and Department of Defence (e.g., China, Russia, Iran, Syria) as well as the large cluster of social justice/anti-empire alt-news publications as defined above.
This is a “significant issue” as the American empire suffers from quite a number of interrelated domestic and international issues MSM reliably avoids.
The phrase “American empire” used herein includes but is not limited to the United States and other nations in which the United States Department of Defense has located military bases with or without permission.
The American Empire’s IC/DoD has assumed the right to execute extra-judicial killings, either directly or indirectly via the military/police and/or PMC forces of proxy nations, without due process of law, such as in Palestine, Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Somalia and a large number of other nations.
This writer goes a bit further reviewing literature pertaining to probable outcomes if alt-news continues to be suppressed and current domestic and international trends continue unabated.
MSM includes most TV and radio programs, movies and news media including broadcast, print and internet news.
MSM news is nominally divided into “liberal” (NYT and USA Today) and “conservative,” however both represent primarily corporate-government-driven interests and perspectives just the same.
Though MSM news sometimes “pays lip service” to minority viewpoints in order to attract and maintain a liberal consumer base, generally the tone is geared towards white-, middleand upper-income “news” consumers.
MSM is funded by corporate entities that work promoting government objectives and is designed to indoctrinate the public into adopting “mainstream” corporate-government viewpoints on life and the news.
Alt-news presents contrasting, alternative views to MSM and often investigates abuse of power by corporations, their handmaidens in government and most especially the ultimate abuse of power war.
Yemen 2014, Ukraine 2014*, Turkey 2016, Venezuela 2019, Bolivia 2019*, Iran 2017 to present, Nicaragua 2018, China 2018 to present, Cuba.
Palestine deserves to be on that list as it’s being rapidly and violently conquered by Israel on a day-by-day basis ever since the Nakba in 1948.
One can assert Israel is the aggressor, however Israel is just a cat’s paw of the USA in its ambition to conquer the entire region.
James K Polk’s Rhetorical Transfer of Savagery,” by Stephen J Heidt “President James Knox Polk is often lauded for his achievements as president, including the territorial acquisition of the western portion of the nation.
During its entire history the USA has only experienced 17 years without a war.
Many in the USA now admit the Vietnam War was a “mistake,” while others assert the entire war was a War Crime.
Being corporate controlled, MSM news is feeding the American public an avalanche of highly deceptive fake news about China, specifically misrepresenting the Chinese government’s legal rights to enforce laws in Hong Kong and Xinjiang.
Likewise, the USA has been funding violent insurrections in many nations in blatant violation of United Nations Charter signed in 1945.
Meanwhile within the USA homelessness, poverty, racial conflicts, frustration, judicial impropriety and grave uncertainty about the future stalk the land.
Only the Social Justice/Anti-Empire alt-news consistently investigates and reports the details.
Simultaneously, the “Social Justice/Anti-Empire” alt-news group of publications is being massively and illegally suppressed by Google’s search engine algorithm so practically nobody can find any of those publications unless they know their names and look for them specifically.
Alt-news is also sometimes sub-divided into left-wing , centrist and right-wing although those reductionist categories do not apply to all groups labeled “alt-news,” as many are broad-based in their viewpoints.
Some alt-news readers, writers, editors and publishers find remarkable similarities between MSM and Hitler’s Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda.
And now the American Empire is suppressing news from American IC/DoD “target” nations which includes a disproportionate number of Muslim countries in addition to Russia, China, and Venezuela.
His “conflict of interests” was transparent as India stood to benefit from the demise of net neutrality.
Though Californians managed to win it back, other altnews publications around the USA are still suffering from search engine algorithmic tyranny and being largely marginalized.
Following that is a brief review of alt-news in other countries, links to a couple of alt-news history sites, legal issues pertaining to the suppression of alt-news, and Conclusions.
It is true this association is vaguely alternative in some ways; however, this label is a bit deceptive.
Newsletters and small periodicals belonging to the AAN cover arts, entertainment and local news, and only rarely address issues like social justice and government malfeasance beyond the local level.
On the other hand, promoting local level arts and entertainment media is most certainly a valuable service to the community and those artists.
On the other hand, arts historically have been one of if not the major vehicle for protesting injustice.
Most minorities especially in the USA feel marginalized and statistical analysis of their relative power in government, the economy and media provide solid evidence they are right.
The Black Press and Online News The Black Press is a large and powerful group of both print and online newspapers that covers primarily domestic minority, primarily African American issues.
Though they primarily cover domestic issues some also report on events in Africa and worldwide.
Many or most publishers in the USA require corporate sponsors to pay the bills and, in some or many cases, “make compromises” with MSM and their corporate-government sponsors.
And replace it with one advising their readership to wear a facemask in all public places especially enclosed public places like stores and on transportation.
They all chose to ignore this advice and naturally COVID-19 hit the African American community particularly hard with death rates two to three times higher than in the white community.
Only one editor wrote back to me stating they would “think about it.” | noticed those same “public service” notices kept running for months in that African American newspaper.
In other words, they chose to follow the advice of President Trump over a former physiology researcher who had a front row seat on how China defeated the COVID-19 epidemic.
That, is a prime example of the “Black Misleadership Class” in my opinion.
This is dubious advice from supposed advocates for the African American community and in the case of COVID-19, proved to be deadly advice that fatally misled the community they claimed to serve.
In all fairness they weren’t the only ones to completely ignore my advice as | also wrote to the mayor who | knew at one time and city health officials without response.
Those kinds of issues aside the Black Press usually does a great job of representing Black communities around the USA, however from time to time they miss the boat entirely.
Likewise, few of them report on critically important international issues in Afrika like for example in Somalia, DRC, Mali, etc.
Few are likely to spell Afrika with a “k” in the middle in an effort to please mainstream Amerika.
One cannot blame them for not using a “k” in the word “Amerika” because they need corporate sponsors to stay afloat, however one might think they could “get away with” using a “k” in Afrika.
To continue using a “c” in the middle is rather like continuing to call black people “negros,” in my opinion.
There is nothing wrong with that per se, as long as editorial content has true independence,g., to advocate for the people of for example Venezuela who suffer extreme deprivation and in some cases starvation due to American government economic sanctions and covert actions,® as well as other Latin American people who suffer under the yoke of American imposed dictators and fraudulent presidents.
Asian American Journalists Association There is an Asian American Journalists Association.
The AAJA is sponsored by a variety of mostly very conservative organizations like the Democracy Fund, CNN, Fox News, Knight Foundation, Ford Foundation and so on.
As time goes on and violence against Asian Americans increases, they might find it expedient to do more bonding with other minority groups as the source of the violence against them is coming from the same very conservative groups they have bonded with.
There exists the possibility white supremacists are just warming up for greater violence in the future.
The USA is becoming increasingly polarized economically, politically and racially.
Minority groups are sometimes represented by sycophants of majority groups who — though generally well intentioned — may misrepresent their constituencies.
Due to the rapid escalation of oppression directed at all minority groups, including alt-news, more bonding between oppressed groups might be advised in order to create more effective leverage in demanding equal rights and opportunities.
Ostrich approaches to news don’t usually work out to well from a Darwinian perspective on evolution.
It’s difficult to name this group because they cover so many topic areas, however — to borrow and memorialize the late great alt-news icon Bill Blum’s newsletter’s title — “The Anti-Empire Report” seems appropriate.
The phrase “Fourth Estate” as applied to the free press was first used by Thomas Carlyle in 1840.
They may keep it well hidden under the journalists’ obligatory, hard-bitten mask, but the immortals, the persecuted and the unsung all share a belief in what the job is about.
Suppression of alt-news in the USA The American police state has had an going war against minority alt-news publications at least since the 1970s.
Sometimes it is overt (which included bombing the headquarter offices of one alt-newspaper and bombing the car of the editor of another alt-newspaper) and sometimes somewhat covert.
Rights enshrined in the Bill of Rights like Free Speech and Free Press have been subverted by special interests.
Collectively those special interest groups control politicians and MSM, effectively silencing many of the best of the Social Justice/Anti-Empire Alt-News publications.
However, freedom of expression is currently under assault across the world.
Recent laws and policies show that western democracies are not immune from this trend, with governments increasingly willing to limit the freedom of civil society to participate in public debate and discussion.
Udo Ulfkotte, a former editor with the German main daily newspaper, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , wrote an authoritative book on how the CIA and German Intelligence bribe journalists to write articles devoid of verifiable truth, and with an unambiguously pro-Western, pro-NATO bias.
His first-hand experiences in this unsavory field lends a great deal of credibility to his work, as does naming the names of specific individuals involved as he does in his book.
He died January 2017, found dead in his home, it is said by a heart attack.
Black Agenda Report, Counterpunch, and Paul Craig Roberts Join Us in Second Demand Letter Retraction and Apology for Defamatory “Propaganda,” by Yves Smith The Washington Post apparently hoped it had successfully tamped down the controversy over a story that defamed Naked Capitalism and many other reputable sites.
Three other publishers, Black Agenda Report, Counterpunch, and Paul Craig Roberts, have joined us in again calling for the Post to retract the article by Craig Timberg, Russian propaganda effort helped spread ‘fake news’ during election, experts say, issue a prominent apology, and give us an equivalent opportunity to respond.
Truthdig and Naked Capitalism both sent letters to the Post earlier this month demanding the article be retracted.
As you will see below, Black Agenda Report, Counterpunch, and Paul Craig Roberts have joined us.
We’ve also had five other sites say they would participate in a lawsuit against the Post, and one other prominent site is seriously interested.
There is a multi-faceted strategic purpose for this as discussed later in this paper.
The CIA’s long history of manipulating “news” Even above those superstructures there are several other little-known entities that have long histories of controlling American and international news media.
Shoup and Minter; L Fletcher Prouty, The Secret Team: The CIA and Its Allies in Control of the World.
Suppression of alternative views on news on the internet comes from many directions, including the CIA and United States Department of State.
One can only wonder if they will study the history of American misinformation, and the very real threat to democracy from corporate MSM news completely determining who Americans will vote for.
Democracy is most certainly under threat; not from enemies without but rather those within.
This dubious organization is also sponsoring the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs led by MIT Innovation Fellow and Obama’s Secretary of Defense Ash Carter, who gave literally billions to far-right neo-Nazis in Ukraine in order to escalate the proxy war there against Russia, a trend President Biden is continuing.
Thus, to expect anything good to come from the Harvard Kennedy School’s Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy is wishful thinking at best.
Instead, it appears to be adding its considerable weight to triggering WWIII, or at minimum more endless, pointless, expensive wars that profit no one except the already super rich, while the poor die premature, pointless, usually very painful deaths.
August 4, 2017 “The State Department's Global Engagement Center is tasked with countering foreign state and non-state propaganda and disinformation targeting the United States and United States interests.
Whereas the original GEC had a specific purpose to focus on countering terrorist and extremist groups’ influence, Section 1287 states that the GEC's purpose is to ""counter foreign state and non-state propaganda and disinformation efforts"" that threaten United States national security interests as well as the national security interests of United States allied and partner countries.
This language indicates a much broader purpose for the new GEC than the original one, possibly encompassing counterterrorism communications but also expanding the GEC's coverage to include countering certain foreign communications from any source.
Section 1287 also provides the new GEC with specific hiring and grant-making authorities that were not included in Executive Order 13721.
The above pdf goes on to list budget increases slated up to $80 million in direct funding in FY2017 or FY2018.
FBI’s Foreign Influence Task Force “FBI launches open attack on ‘foreign’ alternative media outlets challenging United States foreign policy by Gareth Porter ""In a particularly notable case in 2018, the FBI encouraged Facebook, Instagram and Google to remove or restrict ads on the American Herald Tribune , an online journal that published critical opinion articles on United States policy toward Iran and the Middle East.
The bureau has never offered a clear rationale, however, despite its private discussions with Facebook on the ban.
The FBI’s first step toward intervening against dissenting views on social media took place in October 2017 with the creation of a Foreign Influence Task Force in the bureau’s Counterintelligence Division.
Next, the FBI defined any effort by states designated by the Department of Defense as major adversaries to influence American public opinion as a threat to United States national security.
In February 2020, the FBI defined that threat in much more specific terms and implied that it would act against any online media outlet that was found to fall within its ambit.
A look through its site reveals a hodgepodge of accusations with somewhere between little and no evidence to substantiate any of it.
China modifying laws in Hong Kong to aid in the extradition of wanted criminals is a normal, ordinary and legal part of judicial due process yet was used by the NED funded dissidents in Hong Kong as a pretext for violent rioting.
Chinese medical authorities should be congratulated for being the 1) the first to identify this disease, and 2) the only nation to successfully contain it rather than being condemned and vilified with the pandemic.
Unfortunately, by making those reasonable and logical observations, this writer can be “identified” as a “foreign agent,” by such inquisitorial organizations as DFRLab.
In my own defense | can report any reasonable person would come to the same conclusions, and only in an American politically motivated “Red Scare” environment could someone be scurrilously accused in such a manner for use of logic that should be obvious to anyone over age six and/or with an IQ above 100.
In general, discourse power for the party aims to convince foreign audiences with sugarcoated Chinese narratives and, if that fails, seeks to deny unfavorable party-state narrative.
United States government-backed Graphika implies criticism of Western imperialism is Russian disinformation.
Graphika has a history of weaponizing dubious tactics to smear left-wing politicians and journalists as tools of the Kremlin.
Graphika’s director of investigations, Ben Nimmo is also a senior fellow at NATO’s de facto think tank, the Atlantic Council, which is funded by the governments of the US, Britain, and the United Arab Emirates, along with NATO and the European Union.
And he helps lead the Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab.
Researchers at the social network analysis company Graphika made a name for themselves in 2020 by reporting suspected Russian operations targeting conservative voters before the United States presidential election, flagging Chinese state efforts targeting Taiwan, and discovering global misinformation around COVID-19.
Only the American IC and the American Empire’s colonial partners and vassal states. e If Graphika wants to really research fake news, they should research themselves.
Unless there is a Constitutional Amendment redressing the appointment of Attorney Generals, and as long as presidents can fire and hire Attorney Generals at will, justice in the USA will always depend upon the whims of the (corporate controlled media selected) person occupying the White House.
USC Center on Public Diplomacy This is one of the most pathetic examples of United States government disinformation | can possibly imagine.
And, I’ve traveled enough around this world over the past 55+ years to know this is the truth of it.
There is no lie too big for the United States government to sell to the unsuspecting American public.
There is no infamy too great for them to force upon the innocents in this world.
Furthermore, the mainstream American media will support the American killing machine every step of the way.
These days the United States often gets allies to do their killing for them.
Later, | saw one missile come through the roof; another from the window and the third one, | do not know from where. | then looked around and | saw my mother. | went to her and realized that my mother (Rahma Mohammed Mahmoud AISamony, then aged 43) died with half of her face blown away.
Blood was everywhere. | lifted my daughter and she had wounds on her neck and stomach.
There’s no trace of the blood, intestinal or brain fluids spilled by their “intelligence community” masters anywhere on it.
In fact, it’s so clean it’s absolutely sterile, until one starts reading.
United States foreign policy tools in the era of disinformation deficiencies prevent effective response to malign information operations e Russia, China, Iran and ISIS use information operations to undermine the national security objectives of the United States and its allies. e The US’s international response has been weak. e Internal constraints have limited more effective countermeasures.
The fact is Russia, China and Iran don’t want American leadership; they have their own.
Second, they would be more than happy to be friends with the USA if the USA didn’t constantly attack them and surround them with vast military killing machines.
The people at USC should be ashamed of themselves for affiliating with such a scurrilous agenda that represents such blatant disregard for truth, human life and both American and internationals laws starting with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and original UN Charter.
In May 2019, the GEC was forced to suspend its Iran Disinformation Project after it was determined that the partner organization had inappropriately targeted reputable journalists, academics and human rights activities for not being tough enough on Iran.
The American DoD demands total subservience of all nations to its own interests.
To the best of my knowledge, the American DoD relentlessly just makes things up, fabricates, distorts, uses wild exaggerations, etc. whereas China is fighting a defensive counter strategy trying to be as diplomatic as possible every step of the way.
Usually, it’s the foreign agents that tell the American officers the lies they want to hear.
Then the officers report those lies to their bosses up the pipeline and the big lie get bigger every step along the way.
The poor indigenous agents are more than happy to supply any number of lies the “intelligence community” officer wants to hear for the right price, or even just the hint of a Green Card at the end of it.
To a Russian, Chinese or Iranian the accusations contained in that document are provocative in the extreme, just like the billions of dollars of killing weaponry pointed at their families 24/7/365.
If the reader doesn’t believe this, please, just keep reading. | am not proud to be an American, but | am proud to see the Social Just/Anti-Empire reporters, editors and publishers bravely moving forward into the hailstorm of illegal disinformation, harassment, and censorship.
Given their extreme biases against any views at variance with official Department of Defense dogma, they certainly appear very threatening to all the innocent people in the world who only want to live in peace.
But what this publication has not disclosed is that it is funded by the United States government, backed by the European Union, linked to the NATO war alliance, and part of a larger network of regime-change outfits that are bankrolled by Western governments and corporate oligarchs.
From a historical point of view, it operates rather like inquisitor Tomas de Torquemada.
In some ways Coda Story’s methods are the usual McCarthy Red Scare tactics because of its anonymity.
Anyone, anytime can be smeared anonymously with vague unproved allegations.
The people behind Coda Story may think of themselves as “info-warriors” but are just cowardly bullies acting on behalf of other cowardly bullies.
Real news must have some verifiable information and not just vague innuendo and baseless accusations.
Coda Story is just as pathetic as USC Center on Public Diplomacy, Graphika, FTIP, GEC, etc., etc., etc. | spent some time in Xinjiang hanging out with a large extended Muslim family and it was one of the most wonderful experiences of my life.
They understand the meaning of love. | bitterly resent foreigners who are programmed by the American “intelligence community” to hate and sow fear of innocent people, especially because | have an American passport.
They are very proud of Xinjiang grapes, arguable some of the best in the world, as are their raisins.
If only Americans would get up off their couches and up from behind their computers and travel more what a peaceful and beautiful world this could be.
Instead, the world is balanced on the knife edge of a thermonuclear war.
What a horrid, horrid world the American “intelligence community” is creating for the billions of poor around the world and anyone who gets stuck on any side of American hegemonic wars.
Like the very poorly named USC Center on Public Diplomacy, Coda Story is not alone.
In some ways Google is only one of the newer members of the corporate cult that rules the USA and world.
Monopolies were theoretically made illegal in the United States with anti-trust legislation starting with the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, Clayton Act of 1914, and Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914.
During the 1930s this again became a big issue leading to the formation of large trade unions in the United States and further legislation.
None-the-less numerous examples of monopolies continue to exist in the United States with communication corporations like Google, Facebook and others totally dominating their fields.
Freebase was founded by MIT alumnus and Al expert Danny Hillis, cofounder of Thinking Machines, in 2005.
However, since Google rolled out Knowledge Graph, something interesting happened.
Visits to Wikipedia had previously risen steadily year-on-year for a decade.
Towards the end of the 2012 this trend not only stalled, but went into an unprecedented decline.
According to Wikipedia's own stats, the page views for English language Wikipedia pages fell by 21 per cent over 12 months to December 2013.
For German, Spanish and Japanese language pages, views dropped by 30 per cent, 29 per cent and 25 per cent respectively.
Ignoring Wikipedia, which is every bit as much a monopoly and a monopolist as the rest, is a dire mistake.
There is nothing positive about sucking away users from high-quality content published by individuals, small blogs, or focused wikis.
Wikipedia went dark to prove the point they’re vital and immediately missed.
On October 20. 2020, the United States filed an anti-trust law suit against Google.
Thanks to the overwhelming power of corporate controlled Mainstream Media and systematically suppressed Social Justice/Anti-Empire alt-news, we have anti-bussing, pro-war American president Joe Biden and his neo-con Vice President Kamala Harris.
Tragically the criminal activities of the American Empire appear they only will get worse under President Joseph Biden.
In proof that “politics can make for strange bedfellows” is the fact that President Trump found himself on the same side as Julian Assange advocating for net neutrality.
Enter stage center the appointment of second generation Indian immigrant Ajit Pai, an opponent of net neutrality to become the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission , and net neutrality was effectively killed in 2017 pushing the internet towards the direction of the Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda, and radically away from any concept of a medium for the “free press,” existing only in the form of alt-news these days.
Pai voted against the FCC's 2015 Open Internet Order , classifying internet service under Title Il of the Communications Act of 1934.
Why liberal democrats should wish to kill net neutrality might seem confusing to some, but the answer appears to emerge from big money paid to the democrats by virtually omnipotent special interest lobby groups with links to foreign governments; not China or Russia, but rather Israel and India.
Given that this “treasure trove” of information was available to all Google employees, it is probably not complete in regards to algorithmic bias or list of banned news sites.
None-the-less this is rather strong evidence that Google does have at least one news publication blacklist in violation of numerous American laws pertaining to Free Speech and Free Press.
Not understanding humor, satire, irony, etc. means Al can misclassify a great deal of information.
It is a dull-minded brute that is now managing elections, and Google’s use of it in “filtering” the news is absolutely illegal in American law.
Article 5 — Laws and Legal Precedents addressing the suppression of alt-news.
But in this polluted information environment, it’s never been harder to know what to trust, and never easier to be misled.
This, for the reader’s information is finely crafted, highly professional disinformation, a sub-discipline of psychological operations.
It might be amusing to the armchair intellectual who happens to know what’s really going on in the world however to someone who’s personally experienced the terror and death inflicted by American hegemonic wars it’s extremely disturbing, revolting and nauseating.
For movie buffs it’s reminiscent of HAL 9000 in the movie 2001 A Space Odyssey, the Red Queen in the Resident Evil movies, the Master Control Program in Tron and Skynet in the Terminator series.
In other words, it doesn’t seem human due to its utter lack of moral conscience, common sense and truthfulness.
It is utterly astonishing to this writer that the Google planners, writers and project managers that approve this style of totally dishonest writing cannot see their writing style is the prototype of an evil computer trying to take over the world, universe or whatever.
On the other hand, it should not be so surprising because corporate influence in the world today is the prototype for the movies that follow in their wake, and the total lack of the simplest forms of humanistic awareness is the a priori prerequisite for those kinds of jobs.
On the other hand, fake forms of liberalism are usually easily detected as well. | recall seeing a group photo of some of the younger members of the UN Security Council a couple of years ago on the UN site.
They were dressed and posed to look like “rebels,” when in fact they represent the same authoritarian hegemonic interests as the American Empire.
At first glance they looked authentic, but a deeper look followed by a moment of reflection evaporated the illusion of “liberalism,” and the photo then looked staged and transparently fake.
My apologies to readers of this article for my interjection of these observations in the middle of a review of Google’s projects, however | personally needed some psychological relief, an island of peace in this torrent of strategic disinformation that has led, and will continue to lead to so much horrific death and suffering around the world and even in the host body of the USA itself.
Report for America An initiative we support that aspires to place a thousand young journalists in local newsrooms in the next five years.
Some are even trained to infiltrate the Social Justice/Anti-Empire domain.
Google’s Report for America and The Groundtruth Project Report for America has several subcomponents.
This is the reason both American Democrat and Republican candidates are virtual carbon copies of each other in regards to their absolute obedience to and support for corporate rule of the USA and world.
Thus, Google employees most certainly do work on IT and other projects that cause immeasurable suffering and the uncountable deaths of innocents.
What Google News Lab apparently does is facilitate suppression of alt-news investigatory journalism, while flooding the internet with narrative supplied to it by the American Department of Defense, directly at the higher levels of administration, and via MSM at lower operational levels.
This makes getting and keeping sponsors very difficult or impossible in some cases.
Then, a few hungry altnews publishers and editors are — in a few cases — more likely to publish “tailored” altnews stories that appear to report real news, but in fact push a corporate-government supplied narrative.
Likewise, there are numerous new “alt-news” sites that appear to be Social Justice/AntiEmpire publications, but each has specific “targets” coinciding with American Department of Defense targets they lambast.
For example, one of these new alt-news sites might criticize Israel for their land-grabbing in Palestine and then skewer Chinese authorities for attempting to maintain order in Hong Kong.
Or, they might write sympathetic stories about China, but also publish articles defaming Syrian President Assad repeating DoD narratives about gas attacks which have been thoroughly discredited in most real Social Justice/Anti-Empire publications using fact based verifiable evidence.
This sort of asymmetric fake journalism appears to be the kind of product the so-called “Groundtruth Project” is producing.
Alt-news reports on Google search engine rank suppression Google’s new search protocol is restricting access to 13 leading socialist, progressive and anti-war web sites by Andre Damon, David North, August 2, 2017 “New data compiled by the World Socialist Web Site, with the assistance of other Internet-based news outlets and search technology experts, proves that a massive loss of readership observed by socialist, anti-war and progressive web sites over the past three months has been caused by a cumulative 45 percent decrease in traffic from Google searches.
More than half the sites were right wing nutjobs, from the nazis at StormFront to the libertarians at the Ron Paul Institute.
Their sources of information are usually “anonymous government spokesman” or “intelligence sources,” while the wars they promote kill millions of innocents.
And then, they denigrate and censor the only real journalists that look behind the scenes and get the names and even in some cases photos of the terrorists that work for the United States government.
Thus, Google is building an army of info-war specialists to expand the influence of the American Empire inside the USA and worldwide, while further ratcheting down their ruthless and illegal suppression of alternative news in violation of First Amendment rights to free speech and freedom aided by the “scions” of the MilitaryIndustrial-Media complex.
Mohammad Morsi was sworn into office June 30, 2012, and overthrown 3 July 3 the next year by American appointed Abdul Fatah al-Sisi, and died due to medical neglect in squalor in prison June 17, 2019.
Tens of thousands of his followers and friends were then rounded up, imprisoned and many were executed by the new American appointed strongman dictator al-Sisi.
Given the truth of these assertions it’s a bit surprising that “The Groundtruth Project” would dare to mention Egypt, but audacity always have been a hallmark of American policy.
Likewise, they didn’t mention how the United States backed so-called rebels raped him with an iron rod before murdering him.
In other words, The Groundtruth Project seems to conveniently overlook a lot of very important truths.
William Blum, Killing Hope, United States Military and CIA Interventions since World War II, 15 [Permission to quote granted by William Blum via email March 15, 2018] The cases of Egypt and Libya are only two of dozens of ongoing intelligence and military operations by the USA in foreign countries.
Britain, France and Russia, by contrast, have about 30 foreign bases combined.
By my calculation, maintaining bases and troops overseas cost $85 to $100 billion in fiscal year 2014; the total with bases and troops in warzones is $160 to $200 billion.
This is another illegal war the USA is fighting in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter.
One of the challenges of reporting on the American Empire is that the American “intelligence” community and DoD are so infinitely rich and operating in so many countries simultaneously it’s practically impossible for any publication to keep up with it all.
Matter Ventures A media startup accelerator we support that is working with the Next Media Alliance to offer design thinking bootcamps to local newsrooms.
Monopoly, bias and government narratives The issue of bias built into search engine results by Google is a different issue than that of a it being a monopoly.
Those two issues combined make formidable obstacles for altnews to survive and for voters to have a fair choice in choosing an honest nominee for political office when combined with corporate control of virtually all of MSM news.
There’s more than a little irony that Google in some ways launched the Cold War against by refusing to censor pornography in China in 2010.
It’s also interesting that in 2017 Google launched an Al research center in Beijing which attracted some of China’s top tech companies including Tencent and JD.com.
The next year Google was working on a censorship program called Project Dragonfly which employees objected to and was then dropped.
Social Justice/Anti-Empire alt-news has a long list of detailed investigatory reports illuminating American CIA financing for the sometimes very violent “student protests” in Hong Kong.
Google, Supreme Court and Congress They like all corporate functionaries within the American Empire Google is absolutely confident they can abuse their power in any way they like because they believe, the Supreme Court is weighted in favor of their imperial obsessions.
In the case of the suppression of alternative news a conservative view will be to uphold previous Supreme Court decisions upholding First Amendment rights.
Should that not happen it may be possible for Congress to override the Supreme Court in most cases.
Biden's Chance to Open a Clean Slate on Surveillance, March 14, 2021 “President Joe Biden has an unprecedented opportunity to restore faith in America’s intelligence agencies -if he seizes this opportunity to make a clean break with the practices of the past 20 years.
As recently as 2015, the Department of Justice and NSA argued they didn’t need a warrant to acquire the records of calls of all people in the United States based on the mere notion that some records could be relevant to foreign intelligence.
The ongoing deployment of facial recognition systems across the nation, for instance, alarms us all.
The secrecy and unaccountability of the surveillance state delegitimizes the government and undermines trust.
Recall that the FISA Court ordered the FBI to address issues that tainted the Carter Page investigation, followed by a DOJ inspector general audit that found pervasive problems affecting each of 29 sampled FISA applications.
Mike Lee, R-Utah, and Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., wrote a letter to Barr and then-Director of National Intelligence John Ratcliffe demanding to know to what extent the executive branch believes it has the inherent authority to spy on people in the United States.
Free speech is permitted theoretically, but practically nobody is allowed to read that free speech thanks to Google’s monopoly, bias, and FISA permission to spy on any attempt to circumvent that bias and monopoly.
First Amendment rights supersede FCC rulings according to United States law.
The Supreme Court could try to claim they don’t have jurisdiction as they often do to avoid making decisions in critically important cases, however their credibility is so low now they might be forced by popular demand to actually do their job for a change.
Net neutrality is an issue most Americans actually do care about, and all the programming from MSM probably isn’t going to change that.
One of the symptoms of this Third Red Scare is suppression of alternative news publications on the internet.
One might think the scions of the Intelligence Community , Department of Defense and MSM news would know this and avoid past mistakes.
Tragically, the costs of repeating those “mistakes” today are vastly greater than in past centuries and the potential future costs beyond imagining.
Ed. and notes G Brundage April 4, 2021 Just as in the past the current suppression of social-justice/anti-empire altnews is cynically done to suppress liberal viewpoints advocating for social justice and critical of government malfeasance and abuse.
Lessons from the First Red Scare (19171920) and the Second Red Scare can help prevent greater conflicts and loss of innocent lives in the USA and abroad, now and in the future.
Introduction The weaponization of racism within the United States to justify foreign policy objectives is nothing new.
It was used most effectively in all colonial exploits and continues to this day.
The March 6"" 2021 murders of six Asian women in Atlanta was only the most recent example of this.
President Eisenhower's prescient speech warning the American public about the dangers of the Military Industrial Complex, mentioning massive spending, especially deficit spending, the potential for the domination of science through Federal funding and the domination of science-based public policy by what he called a ‘scientific-technological elite,’ was delivered January 17, 1961.
Since then, the American Military-Industrial Complex has also consumed mainstream media and become a massive multi-trillion-dollar industry dedicated to total world domination such that now it’s called the military-industrial-media complex.
This military-industrial-media complex is the single greatest mass murderer and torturer in world history, while simultaneously presenting the single greatest threat to democracy ever encountered in American history.
Democracy in the USA and in most countries has long been a sham when corporations control the media, they also control who will be nominated for and ultimately elected to political office.
That is a usurpation of power that totally undermines the foundation of a liberal democracy.
When the free-flow of ideas falls beneath the iron heal of totalitarianism, dissenting views are silenced and democracy is dead.
As of this writing, dissenting/alternative views are surviving only on respirators.
It is presented such that when readers review information about the First and Second Red Scares in the following sections, they can easily see the same assumptions, methods and abuses used in the 20 Century Red Scares and currently ongoing 21% Century Third Red Scare.
For example, various Supreme Court decisions were made that effectively ended the Second Red Scare.
Tragically, 21°t Century political zealots have conveniently forgotten them and brazenly gone ahead with the Third Red Scare.
About the Global Engagement Center “A new task force at the Department of Homeland Security is focused on the domestic effort in the United States, and the administration established the Global Engagement Center in response to the new urgency to break the recruiting efforts of violent extremists abroad.
We are currently adding staff and securing more funding, but, most importantly, we are taking a fundamentally new approach to the problem.
The GEC is using new 15 One can accurately report it was Republican President George W Bush that started the Afghanistan and Iraq Wars, however he did so upon the advice of his CIA director George Tenet.
It is relevant to note that George Tenet was appointed by Democrat President William Clinton.
It appears when President Bush realized how he had been “suckered” into two unjustifiable and intractable wars, he “retired” George Tenet.
And thus, a conservative Supreme Court may be a good thing to help end the Third Red Scare.
Please also recall a synonym for “conservative” is “careful,” and the wild excesses of the Third Red Scare in particular can have absolutely devastating consequences for the USA and world.
A careful person would put an end to this wildly illegal and transparently duplicitous farse as quickly and expediently as possible.
Suppressing free speech and freedom of the press is not an effective solution to the issues the USA is not confronting, but rather contributing to the dangers inherent in those issues.
Furthermore, this Third Red Scare with all its’ high-tech weaponry has the potential to deliver the final death blow to democracy by totally stifling reasonable dissent.
Fortunately, the Supreme Court shouldn’t have to do much as decisions regarding the unwarranted suppression of reasonable (and even highly questionable) alternative views have already been made.
It will be up to the lower courts to decide in litigation by injured parties those individuals and groups that have suffered loss and injury as the result of the Third Red Scare.
The organs of government, quasi-government and private organizations that should lose in those state, and federal lawsuits will then appeal to the Supreme Court, which | believe will refuse to rehear those cases as decisions on such matters have already been made.
Ultimately, any long-term strategy to counter violent extremism cannot focus solely on killing terrorists; rather, it must effectively prevent the recruitment of new ones.
The United States Information Agency was established during the Cold War, in part to counter Soviet disinformation and engage directly with overseas audiences.
The GEC’s predecessor, the Center for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications, was created in 2010 by Secretary Clinton, when al-Qaeda and its affiliates were the primary focus.
Al-Qaeda always used communications in its strategy, but the volume and quality was nothing like what we see violent extremists doing today.
Over time, we were not putting the right amount of resources—technology, people, and funding— necessary to address the evolving threat.
In other words, to support social justice in the USA and worldwide, and oppose the American military and intelligence communities’ drive for “hegemony in perpetuity” is now labeled as foreign inspired “terrorist” activities and can and must be suppressed by United States government and its corporate support structures.
In both cases those responsible were later reviled as oppressive loathsome individuals which indeed they were.
It’s happening in the UK too 20 Apr, 2021 McCarthy’s law is coming, as UK wants to register me as a foreign agent...because | work for RT by George Galloway (was a member of the British Parliament for nearly 30 years) — “Rumours are gathering momentum of a planned register for those in Britain considered to be ‘agents of foreign governments’— including me.
But | have nothing to hide, unlike the Tory cronies raking it in thanks to the pandemic.
The secretive American “Kill list” officially labeled the “Disposition Matrix” is planned to stay in effect indefinitely.
The roots of unrestrained capitalism and colonialization are the same in all cases.
The following review of the history of the Red Scares in the USA demonstrate the same pattern of repressing American citizens communication rights in order to allegedly combat “foreign influence” as has been used since 2010 by Secretary Clinton’s Center for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications, which has since morphed into the Global Engagement Center.
The Haymarket Affair of 1886 marks a suitable beginning point for examining the actions that led up to the Red Scare.
The massacre, or riot, depending on the view one wishes to take, was a bombing that took place on May 4, 1886 in Chicago.
While the day began as a peaceful rally striking for an eight-hour workday, it quickly turned into chaos.
It was already tense with police killing an individual and injuring several men the day before, when someone threw a dynamite bomb at police attempting to disperse the crowd.
Gunfire quickly followed and when the smoke dissipated seven police officers and four civilians were dead with dozens of others injured.
Next came the dismissal of hundreds of potential jurors who spoke well of the men and eventually a bailiff picking the jurors.
These jurors even admitted to being openly prejudiced against the men, but Judge Joseph Gary allowed the case to continue.
This shows that before there was ever a Soviet Union to fear, economic tensions between classes had Americans on edge.
This only increased racial tensions within communities, as white men saw African Americans as inferior to themselves and destroying their jobs and livelihoods.
High tensions resulted in emotions exploding on May 28, 1917 during a meeting to discuss the ongoing strike at Aluminum Ore Company, when the men decided the solution to their problems was violence.
The mob cut the fire department’s hoses and set buildings and homes ablaze.
When beatings or shooting were not their choice of violence the mobs resorted to lynching.
On September 9, 1919 the police officers of Boston decided to strike to obtain higher wages, better working and living conditions, and alleviation of a long list of other grievances, such as high equipment cost.
With their requests denied, they collaborated with the American Federation of Labor to unionize.
The mayor of Boston almost immediately suspended those who held union leadership.
With the backing of Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge, the men’s suspension was not only upheld, but they were removed from the police force.
They further warned that what was to follow is the replacement of democracy with a Soviet.
Instead, the city recruited an entirely new police force to supplement the few who had remained on the job.
Not only had the strike failed, the labor movement lost any credibility as large portions of the country and media saw it.
Evidence from the first Red Scare strongly suggests that association with the foreign “other” decades later was used as evidence against the American workers attempting to get labor rights and fair wages which was then used to censor them , weaken their bargaining position, incarcerate and kill them.
Just like today mainstream media supported the wealthy against the workers struggling to put food on the table for their families.
Dealing with oppression in many forms, James Weldon Johnson, field secretary of NCAAP, spoke out against increasing the censoring of mail.
This outspokenness came as censorship suppressed any protest by the 15 million black Americans.
Despite the oppression of protesting by African Americans themselves, national attention focused on the anti-black feelings becoming more violent across the entire country.
Cities such as Chicago, Omaha, and Washington D.C. suffered severe riots, but also showed organized counterfighting by African Americans against white-supremacist attacks.
McCarthy ruined lives of innocent people “The criticisms of McCarthyism, and of Senator McCarthy in particular, are threefold.
McCarthy and his followers believed subversive elements posed a danger to the national security of the country and so justified such extreme measures, even if they included the denial of civil liberties.
As understood, it is a means of government harassment that includes blacklisting with intent to pressure people to follow popular political beliefs.
Thus anyone who makes insufficiently supported accusations or engages in unbalanced investigations against persons in an attempt to silence or discredit them is said to be practicing McCarthyism.
However, it would go on to serve in the Second World War as a version of the First World War’s Espionage and Sedition Acts, suppressing anti-war agitation and foreign subversion of American war efforts.
Later, during the Cold War and “McCarthyism,” the Smith Act would be used to prosecute dozens of American communists for suspected subversion.
It was in response to this string of convictions that the Supreme Court would finally begin to rule against the government in cases of sedition, starting with Yates United States.
Richard Stengel the Third Red Scare and Intensified Moslem Scare The new Senator Joe McCarthy is named Richard Stengel.
At the time, he was the single person in government tasked with unpacking, disproving, and combating both ISIS’s messaging and Russian disinformation.
Timothy Setter tjsetter@mail.fhsu.edu, Summer 2020 ABSTRACT “With American involvement in World War | a drastic change in United States domestic policy occurred.
Through the use of wartime Espionage and Sedition Acts came the tool to begin a campaign of suppression of political radicals.
This came as the compounding of earlier events like the Los Angeles Times bombing in 1910 occurred with a campaign of anarchist bombings, a growing number of strikes, and wartime propaganda created a setting allowing for government officials to carry out raids, arrests, and both a censoring and punishment of speech.
Within these varying levels of examination is an analysis of categories such as race, economics, gender, and other factors and the evolution of their repression throughout the Red Scare.
Boards of Education and Loyalty Leagues combined to create the perfect little patriots.
To ensure this, there was removal of all signs of insubordination in both the students and, equally worryingly, in the teachers.
Because of this, both were under constant surveillance by private groups, such as the American Protective League, and the government.
The first recorded case of sedition, however, was the arrest of William N Waddleton in Juneau on June 6, 1917.
Waddleton, described as a “colored man” was an unofficial lawyer accused of distributing a pamphlet created by socialists.
The pamphlet encouraged resisting conscription and the draft and for working men to strike with the goal of embarrassing the government.
Despite the material he was accused of distributing, the result was a hung jury.
Therefore, while race did indeed play a role in the hysteria, it is not a lone factor in the actions of the government, numerous groups, or individuals.
Regardless of the reasoning, the actions performed do show that after the conditions were set, a baseline of fear that is accommodating pre-existing American racial, social, gendered, nativist, economic beliefs, the Red Scare took place.
CONCLUSION “The end of the Red Scare came as the fear dissipated and some form of rationality with the law came back into existence.
While the earlier Homestead and Pullman strikes stoked animosity, it was McKinley’s assassination and the Los Angeles Times bombings that pushed any tolerance for radical or anti-capitalist movements out of many Americans’ realms of possibility.
Despite the growing hatred, there was no real justification to punish or retaliate against these groups on a large scale, at least legally.
As a result, it was during the period following the start of World War | that it did become actionable.
Public opinion slowly became pro-war, or at least anti-German, before exploding into the dominant public consensus.
It would then become anti-foreign, and anything perceived as anti-American.
The Red Scare slowly began with the Espionage and Sedition Acts and World War I, it escalated.
Labor increasingly lost ground as the Red Scare escalated in scale over time.
The latent fears received further stoking by individuals like Mitchell Palmer and J Edgar Hoover.
There was pushback against these men and their agendas to root out the communism and opposition they saw in every radical’s shadow.
On March 6, 1920, Louis F Post became acting Secretary of Labor due to President Wilson’s sick leave.
This was a welcome return for many as no longer would they receive counsel only at the hearing when it had largely already been determined what was in the governments best interest regarding the individual.Previously content to punish labor or radicals in many circumstances, the courts returned to normal behavior, this coming as early as February 12, 1920, when Judge George Bourquin in a Montana district court upheld Whitfield vs Hangesin the case of John Jackson.
Following Jackson’s arrest, the police ransacked his home without a proper warrant in the hopes of finding some radical material to deport him for.
Throughout the Red Scare this had become largely accepted practice with the obtaining of warrants coming after the arrests.
Times bombing of 1910 had set the stage to fear and target radical bombers it did not last through the scare.
These negative feelings compounded during the economic hardships of the Great Depression, just as it had after World War | with repatriations and discrimination being present in American society and policy.
Mexican racism peaked before receding; white Europeans saw racism in areas like Alaska, and black Americans saw relations deteriorate due to economic and social issues culminating in the 1919 Red Summer race riots.
The fear of communism still bubbled beneath the surface as those suspected were blacklisted or suffered other social consequences.
This second high point took place through the late 1940’s into the 1950’s under the direction of Senator Joseph McCarthy.
Conclusions “The deliberations of the Constitutional Convention of 1787 were held in strict secrecy.
Consequently, anxious citizens gathered outside Independence Hall when the proceedings ended in order to learn what had been produced behind closed doors.
The Supreme Court has already decided on these matters, and it only remains for judges in the lower courts to enforce the laws to put an end to this Third Red Scare.
These should not be lengthy court proceedings as the laws in this matter are very clear and unambiguous.
Suppression of alternative views on the news is wildly illegal and spurious claims of “sedition” have no substance or merit within the legal framework established at the end of the Second Red Scare.
When the Inquisition came to a suspected area, the local bishop assembled the people to hear the inquisitor preach against heresy.
Many of the alleged Communist sympathizers that were rounded up were deported in December 1919.
The boat utilized for this, the USAT Buford, was nicknamed the Soviet Ark and the Red Ark.
When Cannone refused to sign a statement admitting to being an anarchist, his signature was forged.
She would not return to America until 1940 when her dead body was shipped for burial.
Justice Department agents conducted raids in 33 cities, resulting in the arrest of 3,000 people.
Just so, any reference to Islam or Muslims on the Internet can be targeted as sympathetic to or supportive of Iran.
Anyone’s site can easily be added to a blacklist, or simply have a different algorithm applied to its ranking on Google.
This is precisely the same kind of environment created ruing the Red Scare.
The Modern-Day Red Scare Perceptions of Modern Islam in American Society Modern Islam in American Society by Cierra Wallis “In times of chaos and fear, American people have often looked to point the finger at a certain group, religion, or idea that far extends pass just women and African-Americans.
American society continuously looks to blame _ others-a phenomenon the government actually uses to gain power and unite Americans.
We will first look to history to see how the public and influential leaders during the Salem Witch trials, Japanese Internment, and McCarthyism all have placed blame on a minority under the leadership of the government as a way to answer social problems and as a way for the government to gain power.
We will then look at the modern issue of how in the grand scheme of things, this continues today with the making of Muslim-Americans and terrorists to be synonymous and the role the government has played in uniting the American people against a common enemy.
Visitors to the site are invited to report sites that might have Russian propaganda.
Even being a critic of “mainstream media” is listed as a criterion for being a Russian sympathizer.
Thus, good Americans should march lockstep behind the Fuhrers at Propornot and inform on Un-American Americans.
There isn’t any question that at least since 2016 when Propornot went online, the Third Red Scare is in full deadly flower in the USA and worldwide.
The question is, why are the courts remaining silent on this when the laws are unambiguous on the illegality of all this.
It’s difficult to say if the Anti-Empire Alt-News group really a “minority news” group because they actually represent the majority of humanity that does not in any way benefit from the American empire’s unrestrained capitalism, eradication of all human and national rights, legitimation of the American police-incarceral state, rapidly escalating national and international wealth inequality, pernicious saturation level misogyny, racism and Islamophobia, absolute political corruption, IT tyranny and industrial-scale theft from, and murder of innocents around the world.
In terms of money and power however, the Social Justice/Anti-Empire Alt-News is definitely a minority.
The fine hotels, first-class seats on airplanes and magic carpet rides are all reserved for MSM pseudo-journalists who happily rephrase American government narratives and can expect healthy retirement packages at the end of it all.
Thus, Social Justice/Anti-Empire journalists and publications are most certainly minorities.
There was an organization called The Alternative Press Center a non-profit collective dedicated to providing access to and increasing public awareness of the alternative press.
Fortunately, its’ very extensive link list to sometimes obscure publications is still there and occasionally useful, but as large as it is, it isn’t complete or updated.
International Alt-News Most of America’s colonies overseas have either presidents, prime ministers or dictators.
Because the American government can print up as much money as they like, and have no need to follow any international laws what-so-ever (as per American exceptionalism), they are free to completely control at least half of the nations on earth using bribery, extortion, ideology, honey-trap seductions, and of course murder.
Those murders usually take the form of airplane crashes, *® helicopter or car crashes, heart attacks, cancer, etc.
Most don’t last long as majority groups have a number of ways of extinguishing them.
It appears right-wing nationalist parties are “riding high” in Europe at time, especially in Germany.
One reason for this is blow-back from Euro-American wars in Middle Eastern and African countries in the form of waves of refugees arriving in European countries.
This has caused considerable consternation in some members of those local populations that express fear that their “whiteness” is in jeopardy.
The state must prove “imminent threat” to suppress news, which they could not do and so lost this landmark case.
Those trends include the genuine threat of thermonuclear war as compared to “simply” an ever-growing number of endless wars and deadly economic sanctions motivated by American corporate greed for other nation’s natural resources.
February 18, 2021 Ending Corporate Tyranny: Solutions to the Plague that Afflicts Us All, By Michael Diamond There is one sure way to turn matters around quickly.
It involves use of the domestic violence clause in the Constitution of the United States.
That clause in Article IV, Section 4, has the power to wrest control from the corporate elite.
It contains the authority to reconfigure all United States institutions, public and private, for the benefit of the people and to assure our survival.
Whereas the Statue of Limitations may protect some of the above from some litigation, when it comes to American IC/DoD driven wars, the extrajudicial killing of innocent foreigners is murder, which is not covered by the Statue of Limitations.
All of the above bulleted organizations are, on an ongoing basis “party to” these egregious crimes, liable for civil damages and vulnerable to criminal prosecution.
The rational of “just following orders” did not serve as an adequate defense at the Nuremberg Trials and likewise will provide no shelter from civil and potentially criminal prosecution today.
Photo by G Brundage The struggle for liberation from the oppression and violence of the corporate American drive for hegemony in perpetuity will go on.
This struggle is illuminated and facilitated by the last survivors of the real 4** Estate — the Social Justice/Anti-Empire Alt News.
The people in the IC/DoD cabal, Harvard School’s Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy, United States Agency for Global Media, FBI’s Foreign Influence Task Force, the Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab, Graphika, those on the judicial right, USC Center on Public Diplomacy, Coda Story and all the other organizations working on suppressing truth in the United States may feel really good about themselves when they go to sleep at night, but the victims of American hegemonic wars don’t feel so good.
Meanwhile wealth inequality within and between nations leap-frogs to every dizzying extremes.
USAGM also lists five other subordinate organizations besides VOA most people probably never heard of which makes them exponentially more powerful and potentially dangerous to world peace.
Those official numbers are as good as former President Trump’s leadership during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Corporate control of the media intractably diminishes the integrity of American democracy.
For example, CrowdTangle is a Facebook tool that publishers use to track how content spreads across the internet, for monitoring Facebook pages that have put out misinformation at some point in the past and are on either side of the ideological spectrum.
Chomsky's 'Breathlessly Deranged' Quotes, Waving black flag @quotes_chomsky Mar 29, 2021 “The #Reagan administration constructed an array, a #terrorist network of terrorist states.
Next to them all other terrorists are just the rank and file, probably equally divided between witting and unwitting agents of the American “intelligence” apparatus.
The Master List Instances of the United States overthrowing or attempting to overthrow a foreign government since the Second World War,” by William Blum.
Please try to conceptualize how those slaughters of innocents actually benefitted the average American tax payer.
The answer is simple, only the shareholders in major corporations benefit and a substantial number of them hide their profits in anonymous untaxed off-shore accounts.
Furthermore, the entire world is sickened by the American hegemonic drive, few people trust or even like Americans anymore, the United States has an “aging” nuclear arsenal, Russians generally make pretty darned good weapons and due to the ever-widening wealth gap in the USA, plus the huge number of guns, racism, ever-lowering levels of education, hyper-inflated stock market etc. conditions are about right for an implosion.
Further blinding American voters to the realities of world will not help this situation and makes a further complete sham of the democratic system.
Noam Chomsky, the apex social philosopher of our times in his book ‘Hegemony or Survival’ made the consequences of not relinquishing the American fantasy of global hegemony in perpetuity quite clear.
Many empires in the past have attempted to wrest global domination and all have failed.
The USA however is in the unique position where it can trigger WWIII and possibly cause global extinction of all life on earth.
The question is not whether most people on earth would prefer American global domination or death.
Most people in the world are poor (thanks primarily due to EuroAmerican neo-liberalism which results in massive poverty; an a priori condition for instilling colonial servitude worldwide) and have known something akin to slavery their whole lives.
They might opt for American global domination if they had a choice, as compared to certain death in thermonuclear war or the nuclear winter that would follow.
The real question is whether the leaders of other nuclear powers are willing to accept balkanization and eventual subjugation to American hegemony, or risk the potential for thermonuclear war and the nuclear winter that would probably follow.
Russia and China will not ‘go gentle into that good night,’ but will certainly rage before the dying of the light.
The yield of a thermonuclear bomb can be hundreds to thousands of times more powerful than the atomic bomb.
Those fake “alt-news” sites can be identified by the precision of the details they provide in regards to those conflicts.
It is hoped that the issues discussed in this article will help foster a new generation of honest journalists and facilitate political, judicial and corporate reforms in the USA and Western Europe such that that the fate of nations and the people that define them begins again to rest upon forgotten principles such as truth, justice and freedom, as it has in most places at most times in history.
Expanding empires in history usually expanded in bloodshed but then fostered hundreds of years of peace.
As numerous examples across other continents would show, any conquest could bring death and suffering on a large scale.
But, periods of explosive expansion across Asia and North Africa, such as in the extraordinary first decades of the spread of Islam or during the time of the Mongol conquests, were followed by longer periods of stability, peace and prosperity.
In that sense seminal works like Thomas Hobbes’ Leviathan were quintessential texts that explained the rise of the west.
Meanwhile mainstream media are collusively obscuring the fact that the attack on the 76-year-old Chinese granny and the murder of six Asian women in Georgia, were racially motivated largely by President Trump’s Cold War style populist “China virus” lie.
Both the attacker and the victim were later taken to hospital for treatment.
Trumps false claims have further significantly reduced the freedom of millions of Asian Americans.
The single most complete article in the news media about the Atlanta murders of six innocent Asian women was produced by social justice/anti-empire alt-news publication FAIR.com.
It’s the product of a carefully calculated strategic move by the American Department of Defense to defame China in advance of IC/DoD’s intention to Balkanize China into several smaller impoverished nations, in order to further its megalomaniacal plan for hegemony in perpetuity.
Other anti-China myths like the Huawei “security threat” are part of the coordinated information war which provides critical support for the New American Cold War designed to 1) squeeze more money out of tax payers for the Department of Defence , and 2) further the American hegemonic drive designed to attain total global domination.
The IC/DoD confederacy see Balkanization of China as critical to American total domination of the world.
That Chinese grandmothers in the United States should get beaten in the streets and other Asian women murdered is just acceptable “collateral damage” to the IC/DoD cabal.
Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
The differences are semantic, linguistic and cultural variations all describing precisely the same things.
One woman said, ‘Please, my lord, this woman and | live in the same house; and | gave birth while she was in the house.
We were together; there was no one else with us in the house, only the two of us were in the house.
She got up in the middle of the night and took my son from beside me while your servant slept.
So, the king said, ‘Bring me a sword,’ and they brought a sword before the king.
The world wants to be friends with the USA, but the American government has been hijacked by cold-blooded corporations that have weaponized all aspects of American life, turning it into a nation divided against itself and the world.
For those who have never experienced one of America’s hegemonic wars, the possibility of this seems remote at best.
There are certain natural laws and it is wise not to push one’s luck too far.
As of this writing it is not too late for the aggressors to back off and make amends.
Mothers’ Crusade For Victory Over Communism We mothers, who are fighting to save our sons and our Republic, need your immedicte financial end moral support.
National Headquarters, Mothers’ Crusade For Victory Over Communism, P 0.
Those were purely defensive battles against gangs of British boys who had been programmed in school to hate “Yankee dogs,” for their part in the American Revolution.
Skipping a bunch of years in 1968 Mr Brundage returned to the United States again for a couple of years and participated in anti-apartheid and anti-Vietnam War demonstrations learning that the USA was and remains as much or more of a colonial power than the UK ever was.
His first exposure to social justice/anti-empire altnews was via the Kaleidoscope and then the Bugle American newsletter published in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Bugle’s office was firebombed in 1975 and the car of Kaleidoscope’s editor John Kois was also bombed.
Everyone knew Milwaukee Police Department’s Red Squad was behind those attacks.
He, along with a couple of friends started an “underground newspaper” at his high school in 1972.
He was a university student from 1973 to 1988 without a break and started publishing professionally in 1980 writing book reviews for the Special Publication of the American Geographical Society.
In 1988 he started working as a reporter for the Black Press, specifically the Milwaukee Community Journal.
In 1992 he moved to South Asia where he worked first as a stringer with a national newspaper, and later ona freelance basis.
He has lived in and traveled through 30+ nations during almost half of his life, almost always living with indigenous people.
When he began this research, he noticed that no alt-news publications were appearing in his Google searches and found this unusual as in 2016 he had found quite a good collection of what he terms “social justice/anti-empire alt-news” publications on the web.
This led him to consider ways to improve alt-news’ rankings on Google’s search engine.
This led to research on Google’s algorithm, which broadened into more research on the very wide range of government and corporate efforts to suppress alt-news.
After that he began to study relevant laws pertaining to First Amendment rights and subsequent case law.
As many of the subsequent case laws date to the Red Scares in the USA, he studied them also.
This collection of annotated research reviews is the product of that chain of events.
The roots of this dubious plan date back at least to the Munroe Doctrine and are supported by a belief in American Exceptionalism.
Former Secretary of State Clinton brags and laughs about killing him, knowing full well the “rebels” she hired raped him with an iron rod before murdering him.
Certainly, Saddam Hussein the sovereign leader of Iraq was kidnapped by the United States and hanged.
Manuel Noriega, also a former United States intelligence asset was kidnapped, tried and sentenced to 60 years in prison for murder, despite the fact that United States presidents routinely murder large numbers of people.
There used to be a “Kill list” or “Kill Chain” but these days in some countries CI/DoD just kill whoever they want whenever they want.
That only happened because French-African banking headquarters are located in Tunisia, and some members of the French aristocracy and even some members of the French middle class like to take winter vacation in Tunisia enjoying the splendors of the Mediterranean Sea resorts there at much cheaper rates than Italy and Greece.
Niger also always ranks at or second to the bottom of UNDP country rankings and is thus the least, or second least developed country in the world, in spite of being natural resource rich.
For example, Niger’s uranium lights the skies of Paris and other major French cities, while citizens of Niger drink uranium polluted water and live mostly without modern infrastructure at all.
