What followed for the next thirteen days until October 28, 1962 was a series of intense discussions usually held in the Cabinet Room which centered on how to respond to this situation.
The President’s primary response included a naval blockade or “defensive quarantine” put into effect on October 20, 1962.
In addition to the naval blockade, preparations for an all-out military action, including a massive airstrike followed by an invasion of Cuba along with other “diplomatic initiatives” under the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , the Organization of American States , the United Nations , and Rio Treaty were also approved by the President on October 20, 1962.
The air strike was to be implemented following the blockade on October 23, 1962.
However, thanks to Kennedy’s firm resolve to pursue a more peaceful course, and a firm leash on the military and the Central Intelligence Agency , a full-fledged military strike was finally not undertaken.
In addition, I argue that Kennedy’s foreign policy process reflected the small group model, meaning that the foreign policy was an outcome of a small group of people who were formulating the policy process.
This model underlined the need for secrecy, decisiveness in policy making, speed and an extraordinary degree of liquidity in the flow of information to and from the White House.
Hence, the small group model strongly explained the President’s decision making style during the crisis.
Overall, the foreign policy process was very complex, but I characterize it in terms of how President Kennedy headed the process and the various elements he factored in when formulating his response.
President Kennedy initiated the EXCOMM to ensure secrecy and vitality in the decision making process.
This reflected how the President maneuvered the EXCOMM to synthesize a viable response during the crisis.
Kennedy’s exercise of authority was further underlined by Roger Hilsman Jr, Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Research, Department of State, who stated that “in the case of the Cuban missile crisis, it very quickly became clear to Kennedy that it was his baby, and he became the desk officer; he could not delegate this one.
This implied that the OAS, NATO, UN, and allies such as France and Britain had no influence over the foreign policy process.
We find President Kennedy agreeing with Vice President Lyndon Johnson and NSA McGeorge Bundy in the very first EXCOMM meeting on October 16, 1962 where he stated that “I don’t know how much use consulting with the British… I expect they’ll just object.
Hence, it appears that none of these players had any impact whatsoever on Kennedy’s decision.
Hence, the OAS, NATO and the others alike had no impact whatsoever on Kennedy’s decision.
Hence, it was a gesture of diplomatic courtesy on the part of Kennedy Administration, nothing more.
In actuality, the Congress was initially critical of the President’s approach in resolving the crisis.
That is, Congress declared Kennedy’s response to be weak and called for a much more aggressive approach on the part of the United States in dealing with the Soviets.
This was evident from a congressional briefing on October 22, 1962 when the Republicans criticized the Kennedy Administration’s response to the Soviet build up in Cuba to be insufficient and advocated for immediate all-out military action against the missile sites.
The most vigorous and aggressive proponent for military action was the Chairman of the Armed Services Committee, Senator Richard Russell, who criticized President Kennedy by saying that “you have told them not to do this thing.
Although President Kennedy held firmly to his ground and chose to proceed with a blockade, the manner in which congressmen such as Senator Russell perceived the United States response to the missiles in Cuba mirrored the fact that the Congress viewed Kennedy’s response to the crisis through a very critical lens.
However, the role of the Congress in influencing the foreign policy process was limited.
President Kennedy and his inner circle intended to keep the decision-making circle limited to very few members.
That is, the information cycle was limited to only “those with an operational necessity to know” since the President and the EXCOMM believed they did not have “much time” and feared that the missiles would become operational if the United States didn’t react fast and decisively.
This need to conceal the information from the Congress meant that involving the Congress in the policy making process would prove to be detrimental to the United States in light of the given volatility of the situation.
Hence, due to such inherent deliberative functioning of the Congress , due to Kennedy’s hands-on administrative style and time sensitivity, the Congress was simply ‘informed’ of the blockade on Cuba rather than be actively engaged in formulating that response.
Regarding domestic factors, we find they did not exert any explicit direct influence on the President’s decision-making process.
By intermistic issues, we mean that a foreign policy rarely has a purely international focus since much of it will have an impact on domestic issues.
Members of the Senate have a well-defined constituency and are busy responding to domestic concerns, most of which are related to foreign policy issues such as bilateral trade relations between two countries and the like.
As congressmen follow the interests of their constituents, they often come in conflict with other fellow congressmen.
Hence, since the members of Congress are responding to constituent concerns, within Congress we often see this conflict.
But, the developments in Cuba that were brought up by the opposition in terms of a security concern for the United States didn’t have any impact on the United States policy process and the outcome of the blockading Cuba in the crisis.
The reason for the exclusion of the Congress was due to its inherent deliberative functioning and due to Kennedy’s hands-on administrative style.
Consequently, the Congress was simply informed of the blockade rather than be effectively engaged in formulating that response.
Clearly, the domestic elements did not factor in the outcome of the policy process in the crisis.
Control on the Flow of Information and Agenda Setting The President controlled the flow of information.
President Kennedy determined the set of issues to be addressed and the issues he will focus on and how he would focus on them.
Hence, President Kennedy determined the set of issues to be addressed and the issues he would focus on and how he would focus on them.
Hence, this shows that the President ensured that he had absolute knowledge of the latest developments during the crisis and who was receiving the updates besides himself.
President Kennedy not only dictated the process, but also crafted the foreign policy response.
This was evident when President Kennedy, in response to Bundy’s question regarding how the EXCOMM would respond to the information gathered about the missiles on October 16, 1962 stressed that “We ought to stick with that until we want to do something.
This not only reflected the level of control exerted by President Kennedy over media but also, shows the level of secrecy exercised by the Presidency on the information.
The President not only controlled the flow of information, but also exercised control over who participated in the foreign policy process.
We find that Kennedy determined who ought to be included in the process.
Also, President Kennedy exercised total command over the secrecy of the issue, which gained the EXCOMM more time and facilitated the formulation of the response.
This was evident when President Kennedy passed instructions to Bundy stating that “in Defense we’ve got to keep it as tight as possible, particularly what we’re going to do about it.
Furthermore, in his meeting with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Anderi Gromyko, President Kennedy’s application of secrecy was visible in the concealment of his strong intentions to confront Gromyko with the U-2 photographic evidences of the missiles.
Robert Kennedy, Attorney General, stated that the President and his advisors worked “secretly, quietly” and “privately” which enabled the EXCOMM to decide an appropriate United States response.
Hence, we observe that President Kennedy not only determined the players who ought to be a part of the “inner circle” but also, exercised enormous level of control in keeping the issue very quiet.
Commander in Chief The President asserted himself as the Commander in Chief of the Military.
Another event which demonstrated the level of control exercised by the President Kennedy on the Navy was when he himself “carefully and personally selected” the ship Marucla “to be the first ship stopped and boarded ” on October 26, 1962.
President Kennedy was always closely monitoring the developments and did not allow any event go unsupervised by the President himself.
In short, all decisions were made and transmitted from the White House alone.
Kennedy ensured that he had access to every pertinent detail and avoided being insulated from individuals because of their rank in the chain of military command and intelligence hierarchy.
This meant that apart from controlling the information, Kennedy exercised a certain degree of caution in dealing with the crisis.
To this end, the President initiated an “elaborate command and control network,” facilitating his direct communication with the officers on the front.
Kennedy’s command over the military as magnified when the situation was rapidly approaching war, with reports on the October 27, 1962 claiming that a U-2 reconnaissance plane maintaining surveillance over Cuba post blockade had been shot down.
We observe the President refrained from decisively opting for a military retaliation on Cuba and Soviet Union.
Factors Influencing the Process There are several factors which explain why President Kennedy chose to proceed with a blockade over the other three potential policy options proposed by his advisors during the thirteen days.
Fear of Escalation Fear of escalation of the crisis was the most dominant element influencing the foreign policy process.
In short, the threat of US-Soviet relations going extremely bitter was haunting Kennedy months before the crisis of April, highlighting that the fear of escalation was irrevocably a dominant factor influencing Kennedy’s choice of a blockade over a surgical military attack and invasion.
President Kennedy was worried about an unintended escalation of events which would result in a catastrophic nuclear exchange.
The key reason why President Kennedy opted for the blockade over an air strike was simply because this unpredictability of events and a consequent chain reaction of nuclear exchange.
Robert Kennedy attributes the President’s concern regarding “a miscalculation-a mistake in judgment” to the influence of Barbara Tuchman’s book, The Guns of August, which the President had read.
In explaining the reasons for World War I, the book argued that It was possible that “either side could take a step that –for reasons of security or pride or face” which in turn could very easily “bring about a counterresponse” from the other side for similar reasons and this would eventually end in a needless escalation towards armed confrontation.
The impact of this book on President Kennedy was evident when he decided to permit the ship Bucharest to go to Cuba despite strong opposition from his advisors and the military.
His explanation for doing so was that “we don’t want to push him to a precipitous action–give him time to consider.
In short, “every opportunity was to be given to the Russians to find a peaceful settlement” in order to eliminate every possibility of transforming the crisis into “a public humiliation” for the Soviets.
This fear of uncertainty forced the President to constantly place himself in the shoes of Khrushchev.
As well, the constant fear of escalation forced the President to oversee nearly every pertinent detail.
The fact that President Kennedy decided that the blockade on Cuba was strictly against “Soviet arms deliveries to that island rather the all shipments of vital supplies, such as oil” was evidence of President Kennedy’s exercise of maximum precaution towards preventing any further deterioration of the situation.
The impact of this fear of escalation on the President can be seen from the exchange of letters between Kennedy and UN Secretary General U Thant.
Hence, to prevent the occurrence of such a catastrophe, U Thant informed Kennedy about his request to Khrushchev that Soviet ships “be instructed to stay away from the interception area” to permit more time for the “discussions of the modalities of a possible agreement” along the lines of the UN Charter.
In response, on the very same day Kennedy assured U Thant that the United States will “accept and abide by your request” and “do everything possible to avoid direct confrontation with the Soviet ships in the next few days,” avoiding the “risk of any untoward incident” that would exacerbate an already volatile situation.
The second letter which was made public on the same day, recalled Pierre Salinger, “had all kinds of questions and conditions which made Kennedy “uncomfortable” and hence, inclined him to respond to the first letter.
A Rational Policymaker Complementing this fear of miscalculation was President Kennedy’s perception of Khrushchev as a sane and rational actor, which also explains why the former adopted a blockade and followed it with a practice of maximum restraint for the remaining eight days after the blockade.
Robert Kennedy stated that the President “believed right from the start that the Soviet Chairman was a rational, intelligent man who, if given sufficient time and shown our determination, would alter his position” and the President was absolutely focused on eliminating the chances of “error, of mistake, miscalculation, or misunderstanding” on his side.
Everything from issuing a public statement to selectively stopping a ship named Marcula was made based on this simple yet critical question.
As Dean Rusk pointed out, “the United States had overwhelming conventional superiority in the neighborhood of Cuba, and we could have gone in there and taken out those missiles almost with the snap of a finger.
In that same letter, the Soviet Chairman showed his understanding concerning the possibilities of the circumstances to lead to an all-out war by reminding Kennedy that “we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of a rope,” since, “the more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied” and eventually, neither will have the strength to untie that knot, forcing it to be cut.
Hence, Kennedy’s anticipation of Khrushchev’s responses, which were grounded in the former’s understanding and perception of the latter to be rational, set the course of the outcome to be more diplomatic rather than a path of war.
This clearly shows how much the understanding and the perception of the Soviets to be just as rational as Kennedy’s EXCOMM in terms of formulating policy responses explained and influenced Kennedy’s decision to proceed with the blockade.
The Bay of Pigs taught him to not to permit the CIA to act with complete independence and also to not to trust the Joint Chiefs.
Assistant for Special Operations to the Secretary of Defense and Head of Operation Mongoose, Brigadier General.
But, this was false; the reason being that “there was no intelligence evidence” of a potential rebel uprising against the Castro regime within Cuba.
This was unsupportive of the intelligence which the CIA transmitted to the White House, calling for some United States assistance in support of the US-trained dissent groups, stated Brigadier General Andrew Goodpaster, Staff Secretary to President Dwight Eisenhower.
This, coupled with the understanding that “it would be easy” as remarked by Eugene McCarthy, United States Senator highlighted that Operation Mongoose was a case-study mirroring intelligence failure.
The claim that “these plans of the CIA were militarily feasible” by Schlesinger Jr., Special Assistant to the President, made President Kennedy decide not to trust the military and the CIA just on face value.
There was no ground uprising as calculated, and this left President Kennedy “ with himself for relying too much on the advice of others ” during the Bay of Pigs.
Such elements caused a tremendous distrust about the CIA and the military chiefs on the part of the President.
President Kennedy was determined not to repeat it again especially in light of the volatility of the situation.
This not only illustrated the President’s distrust of the JCS, but also re-emphasized his belief that any application of military action by the United States will inevitably escalate the crisis instead of resolving it.
More evidence of the impact of the Bay of Pigs on President Kennedy’s thinking can be seen in his instructions to the Joint Chiefs to communicate to the Turks that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey will not be fired without presidential consent.
Kennedy asked Paul Nitze, Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs, Department of State, to confirm this by stating that “what we’ve got to do is make sure these fellows do know, so that they don’t fire them off and think the United states is under attack.
In other words, Kennedy’s hands-on navigation of the EXCOMM and his approach towards dealing with the JCS and the flow of information was significantly a product of his experience in the Bay of Pigs.
The Berlin Factor With respect to the issue of Berlin and Turkey, Kennedy also had to constantly factor in the implications of military action not only directly on the United States itself rather on other key United States interests abroad, especially on Berlin.
The value of the consequences of a military action on the part of the United States on Cuba and a retaliatory Soviet military move on Berlin and Turkey was central to adopting any course of action.
President Kennedy evaluated the consequences of individual actions prior to embarking on them.
He underlined that whatever the United States response was going to be, it had multilateral implications for both the United States and its allies as well.
In his meeting with the JCS on October 19, 1962 President Kennedy concluded that “when we balance off that our problem is not merely Cuba but it is also Berlin and when we recognize the importance of Berlin to Europe, and recognize the importance of our allies to us, that’s what made this thing to be a dilemma for three days.
Hence, Kennedy clearly evaluated the pro and con of a military strike on Cuba in light of a likewise retaliation from the Soviet Union on Turkey and Berlin and this would hurt the United States interests in Europe tremendously.
Hence, the Turkey and Berlin factors had to be weighed into the policy calculus before embarking on a definitive foreign policy response, explaining why a blockade was chosen over military attack.
Continuous Flow of Information The constant flow of information also had an influence on how President Kennedy made the foreign policy decisions during the thirteen days in 1962.
This report, coupled with the photos of the MRBMs shot by the U-2 reconnaissance on October 14, 1962 provided President Kennedy with the “hard intelligence” which he had asked from Ted Schackley, nearly a month earlier.
Hence, the President’s need for hands-on intelligence evidence about the nature of the missile activities in Cuba prior to the setting up of the EXCOMM signifies not only the enormous amount of control Kennedy exercised on the intelligence community, but also his attempts to ensure the constant flow of information to the White House.
President Kennedy believed that “military policy and power cannot and must not be separated from political and diplomatic decisions” which clearly proved that “the use of force always remained to him merely political tools” and not the final solution to any crisis.
George Ball was the first person in the EXCOMM to bring out this issue of morality on October 18, 1962.
His argument was that a surprise military action is simply a United States imitation of the Pearl Harbor and hence, he stated that “it’s the kind of conduct that one expects of the Soviet Union.
This was chiefly why the President was reluctant to adopt the airstrike and instead chose to proceed with a blockade.
The argument that “a surprise air attack would erode if not destroy the moral position of the United States throughout the world” was further strengthened by General Taylor’s estimation that “we’re never sure of getting all the missiles and the offensive weapons if we fire a strike.
This made President Kennedy firmer in pursuing the course of blockade instead of a military action.
Hence, we observe that the blockade not only significantly reduced the unpredictability in crisis but also restored the United States image in the world, and most importantly, preserved the unity of alliances which in turn lent credibility and legitimacy to the response itself.
In support, from the EXCOMM conversations on October 18, 1962 in the DVD Voices from the Brink, we hear Ball remarking that “this business of carrying that mark of Cain on your brow for the rest of your life is something…” Here, we observe that the quarantine provided a moral basis for the acceptance of the United States response in the international community which the alternative options such as the surgical military strikes didn’t.
Credibility and International Legality Turning our attention on the question of international legality, we find that one of the crucial elements influencing President Kennedy’s decision to follow through with the blockade was the issue of legality or legitimacy of the response.
In addition to reducing the unpredictability in crisis, the blockade restored the United States image in the world and, most importantly, preserved the unity of alliances which in turn lent credibility and legitimacy to the United States response.
To begin, Kennedy perceived the placement of the missiles even after repeated warnings in his speeches on September 4th and 13th to be violating the ethics and the conventional etiquette of the international arena.
In addition, the deployments of Soviet missiles in Cuba were seen as challenging the United States willingness/firmness to enact its stated policies which signified the nature of the United States response to such actions on the part of the Soviets.
Hence, it was a question of the international or “hemispheric” legality and credibility of the response which President Kennedy and his advisors had to articulate, in order to maintain the unity within various alliances, including the NATO, UN, OAS, Britain, and France.
When Robert McNamara emphasized the advantages and disadvantages of a blockade in the meeting on October 20, 1962, it explains why proceeding with the blockade, in Kennedy’s eyes, would be perceived as a legitimate and credible policy by the allies.
This cost-benefit analysis by the Secretary of Defense was again explicitly reflected in the President’s meeting with the JCS on October 19, 1962 during which President Kennedy explained his reasons for choosing the blockade over a military alternative.
Another instance which reflected the significance of credibility was when Kennedy, underlining the significance of holding talks with NATO over Khrushchev’s proposed Cuba-Turkey deal on the October 26, 1962 said that “the advantage of the meeting is that, if we reject it , they participate in it.
Also, Kennedy’s letter to Macmillan on October 22, 1962 in which he reached out to the latter, asking him to “speak forthrightly in support” of the blockade in the UN Security Council meeting, shows Kennedy’s aims to gain unanimity among his allies such as Britain for the quarantine.
Macmillan replied in a telegram stating Britain’s support to the United States response on Cuba in the Security Council meeting.
Here, we see that although President Kennedy did not engage the allies in the decision-making process, he definitely reached out to them for mustering international support for United States response once the decision to employ a blockade was made.
Clearly, President Kennedy was signifying that the perception of allies does matter towards implementing the United States response which enjoyed international consensus.
President Kennedy’s EXCOMM reflected the small group model towards formulating the policy response.
This situation is characterized by policy makers coming together and acting together in the same way because it’s easy and they don’t have to run the risk of facing criticism for holding a particular viewpoint which in turn could alienate them from the group and the policy process.
The hallmark of group-think is “close-mindedness or a collective reluctance to question basic assumptions about the problem at hand,” resulting in a “shared illusion” of consensus within the group.
Hence, the implication of group-think in the context of a foreign policy process includes “collaboration and compromise” among the players whose individual beliefs harmonize and align with other members involved in the decision making process.
Roswell Gilpatric, Deputy Secretary of Defense, recalls that the President “not only allowed, he encouraged open discussion.
Hence, the meetings involved multiple viewpoints and insights which significantly eliminated the groupthink issue.
However, it was the President who had the final say as to how things were to proceed.
In conclusion, the small group model illustrates how President Kennedy delegated the policy response to the Soviet missiles placed in Cuba through the EXCOMM in those thirteen days between October 16, 1962 to October 28, 1962.
This model showcases President Kennedy’s organization style as a “personal and intimate command” in delegating and constructing the United States response to the crisis.
The crisis did not end on October 28, 1962 with the confirmation of the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba in exchange for the United States assurance against the invasion of Cuba.
Instead, “weeks of secret, often tense, negotiations followed until a complete Soviet and United States understanding and an accompanying end to the United States blockade could be announced on November 20” The Kennedy Tapes, ed.
Furthermore, Marcula was basically an American built Liberty ship which was registered from Lebanon and was going to Cuba under the soviet charter.
Second, a surgical airstrike only on the Soviet missile sites and third, an invasion of Cuba.
Both of these military proposals were firmly advocated by the military chiefs headed by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell Taylor.
Furthermore, President Kennedy’s control over the military is evident in the Executive Committee Minutes document of October 23, 1962 which clearly mentions a list of plans authorized personally by the President.
Also, see President Kennedy’s personal telegram T488162 to Macmillan on October 21, 1962 in which he stressed on unity and resoluteness among the ally forces of Briton, NATO, OAS and France towards countering Khrushchev.
For further understanding of the United States stance in this regard, see Zelikow and May, 178.
I’m not sure what this means/ how it would have affected Kennedys decision making process and would be greatful for any help in understanding.
