Subscribe here to our free email list for two information-packed emails per week.
Key news articles Big Brother: Revealing news articles Income Inequality: Revealing news articles Mass Animal Deaths: Revealing news articles Mind-Altering Drugs: Revealing news articles Nature of Reality: Revealing news articles 9/11 Cover-up GO General: Excerpts from all key 9/11 articles Able Danger: Excerpts from key articles Prof.
Subscribe Free John F Kennedy Assassination Facts, Theories Author Presents Facts, Theories of John F Kennedy Assassination Dear friends, Countless theories attempt to explain the John F Kennedy assassination.
Yet few have taken the painstaking efforts needed to carefully document all of the facts related to the many steps taken by Kennedy which greatly upset the establishment in the lead-up to his assassination.
This may be the most definitive book ever on the many facts and theories surrounding the Kennedy assassination.
The below concise summary of the painstaking work by Douglass both captivates and inspires.
With references and links to verify his statements, Douglass presents numerous revealing facts and powerful evidence that John F Kennedy took far too many steps towards peace and away from the secret agendas of his war-hungry generals and rich industrialists.
His behavior simply could not be tolerated by those who stood to lose billions of dollars from his ever-growing resolve to create more peace in our world.
Yet despite some of the disturbing facts presented, Douglass leaves us with great hope.
As he states, the life and death of John F Kennedy ""is not so much a story of one man as it is a story of peacemaking when the chips are down.
If each of us is inspired to stand up and do the right thing, the whole world will change for the better.
For how you can play your part, see the ""What you can do"" section at the end of this excellent essay.
By James W Douglass, author of acclaimed book JFK and the Unspeakable I believe this experiment we are doing into the dark truth of Dallas can be the most hopeful experience of our lives.
But, it does require patience and tenacity to confront the unspeakable.
We, first of all, need to take the time to recognize the sources in our history for what happened in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
The document was issued in 1948, one year after the CIA was established, and 15 years before JFK's murder.
That document, National Security Council directive 10/2, on June 18, 1948, ""gave the highest sanction of the government to a broad range of covert operations"" — propaganda, sabotage, economic warfare, subversion of all kinds — that were seen as necessary to ""win"" the Cold War against the Communists.
In the 1950s, under the leadership of CIA Director Allen Dulles, the doctrine of ""plausible deniability"" became the CIA's green light to assassinate national leaders, conduct secret military operations, and overthrow governments that our government thought were on the wrong side in the Cold War.
President Harry Truman, under whom the CIA was created, and during whose presidency the plausible deniability doctrine was authorized, had deep regrets.
One assumption behind Kennan's proposal unleashing the CIA for its war against Communism was that the Agency's criminal power could be confined to covert action outside the borders of the United States, with immunity from its lethal power granted to United States citizens.
During the Cold War, the hidden growth of the CIA's autonomous power corresponded to the public growth of what was called a fortress state.
The insecure basis of our security then became weapons that could destroy the planet.
To protect the security of that illusory means of security, which was absolute destructive power, we now needed a ruling elite of national security managers with an authority above that of our elected representatives.
So from that point on, our military-industrial managers made the real decisions of state.
President Truman simply ratified their decisions and entrenched their power, as he did with the establishment of the CIA, and as his National Security Council did with its endorsement of plausible deniability.
Kennedy sacks CIA leaders We know how JFK reacted to the CIA's setting him up.
He ordered an investigation into the whole affair, under the very watchful eyes of his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
He fired CIA Director Allen Dulles, Deputy Director Richard Bissell, Jr., and Deputy Director General Charles Cabell.
That was a huge decision — firing the top of the CIA's hierarchy, including the legendary leader who had come to personify the agency, Allen Dulles.
He was cutting back the CIA's power in very concrete ways, step by step.
JFK alienates CIA and Pentagon JFK had to confront the unspeakable in the Missile Crisis in the form of total nuclear war.
At the height of that terrifying conflict, he felt the situation spiraling out of control, especially because of the actions of his generals.
The White House tapes show Kennedy questioning and resisting the mounting pressure to bomb Cuba coming from both the Joint Chiefs and the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
The United States and Soviet leaders had been following Cold War policies that now seemed to be moving inexorably toward a war of extermination.
Two enemies become peacemakers Yet, as we have since learned, Kennedy and Khrushchev had been engaged in a secret correspondence for over a year that gave signs of hope.
Even as they moved publicly step by step toward a Cold War climax that would almost take the world over the edge with them, they were at the same time smuggling confidential letters back and forth that recognized each other's humanity and hoped for a solution.
They were public enemies who, in the midst of deepening turmoil, were secretly learning something approaching trust in each other.
On what seemed the darkest day in the crisis, when a Soviet missile had shot down a U2 spy plane over Cuba, intensifying the already overwhelming pressures on Kennedy to bomb Cuba, the president sent his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, secretly to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
RFK told Dobrynin, as Dobrynin reported to Khrushchev, that the president ""didn't know how to resolve the situation.
Even if he doesn't want or desire a war, something irreversible could occur against his will.
At a moment when the world was falling into darkness, Kennedy did what from his generals' standpoint was intolerable and unforgivable.
Even worse, the president then reached out to their enemy, asking for help.
The two most heavily armed leaders in history, on the verge of total nuclear war, suddenly joined hands against those on both sides pressuring them to attack.
Khrushchev ordered the immediate withdrawal of his missiles from Cuba, in return for Kennedy's public pledge never to invade Cuba and his secret promise to withdraw United States missiles from Turkey — as he would in fact do.
When President Kennedy stood up to the Pentagon, the CIA, and the military-industrial complex, he was treated as a traitor.
His attempt to save the planet from the weapons of his own nation was regarded as treason.
The doctrine of ""plausible deniability"" allowed for the assassination of a president seen as a national security risk himself.
Kennedy's rejection of ""a Pax Americana"" was an act of resistance to the military-industrial complex.
At his own risk, Kennedy was rejecting the foundation of the Cold War system.
Kennedy said he wanted to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union in Moscow — in their capitol, not ours — as soon as possible.
To clear the way for such a treaty, he said he was suspending United States atmospheric tests unilaterally.
Kennedy's strategy of peace penetrated the Soviet government's defenses far more effectively than any missile could have done.
The Soviet press, which was accustomed to censoring United States government statements, published the entire speech all across the country.
Soviet radio stations broadcast and rebroadcast the speech to the Soviet people.
In response to Kennedy's turn toward peace, the Soviet government even stopped jamming all Western broadcasts into their country.
In contrast to the Soviet media that were electrified by the speech, the United States media ignored or downplayed it.
He negotiated the Test Ban Treaty without consulting them, because they opposed it.
JFK reaches out to Cuba In the month leading up to the assassination, Kennedy and Castro actually began a dialogue on normalizing U.S.-Cuban relations, through the mediation of French journalist Jean Daniel who personally visited both men.
Daniel was actually eating lunch with Castro in his home on November 22, conveying Kennedy's hopeful words, when the Cuban premier was phoned with the news of Kennedy's death.
JFK's top-secret order to begin withdrawal from Vietnam Kennedy decided on his policy of withdrawal from Vietnam, against the arguments of most of his advisers, at a contentious National Security Council meeting on October 2.
In light of the future consequences of Dallas, it was not only John Kennedy who was murdered on November 22, 1963, but 58,000 other Americans and over three million Vietnamese, Laotians, and Cambodians.
The Steel Crisis In a head-on confrontation with the ruling elite of Big Steel, JFK ordered the Defense Department to switch huge military contracts away from the major steel companies to the smaller, more loyal contractors that had not defied him.
After the big steel companies bitterly backed down from their price raises, JFK and his brother, Robert, were denounced as symbols of ""ruthless power"" by the Wall Street power brokers at the center of the military-industrial complex.
The Ides of April"" , Henry Luce's Fortune magazine called to readers' minds the soothsayer's warning in Shakespeare of the assassination of Julius Caesar.
Fortune was warning Kennedy that his actions had confirmed the worst fears of corporate America about his presidency, and would have dire consequences.
As interpreted by the most powerful people in the nation, the steel crisis was a logical prelude to Dallas.
JFK reaches out to third world Yet another Bay of Pigs was Kennedy's diplomatic opening to the fiery Third-World leadership of President Sukarno of Indonesia.
It wanted what it saw as his pro-communist ""global orientation"" obliterated.
During Eisenhower's presidency, the CIA repeatedly tried to kill and overthrow Sukarno but failed.
Most significantly, three days before his assassination, President Kennedy said he was willing to accept Sukarno's invitation to visit Indonesia the following spring.
His visit to Indonesia would have dramatized in a very visible way Kennedy's support of Third World nationalism, a sea change in United States government policy.
JFK's Indonesian policy was also killed in Dallas, with horrendous consequences.
After Lyndon Johnson became president, the CIA finally succeeded in overthrowing Sukarno in a massive purge of suspected Communists that ended up killing 500,000 to one million Indonesians.
Kennedy's proposal for a joint U.S.-Soviet moon landing In his September 20, 1963, speech to the United Nations, JFK once again stated his hope for a joint expedition to the moon.
However, neither American nor Soviet military leaders, jealous of their rocket secrets, were ready to accept his initiative.
Nikita Khrushchev, siding with his own rocket experts, felt he was still forced to decline Kennedy's proposal.
That further visionary step to end the Cold War also died with Kennedy.
United States and Soviet rockets continued to be pointed at their opposite countries rather than being joined in a project for a more hopeful future.
JFK meets the Quakers In the final weeks of his presidency, President Kennedy took one more risky step toward peace.
It can be seen in relation to a meeting he had the year before with six Quakers who visited him in his office.
Among their challenges to him was a recommendation that the United States offer its surplus food to the People's Republic of China.
Kennedy said he knew that, and knew that it was the right thing to do, but he couldn't overcome the China lobby in Washington to accomplish it.
Nevertheless, a year and a half later in the fall of 1963, against overwhelming opposition, Kennedy decided to sell wheat to the Russians, who had a severe grain shortage.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson said he thought Kennedy's decision to sell wheat to Russia would turn out to be the worst political mistake he ever made.
Today JFK's controversial decision ""to feed the enemy"" has been forgotten.
In 1963, the wheat sale was seen as a threat to our security — feeding the enemy to kill us.
The violent reaction to his decision was represented on Friday morning, November 22, 1963, by a threatening, full-page advertisement addressed to him in the Dallas Morning News.
JFK talks about assassination JFK read the ad before the flight from Fort Worth to Dallas, pointed it out to Jacqueline Kennedy, and talked about the possibility of his being assassinated that day.
That was not the kind of leadership the CIA, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the military-industrial complex wanted in the White House.
Given the Cold War dogmas that gripped those dominant powers, and given Kennedy's turn toward peace, his assassination followed as a matter of course.
Because John Kennedy chose peace on earth at the height of the Cold War, he was executed.
But because he turned toward peace, in spite of the consequences to himself, humanity is still alive and struggling.
That is hopeful, especially if we understand what he went through and what he has given to us as his vision.
A profile in courage The void of the unspeakable is the dark abyss, the midnight reality of plausible deniability, that we face when we peer into our national security state's murder of President Kennedy.
At a certain point in his presidency, John Kennedy turned a corner and didn't look back.
Although Kennedy was already in conflict with his national security managers, the missile crisis was the breaking point.
At that most critical moment for us all, he turned from any remaining control his security managers had over him toward a deeper ethic, a deeper vision in which the fate of the earth became his priority.
Without losing sight of our own best hopes in this country, he began to home in, with his new partner, Nikita Khrushchev, on the hope of peace for everyone on this earth.
And what a propaganda campaign has been waged to keep us Americans from understanding that story, from telling it, and from re-telling it to our children and grandchildren.
But when a nation is under the continuing domination of an idol, namely war, it is a story that will be covered up.
When the story can liberate us from our idolatry of war, then the worshippers of the idol are going to do everything they can to keep the story from being told.
From the standpoint of a belief that war is the ultimate power, that's too dangerous a story.
It shows a different kind of security than always being ready to go to war.
It's unbelievable — or we're supposed to think it is — that a president was murdered by our own government agencies because he was seeking a more stable peace than relying on nuclear weapons.
For the sake of a nation that must always be preparing for war, that story must not be told.
That is why it is so hopeful for us to confront the unspeakable and to tell the transforming story of a man of courage, President John F Kennedy.
In the end, it is not so much a story of one man as it is a story of peacemaking when the chips are down.
To purchase the author's highly acclaimed book JFK and the Unspeakable: Why He Died and Why It Matters, click here.
For a stunning History Channel documentary presenting powerful evidence that President Lyndon Johnson had a direct hand in the Kennedy assassination, click here.
For documents on Kennedy stopping his generals from staging a terror attack in the United States and falsely accusing Cuba, click here.
And for lots more reliable facts, videos, and revealing information on the John F Kennedy assassination, click here.
United States News and World Report, July 25, 2004, Mission Impossible.
Originally in letter from Harry S Truman to William B Arthur, June 10, 1964.
Address by President John F Kennedy to the UN General Assembly, September 20, 1963.
See also the July 24, 2010 Dallas Morning News article which includes this story as reported by JFK aide and close friend Kenneth O'Donnell at this link.
Inform your media and political representatives of this important information on John F Kennedy assassination facts and theories.
For lots more facts, information, videos, books, and more John F Kennedy assassination theories, see the excellent Kennedy assassination information center at this link.
For a collection of highly revealing major media articles and government documents on the John F Kennedy assassination, click here.
For an inspiring essay on how we can work together to build a brighter future, click here.
WantToKnow.info Inspiration Center WantToKnow.info believes it is important to balance disturbing cover-up information with inspirational writings which call us to be all that we can be and to work together for positive change.
For an abundance of uplifting material, please visit our Inspiration Center.
