Fidel Castro's radical Cuban government alarmed United States officials because it advocated revolution throughout Latin America and built economic and military ties with the Soviet Union, the United States’ primary Cold War adversary.
Since 1959, the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations had sought to overthrow Castro through such operations as the failed Bay of Pigs expedition—Kennedy was understandably cooler on military solutions to the Cuban problem as a result of the Bay of Pigs.
Through this measure, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sought to defend Cuba; counter the threat raised by the Jupiter missiles America recently placed in Turkey; and bolster Moscow's leadership of the Communist world, which China's Mao Zedong had begun to challenge.
The Central Intelligence Agency monitored Cuba through U-2 reconnaissance flights.
The CIA predicted that some Soviet missiles could shortly become operational, perhaps even with nuclear warheads.
On 16 October, an alarmed President John F Kennedy assembled key advisers, soon designated the Executive Committee , and debated how to respond.
ExComm advisers ruled out an air strike because it might leave missiles untouched.
Kennedy readied United States forces for an invasion, but hesitated because of potential high casualties and possible Soviet retaliation, perhaps against Berlin—the Bay of Pigs also provided little positive precedent.
ExComm shelved the negotiations option because United States officials refused to negotiate with Castro, and they feared that Khrushchev would simply stall until missiles were operational.
In the end, ExComm endorsed a naval blockade, or “quarantine,” to stop further Soviet military shipments and to force Khrushchev to retreat in the face of superior United States power in the region.
United States war vessels patrolled the Caribbean to intercept ships, and 140,000 United States troops in Florida prepared for an assault against Cuba.
Nervous observers sketched doomsday scenarios, especially when Moscow denounced the blockade as a violation of international law and an intrusion into Soviet–Cuban affairs.
On 26 October, in one of several letters he exchanged with Kennedy during the crisis, Khrushchev proposed to remove the “defensive” Soviet missiles if the United States pledged not to invade Cuba.
Meanwhile, the president's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, met privately with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, exploring the missile-swap option.
That day, 27 October, the crisis escalated when a SAM shot down a U-2 over Cuba and an Alaska-based United States spy plane strayed into Soviet territory.
Deciding to strike a deal, President Kennedy publicly agreed to the no-invasion pledge and privately, through Robert Kennedy, assured Dobrynin that the Jupiters would be withdrawn.
Khrushchev, who feared losing control over the events, especially because of Castro's unpredictability, accepted these terms.
Castro bitterly resented the settlement and rejected United Nations on-site inspections to confirm missile removal.
Although the missiles and bombers departed Cuba, the United States and the Soviet Union never signed a formal agreement.
Taking credit for effective crisis management, Kennedy enhanced his image for boldness and courage.
In retrospect, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara attributed the success less to Kennedy's competence than to happenstance because of the “misinformation, miscalculation, misjudgment, and human fallibility” that dogged all leaders in the crisis.
Soviet leaders in 1964 deposed Khrushchev, apparently believing he had undertaken a reckless gamble.
In its aftermath, Washington and Moscow worked to soothe tensions, installed a “hot line” , and signed the Limited Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 1963.
Still, some analysts argue that Kennedy's success in driving the missiles from Cuba may have emboldened him to become more interventionist in Vietnam.
United States policy toward Cuba remained hardline, with new assassination plots and CIA sabotage.
The Soviets vowed to end their nuclear inferiority by building more weapons, escalating the nuclear arms race.
With its potential for thermonuclear exchange, the Cuban missile crisis ranks as perhaps the Cold War's most perilous moment.
