On Tuesday morning, October 16, 1962 President John F Kennedy awoke to a political and security nightmare.
At 9 A.M., McGeorge Bundy, his National Security Adviser, informed him that a U-2 reconnaissance mission over Cuba had photographed Soviet medium range ballistic missiles, nuclear capable weapons with a range of 1,200 miles.
In public and private statements Premier Nikita Khrushchev had stated that he sent only defensive armaments to Cuba, and during a press conference in September the president had warned Khrushchev that the United States would not tolerate offensive weapons.
Meeting that morning with fourteen handpicked advisers—known to history as the ExComm—Kennedy agreed that the missiles would have to be bombed and Cuba invaded.
But a week later, on Monday evening, October 22nd, he announced his decision to “quarantine” Cuba as the first move to force Khrushchev to withdraw his missiles.
It required shedding firmly held Cold War doctrines and resisting the arguments of hard-line advisers who favored attacking Cuba and overthrowing Castro.
It was a political risk, but in light of the possibility that an attack could lead to a war with the Soviet Union, Kennedy reasoned, possibilities had to be treated as probabilities.
How he reached this conclusion is revealed in a secret recording of a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the fourth morning of the crisis.
It offers a cardinal lesson in presidential leadership in the nuclear age.
The meeting in the Oval Office on October 19th began at 10m. with JCS chairman, Gen.
On the other hand, if we attack the missiles or invade Cuba it gives them a clear line to take Berlin,” Khrushchev’s highest priority since 1958.
To complicate the situation further, he continued, “our blockade of Cuba will give Khrushchev an excuse to blockade Ber­lin, which will infuriate our allies.
When we recognize the importance of Berlin to Europe, and recognize the importance of our allies to us, that’s what has made this thing be a dilemma for three days.
Of course “we’ve got to do something,” he conceded, because doing nothing will not make the Berlin problem go away.
The blockade, he worried, will provide the Soviets with time to hide their missiles, and it will even encourage them to move against Berlin.
It is a loss to history that there is no photograph of Ken­nedy’s face at that moment.
But one can imagine his jaw tightening, his temples pulsing, and his eyes fixed firmly on LeMay.
Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral George Anderson, Army Chief of Staff Earle Wheeler and Marine Corp Commandant David Shoup backed LeMay.
As long as Castro was supported by the Soviet Union, a military assault was the only good option, they believed.
It was impossible to be sure that all the missiles were destroyed, Gen.
From a military point of view, he concluded, “I feel that the lowest risk course of action is the full gamut of military action by us.
LeMay then reminded the president that he had made several strong public statements warning the Soviets against sending offensive weapons of any type to Cuba.
Despite their mutual interest in deposing Fidel Castro’s communist government, the chiefs’ and the president viewed the crisis differently.
The chiefs’ objective was to be in the best position to fight a war, while the president’s aim was to select the strategy that was least likely to start a war.
Both assumptions were plausible, and perhaps the Soviets would not have responded militarily.
But he was driven by obligations and pressures that could force him to retaliate if his missiles were attacked.
His decision would depend on too many variables for the president to accept the chiefs’ blithe assumptions.
People watching President John F Kennedy's TV announcement of Cuban blockade during the missile crisis in a department store in California on Oct., 1962.
Focus on diplomacy and make it as easy as possible for Khrushchev to back down.
The additional firepower that the missiles in Cuba added to the Soviet arsenal didn’t add “particularly to our danger,” he insisted.
The missiles in Cuba might add to the danger, but they didn’t create it, he insisted.
The Soviet Union’s ICBMs, bombers, and sub­marines can kill eighty to one hundred million Americans.
Had the president not insisted on a blockade, had he accepted the Chief’s recommendations (also favored by the majority of his ExComm advisers, he unwittingly would have precipitated a nuclear war.
As American troops assaulted the island they would have confronted four times the 10,000 Soviet troops the CIA estimated in Cuba, and they would have been massacred by an array of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons that American intelligence had not discovered.
The decision to blockade rather than invade Cuba led to the most dangerous week of the Cold War.
But with diplomacy and luck, compromise and serendipity, the crisis ended peacefully when Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles on Sunday morning, October 28.
No other event in history offers as many relevant lessons about presidential leadership in the nuclear age as those thirteen days in October.
Vote Now What to Know About the Leaked Roe Wade Supreme Court Draft Opinion The Economy is Great.
The Middle Class is Mad The Ukraine Food Price Crisis is Just a Preview of What Could Happen as Climate Change Worsens The United States Is in a 'Controlled Pandemic' Phase of COVID-19.
Elon Musk and the Tech Bro Obsession With 'Free Speech' The Best Fashion Moments From the 2022 Met Gala Contact us at letters@time.com.
TIME Ideas hosts the world's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture.
Opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of TIME editors.
SHARE THIS STORY Read More From TIME You May Also Like Read Next I Was Shot and Lost My Sight for Protesting Inequality in Chile.
