Kennedy traveled to Vienna, Austria, for a summit with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
Not only was the summit unsuccessful in its goal of building trust, but it also increased tensions between the two superpowers—particularly in discussions regarding the divided city of Berlin.
West Berlin became highly attractive to East Berliners, who were suffering economically and had no freedom of speech.
More than 3 million East Germans ﬂed to West Berlin; problem was that they were highly skilled workers/academically trained, and were vital to EG economy.
By 1961, Soviets knew they had to stop exodus in fear of economic decline.
On 4 June 1961, Khrushchev demanded the Western powers leave Berlin, but the US refused.
Building the Wall On 13 Aug., 1961, a 27 mile long wall of barbed wire was put up, which separated West Berlin from East Berlin, with tanks/gunmen placed at strategic points to stop people ﬂeeing to West Berlin.
The wall made from barbed wire so to gauge the Western response; the three essentials of United States foreign policy were not affected, and so the Western response was moderate.
Concrete construction of wall began on 17 Aug This permanent wall had: A touch alarm fence Steel mesh A pipe too large in diameter for climbers to grip on top of the wall Towers, guards and dogs watching over ‘forbidden zones’ which ran for miles behind the wall.
West side: had graffiti/drawings all over it, showing how they felt about the divide.
Creation of Berlin Wall only increased strain on already tense US-USSR relations.
Walling up the East Less than a month later the East German government sealed off all access roads between East and West Berlin and began construction of the Berlin wall that surrounded West Berlin to ensure that citizens of East Germany would stay in their communist territory A long wall of barbed wire was put up, which separated West Berlin from East Berlin, with tanks/gunmen placed at strategic points to stop people ﬂeeing to West Berlin.
Symbolic of the Cold War and the dictatorial and oppressive means that the communist party needed to employ to ensure loyalty of its inhabitants – telling symbol of the closed society that was at the heart of the Soviet’s communist system.
Concrete example of the differences between the communist world and the non-communist world.
CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CONTEXT Since 1933 Cuba was governed by a Pro-American dictator, Batista, who was committed to preserving a repressive, authoritarian regime which favoured the privileged class – anti-democratic policies – America supported this to avoid the rise of anti-Batista communists.
The United States bought the majority of all Cuban exports However in 1959 Batista’s government was overthrown in a communist revolution by Fidel Castro.
Supporters of Batista, industrialists, bureaucrats and the privileged class, ﬂed to the United States – they were welcomed.
Bay of the Pigs Right wing Cuban refugees planned a counter-revolution to overthrow Castro.
JFK endorsed the plan and so the CIA trained Cuban exiles for invasion and counter-revolution – April 1961 the invasion took place – the landing did not incite a popular uprising – the landing brigade was captured by Cuban army loyal to Castro – humiliation to the United States – propaganda for the Soviets – Bay of Pigs incident.
Soviets stepped in to support the Castro government they received aid from the USSR and the Cubans allowed Soviets to construct military/missile bases.
JFK warned Khrushchev against installing the missiles Frantic diplomatic exchanges between the two governments JFK agreed not to invade Cuba and Khrushchev accepted and sent a telegram to tell JFK that the missile bases would be dismantled Soviets stepped in to support the Castro government – Cubans allowed Soviets to construct military/missile bases Up to Aug.62, the Soviets sent equipment, troops and money to Cuba; this included 40,000 USSR troops and other specialised equipment.
Kennedy is informed of this, and was given a variety of options; a quarantine/blockade of the Cuban island; a bombing raid to destroy the missile sites; invasion; or a diplomatic solution involving the removal of the missiles.
On 24 Oct. the Soviet ships reached the line of United States ships and were stopped.
Khrushchev sent a message to Kennedy on 24 Oct., and another, more aggressive, note on 26 Oct.
Kennedy responded to the ﬁrst message on the advice of his brother, but ignored the second message.
October 1962 – United States naval cordon set up around Cuba – ships going into Cuba searches Soviet ships escorted by a Soviet submarine sailed towards Cuba with no intention to stop – realisation a “hot” war, likely to involve nuclear weapons, seemed like a possibility Frantic diplomatic exchanges between the two governments.
Reduced the bargaining power of the USSR in negotiations with the West Brought to the United States reconsiderations about theories about nuclear war.
January 1968 – liberal reformer Alexander Dubcek chosen as new leader of the communist party.
Reformers were still pro-communist, but wanted to implement changes, such as freedom of speech.
Censorship of TV/press is lifted, and this starts to worry Brezhnev in May; censorship was formally abolished in Czech. in June.
Is much protest from Czech. students/artists, etc., and the UN calls for peace/moderation.
Tensions heighten with Romania/Yugoslavia, who proclaim support for Czech.
Soviet troops appear to be readying themselves to invade Romania ; President Johnson of the United States warns the USSR against invasion, and none comes.
In Oct., Dubcek is forced to sign a treaty with the USSR while under arrest in Moscow.
Most Czechs did not resist – although there were rocks thrown at tanks, street signs removed to confuse tanks, etc.
Dubcek and his colleagues’ were arrested and replaced with dictator, Gustav Husak.
A new, pro-Moscow government is introduced The Brezhnev Doctrine decreed the Soviet Union’s right to intervene in the affairs of another country when the interests of socialism were being threatened 20 August 1968, troops from Warsaw Pact countries invaded Czechoslovakia to restore Soviet control Most Czechs did not resist – although there were rocks thrown at tanks, street signs removed to confuse tanks, etc.
Dubcek and his colleagues’arrested and replaced with pliable dictator, Gustav Husak A new, pro-Moscow government is introduced Impact of the Prague Spring The Brezhnev Doctrine was born.
It was the justiﬁcation for the invasion and said that Warsaw Pact countries were not allowed to follow policies involving any departure from a one-party state; and if any developments took place in any Warsaw Pact member country which seemed a threat to socialism, it was the right/duty of other member states to intervene militarily to bring reforms to an end.
This Soviet military imposition on a supposedly sovereign country provoked international outrage – although, Western countries offered only vocal criticism.
Brutal reminder of the Soviet Union’s paranoia about protecting its frontiers through the maintenance of friendly buffer states – in the USSR there were a number of open acts of dissentg. activists protested against the use of military force in Czechoslovakia in the Red Square on 25th August 1968.
If any developments took place in any Warsaw Pact member country which seemed a threat to socialism, it was the right/duty of other member states to intervene militarily to bring reforms to an end.
Warsaw Pact countries were not allowed to follow policies involving any departure from a one-party state.
