Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER Federal Research Division Library of Congress wRi KirirsHEaswir'fl Washington, DC 20540-5220 9.
SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES Prepared under an Interagency Agreement 12a DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 12b.
ABSTRACT This study provides comparative perspectives of the October 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
The purpose is to present briefly the alternative perceptions of the United States and the Soviet Union during the crisis, comparing these perceptions with each other and with current appraisals of the actual course of events.
The major events of the crisis are summarized in chronological order, with the perspectives of the United States and the Soviet Union summarized separately.
A current appraisal of the actual course of events, based on the most recent available declassified primary and secondary literature, is also provided.
NUMBER OF PAGES 30 Cuba United States Foreign Relations Soviet Union — Foreign Relations 16.
The Federal Research Division is the Library of Congress's primary feefor-service research unit.
The subjects researched include the broad spectrum of social sciences, physical sciences, and the humanities.
For additional information on obtaining the research and analytical services of the Federal Research Division, please call 202/707-9905, fax 202/707-9920), via Internet frd@mail.loc.gov, or write to Marketing Coordinator, Federal Research Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC 20540-5220.
April-July 1962 1 The Soviet Conventional Weapons Buildup in Cuba: July-October 1962 2 The Soviet Nuclear Weapons Buildup in Cuba: September 8-October 14.
The major events of the missile crisis are summarized in chronological order, with the perspectives of the United States and the Soviet Union summarized separately.
April-July 1962 The deployment of missiles of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in Cuba was taken at the initiative of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
The operation to introduce medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missiles was conceived by Khrushchev in April and was planned by the Soviet government from May to July 1962.
Mid-April~While vacationing in the Crimea, Premier Khrushchev was alerted by Soviet Defense Minister Marshal Rodion Ya.
Malinovsky to the presence of United States Jupiter missiles just over the horizon in Turkey.
The proximity of United States missiles in Turkey and Italy to the USSR was considered a major threat to the small Soviet intercontinental ballistic missile force, which had become vulnerable to decimation by a United States nuclear firststrike.
Khrushchev proposed that comparable Soviet missiles be based secretly in Cuba in order to quickly reduce the strategic imbalance and deter an expected United States invasion of the island.
Late April~In Moscow, Khrushchev discussed the proposed missile deployment to Cuba informally with First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers Anastas I Mikoyan, who opposed the plan, considering it dangerously provocative toward the United States and impractical from the standpoint of operational security.
Early May-Deliberations regarding the possible installation of missiles in Cuba were held by a small ad hoc group of Soviet officials.
The first meeting was attended by Premier Khrushchev, First Deputy Minister Mikoyan, Presidium Member Frol R Kozlov, Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko, Marshal Malinovsky, and Marshal Sergei S Biryuzov, Commander in Chief of the Strategic Rocket Forces.
During the second meeting, in which the group was joined by the newly-designated Ambassador to Cuba, Aleksandr I Alekseyev and Presidium Member Sharaf R Rashidov, the group decided to proceed with the Cuban deployment, pending approval from the Cuban government.
A secret delegation headed by Rashidov would be sent to Cuba to gain support from Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro Ruz.
On the second day of talks, the Cuban government granted the Soviets permission to install MRBMs and IRBMs on Cuban territory under Soviet control.
July 2-17--A high-level Cuban military delegation headed by Commander of the Revolutionary Armed Forces , General Raul Castro travelled to Moscow to formalize the massive deployment of Soviet conventional and nuclear weapons to Cuba.
May 8-18—US naval, air and ground forces conducted Operation Whip Lash, a Caribbean military exercise designed to test contingency plans for a possible United States invasion of Cuba.
Although the United States had no established intention of invading Cuba at the time, United States forces engaged in extensive training for such a contingency throughout the summer and fall of 1962.
Soviet and Cuban authorities claim to have interpreted Whip Lash and similar exercises as evidence of advanced United States preparations to invade the island.
July 17--US intelligence incorrectly concluded that the Cuban military mission to the USSR had failed to produce an agreement on the sale or transfer of Soviet weapons to Cuba.
This conclusion was based on the absence of public announcements of an agreement by either Cuban or Soviet representatives.
In fact, the Cuban mission succeeded in formalizing the secret agreement to install Soviet MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba.
July-October 1962 The covert deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba coincided with a large-scale buildup of Soviet conventional forces on the island, which included 42,000 Soviet combat personnel armed with state-of-the-art military equipment and, possibly, tactical nuclear weapons.
The parallel deployments of troops and strategic missiles were successfully concealed from US intelligence until the missile installations were detected by a United States U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft on October 14.
July-August~The Soviet missile deployment to Cuba was preceded by a series of negotiations between the Soviet and Cuban governments, which culminated in the drafting in August of a five-year renewable agreement between Cuba and the USSR on military cooperation and mutual defense.
Although the agreement was not signed by Moscow, it served as a framework for the Soviet deployment and arms transfers to Cuba.
July 25-October 24-Soviet combat personnel and conventional weapons were transported to Cuba.
Discussions at the 1992 Havana Conference on the Cuban missile crisis revealed that the Soviet force may also have been equipped with nine rocket-launched tactical nuclear weapons, and that the local Soviet commander may have been authorized to fire these weapons in the event of a United States invasion without further clearance from Moscow.
July 25~The United States was immediately alerted to the increased shipment of Soviet weapons to Cuba by aerial surveillance that showed a large number of Soviet ships bound for Cuba riding ""high in the water,"" a common indicator of weapons deliveries.
Eyewitness reports from Cuban refugees and French intelligence also alerted the United States to the presence of large numbers of Soviet personnel in Cuba.
These were not identified as a Soviet combat force until after the detection of the missile bases.
The Soviet deployment was therefore initially interpreted as a conventional arms transfer involving some Soviet trainers and technicians, intended to strengthen Cuba's defensive capabilities.
August 21~In a special meeting of the National Security Council held at the office of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Director of Central Intelligence , John McCone discussed the possible significance of the stepped-up Soviet deployment to Cuba.
Among the scenarios considered, McCone suggested the possibility that the Soviets might be constructing MRBM and IRBM bases in Cuba.
McCone urged the NSC to consider imposing a naval quarantine of Cuba to avoid such an eventuality.
In the absence of solid evidence proving missile base construction, however, the NSC could not find sufficient justification to take overt action against Cuba, and opted instead to accelerate covert efforts to destabilize the Castro government.
United States & USSR unusually large amount of Soviet military equipment had been transferred to Cuba since late July, estimating that up to 5,000 Soviet bloc personnel had recently disembarked at Cuban ports.
Based on the scale of Soviet activity, the report concluded that ""something new and different is taking place,"" and noted evidence suggesting the construction of a SAM air defense network and an electronic and communications intelligence-gathering station.
September 3--The Department of State recommended that Soviet arms deliveries be accepted in principle as long as they were limited to defensive weapons, but that the United States should publicly declare that it would not tolerate the introduction into Cuba of offensive, particularly nuclear, weapons.
The Soviet conventional weapons buildup in Cuba also prompted the US to accelerate the schedule of Operation MONGOOSE, a covert program of sabotage against the Castro government.
October 25~The combat role of Soviet personnel in Cuba was discovered by low-altitude aerial reconnaissance of the island, which showed Soviet armored groups deployed with their weaponry in combat configurations.
United States estimates of the size of the Soviet force rose incrementally during the crisis, finally reaching 22,000 by late October.
The actual size of the Soviet force was not known by the United States until 1979.
September 2--A communique"" from the Soviet news agency Tass stated that representatives of the Cuban government had met with Soviet officials and had negotiated the transfer of armaments and the sending of Soviet technical specialists to Cuba.
September 8—The Soviets began to ship missiles and support equipment to Cuba.
The USSR originally intended to construct twenty-four SS-4 MRBM launchers and sixteen SS-5 IRBM launchers, with two missiles per launcher, for a total deployment of eighty missiles to Cuba to be deployed at four complexes.
Of the eighty missiles slated for transport to Cuba, forty-two of the SS-4 MRBMs arrived on the island before the United States naval quarantine was established on October 24, whereas none of the SS-5 IRBMs ever made it to Cuba.
The presence of warheads in Cuba has never been confirmed, yet recent statements by former Soviet officials suggest that twenty strategic warheads, in addition to the nine suspected tactical warheads, may have arrived in Cuba prior to the start of the quarantine.
The lack of camouflage may have resulted from a failure by the Soviets to adapt standard missile-base construction practices to the special security requirements of deployment in Cuba.
September ll~Soviet Premier Khrushchev stated that the weapons being shipped to Cuba were exclusively for defensive purposes and that no nuclear missiles were being shipped to the island.
Khrushchev stated that the Soviet Union had no need to deploy nuclear missiles beyond its borders because its missiles were powerful enough to reach any conceivable target from their bases in Soviet territory.
Early September-US intelligence agencies began to consider the likelihood of a Soviet nuclear deployment in Cuba.
September 4~Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador to the US Anatoly Dobrynin to seek assurances that the Soviet weapons transfers to Cuba consisted solely of defensive weapons and did not include offensive surface-to-surface missiles.
Ambassador Dobrynin assured the Attorney General that only defensive weapons were being shipped to Cuba.
September 4-Following the Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting, President Kennedy, believing that the Soviets did not intend to introduce nuclear missiles into Cuba, responded to the concerns of some members of Congress on the issue by stating publicly that weapons then in Cuba were defensive in nature and that there was no evidence of a Soviet combat force or of offensive missiles on the island.
The President reiterated his earlier remarks that the new Soviet shipments did not constitute a serious threat to any part of the Western Hemisphere.
September 19--A CIA Special National Intelligence Estimate concluded that the USSR could derive considerable military advantage from the deployment of MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba, but suggested that such action would be inconsistent with Soviet policy and past practice, as it would introduce an unprecedented level of risk in US-Soviet relations.
An underlying assumption of this view was that the Soviets, aware of overwhelming United States security interests and military capabilities in the Western Hemisphere, would not rationally choose Cuba as the theater for a superpower conflict.
United States & USSR October 14~The missile bases were first photographed by a high-altitude U-2 aerial reconnaissance plane.
The Soviets were not aware that the United States had detected the missiles until Ambassador Dobrynin was informed by Secretary of State Rusk of the United States discovery on the afternoon of October 22.
High-level policy discussion on the significance of the Cuban missile deployment and the formulation of a response was carried out by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , an ad hoc group of administration officials and presidential advisors convened to address the Cuban crisis.
The ExComm's primary functions were to brief the President on day-to-day events, present and develop strategies for dealing with Soviet actions, assess United States readiness and capabilities, and consider Soviet intentions and possible reactions.
After confirming the presence of missiles in Cuba, the ExComm briefly discussed possible Soviet intentions.
The consensus was that the Cuban deployment was somehow related to Soviet ambitions in Europe and to Khrushchev's personal preoccupation with Berlin.
A response based solely on diplomacy, as advocated by United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson, was dismissed early on as insufficient.
The ExComm transcripts show that US decision makers, particularly the President, felt compelled to respond militarily in light of recent United States policy statements that warned the Soviets not to introduce nuclear missiles to Cuba.
Available evidence suggests that the Soviets severely misjudged the manner in which the United States would react to the missile deployment.
Soviet decision makers overestimated the domestic and international pressures that might have compelled the United States to accept a Soviet fait accompli of secretly installed missiles.
Soviet statements prior to the crisis indicate that Premier Khrushchev intended to announce the missile deployment sometime in November 1962.
Khrushchev believed that the Soviet missiles in Cuba could be justified on the basis of their similarity to United States missiles in Turkey.
Moscow apparently did not anticipate the strong United States reaction to the deception that had surrounded the Cuban missile deployment.
The secret nature of the buildup in Cuba invalidated later Soviet claims that their installations there were comparable to United States Jupiter missile bases in Turkey.
Washington maintained that a key difference between the two operations was that United States missiles in Turkey were installed openly in accordance with a publicly acknowledged agreement of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , whereas the Soviet-Cuban Agreement on Military Cooperation and Mutual Defense was negotiated and implemented in secrecy.
Moreover, the United States argued that Turkey was a legitimate recipient of large-scale United States military assistance based on its NATO membership, whereas Cuba was not a member of the Warsaw Pact.
The Soviets also failed to anticipate the nearly unanimous support for the US quarantine among Latin American countries and the success with which the United States would invoke the Treaty of Interamerican Reciprocal Assistance of 1947 to reaffirm the special security relationships within the hemisphere.
Moscow may also have expected Western European governments to restrain the United States from precipitating a crisis that would compromise European security.
United States & USSR Imposition of the Naval Quarantine of Cuba: October 24-November 20.
The quarantine order, which became effective on October 24 and remained in effect until November 20, was intended to prevent further shipments of offensive weapons to Cuba.
All ships approaching Cuba were tracked, and, upon reaching the quarantine line, were to be boarded and inspected for offensive military cargoes.
In theory, the United States task force had standing orders to disable and forcefully board vessels that ignored hailings to halt and be inspected.
Vessels found to be carrying offensive military cargoes would be ordered to turn back or else be impounded.
In actual practice, the boarding order was applied selectively on a case-by-case basis as individual ships approached the quarantine line.
Throughout the crisis, the quarantine operation was closely supervised by the President and the Secretary of Defense.
From the perspective of United States policymakers, the quarantine represented a middle course between the alternatives of negotiation or outright military action through an air strike.
US decision makers believed that it allowed the United States flexibility in demonstrating its resolve without provocatively destroying Soviet military assets.
The quarantine also provided the Soviets with time to reconsider and modify their behavior and it shifted on them some of the responsibility for escalation.
United States decision makers believed, however, that the quarantine by itself would not compel the Soviets to remove the missiles already in Cuba, and that further measures would have to be contemplated to gain their withdrawal.
The United States had generally accurate intelligence throughout the crisis on which Soviet vessels carried missile components and other offensive weapons.
United States Navy reconnaissance planes spotted all Soviet ships bound for Cuba and plotted their position, speed, and direction.
United States policymakers could not anticipate whether Soviet ships would run the blockade and how Soviet crews would respond to forcible boarding if it became necessary.
Nor could they accurately predict the general Soviet military reaction to a potential armed clash at sea.
Available evidence suggests that the Soviets failed to uncover United States plans for a naval quarantine prior to the Kennedy announcement of October 22, and that they did not contemplate the growing likelihood of discovery and naval interception during the latter stages of their covert deployment to Cuba.
This corresponds to the fact that only a small token force of Soviet attack submarines was available for escort duty in the wake of the Kennedy announcement, and that no prepositioning or alerts of the Soviet Atlantic fleet had been undertaken in anticipation of United States moves.
The placement of nuclear weapons near the end of the Soviet shipping schedule to Cuba gave the United States an opportunity to intercept roughly one-third of the missiles and possibly all of the warheads at sea.
A potential confrontation between United States warships and Soviet transports and submarines bound for Cuba was avoided when the latter halted their approach and reversed course on October 24.
An aggressive campaign of public diplomacy against Soviet actions in Cuba was central to United States policy during the Cuban missile crisis.
October 22~President Kennedy addressed the nation to reveal the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba and to announce the United States quarantine of the island.
In his address, the President outlined the legal basis for United States action, invoking the right to enforce regional security arrangements under Article 53 of the United Nations Charter.
The corresponding regional arrangement in this instance was the Treaty of Interamerican Reciprocal Assistance of 1947, which, under Articles 6 and 8, authorized collective defense of Western Hemisphere nations against extra-hemispheric powers.
Comparative Perspectives; United States & USSR October 23~The United States diplomatic offensive achieved a key victory at the Organization of American States when a unanimous vote of the member states condemned the missiles as a threat to peace and called for their removal.
October 25~The United States attained a second important diplomatic victory when Ambassador Stevenson publicly released the U-2 photographs of the missile bases in Cuba at a special session of the UN Security Council, discrediting Soviet claims that only defensive weapons were being shipped to Cuba.
The USSR failed to anticipate the United States plan to announce publicly the secret Soviet missile deployment to Cuba on October 22.
Moscow therefore took no steps to preempt the US announcement and thus avoid international censure.
The Soviets also failed to respond to the United States diplomatic initiative.
By declining to publicly address United States charges, the USSR made it possible for the United States to outmaneuver Soviet diplomats and discredit Soviet positions in international forums.
The USSR, in addition, failed to anticipate the unanimous support for the US blockade that would emerge from the Latin American countries in the OAS, and the success with which the United States would invoke the Rio Treaty in asserting the special security relationships among Western Hemisphere nations.
In addition to putting into effect a naval quarantine of Cuba, the United States armed forces were directed to prepare for further military action to remove the missile bases or to respond to Soviet military challenges.
As part of the DEFCON 2, a ""one-eighth"" airborne alert was put into effect, requiring one out of every eight nuclear-armed B-52 bombers to be airborne at any given moment.
The B-47 medium bomber force was dispersed among thirty-three civilian and military airfields nationwide to reduce its vulnerability to Soviet bombardment.
The United States military mobilization was designed to achieve both practical and psychological objectives.
Military preparedness demanded immediate mobilization of US forces in order to reduce vulnerability and provide opportunities for timely action.
The general alert was also intended to deter Soviet military challenges by demonstrating US resolve and revealing Soviet strategic inferiority.
The Soviet Union appears to have anticipated strong localized military pressure by the US against Cuba upon discovery of the missile bases, as evidenced by the large Soviet military contingent stationed on the island to deter invasion.
However, Moscow apparently did not expect the United States to declare a nuclear crisis involving a global United States military alert.
As a result, Soviet nuclear forces remained at a normal level of preparedness throughout the crisis, possibly deterred from upgrading force readiness by the danger that any move on their part might provoke a preemptive strike by better-prepared United States strategic forces.
Despite their initial misreading of the United States reaction, Moscow was well informed of US military preparations after October 22.
Soviet surveillance of United States military activities was facilitated by the sheer scale of the mobilizations and by high-profile displays of United States military might.
As part of a deliberate campaign of psychological warfare, the United States made little effort to conceal the alerts and mobilizations of its forces after October 22.
One such instance of psychological warfare may have occurred when the SAC Commander in Chief transmitted the orders to assume DEFCON 2 ""in the clear"" through open channels of communication, presumably to facilitate Soviet detection and display confidence in the overwhelming superiority of United States strategic forces.
The Soviet Union took almost no military action in response to the massive mobilization and heightened readiness of United States forces.
October 23--The USSR and Warsaw Pact headquarters publicly announced alerts of their conventional forces.
These had minimal practical effect, however, involving mainly symbolic steps such as the cancellation of military leaves.
October 22-November 20-The Soviet naval response to the quarantine was generally restrained.
At no point during the crisis did the Soviet Atlantic fleet set sail for Cuba or take any significant steps to reinforce Soviet naval forces approaching the quarantine area.
The most likely reason for the lack of a major Soviet naval response was the deterrent effect of the overwhelming United States naval presence in the Caribbean.
The Soviets may also have been deterred from reinforcing their submarine forces in the Caribbean by their knowledge of the capabilities of NATO's antisubmarine warfare net in the North Atlantic.
October 22-November 20-The response of Soviet vessels directly involved in the convoy to Cuba was initially confrontational but became increasingly compliant with minor exceptions.
Despite isolated challenges to United States forces, in which Soviet tankers refused inspection and continued toward Cuba, Soviet weapons transports did not attempt to cross the quarantine line.
After October 22, work on the sites was performed on a 24-hour basis to bring them to operational status as quickly as possible.
October 27--A Soviet SAM shot down a United States U-2 on a reconnaissance overflight of Cuba, killing its pilot.
The incident, which appeared to be a deliberate challenge to the US, was in fact an independent action by Soviet air defense commanders in Cuba.
From the perspective of Soviet authorities in Moscow, who at the time were seeking a negotiated solution to the crisis, the shootdown was unintended and accidental.
In contrast to the main Soviet forces, Cuban military and militia forces were rapidly mobilized and placed on highest alert on October 23.
Cuban antiaircraft batteries were given standing orders to fire on United States reconnaissance aircraft and inflicted damage on at least one low-flying United States plane.
The absence of significant Soviet military preparations was noted by United States intelligence.
October 24~The United States was immediately alerted to the retreat of most of the Soviet weapons transports that had been approaching Cuba and ordered United States warships to refrain from engaging Soviet vessels.
October 27--A CIA Daily Report noted that no significant mobilization of Soviet ground, air, or naval forces had been detected.
October 24--US naval forces at the quarantine line fired low-powered depth charges at the submarine escorts of approaching Soviet transports, forcing the submarines to surface and partially disabling at least one Soviet vessel.
October 27~An air engagement appears to have been narrowly avoided when a United States U-2 reconnaissance plane on a routine air-sampling mission experienced a navigational error that caused it to accidentally stray into Soviet airspace over the Chukotski Peninsula, near Alaska.
The U-2 incursion was detected by the Soviets, who scrambled their MiG fighters in the area to intercept the U-2.
Responding to the U-2's distress signal, several United States F-102 fighter aircraft, possibly armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles, also scrambled to assist the U-2.
An engagement was avoided when the U-2 successfully exited Soviet airspace without incident.
October 27-Two hours after the U-2 incursion over the USSR, another U-2 on a reconnaissance overflight of Cuba was shot down by a Soviet SAM battery.
United States & USSR The United States Perspective: Incidents of military action between United States and Soviet forces alerted United States policymakers to the high risks of inadvertent escalation and demonstrated the limitations of crisis management by nuclear powers.
Within the ExComm, the President and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara became acutely aware of the dangers of inadvertent escalation as the crisis progressed.
October 24--Although the ExComm was aware that low-powered depth charges were being used to compel Soviet submarines approaching the quarantine line to surface, the ExComm was apparently not aware that such charges were being used in a manner that would disable Soviet submarines.
October 27~Upon being informed of the accidental incursion into Soviet airspace by the US U-2, President Kennedy ordered all air sampling missions near the USSR to be cancelled, but did not to raise the incident before the Soviets.
An apology was later issued to the Soviet government in response to a Soviet protest over the incursion that appeared in Premier Khrushchev's private communique to President Kennedy of October 28.36 October 27-The ExComm could not determine with certainty the circumstances surrounding the U-2 downing over Cuba.
In order to allow for the possibility that the shootdown was unauthorized, and to avoid an unwarranted escalation of the crisis, the President intervened to block execution of standing orders to retaliate by air strike against the offending SAM installation.
In the event of further U-2 downings, however, the President was prepared to reconsider selective air strikes against the SAM installations involved.
In a November 8 memorandum to the ExComm, the President formally rejected automatic reprisal and called for continuing high-level consideration of specific incidents.
The President also instructed the ExComm to draft a message to Premier Khrushchev outlining the United States policy of measured retaliation in case of further downings of U-2s over Cuba.
October 24~Faced with an overwhelming United States naval presence and lacking readily available reinforcements, Soviet submarines subjected to the aggressive use of depth charges by US quarantine forces declined to take effective countermeasures.
Soviet captains may have calculated that any aggressive action against United States ships would have resulted in the destruction of their vessels.
The vulnerability to seizure by the United States of highly valuable Soviet missiles and warheads aboard Soviet transports approaching Cuba may also have constrained Soviet options.
Soviet strategic forces may have witheld their response because Soviet decision makers recognized the accidental nature of the incident or because they were reluctant to confront superior US strategic forces without clearer provocation.
October 27~Soviet decision makers in Moscow became aware of the downing of the U-2 over Cuba after the fact.
The shootdown was not authorized by the Soviet national command, nor by the overall commander of Soviet forces in Cuba, but was instead an independent action taken at the initiative of a local Soviet air defense commander, identified at the 1989 Moscow Conference on the missile crisis as General Georgy A Voronkov.
General Voronkov apparently interpreted vague standing orders to resist a United States attack on Cuba as authorization to fire on United States reconnaissance aircraft overflying the island.
The shootdown apparently contravened Soviet policy at the time, as suggested by the fact that the officers involved were reprimanded and standing orders were subsequently clarified to prohibit firing upon United States reconnaissance aircraft.
Eleven messages were transmitted by the political leadership of the United States and the USSR from October 22 to October 28.
Four communiques were sent to Premier Khrushchev by President Kennedy during the critical phase of the missile crisis: October 22~President Kennedy accused the Soviet Union of attempting to disrupt the global balance of power by introducing bases for nuclear missiles and other offensive weapons into Cuba.
The President asserted United States resolve to remove this new threat to hemispheric security.
United States & USSR October 23-President Kennedy charged the Soviet government with responsibility for the secret weapons shipments to Cuba.
October 25--President Kennedy argued that the Soviet Union had deliberately provoked a crisis by ignoring clear United States warnings not to introduce missiles into Cuba and by deploying its offensive weapons secretly.
October 27~Faced with two contradictory Soviet messages on conditions for a negotiated settlement to the crisis, President Kennedy responded by accepting the first, more conciliatory, Soviet communique, in which Premier Khrushchev offered to order the dismantling of the Cuban bases and the return of missiles to the Soviet Union under UN inspection in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba and a lifting of the quarantine.
The United States disregarded the second Soviet message, which, in addition to the above conditions, required the United States publicly to announce the dismantling of Jupiter missile bases in Turkey.
Seven communiques were sent to President Kennedy by Premier Khrushchev: October 23~Responding to President Kennedy's public announcement of the quarantine, Premier Khrushchev accused the United States of aggression against Cuba and the Soviet Union, and of violation of the UN Charter and the laws of navigation.
October 24-Premier Khrushchev rejected any type of ultimatum by the United States regarding removal of the missiles.
October 26--Premier Khrushchev reiterated his claim of the defensive nature of Soviet weapons in Cuba and recommended mutual acceptance of an interim UN agreement.
October 27-In response to revised Soviet intelligence memoranda, which estimated the danger of a United States invasion of Cuba as more remote than previously reported, Premier Khrushchev transmitted a second message to President Kennedy which toughened the Soviet position by adding removal of United States missiles from Turkish bases as a new condition for withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
The USSR would remove under UN inspection its weapons in Cuba that President Kennedy described as ""offensive,"" in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba and a prompt lifting of the United States naval quarantine.
October 28~An additional message from Khrushchev attempted to formalize the secret US concession to remove its Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
One such channel was established by Attorney General Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin.
A second channel was established by ABC News correspondent John Scali and the chief of the KGB's Washington station, Aleksandr Fomin.
The parties to the secret negotiations served as spokesmen for their respective governments, relaying confidential proposals for resolution of the crisis and conducting faceto-face talks that helped defuse tensions and contributed to a peaceful settlement on October 28.
There were at least three Kennedy-Dobrynin meetings and three Scali-Fomin meetings during the crisis.
Attorney General Kennedy met secretly with Ambassador Dobrynin on three occasions during the crisis: October 23~At the first meeting, held at the Soviet Embassy, the Attorney General expressed the strong objection of the United States to the deception that had been used to introduce Soviet missiles into Cuba.
October 26-According to Ambassador Dobryinin and other Soviet sources, Attorney General Kennedy, at the direction of the President, first raised the possibility of a quid pro quo removal of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Robert Kennedy's memoir on the missile crisis states that the meeting was held to inform the Soviets of the imminent threat of United States military action in the absence of an immediate peaceful resolution to the crisis.
Concurrently, the United States reaffirmed its intention to withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey within a short time once the crisis was peacefully resolved.
According to Kennedy, the United States declined any quid pro quo withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for Soviet dismantling of missile bases in Cuba.
John Scali met informally with KGB Washington Station Chief Aleksandr Fomin on three occasions during the crisis.
The first meeting was initiated by Fomin, in what appears to have been an independent effort to explore options for resolving the crisis.
The two later meetings received official backing and were held at Scali's request.
October 26-Scali met with Fomin at the latter's request and was encouraged to approach officials at the Department of State with a proposal for resolution of the crisis in which the missiles in Cuba would be removed under UN supervision and Castro would pledge not to accept future shipments of offensive weapons in exchange for a lifting of the quarantine and a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
October 26—7:35 PM~Scali met with Fomin and relayed a message from Secretary of State Rusk expressing United States interest in the proposal of October 26 and urging that it be immediately formalized at the UN.56 October 27~Scali met with Fomin after receipt of the Khrushchev letter that added withdrawal of United States missiles in Turkey as a condition for a settlement.
Scali accused the Soviets of betrayal in abandoning their original proposal and warned of imminent United States military action against the missiles in Cuba if a settlement were not achieved forthwith.
Kennedy-Dobrynin meetings: October 23—Ambassador Dobrynin, responding to Attorney General Kennedy's charge of Soviet duplicity in introducing missiles to Cuba, revealed that he had not been informed of the deployment.
October 26-Ambassador Dobrynin defended the right of the Soviet Union to install missiles in Cuba by comparing them to United States missiles in Turkey.
According to Dobrynin, Attorney General Kennedy responded by offering to introduce United States missiles in Turkey into a potential settlement of the crisis.
October 26--Fomin presented his first proposal for a resolution of the missile crisis.
Soviet participants at the 1989 Moscow conference on the Cuban missile crisis claimed that the first Fomin proposal was made without authorization from Moscow.
October 27~Fomin acknowledged Secretary of State Rusk's favorable reaction to the proposed crisis resolution terms as relayed by Scali, and informed Moscow of the informal US response.
October 27-Responding to Scali's charge of duplicity in Soviet negotiation, Fomin assured Scali that no duplicity was intended and that the introduction of new conditions by the Soviets resulted from a communications failure.
Fomin relayed the United States warning of an invasion to higher authorities in Moscow.
The terms of the agreement were established in the KennedyKhrushchev correspondence and in the secret meetings of United States and Soviet representatives.
Cuba, which opposed withdrawal of the missiles, was not a party to the negotiations.
Ships carrying missiles returning to the USSR from Cuba were subject to boarding and close naval and aerial surveillance by United States quarantine forces.
One of the terms of the agreement, that of on-site inspection of the dismantled missile sites by the UN, remained unfulfilled after the Cuban government refused to allow UN inspection of its territory.
In response to the Soviet missile withdrawal and a Soviet pledge not to reintroduce offensive weapons into Cuba, President Kennedy ordered the lifting of the naval quarantine of Cuba on November 20, 1962, and informally pledged not to invade the island.
United States & USSR also gave private assurances to the USSR that its Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn within a short time after resolution of the crisis.
In accordance with this secret agreement, the United States began to dismantle its Jupiter installations in Turkey six months after the crisis was settled.
The most critical United States decision making on resolution of the missile crisis occurred on October 27 and 28: October 27-4:00 PM-The ExComm met to discuss the two most recent messages received that morning from Premier Khrushchev.
The first message proposed milder terms for a resolution of the crisis than the second, more demanding message that called for a public ""trade"" involving mutual withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba and United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
President Kennedy decided to partly concede on the Jupiter missile issue by privately assuring the Soviets of United States intentions to withdraw the Jupiters shortly after a peaceful settlement of the crisis.
In addition, the President instructed the Attorney General to warn Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin of the imminent possibility of United States military action against the missiles in Cuba in the absence of an immediate settlement.
October 27-7:45 PM-At the third and final meeting between Attorney General Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin during the crisis, the latter was informed of the possibility of imminent United States military action against the missiles in Cuba unless an agreement on their withdrawal was quickly reached.
As an incentive for speedy resolution of the dispute, Dobrynin was assured that United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn soon after a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
October 27-8:05 PM-A letter from President Kennedy was transmitted to Moscow.
The letter responded to the proposal contained in the first, more conciliatory of the two Khrushchev messages received that morning.
October 27-9:00 PM-The ExComm met to review military contingency planning and readiness for an invasion of Cuba.
October 27~evening~President Kennedy instructed Secretary of State Rusk to contact Andrew Cordier, a former UN undersecretary.
Cordier was given the text of a compromise settlement of the crisis in which United States missiles in Turkey were publicly ""traded"" for Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Cordier was told to stand by and await instructions from Rusk to approach Acting UN Secretary General U Thant with the proposal.
Secretary General U Thant would have been asked to offer the proposal to both sides as a UN-initiated agreement, to which the US would have acceded.
The readiness status of the missiles was not known, although it was assumed that these, too, were operational.
October 28-9:00 AM--A radio broadcast message from Premier Khrushchev ended the missile crisis by accepting the terms for resolution offered by the United States the previous day.
Khrushchev agreed to withdraw ""the weapons which you describe as offensive"" in exchange for a lifting of the quarantine and a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
October 25~Soviet intelligence may have reported hard evidence of United States preparations for an imminent attack on Cuba, prompting Premier Khrushchev to send his ""first"" crisis settlement proposal to President Kennedy.
October 26--Cuban Prime Minister Castro transmitted a letter to Premier Khrushchev warning of an imminent United States invasion of Cuba and urging the USSR to retaliate against the US in the event of such an attack.
Castro's letter may have raised concerns over the ability of Soviet forces to maintain control over the missiles.
October 26--A revised Soviet intelligence estimate of the likelihood of a United States attack on Cuba that assessed the threat as less imminent than previously believed may have prompted Premier Khrushchev to toughen Soviet terms for a withdrawal of the missiles in his ""second"" settlement proposal.
October 27~According to Ambassador Dobrynin and other Soviet sources, during the third Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting, Ambassador Dobrynin agreed to an explicit deal with Attorney General Kennedy whereby the United States would remove Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for a withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Such an estimate would have been corroborated by Prime Minister Castro's letter to Premier Khrushchev on October 26, which warned of impending United States military action against Cuba.
October 28-9:00 AM~Premier Khrushchev, upon being informed once again by Soviet intelligence that a United States invasion of Cuba was imminent, and apparently fearing provocative action against the United States by the Cuban FAR, ended the crisis by drafting a letter to President Kennedy that restored the original settlement terms issued in the ""first"" Khrushchev proposal of October 27.
In the letter, transmitted simultaneously by Radio Moscow and by diplomatic 21 Comparative Perspectives; United States & USSR telegram, Khrushchev agreed to remove ""offensive weapons"" from Cuba under UN supervision and to refrain from reintroducing such weapons in exchange for a US noninvasion pledge toward Cuba and a prompt lifting of the United States naval quarantine.
Instead, the USSR accepted a secret, informal agreement for withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey in exchange for a publicly acknowledged withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba.
The President subsequently ordered this line to be established closer to Cuba in order to allow greater time for approaching Soviet ships to change course.
McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival; Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years , 439.
Welch, David A ""Crisis Decision Making Reconsidered,"" Journal of Conflict Resolution.
