But 18-year-old Anthony was called into a briefing room at the fleet anti-warfare training center one Thursday morning with a group of about 30 men.
Fresh out of Ferris High School, Manocchio looked at his officer and said he had plans to go back to Jersey City for the weekend to visit his girlfriend, whom he hadn't seen in two months.
Little did Manocchio know he would soon find himself in the middle of one of the most tense political and military standoffs in American history.
In response to the Soviet's strategic power play, President John F Kennedy ordered a naval blockade that intercepted and turned around armed ships bound for the island.
The standoff came to a dramatic conclusion when the Soviet Union agreed to remove its missiles as long as the United States did not attack Cuba.
Manocchio spent a month in Cuba working as a hatchman loading and unloading ships at Guantanamo Bay.
More than 50 years had passed since Manocchio served in the Navy when his brother-in-law, Army Lt.
In February, he received a letter saying he was being honored with the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal and the National Defense Service Medal.
Three weeks ago, Manocchio's 6-year-old granddaughter Alexis Rose surprised him with the medals inside the kitchen of the Colgate Street home where he grew up and still lives.
What was even more special, he said, was seeing his ""pride and joy"" so enthusiastic and proud of her grandfather.
While stationed in Cuba, Manocchio said, he didn't fear the looming threat of war.
While he was there, he sent his girlfriend, Dolores whom he married in 1965 a letter so she knew he was OK, but it didn't arrive at her house until three years later.
In the 1960s, Manocchio said, there was talk that his crew was supposed to be honored for their service, but it didn't cross his mind again until just recently.
Nuclear warheads were in Cuba for Soviet missiles targeted at major United States cities.
Washington had photographic proof that there were nuclear-capable Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba, but the Americans never were sure if nuclear warheads were on the island.
The Soviet Union had only ""about 20"" intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching the United States from its own territory.
That was a ""shockingly low number"" and only a fraction of the total estimated at the time by the CIA, said one surprised American.
Two days before the crisis peaked, Cuban leader Fidel Castro reportedly sent a message to Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev urging that the missiles be fired.
Castro spent the night of Oct., 1962, in an air raid bunker because he feared a United States attack.
Castro's cable convinced Khrushchev the confrontation had gone too far, and he agreed to United States demands that the missiles be withdrawn.
In addition to Sorensen, participants included McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy's national security adviser during the crisis; former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, former ambassador to Washington Anatoly Dobrynin and Sergei Khrushchev, son of the Soviet leader.
The United States delegation also included former Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara.
United States sources quoted a Soviet panelist as saying Castro sent his message to Khrushchev urging a Soviet attack.
Sergei Khrushchev told reporters that the missiles could have been operational within a few hours if his father had given the word.
With only about 20 missiles in the Soviet Union capable of reaching the United States, the 42 missiles either installed or in transit to Cuba by October, 1962, represented two-thirds of Moscow's ability to deliver a nuclear strike.
They were always under full Soviet control, he said, and Cuban officials said they were not even permitted onto the bases.
Several United States participants said they previously had underestimated the extent to which Cuban and Soviet officials believed that a United States invasion of the island was a possibility.
In the fall of 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered a secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba that were soon detected by United States spy planes.
On Oct. that year, Kennedy was briefed on photographic proof of the missile sites being developed. 13-day standoff United States officials determined from the size of the weapons that the medium-range missiles would be able to reach Washington, Dallas, Cape Canaveral, Fla., or other sites within 1,000 miles of Cuba, likely within minutes.
Soon after they learned of longer-range missiles in Cuba able to reach most of the country.
Kennedy's team debated how to respond but agreed the missiles would not be tolerated.
The ensuing standoff with Khrushchev over 13 days became ""the most dangerous moments the world has ever faced, either before or since the closest we came to nuclear destruction,"" said historian and journalist Michael Dobbs, who helped preview the National Archives exhibit.
Both Kennedy and Khrushchev had made mistakes leading to this point, Dobbs said.
Khrushchev gambled by deploying nuclear weapons so far from the Soviet Union on the United States doorstep.
And Kennedy fumbled his first major foreign policy crisis at the Bay of Pigs with the failed effort to topple Fidel Castro.
The Kennedy administration's strategy, called Operation Mongoose, to overthrow Castro triggered a dramatic reaction from the Soviets.
An attack speech The archives lays out the crisis in chronological order with sounds of heated debates in the White House over whether to respond with military force.
As Kennedy leaned toward issuing a blockade order to prohibit Soviet ships from sending more military supplies to Cuba, some military advisers thought it a weak response.
As the blockade went into effect, Soviet ships approached, along with submarines, leading to tense moments.
Kennedy ordered small ""depth charges"" to be fired from United States ships to encourage the submarines to surface.
What he didn't know was they were carrying nuclear-tipped tactical missiles and came close to using them.
The exhibit is on view in Washington until February and then moves to Boston's Kennedy Presidential Library in April.
On Oct. that year, Kennedy was briefed on photographic proof of the missile sites being developed.
United States officials determined from the size of the images that the medium-range missiles would be able to reach Washington, Dallas, Cape Canaveral, Fla., or other sites within 1,000 miles of Cuba, likely within minutes.
Soon after they learned of longer-range missiles that could reach most of the country.
The ensuing standoff with Khrushchev over 13 days became ""the most dangerous moments the world has ever faced, either before or since &mdash; the closest we came to nuclear destruction,"" said historian and journalist Michael Dobbs, who helped preview the National Archives exhibit.
The Kennedy administration's campaign called Operation Mongoose to overthrow Castro triggered a dramatic reaction from the Soviets.
There were also emergency plans developed for White House staff in case of an attack on Washington.
One special assistant to the president was directed to go to Camp David in Maryland in case of attack.
The archives lays out the crisis in chronological order with sounds of heated debates in the White House over whether to respond with military force.
As Kennedy leaned toward a blockade order to prevent Soviet ships from sending more military supplies to Cuba, some military advisers thought it a weak response.
Library Director Tom Putnam said they include the attorney general's notes from national security meetings during the crisis and drafts of a memo he sent to the president after meeting with the Soviet ambassador.
Some might think the movie is so dramatic that Hollywood must have shaped it for entertainment purposes.
However, within the constraints of two hours and 20 minutes, the film is an astonishingly accurate account of what happened during those terrifying days in 1962.
Kennedy, and no one else, stopped them from bombing the Russian missile sites and invading Cuba.
Many Congressional leaders refused to support Kennedy's strategy of restraint.
We're going to have to fight the Russians anyway, they said; let's get it over with.
The fact that many of ""us,"" perhaps most of ""us,"" would have been killed didn't seem to dissuade anyone.
Since Kennedy's decision was the most important in the history of the country, perhaps in the history of the world, I have studied it closely_reading all the literature and the transcripts of tapes from the Oval Office.
Each time I read the story , I am convinced that there is going to be a war.
The pressure on the president to risk nuclear annihilation was enormous.
Yet cool, aloof, ironic man that he was, Kennedy prevented war and finessed a Russian withdrawal of atomic weapons from Cuba.
This achievement alone qualifies him for a high ranking in the list of great American presidents.
Perhaps because those 13 days were so scary, they have disappeared from our collective memories.
Kennedy's critics on the right and on the left had a field day after the crisis was over.
The right said that he'd been too weak, and the left said he should have let the Russians keep their weapons in Cuba.
Perhaps they realized that many other presidents would have given the signal to start a nuclear war.
That Kennedy was almost the only restraining force becomes clear when one realizes that three years later, the same team of men under President Lyndon Johnson approved the escalation of the Vietnam War.
If he had escaped the bullet in Texas, he probably would have died of Addison's disease before the end of his second term.
However, when the fate of the human race was at issue, he displayed more character than any of the men around him_a point to keep in mind when we hear that private virtue is a prerequisite for public virtue.
The previous summer, Kennedy had read Barbara Tuchman's book The Guns of August, an account of how the various countries in Europe stumbled into the First World War, which none of them wanted.
Kennedy perceived the same dynamics at work in the relationship between the United States and Russia in the missile crisis.
Other things being equal, it is better to have a president who reads history than one who does not.
Teresa once said that if she had to choose between a holy confessor and a wise confessor, she would choose the wise one.
If Americans have to choose between a virtuous president and a wise one, they should choose the latter.
In retrospect, given the pressures on him, Kennedy was almost preternaturally wise.
In 1965, we had a president who, for all his bluster and machismo, was not wise.
In 1965, the country blundered into a war that did incalculable harm to our society.
Today, the two major political parties are so similar, one hears it said that it doesn't matter who is president.
Imagine if you will that Richard Nixon, a man of deep personal instability, had won the 1960 election.
Almost certainly he would have given the go-ahead to bomb the Russian bases, kill Russian troops and invade Cuba.
The crisis started on Oct., 1962, when Kennedy was told that a U-2 spy plane had photographed Soviet nuclear missiles being installed in Cuba, 90 miles from Key West.
Kennedy originally argued for a diplomatic solution to the crisis, while many of his advisers favored risking war with the Soviets, according to the transcripts of the conversations that Kennedy secretly recorded.
Among the hawks, the transcripts indicated, were Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon, CIA director John McCone and Llewellyn Thompson, the ambassador to Moscow.
However, Kennedy's views hardened after Soviet missiles shot down a United States spy plane over Cuba on Oct., 1962, according to the records. released by the John F Kennedy Library.
The transcripts show he favored launching an air strike on Oct. if there were any more attempts to shoot down United States planes.
The superpowers reached agreement a day before the date of the contemplated air strike.
Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev announced on Oct. that he was withdrawing the nuclear missiles, after receiving secret assurances that the United States would pull similar missiles out of Turkey.
The 82-page transcript records four hours and 40 minutes of meetings involving Kennedy and key advisers.
The key Kennedy comments followed urgings by McNamara for firm action if other United States surveillance craft were fired upon by SAM surface-to-air missiles.
McNamara was among the chief proponents of military action, the transcripts show.
Even before the crisis, the Americans considered removing the United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey and replacing them with more modern weapons.
But some arms experts say the superpower nuclear equation has shifted so dramatically since 1962 that the Cuban crisis is no more relevant than the wars of ancient Greece.
In October 1962, President John Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev became embroiled in the most dramatic confrontation of the Cold War.
On Oct., United States spy planes discovered Moscow was deploying rockets capable of carrying nuclear warheads in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida.
The president, stung a year earlier when a U.S.-backed anti-Castro invasion ended in disaster at Cuba's Bay of Pigs, imposed a naval blockade around Cuba and threatened tougher action bombing and invasion if the missiles remained.
After nearly two weeks of mounting tension, Moscow agreed to remove the rockets in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
Kennedy also secretly promised to remove some aging nuclear rockets based in Turkey.
Kennedy then pressed ahead with arms-control efforts that signaled a thaw in the Cold War and led to nuclear arms limitation talks that have continued over the years.
The present Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, and President Reagan are expected to meet this year to sign a pact scrapping medium-range nuclear missiles.
Stand firm, consult experts and apply force slowly, giving the foe a graceful way out.
But many United States arms experts today question such ''lessons'' because the world has changed so much in the past 25 years.
An article in the current issue of Foreign Affairs magazine says this school of thought holds the missile crisis is no more pertinent to current superpower ties than the Peloponnesian Wars of ancient Greece.
Moscow thus had no choice but to back down, many experts say, dismissing as a myth the view that the crisis brought the world to the nuclear brink.
Dmitri Simes, a Russian emigre and Soviet expert at the private Carnegie Endowment, put them at near zero.
But since 1962, the Soviet Union has accomplished its goal of gaining rough parity with the United States in nuclear weapons a goal Steinbruner said was strongly reinforced by Moscow's humiliation in the missile crisis.
Moscow today has roughly 10,300 intercontinental nuclear warheads compared to America's 12,500, according to the Center for Defense Information, a private Washington think tank.
Kremlin watchers say Moscow would be in a much stronger position in a crisis today.
Soviet leaders would have a powerful incentive to reject concessions in any new confrontation, said Alton Frye, an arms control analyst with the private Council on Foreign Relations.
Frye said in such a crisis the United States president would be under enormous pressure to stand firm and maintain American prestige, even if Moscow proved intransigent.
The complexity of modern superpower arsenals and the problem of preventing unauthorized or accidental attack once nuclear weapons were primed for war, would make a crisis much harder to control than the Cuban missile crisis, Steinbruner said.
Frye said the main lesson of the 1962 missile crisis was to maintain emergency communications with Moscow and an array of formal and informal contacts to reduce misunderstandings between the superpowers.
Cit at ion CHRISTOPHER HANSON, 'Legendary face-off 25 years ago missile crisis gripped world', St.
In October 1962, the United States discovered that the Soviet Union had secretly installed nuclear missiles on Cuba and aimed them at the United States.
After President John F Kennedy reacted by imposing a blockade on the Caribbean island, the Soviets backed down.
Castro says that the Soviet command had been authorized to use nuclear weapons.
In it, Castro voices his regrets at the crisis's resolution as well as its consequences.
Criticizing the ''almost unconditional concessions made by Khrushchev,'' Castro notes ''they left everything the way it was.
Asked if he would accept the missiles, knowing what he now knows, Castro said he would not.
The drama intensified Jan. when Iran test-fired a ballistic missile in violation of United Nations Security Council resolutions.
In response, the Trump administration slapped economic sanctions on Tehran.
That led to Iran threatening a retaliation of its own, most likely additional missile tests.
Iran also fired a surface-to-air missile Wednesday in what officials say may have been connected to the country's 10-day commemoration of the 1979 revolution.
Iran specifically vowed to take action on Feb., which is Revolution Day there.
Based on the evidence Buckley has gathered, it appears the plan was to hold a long-range missile test, which would violate the nuclear agreement.
Sign up for free news alerts from WND.com, America's independent news network.
However, the test Iran conducted on Jan. violated that agreement because the missile could reach targets much farther than 2,000 miles away.
Buckley said there are two primary targets in mind for Iran as it develops longer-range missiles.
Based on translations of written and spoken statements from Iranian officials, Buckley said Iran's longrange missile ambitions are very clear.
On top of that, Buckley said Iran has designs on a space-based weapons program as well.
The dramatic missile launch apparently set for Feb. is now canceled, and satellite images show the missile and launching pad have been taken down.
The supreme leader, Khamenei usually fulminates about death to Satan and all of that.
In his column, Buckley urges the Trump administration to divulge the contents of the Iran deal and the side deals to the American people.
And he said the impact on America's other allies could be very demoralizing.
And we basically threatened Israel that we would shoot down their planes if they tried to attack Iran,"" Buckley explained.
In his opinion piece, Buckley suggested even stronger responses from the Trump administration when Iran acts in a provocative way.
He said Trump cannot stop all commerce between Iran and American firms, but he said sanctions ought to be applied immediately in some important areas.
He got out and went to East Tennessee State College for a couple of years, where he studied business administration.
Steve Goldstein, Knight-Ridder News Service Los Angeles Times/Washington Post Service contributed to this report.
Each of the three sides has its own version of what happened when the Soviets built nuclear missile bases in Cuba and the United States blockaded the island and demanded and obtained the rockets' removal.
The weeklong confrontation between President John Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev brought the world closer than at any time in history to triggering a nuclear war, all agreed.
At the time of the crisis, Gorbachev said in the message, read by Soviet delegate Valentin Falin, ""it became clear that general human principles must be considered"" in U.S.-Soviet relations.
Seated on one side of a large oval table were Kennedy's defense secretary, Robert McNamara, and his special assistant for national security, McGeorge Bundy.
Directly opposite them were former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, who recently retired as the president of the Soviet Union, and Anatoly Dobrynin, the former Soviet ambassador to Washington, who now serves as a special adviser to Gorbachev.
The Cubans had never before encountered their American counterparts from the days of the missile crisis.
And the fact that some Soviets and Americans had met to discuss the subject once before in Cambridge, Mass., in October 1987 was clearly something of a sore point.
The meeting will be devoted to understanding the tensions that lay behind the confrontation.
The Cubans may have a special interest in the United States covert operations, including alleged attempts to assassinate Castro or to destabilize the Castro regime both before and after the crisis.
One such plan, code-named Operation Mongoose, set October 1962 as the target date for Castro's overthrow after a U.S.-supported insurrection on the island, according to a document obtained by the Washington-based National Security Archive.
The document, which was circulated to only 12 people, including President Kennedy, was dated Feb., 1962.
At the U.S.-Soviet meeting in Cambridge, McNamara specifically denied that the United States had any plan or intent to invade Cuba, according to ""On the Brink,"" the book-length account of the conference by James Blight and David Welch.
Among the revelations of that meeting, the book said, was that the Soviet missiles in Cuba were never armed with nuclear warheads.
The ship on which the warheads were to be delivered, the Poltava, was prevented from reaching Cuba by the United States naval blockade.
Had the White House known the missiles were ""blanks,"" Kennedy would have ordered an attack on Cuba within hours of discovering them, the book said.
Asked privately whether the Moscow symposium could lead to improved U.S.-Cuban relations, Risquet was relatively sanguine.
Instead, Cuban and Soviet officials disclosed, there were more than 40,000 Soviet troops and 270,000 armed Cubans on the island.
He told reporters that Cuba had expected to lose as many as 800,000 people if the United States attacked.
Yesterday's disclosures were only the latest of several surprises at the conference, which was organized jointly by the Soviets and officials of Harvard's Nuclear Crisis Project.
The crisis began in October 1962, when Kennedy learned Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
At the conference, Castro, McNamara, and other Cuban and American protagonists in the Cold War drama studied newly declassified documents on the role United States covert action played in months leading up to the crisis.
Many of the papers will be made public at the gathering, including documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House and the Soviet Foreign Ministry.
A portion of the documents, made available to the Associated Press, demonstrate that the crisis did not end Oct. with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as is widely believed.
Weeks after that, Khrushchev still worried that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tensions with the United States perhaps even provoke war.
Cuba ""wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash, and wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions,"" he said in a Nov., 1962, letter to diplomatic aides in Cuba.
At issue were United States surveillance flights to monitor dismantling of the missiles Moscow had installed on the island.
Khrushchev worried Castro would order his forces to shoot down the low-flying surveillance planes, which the Cuban leader saw as an intolerable intrusion on Cuban sovereignty.
There probably was not a march of brick-sized headlines across the front pages of the world's newspapers to match it until September 2001.
The standoff between the United States and the USSR, between American President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, over the buildup of Soviet missiles in Cuba, began on Oct., 1962, in the Rocky.
The paper devoted 13 pages the first day of the story, including the complete text of Kennedy's warning.
Local man-on-the-street interviews strongly supported the president's actions.
RED SHIPS TURN OFF Some Soviet vessels sailing toward Cuba change course, even as Cuban housewives empty food stores.
ADLAI RIPS ZORIN AT UN United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson displays photos of Soviet missile bases in Cuba before the United Nations.
JFK Says Reds Hint At Missile Removal Kennedy says a proposal from Khrushchev indicates the basis for a negotiated settlement of the crisis.
World Tension Eases As Nikita Gives In ""WASHINGTON, Oct. Nikita Khrushchev Sunday agreed to tear down his Cuban missile bases under United Nations inspection,"" UPI reported.
Don't touch my football The Cuban missile crisis gripped the world's attention.
Journalism takes day off On the same Sunday, the Rocky chose page 5, where all week's tense news of the standoff had been well-reported with the use of military photos and maps, for a shabby piece of work.
At the top of the local news page, in a four-column photo, a staff photographer staged a deer head behind the steering wheel of an automobile, with a rifle seemingly aimed out the driver's window.
Two local hunters joined in the fun, posing as if they were draped over both front fenders in the classic 1920s transport of dead game.
His bag includes Harold Koinzan, 45, at left, of 3310 W Wesley ave., and John M Davis, 30, of 1685 S Mabry way.
It is high time for a new approach to avoid a nuclear stand-off worse than the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
The Cuban crisis did not end in catastrophe mainly because the leaders on both sides — John F Kennedy and his advisers, and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and his politburo — did not misjudge each other's intentions.
In the present Korean crisis, there is arguably a greater chance of the leaders — Donald Trump and Kim Jong Un — miscalculating each other's intentions.
Moreover, because North Korea is not an island that can be blockaded , a similar course of action is much harder to find.
In the Cuban crisis, although Khrushchev's aggressive, boastful rhetoric and rambling speech invited misinterpretation, he was constrained in his course of action by the fact that he was part of a collective leadership, which included pragmatic figures such as Anastas Mikoyan.
Moreover, Kennedy was known for his calm, rational demeanour and clear communication.
Now we have a United States president more reminiscent of Khrushchev , and a young, untested North Korean tyrant who enjoys absolute powers over an opaque regime.
The potential for both sides to misjudge each other's intentions is significantly greater.
Getting Pyongyang to freeze — let alone give up — its nuclear and missile programme would be very difficult, given decades of mistrust and hostility between it and the United States and its claim that these systems are indispensable for its national self-defence.
In this context, an eventual comprehensive deal with Washington will deliver real economic and security benefits to Pyongyang to outweigh the loss of national prestige associated with backtracking on its nuclear ambitions and boost Mr Kim's standing as a brilliant tactician.
The first step in facilitating such a scenario should be improving communication and contacts between the two sides so as to prevent mutual misperception and miscalculation.
A nuclear conflict was prevented in 1962 partly because Moscow and Washington had regular high-level contacts before the Cuban crisis — including as allies during the second world war — and had maintained full diplomatic relations with embassies in each other's capital cities since 1933.
In contrast, Washington and Pyongyang have never had extended, regular high-level contacts, let alone full diplomatic relations.
Imaginative symbolic peace overtures must capture Pyongyang's attention and produce a mood conducive to mutual reconciliation.
For such a goodwill gesture to become feasible, tension must be lowered.
Washington could offer to temporarily halt its joint military exercises with Seoul if Pyongyang temporarily halts its tests and comes to the negotiating table.
The eventual goal is a comprehensive settlement comparable to the Iran nuclear deal.
Pyongyang rolls back its nuclear and missile programme in return for economic benefits and security guarantees, including a peace treaty and full diplomatic relations — all contingent on monitoring by outside parties.
Pyongyang makes more nuclear and missile progress while a chasm divides Washington, Seoul and Tokyo on the one hand and Beijing and Moscow on the other, paralysing the global response.
United States officials determined from the size of the weapons that the medium-range missiles would be able to reach Washington, Dallas, Cape Canaveral, Fla., or other sites within 1,000 miles of Cuba, likely within minutes.
Soon after they learned of longer-range missiles in Cuba that could reach most of the country.
By Oct., 1962, Kennedy and Khrushchev made a final agreement through a radio broadcast from Moscow that the Soviets would begin dismantling the weapons.
The United States agreed not to invade Cuba and to remove the ship blockade.
