They have performed an invaluable service for both historians and political scientists.
Nevertheless, the research methodology that Allyn, Blight, and Welch (henceforth AB&W) have used is not without its drawbacks.
Although their work has given us a much better understanding of the American side of the Cuban missile crisis, I am not sure we yet have a better understanding of the Soviet side.
Indeed, our “knowledge” of certain aspects of the Soviet role may, if anything, be more confused than before.
The reservations I express below, though applied to the AB&W article, are intended as general notes of caution.
Mark Kramer teaches international relations at Brown Uniziersity and is a research fellow at the Center for Foreign Policy Development at Brown.
On the Brink contains, among other things, abridged transcripts of the Hawk’s Cay and Cambridge conferences, with detailed annotation by the authors.
In the case of the Cuban missile crisis, the failings and selectivity of memory are especially acute because the events transpired nearly 30 years ago and almost all of those who played any part in the crisis are now elderly.
There are bound to be honest divergences in the way aging men recall events of nearly three decades ago.
Along with inevitable failings of memory, there is the more nettlesome issue of ulterior motives.
Thus, many officials will ”recall” events in a way that puts the best gloss on their own role or that supports causes they have come to promote.
On the American side, this is perhaps best evident with Robert McNamara, who, having become an antinuclear crusader in recent years, now strenuously denies that United States strategic nuclear superiority in 1962 had even the slightest effect on the outcome of the crisis.
On the Soviet side, the question of ulterior motives is far more intractable.
By fostering an impression that the two sides actually were “on the brink” of nuclear war in 1962, the Soviet attendees may have hoped that the conferences would lend a sense of urgency to Gorbachev’s proposal for the elimination of nuclear weapons4 Archival Access and Critical Oral Histoy These weaknesses of oral history-both the lapses of memory and the attempts to slant things or mislead-can be compensated for if adequate documentary evidence 2.
An enormous amount of declassified material is already available to cross-check the recollections of former officials, and more will be released over the next several years.
In combination, the American documents and recollections of American officials provide keen insights into the Kennedy administration’s handling of the Cuban missile crisis.
Our institute, which deals with the military problems of history, possesses quite large possibilities, although I must say straight away that, as before, many archives are closed.
In particular, in the party archives, and even in the military archives, which it might seem should belong to us, there are still stocks to which they do not give us access.
General Volkogonov’s statement is especially important because it implies that wellstocked Soviet archives do exist and that the problem is simply getting access to them.
Indeed, at the Moscow conference, Volkogonov read aloud from documents that he claimed had come from the archives.
Furthermore, even if, as AB&W allege , the Soviet archives on the 1962 crisis are “sparse” , that would create the severest problems of all for practitioners of critical oral history.
It also would raise troubling questions about precisely how the Soviet attendees could have learned what they claim to know, if they could not learn it from archives.
But assuming that the requisite documents are available, we will have to wait until Western scholars are granted full access to them-including the opportunity to test their authenticity-before we can truly accept major Soviet ”disclosures” about historical events like the Cuban missile crisis.
In short, the notion of ”critical oral history” may work well when assessing the American side of the Cuban missile crisis, but thus far it has been irrelevant when we come to the Soviet side.
The main thing we have gotten from the Soviet Union up to now is uncritical oral history.
Most Western journalists who covered the conference suggested that it brought together, for the first time, the top officials on both sides of the Cuban missile crisis.y But, in fact, none of the conferences brought together the highest-level participants from both sides.
The three conferences featured nearly all of the key American statesmen, but on the Soviet side, no comparable representation was possible because all the key officials were long dead.
To be sure, the Soviet foreign minister at the time of the Cuban missile crisis, Andrei Gromyko, attended the Moscow conference, as did the former Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin.
A few peripheral members of the 1962 Presidium were still alive and healthy at the time of the Cambridge and Moscow conferences; 9.
Gromyko in 1962 was not even a candidate member of the Presidium (as the Politburo was then known) and therefore ordinarily would have taken no part in the highest-level deliberations.
Although Gromyko’s recollections of being consulted by Khrushchev are undoubtedly accurate , this by no means implies that the late foreign minister, whom Khrushchev often mocked, was a key figure in the Soviet handling of the crisis.
The same applies a fortiori to Dobrynin, who was not even informed of the missile deployments until well after the United States had discovered them.
Dobrynin subsequently became an important conduit for back-channel negotiations, but aside from that, his role was negligible.
Also not present was Andrei Kirilenko, the only full member of Khrushchev’s Presidium who is still alive.
Instead, the conference organizers were forced to rely primarily on surrogates like Khrushchev’s son, Sergei, and Mikoyan’s son, Sergo.
Up to a point, the use of surrogates is valid , so long as proper care is taken.
But surrogates, no matter how well-informed, are not the same as the principals.
General Volkogonov, by his own admission, has often been denied access to documents that he needs.
Until Western scholars get access to documents that will corroborate the claims of Soviet oral history participants, the best we can do is speculate, as we have in the past, about Soviet motives and actions in events like the Cuban missile crisis.
I certainly would not recommend the abandonment of attempts to make use of ”uncritical” oral history from the Soviet side, but I would be wary of deriving broad conclusions from “knowledge” that is unsubstantiated or, worse, untrue. -Mark Kramer Cambridge, Mass.
Mark Kramer’s cautionary remarks about the shortcomings of purely oral history are sensible and salutary.
He is correct to note that the Soviets’ continuing refusal to release official documents diminishes the confidence that can be placed in some of their claims.
We apologize if our own caveats on these points were insufficiently clear, because we share his concerns.
These include Kiriil Mazurov, who died in December 1989; Vladimir Shcherbitskii, who died in February 1990; and Viktor Grishin, who is still alive.
Although Kramer correctly notes that Gromyko was not a member of the Presidium in 1962, by all accounts the foreign minister was present at Presidium meetings where the Cuban initiative was discussed.
We were told that Volkogonov had been given special dispensation to examine the relevant records prior to the Moscow conference, and he read from what he claimed were documents from the Soviet archives at the conference itself.
It is possible, of course, that we have been the unwitting victims of an elaborate fraud, but we doubt it.
Few of the participants at the Moscow conference currently hold positions of political importance, and in our article we deliberately did not dwell on the views of those who do, for the very reasons that concern Kramer.
We have taken Gromkyo’s claims with a grain of salt, for example, because of his reputation for dissimulation.
We do not maintain that their memories are infallible; but we are confident that they have treated our endeavors with due seriousness.
Scholars have never had access to Soviet documents, and only recently have Soviets begun to speak out.
We should not fail to recall that for almost a decade after the Cuban missile crisis, virtually all serious scholarly interpretation of American decisionmaking was based on five books devoid of doc~mentation.
The crucial question scholars must now ask is whether we should put greater faith in the old Sovietology-based on conjecture and intuition-or in the recollections, however imperfect, of those who were in a position to know something about the matter.
Oral history, to paraphrase Winston Churchill, may not seem very impressive until you consider the alternatives.
Knowledge is never absolute; it is never anything more than the current best guess.
We have tried to articulate that best guess while noting its inherent weaknesses.
Gromyko’s article prompted by the Moscow conference is considerably more informative than his remarks at the conference itself.
We look forward to the day when all relevant Soviet archives are open to Western scholars; but in the meantime we should not permit the opportunities presented by even limited glasnost to slip through our fingers. -Bruce Atlyn Cambridge, Mass. -james G Blight Providence, R.I. -David A Welch Cambridge, Mass.
