Ernesto Bettencourt, Pan American Onloa\ H The following views on Cuba were expressed by/to.
The Missile Crlala tfeakened Caatro ■* Caatro came to power almost exclusively on a pledge to provide political 1 freedom to the Cuban people, with essentially no social program.
Even without any 1 social reforms, Caatro would have achieved a heroic mold in the eyes of the people I or this original battle against tyranny.
He haa no further basis for demanding I and Justifying sacrifices from his people.
His decision to accept the Soviet Union -3 weapons and military personnel dried up the emotional resources available to him. vk the departure of these forces and weapons, Castro has been left, despite his ' S irrevocable commitment to communism, with only the mutual sense of personal dancer % among the elite of hia regime to hold the structure together.
Then Castro came along and showed that this relationshin need not continue.
As a matter of fact, his early captures of 7S military personnel were the beginnings of his effort in this regard.
Hovever, in order to cement the Movement of the Cuban people from their ■ attitude of inferiority to a nev stiffened attitude, particularly the realiaticalloriented military leaders, Caatro had to provide physical proof of hla ability to ' withstand United States strength.
Keep the pressure on Caatro to accelerate disintegration of hia regime.
Do^t "" further, through public declaration, specify the details of the antiinvasion ' guarantee keep it fuxzy. m the long run, the invasion vill probably not be necessary but the threat of it Is a potent veapon.
It ia very important in vlev of the general Latin American situation to continue all diplomatic measures necessary to isolate Caatro.
Remember that although the use of troops remains optional Sr members, it is mandatory for all members of the Rio Pacf to comply ^tlfall other measures voted by the necessary majority.
In this vay, evenlf Brazil oTot^-s \*m disinclined to do so, all Latin American nations could be required to sever dlplanatlc relations vlth Cobs, sever trade relations, etc.
In this regard, In order for the United States to avoid the Giant/Pigmy image* Caribbean nations vfaich enjoy general respect—g., Honduras and Coeta Hlca rather than Nicaragua and Guatemala should be uaed t'o take the lead in advocating such measures, vlth the United States being ""reluctantly"" led along.
In this regard, It la necessary for all concerned to understand the § tvo dimensions of the Cuban situation the national aspects and the Internationale' aspects Involving the entire free world.
Vith regard to the national aspects, thiif lng Cubans must be brought to realize that the 0.
Conversely the U S. must realize that In the conduct of « ""great pover politics"" she cannot control the outccee of the Cuban internal5 situation exclusively as an international matter.
Inere must he a monitoring 1 of the developing political internal and of external groupings to ascertain g how ""best to Integrate this dynamic situation with the national aspects.
Government must be aware that § the Cuban political situation has been thoroughly atomized as a result of first Batista and then Castro purges.
Therefore, any attempt to tring unity among varicng ""splinter"" groups is hound to fail.
She U S. should follow the policy of en§ couraging several groups, continuing to evaluate them all, until one or two bid ™ fair to attract a following.
Perhaps later some coalescing around these stronger £ groups frcm amongst the other ""splinter"" groups may be possible.
Ho £ opposition group could muster the forces necessary even when the U S. was prepared to help overtly.
