After the war, Henry Ford II hired McNamara and a group of other Army Air Force veterans to work for Ford Motor Company.
These ""Whiz Kids"" helped reform Ford with modern planning, organization, and management control systems.
After briefly serving as Ford's president, McNamara accepted appointment as Secretary of Defense.
Kennedy and McNamara instituted a Cold War defense strategy of flexible response, which anticipated the need for military responses short of massive retaliation.
During the Kennedy administration, McNamara presided over a build-up of United States soldiers in South Vietnam.
After the 1964 Gulf of Tonkin incident, the number of United States soldiers in Vietnam escalated dramatically.
McNamara and other United States policymakers feared that the fall of South Vietnam to a Communist regime would lead to the fall of other governments in the region.
In October 1966, he launched Project 100,000, the lowering of army IQ standards which allowed 354,000 additional men to be recruited, despite criticism that they were not suited to working in high stress or dangerous environments.
McNamara grew increasingly skeptical of the efficacy of committing American troops to Vietnam.
In 1968, he resigned as Secretary of Defense to become President of the World Bank.
He remains the longest serving Secretary of Defense, having remained in office over seven years.
He served as President of the World Bank until 1981, shifting the focus of the World Bank from infrastructure and industrialization towards poverty reduction.
After retiring, he served as a trustee of several organizations, including the California Institute of Technology and the Brookings Institution.
In his later writings and interviews, he expressed regret for the decisions he made during the Vietnam War.
Contents 1 Early life and career 2 Ford Motor Company 3 Secretary of Defense 3.
Final years 7 See also 8 Works 9 Media 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Early life and career Robert McNamara was born in San Francisco, California.
He graduated from Piedmont High School in Piedmont, California in 1933, where he was president of the Rigma Lions boys club and earned the rank of Eagle Scout.
He was a member of the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity, was elected to Phi Beta Kappa in his sophomore year, and earned a varsity letter in crew.
Ford Motor Company In 1946, Tex Thornton, a colonel under whom McNamara had served, put together a group of former officers from the Office of Statistical Control to go into business together.
Thornton had seen an article in Life magazine portraying Ford as being in dire need of reform.
Henry Ford II, himself a World War II veteran from the Navy, hired the entire group of ten, including McNamara.
The ""Whiz Kids"", as they came to be known, helped the money-losing company reform its chaotic administration through modern planning, organization, and management control systems.
Starting as manager of planning and financial analysis, McNamara advanced rapidly through a series of top-level management positions.
McNamara had Ford adopt computers to construct models to find the most efficient, rational means of production, which led to much rationalization.
McNamara's style of ""scientific management"" with his use of computer spreadsheets featuring graphs showing trends in the auto industry were regarded as extremely innovative in the 1950s and were much copied by other executives in the following decades.
He was a force behind the Ford Falcon sedan, introduced in the fall of 1959—a small, simple and inexpensive-to-produce counter to the large, expensive vehicles prominent in the late 1950s.
On November 9, 1960, McNamara became the first president of Ford Motor Company from outside the Ford family since John S Gray in 1906.
Secretary of Defense President John F Kennedy and McNamara, 1962After his election in 1960, President-elect John F Kennedy first offered the post of Secretary of Defense to Robert A Lovett, who had already served in that position in the Truman administration; Lovett declined but recommended McNamara.
McNamara had read Kennedy's ghostwritten book Profiles in Courage and asked him if he had really written it himself, with Kennedy insisting that he did.
McNamara's salary as the CEO of Ford ran to some $3 million dollars per year while by contrast the position of the Defense Secretary paid only $25,000 per year.
Given the financial sacrifices, McNamara was able to insist to Kennedy that he have the right to appoint his officials and run the Pentagon his own way.
McNamara became one of the few members of the Kennedy Administration to work and socialize with Kennedy, and he became close to Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, eventually serving as a pallbearer at the younger Kennedy's funeral in 1968.
United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara with United States Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay at The Pentagon on April 10, 1963.
During World War II, McNamara served under LeMay's command as a statistician for the United States Army Air Forces.
Out of a major review of the military challenges confronting the United States initiated by McNamara in 1961 came a decision to increase the nation's ""limited warfare"" capabilities.
These moves were significant because McNamara was abandoning President Dwight D Eisenhower's policy of massive retaliation in favor of a flexible response strategy that relied on increased United States capacity to conduct limited, non-nuclear warfare.
The Kennedy administration placed particular emphasis on improving the ability to counter communist ""wars of national liberation"", in which the enemy avoided head-on military confrontation and resorted to political subversion and guerrilla tactics.
As McNamara said in his 1962 annual report, ""The military tactics are those of the sniper, the ambush, and the raid.
In practical terms, this meant training and equipping United States military personnel, as well as allies such as South Vietnam, for counterinsurgency operations.
He was a strong proponent of the blockade option over a missile strike and helped persuade the Joint Chiefs of Staff to agree with the blockade option.
Increased attention to conventional strength complemented these special forces preparations.
In this instance, he called up reserves and also proceeded to expand the regular armed forces.
Whereas active duty strength had declined from approximately 3,555,000 to 2,483,000 between 1953 and 1961, it increased to nearly 2,808,000 by June 30, 1962.
Then the forces leveled off at around 2,700,000 until the Vietnam military buildup began in 1965, reaching a peak of nearly 3,550,000 by mid-1968, just after McNamara left office.
Kennedy, who was fascinated with counterinsurgency warfare, made a major push to develop the Special Forces, popularly known as the Green Berets.
The United States Army leadership was, for the most part, strongly opposed to the counterinsurgency vogue, and stoutly resisted the presidential pressure for more counterinsurgency training and forces.
The United States Army, for reasons of bureaucratic politics, budgetary reasons and sheer pride, wanted to be equipped to fight a conventional war in central Europe against the Soviet Army, with a large number of divisions armed with expensive hi-tech weapons designed for maximum firepower, instead of having small teams of Special Forces armed with relatively low tech weapons like assault rifles fight in a Third World country.
Nuclear Strategy, the Triad Doctrine United States Civil Defense booklet Fallout Protection, commissioned by McNamaraWhen McNamara took over the Pentagon in 1961, the United States military relied on an all-out nuclear strike to respond to a Soviet attack of any kind, which would kill Soviet military forces and civilians.
This was the same nuclear strategy planned by the Strategic Air Command , led by General Curtis LeMay.
He sought other options after seeing that this strategy could not guarantee the destruction of all Soviet nuclear weapons, thus leaving the United States vulnerable to retaliation.
The subject educated NATO members on the Cold War doctrine of deterrence.
McNamara's alternative in the doctrine of counterforce was to try to limit the United States nuclear exchange by targeting only enemy military forces.
This would prevent retaliation and escalation by holding Soviet cities hostage to a follow-up strike.
McNamara later concluded that counterforce was not likely to control escalation but to provoke retaliation.
Other steps McNamara took other steps to increase United States deterrence posture and military capabilities.
McNamara also increased long-range airlift and sealift capabilities and funds for space research and development.
The end effect was to remove the Intelligence function from the control of the military and to put it under the control of the Secretary of Defense.
In the same year, he set up the Defense Supply Agency to work toward unified supply procurement, distribution, and inventory management under the control of the Secretary of Defense rather than the uniformed military.
NATO Military Committee chairman General Adolf Heusinger meeting with McNamara at the Pentagon, 1964 McNamara's institution of systems analysis as a basis for making key decisions on force requirements, weapon systems, and other matters occasioned much debate.
The word 'analysis' emphasizes the need to reduce a complex problem to its component parts for better understanding.
Enthoven and Smith said they used mainly civilians as systems analysts because they could apply independent points of view to force planning.
McNamara's tendency to take military advice into less account than had previous secretaries and to override military opinions contributed to his unpopularity with service leaders.
It was also generally thought that Systems Analysis, rather than being objective, was tailored by the civilians to support decisions that McNamara had already made.
United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara accompanied by United States Air Force Chief of Staff General John P McConnell greeted by Commanding General, United States Army Europe General Paul L Freeman Jr. during a visit to Rhein-Main Air Force Base in Frankfurt, Germany, September 7, 1962.
The most notable example of systems analysis was the Planning, Programming and Budgeting System instituted by United States Department of Defense Comptroller Charles J Hitch.
McNamara directed Hitch to analyze defense requirements systematically and produce a long-term, program-oriented defense budget.
The annual FYDP was a series of tables projecting forces for eight years and costs and manpower for five years in mission-oriented, rather than individual service, programs.
Sixteen DPMs appeared between 1961 and 1968 on such topics as strategic offensive and defensive forces, NATO strategy and force structure, military assistance, and tactical air forces.
OSD sent the DPMs to the services and the Joint Chief of Staff for comment; in making decisions, McNamara included in the DPM a statement of alternative approaches, force levels, and other factors.
The DPM was hated by the JCS and uniformed military in that it cut their ability to communicate directly to the White House.
But in practice, what it proved to be was a cost burden that became a barrier to entry for companies attempting to deal with the military.
It aided the trend toward a few large non-competitive defense contractors serving the military.
During this time, Robert McNamara was serving as Secretary of Defense and one of John F Kennedy's trusted advisors.
This committee included United States government officials, including Robert McNamara, to advise Kennedy on the crisis.
Kennedy instructed ExComm to immediately come up with a response to the Soviet threat unanimously without him present.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff favored launching air strikes against the Soviet missile sites in Cuba, an opinion that McNamara did not hold and advised Kennedy against the chiefs, warning that air strikes would almost certainly be crossing the Rubicon.
McNamara's relations with the hawkish Joint Chiefs of Staff had been strained during the crisis, and his relations with Admiral George Anderson and General Curtis LeMay were especially testy.
Both Admiral Anderson and General LeMay had favored invading Cuba, welcomed the prospect of a war with Soviet Union under the grounds that a war with the Soviet Union was inevitable, and whose attitudes towards Kennedy and McNamara had verged on insubordination.
Admiral Anderson had at a one point ordered McNamara out of the Naval Operations Room, saying that as a civilian he was unqualified to be making decisions about naval matters, leading McNamara to say that he was the Defense Secretary and Anderson was unqualified to be ordering him to do anything.
During this time it was confirmed the crisis had to be resolved within 48 hours by receiving two messages from Nikita Khrushchev.
The first message, an informal one, stated if the United States guaranteed to not invade Cuba then they would take the missiles out.
The second message, a more formal one, was broadcast on the radio stating if the United States attacked then Cuba was prepared to retaliate with masses of military power.
Although American defense planning focused on using nuclear weapons, Kennedy and McNamara saw it was clear the use of strategic weapons could be suicidal.
The majority of officials favored an air attack on Cuba in hopes to destroy the missile sites, although the vote was not unanimous which brought them to other alternatives.
A quarantine was a way to prevent the Soviets from bringing any military equipment in or out of Cuba.
During the final review of both alternatives on Sunday, October 21, upon Kennedy's request, McNamara presented the argument against the attack and for the quarantine.
After the crisis McNamara recommended to Kennedy that Admiral Anderson and General LeMay be sacked.
However, Kennedy was afraid of a Congressional backlash if he sacked two of the chiefs at once.
Moreover, Kennedy did not wish for his disagreements with the Joint Chiefs to become public and felt that sacking two of the chiefs at once would lead to speculation in the media about such a disagreement.
Later on in 1963, a White House release announced that Admiral Anderson was the new American ambassador to Portugal.
Cost reductions McNamara's staff stressed systems analysis as an aid in decision making on weapon development and many other budget issues.
Acting on these principles, McNamara instituted a much-publicized cost reduction program, which, he reported, saved $14 billion in the five-year period beginning in 1961.
Although he had to withstand a storm of criticism from senators and representatives from affected congressional districts, he closed many military bases and installations that he judged unnecessary for national security.
He was equally determined about other cost-saving measures.Due to the nuclear arms race, the Vietnam War buildup and other projects, Total Obligational Authority increased greatly during the McNamara years.
Not until FY 1984 did DoD's total obligational authority surpass that of FY 1968 in constant dollars.
Program consolidation One major hallmark of McNamara's cost reductions was the consolidation of programs from different services, most visibly in aircraft acquisition, believing that the redundancy created waste and unnecessary spending.
McNamara directed the Air Force to adopt the Navy's F-4 Phantom and A-7 Corsair combat aircraft, a consolidation that was quite successful.
Conversely, his actions in mandating a premature across-the-board adoption of the untested M16 rifle proved catastrophic when the weapons began to fail in combat, though later congressional investigations revealed the causes of these failures as negligence and borderline sabotage on behalf of the Army ordnance corps' officers.
McNamara tried to extend his success by merging development programs as well, resulting in the TFX dual service project to combine Navy requirements for a Fleet Air Defense aircraft and Air Force requirements for a tactical bomber.
His experience in the corporate world led him to believe that adopting a single type for different missions and service would save money.
He insisted on the General Dynamics entry over the DOD's preference for Boeing because of commonality issues.
Though heralded as a fighter that could do everything , in the end it involved too many compromises to succeed at any of them.
The Navy version was drastically overweight and difficult to land, and eventually canceled after a Grumman study showed it was incapable of matching the abilities of the newly revealed Soviet MiG-23 and MiG-25 aircraft.
The F-111 would eventually find its niche as a tactical bomber and electronic warfare aircraft with the Air Force.However, many analysts believe that even though the TFX project itself was a failure, McNamara was ahead of his time as the trend in fighter design has continued toward consolidation — the F-16 Falcon and F/A-18 Hornet emerged as multi-role fighters, and most modern designs combine many of the roles the TFX would have had.
The Truman and Eisenhower administrations had committed the United States to support the French and native anti-Communist forces in Vietnam in resisting efforts by the Communists in the North to unify the country, though neither administration established actual combat forces in the war.
The United States role—initially limited to financial support, military advice and covert intelligence gathering—expanded after 1954 when the French withdrew.
United States involvement escalated after the Gulf of Tonkin incidents in August 1964, involving two purported attacks on a United States Navy destroyer by North Vietnamese naval vessels.In the Kennedy administration, McNamara was closely allied in debates in the cabinet with Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State, with both favoring greater American support for South Vietnam.
Initially, the main concern of the new Kennedy administration was Laos, not South Vietnam.
Rusk shot down that proposal, saying his World War Two experiences in Burma had taught him that bombing was ineffective in the jungles and six planes were not enough.
In the spring of 1961 Kennedy seriously considered intervening in Laos where the Communist Pathet Lao, supported by North Vietnam, were winning the civil war.
However, Laos was a backward, landlocked country with barely any modern roads and only two modern airfields, both of which were quite small by western standards, which would have made for a logistical nightmare.
Furthermore, memories of the Korean War were still fresh, and it was generally accepted if the United States sent in troops into Laos, it was almost certain that China would do likewise, thus leading to another Sino-American war.
The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization was split with its European members such as France and Britain stoutly opposed to intervention in Laos while its Asian members such as Thailand and the Philippines were all for intervention in Laos.
McNamara noted to Kennedy it was quite possible that the two airfields in Laos could be seized by the Communist forces, which would cut off any U.S forces in Laos, thus turning the intervention into a debacle.
At a meeting on 29 April 1961, when questioned by the Attorney-General, Robert F Kennedy, McNamara stated that ""we should take a stand in Thailand and South Vietnam"", pointedly omitting Laos from the nations in Southeast Asia to risk a war over.McNamara soon changed his mind about Laos.
On 1 May 1961, he advised President Kennedy to send in ground troops into Laos, saying ""we must be prepared to win"", and advising using nuclear weapons if China should intervene.
Kennedy, who was distrustful of the hawkish advice given by the Joint Chiefs of Staff after the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion, instead decided to seek a diplomatic solution to the Laos crisis at a peace conference in Geneva in 1961-62 that ultimately led to an agreement to make Laos neutral in the Cold War.
The problems posed by the possibility of a war with China and the logistical problems of supporting a large units of troops in Laos led McNamara ultimately favor an alternative strategy of having a small number of U.S Army Special Forces operate in Laos working with American allies such as the Hmong hill tribes.
Such dire assessments led Kennedy to ignore McNamara and the Joint Chiefs, and to favor a diplomatic solution the Laos crisis.In October 1961, when General Maxwell Taylor and Walt Whitman Rostow advised sending 8,000 American combat troops to South Vietnam, McNamara rejected that recommendation as inadequate, stating that 8,000 troops would ""probably not tip the scales decisively"", instead recommending to Kennedy that he send 6 divisions to South Vietnam.
Led by General Paul D Harkins, the officers of the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam altered a map that showed too much of South Vietnam under Viet Cong control, and massaged the statistics to make the Viet Cong appear weaker than what they were.
McNamara's ""quantitative"" style based upon much number-crunching by computers about trends in Vietnam missed the human dimension.
Aspects of the war such popular views and attitudes in South Vietnam, and that the South Vietnamese president Ngô Đình Diệm favored a ""divide and rule"" strategy of having multiple government departments compete against one another as a way of staying in power were missed by McNamara's ""quantitative"" approach as there was no way that computers could calculate these aspects of the war.
Though McNamara had supported plans to intervene in Laos in 1961, by 1962 he had changed his mind.
During a discussion with General Lyman Lemnitzer, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, McNamara had stumped him by asking him what the United States would do in the event of several scenarios in Laos, none of which Lemnitzer and the chiefs were capable of answering.
In late 1962, McNamara ordered planning to withdraw the American advisers from South Vietnam in 1964 as according to Pentagon calculations the war should be won by then.
On 2 January 1963, McNamara's rosy projections and assumptions based upon what his computers had told him about Vietnam were rudely shattered by the Battle of Ap Bac, that began when three Viet Cong companies were encircled by the ARVN's 7th Division in the village of Ap Bac.
Despite being outnumbered by a factor of 10-1 and being outgunned having only rifles compared to the 7th Division’s tanks, artillery, armored personnel carriers and helicopters, the VC defeated the 7th Division in the ensuing battle and escaped into the jungle.
Vann, a colorful figure whose outspokenly blunt criticism of how the war was being fought made him a favorite of the media, was much disliked by McNamara, who did not appreciate the criticism as he continued to insist that the war was being won.Vann's reports criticizing Diệm's regime as corrupt and incompetent were most unwelcome to McNamara who contended that the reforms advocated by Vann were unnecessary.
In March 1963, Vann resigned from the Army as he was informed that his career was over.
After the Battle of Ap Bac, a debate began in the Kennedy cabinet about the viability of the Diệm regime, which was reinforced by the Buddhist crisis, which began in May 1963.
When the subject of supporting a coup against Diệm was first raised by Kennedy at a National Security Council meeting in August 1963, McNamara spoke in favor of retaining Diệm.
On 31 August 1963, Paul Kattenburg, a diplomat newly returned from Saigon suggested at a meeting attend by Rusk, McNamara and Vice President Johnson that the United States should end support for Diem and leave South Vietnam to its fate.
Unable to gain a consensus about what to do, in September 1963, Kennedy sent McNamara and General Taylor on a ""fact-finding mission"" to South Vietnam.
At a meeting in the Gia Long Palace, President Diem showed McNamara various graphs and charts that purported to be proof that the war was being won, a performance that convinced McNamara the war was as good as won.
Kennedy wanted a negative assessment of Diệm to justify supporting a coup, but McNamara and Taylor instead wrote about the ""great progress"" achieved by Diệm and confidently predicted that the ""bulk"" of the American advisers would leave in 1965 as by that point they predicted the VC insurgency would be crushed.
With the CIA and the ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. urging support for a coup while the Pentagon was opposed, Kennedy vacillated and finally being unable to make up his mind, gave the power of decision to Lodge.
Lodge, who detested Diệm, gave his approval to the generals plotting against him.On 1 November 1963, the coup was launched.
After the presidential palace was overrun in the fighting, Diệm was captured trying to flee Saigon and executed on 2 November 1963.
On 22 November 1963, Kennedy was assassinated and succeeded by Lyndon Johnson.
In December 1963, Johnson sent McNamara on another ""fact-finding mission"" to South Vietnam to assess General Minh's performance.
He also admitted that the computer models and statistics, which he had attached such importance to, were ""grossly in error"" and that government control of rural areas had ""in fact been deteriorating...to a far greater extent than we realized"" since July.
On 30 January 1964, General Minh was overthrown in a bloodless coup d'état by General Nguyễn Khánh.
The same month saw a VC battalion in the Mekong Delta escape from a larger force of South Vietnamese troops, who had been rated as some of the very best in the ARVN by the American advisers who had trained them, a battle that underscored the problems in the ARVN.On 8 March 1964, McNamara visited South Vietnam to report to President Johnson about how well the new regime of Khánh was handling the war.
McNamara pressed Khánh to put South Vietnam on a war footing by conscripting all able-bodied young men into the military, which he promised he would do.
Khánh did not keep his promise as wealthy and middle class South Vietnamese families objected to having their sons conscripted, and as a result the burden of conscription called by Khánh's national service law fell only on sons of poor families, provoking much resentment.
The ""greatest weakness"" accordingly to McNamara was the ""uncertain viability"" of Khánh's government, which might be overthrown at any moment as the ARVN was ridden with factionalism and intrigue.To save South Vietnam, McNamara recommended that the United States make it ""emphatically clear"" its willingness to support Khánh to the hilt.
Other recommendations, which were accepted in a National Security Council ""action memorandum"" called for the United States to pay for an increase in the ARVN, provide the Republic of Vietnam Air Force with more planes and helicopters, and for the United States to pay for more civil servants to administer rural South Vietnam.
More importantly, the ""action memorandum"" redefined the Vietnam War as not only important for Asia, but for the entire world as the document asserted the global credibility of the United States was now at stake as it was claimed America's allies would lose faith in American promises if the South Vietnamese government were overthrown.
In May 1964, Senator Richard Russell advised Johnson against relying too much on McNamara, saying ""McNamara is the smartest fella any of us know.
The advice that McNamara and other American officials gave to the South Vietnamese to make reforms to crack down on corruption and make the government more effective was always ignored as by this point the South Vietnamese government knew very well that the Americans, having repeatedly promised in public that they would never permit the ""loss"" of South Vietnam, were now prisoners of their own rhetoric.
For the South Vietnamese knew that the United States could not abandon them without damaging its own prestige.
So despite their reliance on American aid, now more than a half-billion dollars a year, they could safely defy American dictates.
To compensate for the weaknesses of the South Vietnamese state, by late winter of 1964, senior officials in the Johnson administration such as McNamara's deputy, William Bundy, the assistant secretary of defense, were advocating American intervention in the war.
Fearful of causing a war with China, Johnson was opposed to the plans of Khánh to invade North Vietnam, and he was even less enthusiastic about having the United States invade North Vietnam.
To declare war on North Vietnam would lead to irresistible political pressure at home to invade North Vietnam.
As such, the solution was floated for Congress to pass a resolution granting Johnson the power to wage war in Vietnam.By 1964, the United States Navy sent destroyers into the Gulf of Tonkin to support raids by South Vietnamese commandos on North Vietnam and to gather intelligence.
On 2 August 1964, one destroyer, the USS Maddox was involved in a naval skirmish with North Vietnamese Vietnam People's Navy torpedo boats within North Vietnamese waters.
On 4 August 1964, the Maddox and another destroyer, the USS Turner Joy, initially claimed to have been attacked by the North Vietnamese torpedo boats in international waters on a stormy night, but shortly afterward reported there was probably no attack.
Captain John J Herrick of the Maddox reported that the ""torpedo boats"" were almost certainly just radar ""blips"" caused by the ""freak weather effects"" of the storm and the reports of an attack on his ship were due to an ""overeager"" radar operator who mistook the motors of the ship for the rush of torpedoes.
Johnson promptly seized upon the reports of an attack on a Navy warship in international waters to ask Congress to pass a resolution giving him the authority to wage war in Vietnam.
Grant Sharp Jr. of the Pacific fleet, put strong pressure on Herrick to say that his ship had been attacked by torpedo boats, despite his strong doubts on the subject.
On 5 August 1964, McNamara appeared before Congress to present proof of what he claimed was an attack on the Navy's warships in international waters of the Gulf of Tonkin and stated it was imperative that Congress pass the resolution as quickly as possible.
McNamara was also instrumental in presenting the event to Congress and the public as justification for escalation of the war against the communists.
In 1995, McNamara met with former North Vietnam Defense Minister Võ Nguyên Giáp, who told his American counterpart that the August 4 attack never happened, a conclusion McNamara eventually came to accept.President Johnson ordered Operation Pierce Arrow, retaliatory air strikes on North Vietnamese naval bases.
Regardless of the particulars of the incident, the larger issue would turn out to be the sweeping powers granted by the resolution.
It gave Johnson virtually unfettered authority to expand retaliation for a relatively minor naval incident into a major land war involving 500,000 American soldiers.
Though Johnson now had the authority to wage war, he proved reluctant to use it, for example by ignoring the advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to bomb North Vietnam after a VC attack on Bien Hoa Air Base killed five Americans and destroyed 5 B-57 bombers.
Knowing of Johnson's hesitance, on 1 December 1964 McNamara recommended a ""graduated"" response program, urging Johnson to launch Operation Barrel Roll, a bombing offensive against the part of the Ho Chi Minh Trail in the southern part of neutral Laos, which was approved by the president.
On Christmas Eve 1964, the VC bombed the Brinks Hotel in Saigon, killing two Americans.
Despite McNamara's recommendations to bomb North Vietnam, Johnson still hesitated.
McNamara at war In 1965, in response to stepped-up military activity by the VC in South Vietnam and their North Vietnamese allies, the United States began bombing North Vietnam, deployed large military forces and entered into combat in South Vietnam.
McNamara's plan, supported by requests from top United States military commanders in Vietnam, led to the commitment of 485,000 troops by the end of 1967 and almost 535,000 by June 30, 1968.
Both Bundy and McNamara stated that they favored the latter, arguing that the commitment of U.S troops to fight in South Vietnam and a strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnam were now required.
McNamara's hawkish stance on Vietnam was well known in Washington and many in the press often referred to the war as ""McNamara's war"" as he was the one in the cabinet always pressing for greater American involvement.In February 1965, the VC attacked the American airfield at Pleiku, killing 8 Americans and destroying 10 aircraft.
Only Mansfield and the Vice President, Hubert Humphrey, objected to Johnson's plans to bomb North Vietnam.
Aircraft from the carrier, USS Ranger, launched Operation Flaming Dart bombing the North Vietnamese army base at Đồng Hới later that day.
McNamara was forced to tell Johnson that the Flaming Dart raids had done little damage owning to the heavy clouds, which caused the pilots to miss when dropping their bombs, and more raids would be needed.
On 11 February, Johnson ordered more bombing raids, and 2 March approved Operation Rolling Thunder, a strategic bombing offensive against North Vietnam that was originally planned to last eight weeks, and instead went on for three years.
After the bombing raids started, General William Westmoreland of the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam , cabled Johnson to say that Da Nang Air Base was vulnerable as he had no faith in the ability of the South Vietnamese to protect it, leading him to ask for American troops to be deployed instead.
On 8 March 1965, two battalions from the United States Marine Corps were landed at Danang, making the beginning of the ground war for the United States.
To resolve the debate, later in July 1965, McNamara visited South Vietnam on yet another ""fact-finding mission"" for President Johnson and met the new South Vietnamese Premier, Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ, who had just overthrown Khánh.
McNamara was not impressed with Kỳ, reporting to Johnson that he saw little evidence that he was capable of winning the war, and the United States would have to send more troops to South Vietnam.
McNamara also advised the president that by early 1966 he would have to send 100,000 more troops to South Vietnam in order to win the war, and he would need to mobilize the Reserves and state National Guards as well.
Johnson accepted the first recommendation while rejecting the latter, disregarding Bundy's warnings that to send more troops would paradoxically mean less leverage over South Vietnam.
To mobilize the Reserves and National Guards would mean having to call up hundreds of thousands of men from civilian life, which would inevitably disrupt the economy, which in turn would require ending the peacetime economy and putting the economy on a war footing.
Johnson rejected a wartime economy as imposing too many sacrifices on ordinary Americans while threatening his chances for reelection.
Because the Reserves were never called up, the Army had to send much of its manpower to Vietnam, leaving the U.S divisions in Western Europe in a ""skeletal"" condition as there was a shortage of volunteers.
To make up the shortfall, the Army had to rely upon the draft, which caused much domestic opposition, especially as the draft system offered generous exemptions for those attending university and college, leading to the burden of the draft falling disproportionately upon men from poorer families.
Because of the refusal to call up the Reserves, McNamara had to increase the draft call in July 1965 from 17,000 per month to 35,000 per month.
As most of the 18 and 19-year-old draftees had a high school diploma or less, this also led to a decline in the Army's intellectual standards, with many officers complaining that most of the draftees were not intelligent enough to be trained for technical duties or promoted up the ranks.
Throughout the war, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Earle Wheeler, pressed very strongly for the reserves and national guards to be called out, saying the war was steadily ruining the United States Army.
Though McNamara warned the president in July 1965 that the war would cost an extra $10 billion dollars in defense spending over the next year, Johnson at a press conference said his administration would be spending only an extra $300–400 million dollars until January 1966.
McNamara warned that the increased spending would spark inflation and raise the deficit, advising Johnson to ask Congress to increase taxes to forestall those eventualities.
On 2 November 1965, Norman Morrison, a Quaker burned himself alive in the parking lot of the Pentagon to protest the war.
All McNamara saw from his office was the smoke rising from the parking lot, but he was sufficiently troubled by the incident that he refused to discuss it with his family, all the more so because his wife Margey was opposed to the war and sympathized with Morrison's feelings, if not his suicide.
On 7 November 1965, McNamara sent Johnson a memo saying that the ""substantial loss of American lives"" in Vietnam was worth the sacrifice in order to contain China, which McNamara called the world's most dangerous nation.
The casualty lists mounted as the number of troops and the intensity of fighting escalated.
He concluded that there were a limited number of VC fighters in South Vietnam and that a war of attrition would destroy them.
Faced with a guerrilla war, the question of holding territory was irrelevant as the VC never operated for extended periods in areas where the Americans were strong and if the Americans occupied an area in force, the VC simply moved to other areas where the American presence was weaker.
Westmoreland had decided, with the support of McNamara, to defend all of South Vietnam, believing that he could win via a strategy of attrition as he would simply inflict enough losses to end the enemy's ability to wage war.
McNamara devised the ""body count"" measurement to determine how well the Americans were doing, reasoning if the Americans were inflicting heavy losses as measured by the ""body count"", it must be a sign that they were winning.
In Vietnam, this led to divisions, whose size limited them and their supply trains to the road, using massive amounts of firepower against guerrillas who were often ""nimble"" enough to evade all of the firepower brought to bear.
The Special Forces did fight in Vietnam, but only as an adjutant to the traditional infantry and armored divisions, which did most of the fighting.
In a 1966 memo, McNamara admitted that the sort of counterinsurgency war envisioned by Kennedy with the Special Forces leading the fight had not occurred, and wrote that the responsibility for this ""undoubtedly lies with bad management"" on the part of the Army.
McNamara with Australian Prime Minister Harold Holt at The Pentagon in July 1966 Disenchantment Up to November 1965, McNamara, who been a supporter of the war, first started to have doubts about the war, saying at a press conference that ""it will be a long war"", which completely contradicted his previous optimistic statements that the war would be brought to a close soon.
Although he was a prime architect of the Vietnam War and repeatedly overruled the JCS on strategic matters, McNamara gradually became skeptical about whether the war could be won by deploying more troops to South Vietnam and intensifying the bombing of North Vietnam, a claim he would publish in a book years later.
He also stated later that his support of the war was given out of loyalty to administration policy.
He traveled to South Vietnam many times to study the situation firsthand and became increasingly reluctant to approve the large force increments requested by the military commanders.As a Christmas gesture, Johnson ordered a bombing pause over North Vietnam and went off to his ranch in Texas for the holidays.
McNamara went with his family for skiing in Colorado, but upon hearing that the president was open to extending the bombing pause for a few more days, he left his family at the sky lodge in the Rockies to fly to the Johnson ranch on 27 December 1965.
McNamara knew that Johnson tended to listen to the advice of Rusk who saw extending the bombing pause as weakness, and wanted a meeting with Johnson without Rusk present.
McNamara argued to the president in a three hour long meeting that the North Vietnamese would not open peace talks unless the bombing were stopped first, as they kept saying repeatedly, and persuaded Johnson to extend the bombing pause into January.
At a New Year's Eve party attended by Washington's elite to welcome 1966, McNamara expressed doubts about America's ability to win the war.
A week later at a dinner party attended by the economist John Kenneth Galbraith and Johnson's speechwriter Dick Goodwin, McNamara stated that victory was unobtainable, and the best that could be achieved was an ""honorable withdrawal"" that might save South Vietnam as a state.
In February 1966, during the Honolulu conference, McNamara during an ""off-the-record"" chat with a group of journalists spoke about the war in very jaded terms, stating frankly that Operation Rolling Thunder was a failure.
McNamara stated that North Vietnam was a backward Third World country that did not have the same advanced industrial infrastructure of First World nations, making the bombing offensive useless.
Karnow, one of the journalists present during the ""off-the-record"" conversation, described McNamara's personality as having changed, noting the Defense Secretary, who was normally so arrogant and self-assured, convinced he could ""scientifically"" solve any problem, as being subdued and clearly less self-confident.In October 1966, McNamara returned from yet another visit to South Vietnam, full of confidence in public and doubt in private.
Though McNamara reported to Johnson that American forces were inflicting heavy losses on the North Vietnamese and VC, he added that they could ""more than replace"" their losses and that ""full security exists nowhere"" in South Vietnam, even in areas supposedly ""pacified"" by the Americans.
The students refused to let the car move until McNamara debated their leader, Michael Ansara, the president of the Harvard chapter of Students for a Democratic Society.
McNamara agreed to the debate, and standing on the hood of his car answered the charge from a student in the crowd that the United States was waging aggression by saying the war started in 1954, not 1957, which he knew ""because the International Control Commission wrote a report that said so.
As McNamara continued to insult the crowd and the mood grew more ugly, he fled into Quincy House, from which he escaped via underground tunnels to see Kissinger.
The confrontation with the students had shaken him, and it took half an hour before he was ready to address Kissinger's class.Because the effects of Operation Rolling Thunder were more easily measured than with the ground war, McNamara was especially troubled by the revelation that the bombing offensive had not caused the collapse of North Vietnam's economy as predicted.
In June 1967, American bombers hit North Vietnam's hydroelectric plants and reduced North Vietnam capacity to generate electricity by 85%, according to McNamara's calculations.
At the same time, he also calculated that the annual amount of electricity generated in North Vietnam was equal only to a fifth of the electricity generated every year at the Potomac Electric Power Company's plant in Alexandria, Virginia, making the destruction of North Vietnamese power plants meaningless to the outcome of the war as the amount of electricity generated was so small.
McNamara's doubts were encouraged by his civilian aides such as Leslie H Gelb and John McNaughton, who complained that their wives and teenage children were chiding them as ""war criminals"" when they came home from work.
McNamara's own teenage son, Robert Craig McNamara, was opposed to the war and denounced his father when he came from work every day.
McNamara was shocked to discover that the American flag was hanging upside down in his son's bedroom as the younger McNamara told him that he was ashamed of America because of him.
In a memo of 19 May 1967 to the president, McNamara stated the military side of the war was going well with the Americans killing thousands of the enemy every month, but the political side was not, as South Vietnam remained as dysfunctional as ever.
McNamara wrote that the idea that the American forces would temporarily stabilize the situation so the South Vietnamese could take over the war themselves was flawed as the dysfunctional South Vietnamese state would never be able to win the war, thus meaning the Americans would have to stay in Vietnam for decades to come.
He advised Johnson not to accept Westmoreland's call for an additional 200,000 soldiers as that would mean calling up the Reserves, which in turn would require a wartime economy.
The economic sacrifices that ending the peacetime economy would entail would make it almost politically impossible to negotiate peace, and in effect would mean placing the hawks in charge, which was why those of a hawkish inclination kept pressing for the Reserves to be called up.
The economic sacrifices could only be justified to the American people by saying the war would be brought to a victorious conclusion.
McNamara rejected the advice of the hawks, warning that steps such as bombing North Vietnam's dikes and locks to flood the farmland with the aim of causing a famine; mining the coast of North Vietnam to sink Soviet ships bringing in arms; invading Laos and Cambodia; and finally in the last resort using nuclear weapons if the other measures failed were likely to alienate world opinion and increase domestic opposition.
To the Americans, Indonesia was the most important of all the ""dominoes"" in Southeast Asia, and McNamara argued that even if the South Vietnamese ""domino"" were to fall, the Indonesian ""domino"" would still stand.
He was inspired by the confrontation at Harvard the previous November as he had discovered that the students he had been debating knew more about Vietnam's history than he did.
The task was assigned to Gelb and six officials who were instructed by McNamara to examine just how and why the United States became involved in Vietnam, starting with American relations with the Viet Minh in World War Two.
Subsequent efforts by the Nixon administration to prevent such leaks led indirectly to the Watergate scandal.
In an interview, McNamara said that the Domino Theory was the main reason for entering the Vietnam War.
Equality of Opportunity To commemorate President Harry S Truman's signing an order to end segregation in the military, McNamara issued Directive 5120.36 on July 26, 1963.
This directive, Equal Opportunity in the Armed Forces, dealt directly with the issue of racial and gender discrimination in areas surrounding military communities.
Under the directive, commanding officers were obligated to use the economic power of the military to influence local businesses in their treatment of minorities and women.
With the approval of the Secretary of Defense, the commanding officer could declare areas off-limits to military personnel for discriminatory practices.
Expulsion of the Chagos islanders In July 1961, McNamara was informed by the British Defense Minister, Peter Thorneycroft, that the financial burden of trying to maintain British forces around the world was too much, and that the British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan was considering a withdrawal of all British forces ""East of Suez"" to end the British military presence in Asia.
McNamara was opposed to the contemplated ""East of Suez"" withdrawal, but the possibility of such a withdrawal led the United States Navy to lobby for Britain to allow an American naval base to be set up some British island in the Indian Ocean, a viewpoint that was formally endorsed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in January 1962.
The memo by the Joint Chiefs mentioned that a major problem with British colonies was the rise of nationalist movements demanding independence, and expressed concern that if the United Kingdom were to grant the United States a base in the Indian Ocean, an independence movement might demand the withdrawal of the Americans.
In 1940, Britain granted air and naval bases in the colony of Trinidad and Tobago to the United States, but when Trinidad and Tobago became independent in 1962, the new government of Eric Williams asked for the Americans to leave.
In addition, the Chagossians were black, and the United States Navy were convinced that having the Chagossians living aside an American naval base would result in prostitution, which in turn would lead to American sailors being infected with venereal diseases, thus leading the Navy to demand that the Chagossians be evicted.
The American anthropologist David Vine was of the opinion that the concerns of the United States Navy represented racism as they reflected popular stereotypes about black people being oversexed.In September 1962, Thorneycroft visited Washington to meet McNamara and to begin talks about which British island in the Indian Ocean was to have the American base.
By 1963, the Americans had selected the island of Diego Garcia in the Chagos Archipelago, which was part of the British Crown colony of Mauritius as the ideal place for maintaining air and naval bases that would allow the United States to control the Indian Ocean.
McNamara offered to have the United States pay $15 million United States dollars annually in rent to the British government for a base in Diego Garcia, a sum that was agreeable to London.
In 1965, the Chagos islands were severed from the Mauritius and turned into the British Indian Ocean Territory as the prelude for the projected American base.In 1966, in a meeting with Denis Healey, who was now serving as the Defense Minister, McNamara pressed for the British to remain in Asia, saying he wanted the British to maintain their base in Singapore.
Healey offered evasive answers to McNamara's questions, claiming that his government wanted to maintain the Singapore base, but their financial costs of the Singapore base was draining the British exchequer.
To maintain British forces in Malaysia and Singapore was costing the British government £1 million pounds per day, a crippling sum that led many in the cabinet of the Prime Minister Harold Wilson to want to end the British military presence in Southeast Asia.
In July 1966, McNamara told Johnson that it was ""absolutely essential"" for the British to remain ""East of Suez"", through the reasons he gave were political rather military, namely that having British forces in Southeast Asia showed the importance of the region, which thus justified the Vietnam war.
To placate the Americans, the British were willing to offer a lease on Diego Garcia on almost any terms favorable to the Americans.
To prevent an independence movement in the Chagos islands from emerging, the Americans informed the British that they wanted all of the Chagossians expelled from their homes and never to be allowed to returned, a request that the British agreed.
In January 1968, Wilson announced that with the exception of the garrison in Hong Kong, all British forces would be withdrawn ""East of Suez"" in order to save money, which very much disappointed the Americans.
The British government expelled all of the Chagossians from their homes starting in 1968 with the process completed by 1973.
Under pressure to proceed with the ABM program after it became clear that the Soviets had begun a similar project, McNamara finally agreed to a ""light"" system which he believed could protect against the far smaller number of Chinese missiles.
However, he never believed it was wise for the United States to move in that direction because of psychological risks of relying too much on nuclear weaponry and that there would be pressure from many directions to build a larger system than would be militarily effective.
President Lyndon B Johnson and McNamara at a cabinet meeting, 1968 He always believed that the best defense strategy for the United States was a parity of mutually assured destruction with the Soviet Union.
An ABM system would be an ineffective weapon as compared to an increase in deployed nuclear missile capacity.
Departure Cabinet meeting with Dean Rusk, President Johnson and McNamara, 9 February 1968 McNamara wrote of his close personal friendship with Jackie Kennedy and how she demanded that he stop the killing in Vietnam.
As McNamara grew more and more controversial after 1966 and his differences with the President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff over Vietnam strategy became the subject of public speculation, frequent rumors surfaced that he would leave office.
By 1967, McNamara was suffering visibly from the nervous strain as he went days without shaving and he suffered spasms where his jaw would quiver uncontrollably for hours.
Senator John C Stennis was a conservative Southern Democrat who enjoyed much influence as a senior member of the Senate Armed Forces Committee.
Stennis saw himself more as a champion of the military rather than its overseer, and as such the military often leaked information to him, in the full knowledge that he would take up their cause on Capitol Hill.
Reflecting their unhappiness with McNamara's leadership, in the spring of 1967 senior generals and admirals let Stennis know of their belief that the Defense Secretary was mismanaging the war.
This led Stennis to schedule hearings for the Senate Armed Forces Committee in August 1967 to examine the charge that ""unskilled civilian amateurs"" were not letting ""professional military experts"" win the war.
He charged that McNamara had placed too many restrictions on bombing North Vietnam to protect innocent North Vietnamese civilians.
The chairman of the Senate Armed Forces Committee, Senator Richard Russell Jr., was opposed to the war, but he expressed his opposition in the most cautious and lukewarm terms as he did not wish to appear unpatriotic, and so the hawkish Stennis enjoyed more power than his title of deputy chairman of the committee would suggest.The hearings opened on 8 August 1967, and Stennis called as his witnesses numerous admirals and Air Force generals who all testified to their belief that the United States was fighting with ""one arm tied behind its back"", implicitly criticizing McNamara's leadership.
They complained of ""overtly restrictive controls"" in bombing North Vietnam that they claimed were preventing them from winning the war.
When McNamara himself appeared as a witness before the Senate Armed Forces Committee on 25 August 1967, he defended the war in very lukewarm terms that strongly suggested he had lost faith in the war, testifying that the bombing campaign against North Vietnam was ineffective, making the question of the bombing restrictions meaningless.
McNamara described all of the 57 restricted targets as either of no importance such as a tire factory in Hanoi that produced only 30 tires per day or carried too much risk of hitting Soviet ships bringing supplies to North Vietnam.
He warned that the prospect of American bombers damaging or sinking Soviet merchantmen while wounding or killing Soviet sailors carried too much risk of causing World War Three.
McNamara also stated that North Vietnamese morale was not broken by the bombing offensive as the North Vietnamese people were ""accustomed to discipline and are no strangers to deprivation and death"" while everything indicated the leadership in Hanoi were not affected by the bombing raids.
Besides Stennis, the other members of the Senate Armed Forces Committee were senators Henry M Jackson, Strom Thurmond and Stuart Symington, all of whom were very hostile to McNamara in their questioning of him.
Privately, McNamara felt that Thurmond was an ""ass"", saying he was a bigoted, ignorant Southern politician whose only values were a mindless militarism, a fervent belief in white supremacy and a fondness for marrying women far younger than himself.
McNamara felt that it was beneath him to be questioned by Thurmond, which explained why he was notably truculent in his answers to him.
Stennis damned McNamara for putting in bombing restrictions to protect North Vietnamese civilians and claimed that the war could be easily won if only McNamara would just obey all of the advice he received from the military.
Stennis was not influenced by the hearings as he had written the committee's report before the hearings had even began.
Johnson saw the hearings as proof that it was time to dismiss McNamara, whom he believed was ""cracking up"" under the strain of the war, as reflected in the Defense Secretary's criticism of the Rolling Thunder bombings.
Stennis, an ardent white supremacist who had fiercely opposed Johnson's civil rights legislation, was an old enemy of Johnson's, which led the president to decide not to sack McNamara in August 1967 as that would be seen as a victory by Stennis, and instead to wait a few months to fire him.
Johnson had long resented and hated the Kennedy brothers, whom he thought looked down upon him as ""white trash"" from Texas.
Senator Robert F Kennedy had emerged as a leading critic of the war by 1967, and Johnson stated to Kearns his belief that McNamara had suffered a nervous breakdown, of which Kennedy, a close friend of McNamara, had taken advantage of.
Johnson had chosen the job of World Bank president for McNamara because its rules prohibited the president from involving himself in the domestic affairs of member nations, which would prevent McNamara from criticizing the war after he left office.
Johnson's biggest fear was that if he fired McNamara, then he might join with Kennedy in criticizing him and the war; given his status as the longest-serving Defense Secretary, such criticism would be especially damaging.
General Earle ""Bus"" Wheeler, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff had become dissatisfied with McNamara's leadership and was outraged by that remark.
In response to McNamara's claim that the Joint Chiefs supported him, he proposed that the Joint Chiefs all resign in protest at McNamara's leadership.
General Harold K Johnson of the Army, who erroneously blamed McNamara for Johnson's decision not to call up the Reserves in 1965, agreed to Wheeler's plan with his only regret being that he did not resign in 1965.
The plan collapsed when General Wallace M Greene of the Marine Corps refused to go along with it.On 21 October 1967, McNamara saw the March on the Pentagon anti-war protest from his office in the Pentagon.
He witnessed hippie girls placing flowers in the guns of the D.C National Guardsman standing in front of the Pentagon.
McNamara described the scene as ""hellish"" as the hippie girls bared their breasts to tempt the Guardsman to ""make love, not war"" while other hippies spat in the faces of the Guardsmen.
However, despite seeing the March on the Pentagon demonstrators as a sign of social decay, his characteristic competitive spirit came to the fore as he argued that if he had been leading the March on the Pentagon, he would have taken over the Pentagon and shut it down, saying hippies lacked the necessary discipline and intelligence.
In an early November 1967 memorandum to Johnson, McNamara's recommendation to freeze troop levels, stop bombing North Vietnam and for the United States to hand over ground fighting to South Vietnam was rejected outright by the President.
McNamara's recommendations amounted to his saying that the strategy of the United States in Vietnam which had been pursued to date had failed.
McNamara later stated he ""never heard back"" from Johnson regarding the memo.
Largely as a result, on November 29 of that year, McNamara announced his pending resignation and that he would become President of the World Bank.
Other factors were the increasing intensity of the anti-war movement in the U.S., the approaching presidential campaign in which Johnson was expected to seek re-election, and McNamara's support—over the objections of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, of construction along the 17th parallel separating South and North Vietnam of a line of fortifications running from the coast of Vietnam into Laos.
A History strongly suggests that McNamara was asked to leave by the President.
The historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr stated that he was present during a conversation between McNamara and Senator Kennedy during which the former told the latter that he only learned from reading the newspapers of Johnson's announcement that he had just ""resigned"" as Defense Secretary and had been appointed president of the World Bank.
On 17 November 1967, a story in the Financial Times of London based on leaked sources in Washington stated McNamara was going to be the next World Bank president, which came as a considerable surprise to McNamara.
Afterwards, McNamara met with Kennedy who told him to resign in protest and denounce the war as unwinnable, counsel that McNamara rejected, saying that Johnson had been a friend and that he was still loyal to him.
When McNamara refused to resign, Kennedy told him that he should turn down the World Bank presidency and join him in criticizing the war, which McNamara refused to do.
Johnson knew that McNamara was concerned about poverty in the Third World, and that the possibility of serving as World Bank president would be too tempting for McNamara to resist.McNamara left office on February 29, 1968; for his efforts, the President awarded him both the Medal of Freedom and the Distinguished Service Medal.
The hawkish National Security Adviser, Walt Whitman Rostow, argued at a cabinet meeting that day that the United States was on the verge of winning the war.
Rostow urged Johnson to send 206,000 more American troops to South Vietnam to join the half-million already there and to drastically increase the number of bombing raids on North Vietnam.
McNamara then broke down in tears, saying to Johnson to just accept that the war could not be won and stop listening to Rostow.
Then his voice broke, and there were tears on his eyes as he spoke of the futility, the crushing futility of the air war.
The rest of us sat silently-I for one with my mouth open, listening to the secretary of defense talk that way about a campaign for which he had, ultimately, been responsible.
Shortly after McNamara departed the Pentagon, he published The Essence of Security, discussing various aspects of his tenure and position on basic national security issues.
He did not speak out again on defense issues or Vietnam until after he left the World Bank.
World Bank President McNamara visited Jakarta, Indonesia during his tenure as World Bank President in 1968.
Robert McNamara served as head of the World Bank from April 1968 to June 1981, when he turned 65.
In March 1968, McNamara's friend Senator Robert Kennedy entered the Democratic primaries with aim of challenging Johnson.
Though this was a violation of World Bank rules, McNamara felt guilty over refusing Kennedy's requests to resign and decline the World Bank presidency.
For a moment, McNamara feared he would be fired from the World Bank.A safe was installed in McNamara's office at the World Bank to house his papers relating to his time as Defense Secretary, which was a normal courtesy extended to former Defense Secretaries who might face controversy over their actions and wish to defend themselves by quoting from the documentary record.
By 1969, McNamara wanted to forget the Vietnam war and did not want any reminders of his former job.
Tenure In his 13 years at the Bank, he introduced key changes, most notably, shifting the Bank's economic development policies toward targeted poverty reduction.
Prior to his tenure at the World Bank, poverty did not receive substantial attention as part of international and national economic development; the focus of development had been on industrialization and infrastructure.
Poverty also came to be redefined as a condition faced by people rather than countries.
McNamara negotiated, with the conflicting countries represented on the Board, a growth in funds to channel credits for development, in the form of health, food, and education projects.
He also instituted new methods of evaluating the effectiveness of funded projects.
One notable project started during McNamara's tenure was the effort to prevent river blindness.In 1972, McNamara visited Santiago to meet President Salvador Allende to discuss the latter's policy of nationalization, especially of the copper mining companies.
McNamara's son, Craig McNamara was living in Chile at the time, but the two did not meet owning to the rift over the Vietnam war.
The meeting with Allende concluded with McNamara ending all World Bank loans to Chile.
On 11 September 1973, Allende was overthrown in a coup d'etat led by General Augusto Pinochet.
In 1974, McNamara visited Santiago to meet Pinochet and agreed to the World Bank resuming loans to Chile.
McNamara fils feels that his father's claim that he had to cease loans to Chile because the Allende government's nationalization policy was an ""economic"" matter that fell within the purview of the World Bank, but human rights abuses under Pinochet were a ""political"" matter that was outside of the World Bank's purview was disingenuous and dishonest.
During the emergency in India, McNamara remarked ""At long last, India is moving to effectively address its population problem,"" regarding the forced sterilization.
The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam, published in 1995, presented an account and analysis of the Vietnam War from his point of view.
In November 1995, McNamara returned to Vietnam, this time visiting Hanoi.
Despite his role as one of the architects of Operation Rolling Thunder, McNamara met with a surprisingly warm reception, even from those who survived the bombing raids, and was often asked to autograph pirate editions of In Retrospect which had been illegally translated and published in Vietnam.
During his visit, McNamara met his opposite number during the war, General Võ Nguyên Giáp who served as North Vietnam's Defense Minister.
The particular structure of this personal account is accomplished with the characteristics of an intimate dialogue.
As McNamara explains, it is a process of examining the experiences of his long and controversial period as the United States Secretary of Defense, as well as other periods of his personal and public life.The American anthologist David Vine became interested in the subject of Expulsion of the Chagossians and part of his research tried to contact various American officials.
McNamara maintained his involvement in politics in his later years, delivering statements critical of the Bush administration's 2003 invasion of Iraq.
On January 5, 2006, McNamara and most living former Secretaries of Defense and Secretaries of State met briefly at the White House with President Bush to discuss the war.
Personal life McNamara married Margaret Craig, his teenage sweetheart, on August 13, 1940.
She was an accomplished cook, and Robert's favorite dish was reputed to be her beef bourguignon.Margaret McNamara, a former teacher, used her position as a Cabinet spouse to launch a reading program for young children, Reading Is Fundamental, which became the largest literacy program in the country.
Later that summer, her ashes were scattered by her family on a mountainside meadow at Buckskin Pass, near Snowmass Village, Colorado.
The son Robert Craig McNamara, who as a student objected to the Vietnam War, is now a walnut and grape farmer in California.
Although McNamara had a relatively short stay in the hospital, his wife's case was more serious and it was concern over meeting her medical bills that led to his decision to not return to Harvard but to enter private industry as a consultant at Ford Motor Company.
At Ford When working at Ford Motor Company, McNamara resided in Ann Arbor, Michigan, rather than the usual auto executive domains of Grosse Pointe, Birmingham, and Bloomfield Hills.
He and his wife sought to remain connected with a university town after their hopes of returning to Harvard after the war were put on hold.
Robert McNamara and Five Lives of a Lost War, October 27, 1996, C-SPANOn September 29, 1972, a passenger on the ferry to Martha's Vineyard recognized McNamara on board and attempted to throw him into the ocean.
Final years After his wife's death, McNamara dated Katharine Graham, with whom he had been friends since the early 1960s.
In September 2004, McNamara wed Diana Masieri Byfield, an Italian-born widow who had lived in the United States for more than 40 years.
McNamara died at his home in Washington, D.C., at 5:30 a.m. on July 6, 2009, at the age of 93.
He is buried at the Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia, with the grave marker also commemorating his wives.McNamara's papers from his years as Secretary of Defense are housed in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston, Massachusetts.
New Thinking for American Foreign and Defense Policy in the 21st Century.
Reducing the Risk of Conflict, Killing, and Catastrophe in the 21st Century.
According to a 1961 entry in Contemporary Biography, McNamara was a registered Republican.
ISBN 0-226-01654-4. ^ a b ""Robert S McNamara > Historical Office > Article View"". history.defense.gov.
United States Gross Domestic Product deflator figures follow the Measuring Worth series.
In 1970 the requirement that commanding officers first obtain permission from the Secretary of Defense was lifted.
Heather Antecol and Deborah Cobb-Clark, Racial and Ethnic Harassment in Local Communities.
Craig McNamara is owner of Sierra Orchards, a diversified farming operation producing walnuts and grape rootstock.
He is a California Agricultural Leadership Program graduate, American Leadership Forum senior fellow and College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences Dean's Advisory Council member.
McNamara helped structure a biologically integrated orchard system that became the model for UC/SAREP and created the FARMS Leadership Program, introducing rural and urban high school students to sustainable farming, science and technology.
He was one of 10 United States representatives at the 1996 World Food Summit in Rome.
Ending 'East of Suez' The British Decision to Withdraw from Malaysia and Singapore 1964-1968.
The Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War A Political, Social and Military History.
The Nearly Impossible Job of Secretary of Defense . ch 3 Patler, Nicholas.
Island of Shame The Secret History of the United States Military Base on Diego Garcia.
