Cuba, Castro and Bioterrorism Feature Article Cuba, Castro and Bioterrorism Agustín Blázquez There are many academic studies, articles and books in public records exposing Castro's long term involvement with bacteriological and chemical weapons.
The United States media has been invited but they systematically choose to be absent.
This information will also clash with the heavily orchestrated campaign to present Castro as non-threatening in order to normalize relations with Cuba.
This collaboration of the United States media with the Castro regime is reprehensible.
I first learned pertinent details about Cuban dictator Fidel Castro and his bacteriological warfare after attending a discussion on Capitol Hill on October 28, 1997.
Over the years, Castro's Cuba has developed very ingenious ways to deliver their deadly materials to the United States As Dr.
Cereijo says, ""To conduct a bacteriological attack, a country or a terrorist group does not need to have any sophisticated means of delivery, such as a missile.
In a previous article ""Castro and International Terrorism,"" I mentioned the evidence pointing to Castro's involvement with the introduction of West Nile virus into the United States via migratory birds.
In addition to people affected and some deaths caused by the virus in the U.S., it is affecting endangered animal species.
Cereijo's paper, are other ingenious ways researched in Cuba to deliver deadly biological agents including the developing ""from marine technology, with the assistance of Japan, which never knew what the final product was, a paralyzing toxin, which is now ready to use.
Cereijo's reveals, ""to put notes inside the bottles, asking for replies.
They found where in Cuba was best to release containers with bacteriological material.
The north coast of Havana province was found to be the best, as well as the region around the town of Sagua La Grande.
The United States media should inform the American people of these matters.
The people in the southern and southeastern coastal areas of the United States should be on notice not to pick up or open any floating objects.
Children are very curious, so parents should instruct their children of the danger of picking up and opening what they find at the beach.
Information and precaution is the only way to prevent a major catastrophe caused by bacteriological material sent that way.
A July 20, 1998, Insight Magazine article appeared in The Washington Times titled ""Fidel Castro's Deadly Secret --Five BioChem Warfare Labs"" by Martin Arostegui.
Among other shocking information I learned from this confidential report was that the bacteriological and chemical warfare capabilities of Castro are now known by the United States government.
And that there are about 12 centers producing bacteriological agents strategically located around Havana.
It has a 10,000-RPM centrifuge and other laboratory equipment bought through COMICONDOR, an Italian company in Milan that also supplies technology to Libya for Muammar Qaddafi's biological-weapons experiments.
This factory in Havana was ""inaugurated in 1993 on Armed Forces Day on December 2, 1993,"" and has been in operation for eight years.
In order to enter La Fabriquita you need ""top-secret credentials --you must pass through a station of the Cuban Armed Forces , odd for a place supposedly producing cattle feed, which is its disguise.
The report gives a lot of specific information about La Fabriquita, which is located just across the street from ""Cuba's premier medical center --the Luis Diaz Soto General Hospital, formerly known as the Naval Hospital.
Oddly, that ""Animal-Feed Plant"" located in Havana ""is well protected by rapid action defense units.
Cereijo says, ""These are of a high capacity and they are shielded against lethal agents.
Also Cuba is involved in the so-called 'binary weapons' where two chemicals are used to form a toxic agent when a weapon is exploded.
They can be disguised as common agricultural chemicals, which make them more difficult to detect.
These new agents are as toxic as VX, a persistent nerve agent, and as resistant to treatment as Soman.
But records and sources say that they are apparently a fanatical and prone-to-violence pro-Castro front organization advancing Castro's agenda and misinformation.
They are an important part of his support network inside the United States conducting fundraising to advance their radical agenda.
Now we find that last July 13, 2001, The Los Angeles Times reported that the pastors, after returning from Cuba, were trying to cross the border with Mexico smuggling 30 pounds of ""rat poison"" made in Cuba.
Lucius Walker, a close friend of Fidel Castro who is constantly traveling to Cuba.
His group specializes in creating border-crossing incidents with the United States border authorities.
Through his agents like Pastors for Peace and other subterfuges, Castro continues to export toxins into the United States that can cause harm to the American people while proclaiming friendship for them.
On September 24 and 25, 2001, it was reported on United States television news that members of the suspected ring of terrorists that executed the September 11 attack against the American people, were inquiring about crop-dusting airplanes in Florida.
Intelligence sources in the United States do not question if there will be an attack, but when will it be.
The blunder of John F Kennedy by betraying the April 1961 invasion of Bay of Pigs to get rid of Castro, brought on the October 1962 Missile Crisis that put the world at the brink of nuclear war.
And this situation led to the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal for which the U.S. became Castro's protector by agreeing to prevent any foreign invasion of Cuba.
However, Castro and the former Soviet Union violated their part of the Kennedy-Khrushchev deal by exporting revolutions to Latin America and Africa.
And Castro not only destroyed the once prosperous and advanced Cuba, bringing misery to his people, but also extended his hands supporting terrorism throughout the American continent and abroad.
To date Castro continues training, arming and offering sanctuary to international terrorists and placing his agents and spies in the United States --note the September 21, 2001, detention of the spy Ana Belen Montes in the Defense Intelligence Agency.
In a 1997 report titled ""The Comandante's Reserves"" compiled from information given by high-ranking government defectors, especially Jesus M Fernandez, some of his money has been traced to 1959.
A large part of it was stolen from the Cuban people and more from his profits from drug trafficking.
Most of the money resides in Swiss bank accounts from which it is used to pay for international subversion, the purchasing of arms, his terrorist activities, agents and spies.
History one day will reveal how nefarious Castro has been in our hemisphere.
According to Declan McCullagh's February 9, 2001, article ""Feds Say Fidel Is Hacker Threat,"" ""These must be jittery times for anyone in the military who uses the Internet.
Not only do they have to guard against Love Bug worms and security holes in Microsoft Outlook --now they've got to worry about Fidel Castro hacking into their computers.
Cereijo's 1997 paper in relation to Castro's regime being actively involved in terrorism directed at United States computer systems.
Castro's unpublicized-by-the-media war against the United States is on all fronts.
Last May 9, 2001, Castro proclaimed in Iran, ""Today, there is a king in the world a thousand times stronger than the shah you overthrew, and that is the imperialist king living next to my homeland.
According to Agence France Presse, Castro affirmed in Iran on May 10, that ""Iran and Cuba, in cooperation with each other, can bring America to its knees.
On September 22, 2001, Castro in Havana accused the United States of being ""a world military dictatorship"" attacking President Bush's resolve of defending the United States against terrorism in spite of the overwhelming support of the American people and the international community.
Apparently, foreseeing the possibility of his ties to terrorism, his ""secret"" bacteriological and cybernetic war against the United States being finally exposed, he sent a warning to the United States in case the United States attacks Cuba in pursuit of terrorists.
Now, after years of appeasement, the nonsense about engagement, people-to-people cultural, scientific and sport exchanges, the pervasive campaign to lift the United States embargo and tourist visits to Cuba, we clearly see that Castro has used this time to develop weapons of mass destruction in our backyard to be used against us.
The blackmail potential that this represents renders the United States and its people in grave danger and in an almost impotent situation.
The Next Generation and the upcoming Covering Cuba 3: Elián, and co-author of the book Covering and Discovering with Carlos Wotzkow.
