A common effect of such practices is to marginalize Third World and other subaltern points of view.
For three decades, analysis of the Cuban missile crisis was dominated by a discursive framing produced in the ExComm, one in which Cuba was invisible.
The effort to produce a critical oral history enabled Cuban voices—long excluded from interpretive debates about the events of October 1962—to challenge the myth of the crisis as a superpower affair.
Decolonizing the crisis, and by extension the discipline itself, is not easy to do.
For scholars of International Relations , the Cuban missile crisis—the standard United States label for these events1—has canonical status; its interpretation is central to debates about decision-making, nuclear proliferation, and deterrence, amongst others.
As commonly understood, the crisis took place between the United States and the Soviet Union.
In this U.S.-centered account, first articulated in the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , and reproduced in scholarly and popular writings, ‘‘the most dangerous crisis the world has ever seen,’’ has only two participants.
Analysis of the missile crisis has long focused on United States and, to a lesser extent, Soviet perspectives; Cuban viewpoints have been virtually ignored.
Cuba’s absence in the literature is not explained by its exclusion from negotiations to ‘‘end’’ the crisis; this is to accept the U.S. account.
Nor is it explained by a lack of Cuban data; despite the critical oral history project, Cuba’s marginal status persists.
Drawing on postcolonial thought, in this article we examine the extent to which IR, as a predominantly Anglo-American social science, can acknowledge the role of subaltern others like Cuba in the making of our world, and on what terms.
The effort to produce a critical oral history constitutes a postcolonial intervention in the literature, enabling Cuban voices to challenge standard views of the crisis.
We use Cuba’s initial absence from and subsequent appearance in standard U.S. accounts of the crisis to explore the prospects for producing better, less colonial analyses of world politics.
Postcolonial scholars show how knowledge practices participate in the production and reproduction of international hierarchy.
We treat Cuba’s invisibility—not unusual in itself—as a puzzle to be explained.
Through analysis of the standard IR literature on the crisis, we show how scholarly practices and the practices of states together produce a hierarchical international order in which Cuba is not a significant locus of agency or knowledge.
A dominant narrative of the events of October 1962 emerged from the ExComm deliberations and for almost three decades defined the limits of 2 Two meetings took place in 1987, at Hawk’s Cay, Florida and Cambridge, Massachusetts, but no Cubans were present.
In that narrative, Cuban actions and interests were irrelevant, making Cuba an omitted variable and generating unreliable analysis of the causes and dynamics of the crisis.
We show how Cuba was excluded from analysis of the Cuban missile crisis, examining the discursive frames through which plausible narratives about the world are assembled.
Decolonizing the missile crisis, and by extension the wider discipline, is not easy to do.
Our analysis does not engage the literature’s dominant decision-making focus directly,5 nor do we seek to explain the crisis.
Instead, we highlight the relations between IR and historiographies of world politics, between the theories and models we build, and the ground those theories take for granted.
The ground upon which IR and its theories are built is shifting, making it important that we are self-conscious about the ways in which scholarly practices contribute to the invisibility of other experiences and points of view.
We address this sociology of knowledge issue as an exercise in applied postcolonial theory.
First, we discuss the relations between power, knowledge, and international hierarchy, focusing on the ways in which the temporal and spatial assumptions structuring conventional analysis of the Cuban missile crisis have served to reproduce relations of international hierarchy.
Second, we reconstruct the emergence of the dominant United States narrative of the crisis and show how it functioned to marginalize other understandings of the events of October 1962.
Third, we examine the attempt by Cubans participating in the critical oral history project to articulate an alternative account of the crisis in which Cuba and Cuban actions did matter.
Fourth, we consider IR’s response to the subaltern and the consequences for decolonizing the missile crisis.
Our argument concerns the dominant account and the discursive mechanisms through which alternatives have been marginalised.
Hoffmann and Carr each raised serious questions about the ways in which power shapes knowledge of the international.
The former becomes the space of modernity, agency, knowledge, history, and power.
The discursive practices that make such Eurocentric accounts possible and plausible also make ‘‘other possible readings ⁄ writings of world politics’’ more difficult, hence the near invisibility of Africa in IR theory (Dunn 2001, 3; cf.
As active subjects of world politics ‘‘the rest’’ appear in distorted form or simply drop from view.
Taken together, these assumptions produced an historical geography of the crisis, one in which Cuba didn’t count.
The Cuban missile crisis, and by extension world politics, wasn’t about Cuba or Cubans; it was about the United States and the Soviet Union.
Despite this broad consensus, however, ‘‘the Cuban missile crisis’’ is not the only way these events can be understood.
These accounts are not easily reconciled with the dominant United States narrative; in important respects they are simply incompatible with it.
Available at the time, and since, in the statements of Soviet and Cuban state actors, these other accounts highlight the contestability and partiality of the United States narrative.
But in the United States relatively little attention was paid to Soviet and Cuban accounts.
Prior to 1990 the Cubans in particular remained marginal to scholarly analysis of the crisis, with serious consequences for explanation and policy prescription.
Cuba’s marginal status in dominant United States narratives of the crisis is an effect of power, reflecting the differential ability of social actors to shape the production of knowledge.
The prestige of United States political institutions, lack of documentary evidence, and insider status—as a member of the ExComm, for instance—lent prima facie credibility and authority to accounts produced by former policy-makers.
The dominant United States narrative has seldom confronted other accounts of the crisis directly.
When forced to do so, as we show below, the typical response is to deploy a new version of that narrative.
Dominant accounts of events such as international crises generally exclude a variety of subaltern voices.
Postcolonial scholars rewrite these accounts by attending to the experience of the subaltern.
This is no easy task (Alcoff 1991; Spivak 1988), leading scholars to stress the need to seek out new sources, and to read old ones in new ways.
Like the oral history project, these efforts generate new data but the aim is not just more facts as if some day, having them all, we can write definitive accounts of the past.
Against such fantasies, postcolonial thought seeks new ways to make sense of the facts, so to contest or transform colonial fields of knowledge and the wider relations of domination—social, economic, cultural, and political—of which they are part.
Engaging subaltern knowledges, postcolonial analysis uses the periphery to throw light on the core, showing how dominant understandings and practices take on different meaning when viewed through subaltern eyes.
These relations are both context and, often, cause of events such as the missile crisis.
Beyond critique of representational practices and their mystifying and ideological effects , postcolonialism also attends to the political economies of value and force through which international hierarchies are produced and maintained.
Subaltern knowledge provides a vantage point from which to critique both dominant and subordinated understandings (cf.
Postcolonial critique begins with the subaltern voice but it aspires to overturn the coloniality of power.
In allowing the Cubans to speak in their own voice and challenge the standard United States account of the missile crisis, the oral history project effects a postcolonial intervention, albeit a limited and potentially problematic one.
Making space for subaltern agency is not inherently postcolonial; it depends on what terms agency is acknowledged.
For instance, taking for granted the power relations that shape its context means the oral history project risks a neo-colonial relation with the Cubans, turning them into a kind of native informant.
Castro was a nationalist internationalist, for example, Che Guevara a proletarian one.
Decolonizing the crisis is not equivalent to taking Cuban state claims at face value.
Crises impact different subjects in different ways, reproducing or transforming hierarchies of diverse kind.
Letting a subaltern speak is only the first step in a postcolonial critique.
These, such as South Asian peasants under the British, are often illiterate, leaving only indirect traces of their practices in the texts of colonial rule.
Modern institutions like the state are produced through, and in turn generate, numerous texts of diverse kinds.
Whether in the form of a state actor such as Castro or the bureaucratic practices that give it form, Cuba can and does speak.
In certain respects, then, the typical referents of subaltern studies are not like the Cuban state.
Neither an illiterate South Asian peasant nor a famously garrulous Cuban state actor has the power to narrate events in ways that effectively contest dominant accounts.
This asymmetry means Cuba’s relation to the United States is that of a subaltern.
This question leads to a focus on discursive mechanisms of knowledge production—the ways in which a particular account of the crisis emerges from the ExComm and for three decades serves as the basis for subsequent interpretation and analysis.
The framing of Cuba in the ExComm drew on a set of background assumptions and representations, on a particular historical geography of world politics, through which the United States constituted its international relations.
In this section we trace those practices, showing the consequences for Cuba and U.S.-Cuban relations.
Cuba was the place in which missiles were deployed by the Soviet Union and from which they had to be removed by the United States; the drama was thus between the United States and the Soviet Union.
United States actions during the crisis—surveillance, blockade, possible bombing or invasion—were directed against a Soviet threat in Cuba.
Through its practices during the crisis the United States re-enacted a particular set of international hierarchies between itself, the Soviet Union, and Cuba.
As such, the United States had both the right and the responsibility to deploy its power to defend the Free World from its enemies.
It was thus represented as both dangerous and powerful, a force to be taken seriously.
Under Batista, Cuba was a minor satellite, an ally, or client of sorts, but not very important.
After the 1959 revolution a starker U.S.-Cuba hierarchy emerged; Cuba came to be represented as a communist state.
Under Soviet influence, Cuba supported revolutionary movements elsewhere in Latin America, threatening regional peace and stability.
In response, the United States resorted to increasingly harsh economic and political pressure as well as force, both overt—as in the Bay of Pigs invasion—and covert—as in support for Cuban counter-revolutionary terrorism.
Simultaneously, however, Cuba was rendered insignificant and virtually invisible.
The United States thus constructed a Cuba whose concerns could be ignored.
Cuba’s absence from the missile crisis and the subsequent myth, then, were made possible by and served to re-enact Cuba’s subordinate position on the hierarchy of states.
These hierarchies were variously enacted by the United States during the events of October 1962.
For example, United States decision-makers determined that they had a right to conduct surveillance over Cuba.
As it entailed a violation of Cuban airspace, this United States ‘‘right’’ in fact abrogated Cuban sovereignty.
The United States further enacted this hierarchy by dictating to the Soviet Union and Cuba what weapons they could deploy, and where.
In 1962 the United States had significant extra-territorial military deployments, including nuclear weapons in Italy and Turkey, which might have been taken to justify reciprocal Soviet measures.
Instead, the United States succeeded in determining that the Soviet Union could not station nuclear weapons in Cuba and that the Cubans could not have nuclear or indeed any ‘‘offensive’’ weapons at all.
For Cuban views of these relations, see Castro in Blight, Allyn, and Welch , 120.
That this has seemed unexceptional, exciting virtually no comment by United States decision-makers and in most United States treatments of the missile crisis, indicates how firmly entrenched this hierarchy is in United States foreign policy and scholarly discourse.
Classic early accounts offered by participants, such as Arthur Schlesinger , Theodore Sorenson , and Robert Kennedy , closely follow the ExComm narrative.
For example, except for a brief discussion of whether the decision to deploy the missiles was Soviet or Cuban, and the claim that Castro’s resistance to the verification procedures caused the United States to refuse Cuba a guarantee not to invade , Schlesinger’s chapters on the crisis ignore Cuba, treating it merely as the site of the conflict.
In 1971, Graham Allison’s influential Essence of Decision began the preoccupation with the missile crisis as a canonical instance of crisis decision-making.
Despite being logically and empirically necessary to his analysis—how else can the quality of U.S. choices be judged?—Cuban decision-making is ignored.
Although justified by lack of access to Cuban data, a similar lack in the United States and the Soviet Union did not slow growth of huge secondary crisis literature.
For us, the most striking omission is Allison’s and others’ failure to consider how or why the Cubans were defined out of the crisis.
Early writings on an event like the missile crisis are highly politicized and in fact constitute part of the event itself.
Standard United States analyses of the missile crisis before the 1990s remain ensconced in this heroic moment.
Intentionally or not, such analyses continue to take part in the politics of the events themselves.
They do so, first, by adopting the categories and tropes put into place by United States decision makers in descriptions and policy practices at the time and, second, by reproducing the narratives constructed during and after the crisis by United States state officials, and members of the ExComm in particular.
Scholarly practices thus participate in Cuba’s continuing unequal encounter with the United States.
The Cuban missile crisis and the relations of hierarchy enacted in it continue well beyond the formal resolution of the crisis in 1962.11 In his analysis of the historiography of peasant protest in colonial India, Ranajit Guha shows how a particular account of peasant protest structures primary discourse such as the eyewitness accounts of colonial officials, secondary discourse such as memoirs, and tertiary discourse such as professional histories.
In striking parallels to the heroic myth of the missile crisis, the assumptions of policy—the prevention and control of peasant protest in Guha’s case—are built into the historical record and become the taken-for-granted empirical data on which scholarly accounts are produced.
Power is both external to historical narrative and also constitutive of it, inscribed in the narrative and in the sources on which it draws.
The resulting historiography thus participates in struggles it claims only to describe or explain.
Castro and Cuba are present in the heroic myth but always on someone else’s terms, largely those of United States policy-makers in 1962.
Cuba’s marginalization in the myth obscures the pre-October 1962 origins of the crisis in a persistent pattern of United States aggression and subversion of the Cuban revolution.
When Cuban state actors like Castro endeavour to raise issues like United States aggression, Cuban sovereignty, or Soviet irresolution, they are regularly ignored, mocked, or misinterpreted.
The subaltern are spoken for in ways that deny their historical agency and the legitimacy of their concerns while valorizing conceptions of the world in which, for example, a benevolent United States seeks to liberate the Cuban people from the malign influence of an alien Moscow-controlled Communist regime.
Such representations participate, more or less directly, in projects of colonial and neo-colonial ordering.
In 1989, 1991, and 1992 the heroic missile crisis myth was challenged when United States and Soviet scholars and decision-makers sat down with their Cuban counterparts to produce a critical oral history.
In postcolonial terms, this was a moment when the subaltern spoke, when the Cubans could interrogate the crisis myth.
As we argue below, despite generating new and important insights into the missile crisis, as a result of micro-practices that continue to marginalize the subaltern voice or explain it away, the critical oral history project largely fails of its postcolonial promise.
Heroic History and the Subaltern Voice In this and the next section we examine how IR reacted to Cuban challenges to the missile crisis myth.
Unsurprisingly, Cuba was absent from the first two meetings in 1987, replicating the heroic myth by ignoring Cuba and its concerns.
In the October crisis narrative, responsibility rests squarely with the United States.
The crisis follows concerted U.S. hostility towards the Cuban revolution and is a result of Cuban efforts, with Soviet help, to protect Cuba against an expected United States invasion, a larger Bay of Pigs with United States ground forces and air power (e.g., Allyn, Blight, and Welch 1992, 15; cf.
In the meetings, these points were central to Cuban accounts of the crisis.
The subaltern rejected Cold War articulations of Cuba that marginalized Cuban agency.
In orthodox United States accounts, Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan’s visit to Cuba in March 1960 signals the subordination of the Cuban revolution to Moscow and prompts Eisenhower to allow the CIA to commence covert operations.
Consistent with a postcolonial analysis, the subaltern challenged the missile crisis myth by rejecting the spatial and temporal framing that made Cuba and U.S. imperialism invisible.
In Antigua, Risquet framed the crisis similarly, noting how Cuba was excluded from the peace conference that ended the Spanish-American War (in Blight, Lewis, and Welch 1991, 167, 195)—in Cuban accounts, the Spanish-Cuban-American War.
This is a very different view of the missile crisis; the spatial and temporal framing is shifted from the 13 days of heroic myth to a century of U.S.-Cuban interaction, punctuated by repeated United States interventions in Cuba and elsewhere.
This history is not heroic, stressing instead imperial power and its meaning for the subaltern.
For the Cubans, the missile crisis was about the sovereign rights of small states in a world dominated by great powers.
It was about imperial power and competition, and the corresponding need to build laws and institutions that defend the independence of small states.
This is perhaps clearest in Cuban accounts of the ‘‘lessons’’ of the crisis.
This interest leads to the usual focus on crisis decision-making and deterrence, for example.
Responding to the Subaltern Getting into the room was not the end of Cuban problems in making themselves heard.
Cuban contributions, said the editors after Moscow, had to be read in light of contemporary politics.
Beyond discounting repeated Cuban articulations of an alternative historical geography of the crisis as political, United States participants in the meetings responded in two further ways.
First, they translated the subaltern voice into the social scientific language of misperception; second, they offered their own account of the history of U.S.-Cuban relations.
These responses, we show, effectively muffle or distort what the subaltern was saying, while reproducing key elements of the conventional crisis narrative.
Translating the subaltern voice into the language of misperception produced a causal and moral equivalence between the United States and Cuba.
At the same time, it was agreed that, as a result of these ‘‘foolish’’ actions, had United States policy makers been Cuban, they too would have expected an invasion.
Determining the threat to Cuba is thus reduced to a simple binary—intent to invade or not.
In the absence of such intentions, Cuban and Soviet fears of an invasion were based on misperceptions.
Translating the subaltern voice in these terms mutes claims that the United States was responsible for the crisis, making it instead an unintended consequence of U.S., Soviet, and Cuban actions.
As in a postcolonial analysis, the easy slide into relativism is rejected by locating these competing accounts in the context of a particular configuration of power.
Framing the crisis in terms of misperception, mutual or otherwise, elides U.S. imperialism and the systematic character of post-1959 efforts to change the Cuban government; the role of United States aggression is reduced while the failure to launch an invasion is exaggerated .16 The second response of United States participants to the subaltern’s alternative historical geography was to offer their own account of U.S.-Cuban relations.
Over the course of the project its organizers grew more receptive to subaltern claims.
Blight, Allyn, and Welch included a history of U.S.-Cuban relations, before and after 1898, in the transcripts of the Havana meeting.
In making imperialism integral to the causes of the crisis, as part of a longer history of U.S.-Cuban relations, Blight, Allyn, and Welch accept a key subaltern claim and their history pushes in postcolonial directions.
They trace the patterns of racism, paternalism, and imperial desire that shaped United States policy towards Cuba, as well as the resentment these policies produced on the island.
Making sense of the United States role in the world thus requires seeing it as others do.
In other ways, however, Blight, Allyn, and Welch reject the Cuban view of the crisis.
In Moscow, Antigua, and Havana the Cubans stressed the continuities in United States relations with Cuba.
In contrast, Blight, Allyn, and Welch offer a history of discontinuity.
In 15 Classical realist analysis works similarly while differing sharply in other ways.
Imperialism only exists if consciously present in the minds of United States policy makers.
Taking United States foreign policy makers at their word, United States Cold War policy is presented as discontinuous with what had gone before.
Rejecting that history requires more than simply believing what United States policy makers say.
Minimally, it requires a comparative analysis of U.S.-Cuban relations before, during, and after the Cold War.
Consistent with the subaltern view, such an analysis undermines claims of discontinuity in United States policy towards Cuba.
The United States intervened militarily in Cuba in 1906, 1909, 1912, and 1917–1921; it supported or welcomed military coups in 1934 and 1952.
Comparative analysis of United States reactions to social revolution in Mexico, Cuba, Bolivia, and Guatemala, as well as in Chile and Nicaragua, highlights the consistency of United States policy towards Latin America throughout the twentieth century.
From each of these otherwise very different theoretical perspectives, then, continuity not discontinuity defines the longer history of U.S.-Cuban and U.S.-Latin American policy.
Justifications for intervention shift across the Cold War divide but relations of hierarchy persist.
A Cold War narrative of world politics obscures such patterns and provides the framework within which subaltern claims are interpreted and dismissed.
Blight, Allyn, and Welch explain the immediate origins of the crisis in the same Cold War terms as the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations 18; their history thus provides a ‘‘proper education’’ in which the subaltern and its account of the crisis are explained away.
The Discipline and the Subaltern Voice In this section we examine how IR has responded to the critical oral history project’s postcolonial intervention.
Despite efforts to speak for the Cubans in the meetings and in editorial commentary, in Moscow, Antigua and Havana the subaltern voice was loud and clear.
Recovery of Cuban agency—in practice quite rare—thus reproduced a conventional Cold War historical geography in which the global south is marginalised.
The subaltern account of the crisis linked it to United States interventions in Latin America and elsewhere before, during and after the Cold War.
A clear indicator of whether or not the subaltern voice has been heard then is the treatment of United States imperialism.
Most IR scholars define imperialism narrowly in geopolitical terms, as deliberate policies of foreign conquest and rule.
In Lebow and Stein’s otherwise impressive analysis of the crisis, imperialism is not mentioned; Cuba is compared with the U.S.-Soviet crisis over the Israel-Egypt war of 1973.
The updated edition of Essence of Decision cites imperialism only in reference to bureaucratic expansion.
When invoked, imperialism as political strategy is usually confined to an historical past with little significance for the crisis.
Conceiving of the crisis in these terms limits the oral history project’s postcolonial potential.
This is evident, for example, in the lessons drawn by both North American and Cuban scholars.
The problem is that the North Americans and the Cubans simply do not understand each other.
As British colonial officials also learned, it is important to know what the peasants are thinking.
For the Cubans, the key lesson of the crisis is the need for better international laws and institutions to defend small-state sovereignty.
After Moscow, Antigua, and Havana, great powers and small states can draw new, different lessons from the crisis but for both, adding Cuba only reinforces dominant realist and state-centric views of the international.
When read through this literature the novelty of the oral history project’s findings is reduced.
The origins of the crisis, argues Thomas Paterson, ‘‘derived largely from the U.S. campaign to quash the Cuban Revolution.
This prompts questions about relations between the Cuban revolution and the Cold War assumed away in the heroic myth, and helps make sense of Soviet-Cuban conflict both during and after the crisis.
It also raises questions about how the Cold War relates to United States and other imperial histories.
The Cold War’s east-west logic is not dismissed but de-centered , initially in favour of colonial and imperial relations.
The global south becomes integral to how we conceive of the international.
Attention shifts from the policies of great powers to the social relations through which they and other subjects of global life are connected, constituted, and produced.
Like postcolonial scholars, revisionists show how ‘‘the different meanings, social myths, and cultural self-understandings constitutive of state and national identities’’ are shaped by colonial and imperial relations 20 This is contentious, in 1962 and since.
For example, Greg Grandin argues the Cold War in Latin America was not just a great power conflict or a contest between political liberalism and Soviet communism.
Located in structures of imperialism centered on the United States, the missile crisis is a moment in this struggle, conducted within and across state boundaries.
The parallels between Cuban and revisionist accounts of the crisis are striking and, to our knowledge, unremarked.
In a conventional Cold War framing of the crisis, for example, Lebow and Stein note Paterson’s ‘‘neo-revisionist’’ argument—which makes U.S.-Cuban relations central to the crisis—without engaging it.
For three decades Castro and Cuba were practically invisible in a vast body of research on the Cuban missile crisis.
Analysis of the critical oral history project as a postcolonial intervention in the literature shows IR has responded to the subaltern voice.
It is no longer plausible to discuss the crisis without taking Cuban agency into account.
As postcolonial scholars show, IR’s too frequent failure to take the subaltern seriously produces blind spots in analysis of world politics.
Faced with nuclear proliferation and a war on terror fought mostly outside IR’s North Atlantic homelands, the wider relevance of our argument is obvious; it is not only the subaltern who has an interest—albeit rather different—in decolonizing the crisis.
More than a decade after the meeting in Havana at which the subaltern spoke so clearly, however, it is sobering to reflect on how much remains to be done to decolonize the Cuban missile crisis.
If our goal is to decolonize the discipline, so to produce better accounts of the world, we still have a long way to go.
On the Ground with the American Military, from Mongolia to the Philippines to Iraq and Beyond.
Latin American Program, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
White, Timothy J., Gregory P Nowell, Robert Hager, and Ronald W Cox.02.
