Forty years ago, President John F Kennedy was locked in a test of wills with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev over missiles in Cuba.
Memorialized in both film and print, the Cuban missile crisis has come to be the ultimate symbol of presidential resolve and courage.
In the 1974 movie ""The Missiles of October"" and the more recent ""Thirteen Days,"" starring Kevin Costner, JFK is portrayed as a resolute and unflinching commander in chief.
In short, Kennedy's handling of the crisis has captured the popular imagination, making him perhaps the most potent symbol of Cold War courage and resolve.
But now that the Soviet archives have been opened, it's time to retire JFK as Cold War hero.
Instead, the mantle should be passed to Ronald Reagan who, according to those archives, was the president they most respected and feared.
Most portrayals of the Cuban missile crisis begin with the secret placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba and Kennedy's insistence that they be removed.
But the story actually begins a couple of years earlier, when JFK first stepped into the Oval Office.
The Kremlin regarded Kennedy as a ""typical pragmatist,"" who would change his position and accommodate adversaries if it served his interests.
Khrushchev went so far as to delay the release of American U-2 pilot Gary Francis Powers, who was being held in prison after being shot down on a spy mission over the Soviet Union, until after the election.
In March 1961, Communist guerrillas armed with new shipments of Soviet weapons advanced deep into the eastern reaches of Laos, which borders Vietnam.
The peaceful country's neutrality was supposedly guaranteed by the 1954 Geneva Accords, but the North Vietnamese wanted to use the country as a supply line for their forces fighting in the south.
In short order they occupied Eastern Laos and began developing what came to be called the Ho Chi Minh Trail to arm their forces fighting in South Vietnam.
In Washington, Kennedy was apprised of the situation and elected to do nothing.
One month later, a large force of Cuban exiles began landing on the beaches of Cuba, near the so-called Bay of Pigs.
They had been trained and equipped by the CIA with the intent of liberating the country from Fidel Castro.
When the exiles hit the beaches they did so without American air or naval support.
A few months later, Soviet bloc leaders decided to begin construction on the Berlin Wall to stem the flow of refugees into West Berlin.
He called up the reserves, sent troops to Europe, and proposed a substantial increase in the military budget.
In the Kremlin, the combination of Kennedy's tough words and lack of action was seen as weakness and fear.
For Nikita Khrushchev, Kennedy's failure at the Bay of Pigs, along with Communist successes in Laos and Berlin, was proof that he could have things his way with the young president.
In short, Kennedy was encouraging Khrushchev to pursue what would become his most dangerous gambit.
In May 1962, Khrushchev announced to the Politburo his secret plan to put Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Fidel Castro was eager for the missiles because they would deter another Bay of Pigs-type invasion.
Khrushchev figured if he could pull the plan off, it would shift the balance in the arms competition because his shorter-range ballistic missiles would now be capable of reaching the United States.
The Soviet premier, seemingly always the gambler, was hoping to build the missile sites before the United States even detected them.
On the chance that they were discovered, he believed that Kennedy might fear a confrontation and not take any substantial action.
Soviet transport ships brought material and specialists to Cuba where construction crews busily worked on the missile batteries.
The plan seemed to be going as Khrushchev hoped, until an American U-2 spy plane flying over the island uncovered the scheme.
The president ordered an immediate naval blockade of Cuba and regular U-2 flights to monitor the situation.
Remove the missiles and the personnel to man them or military action is imminent.
Khrushchev, mulling over the situation in his Kremlin office, knew the strategic situation favored the United States.
Not only did America have nuclear superiority; Cuba was just off the American coastline while the Soviet Union was halfway around the world.
And Kennedy, contrary to the steely determination portrayed in the movies, was all too willing to deal.
For his ally Fidel Castro, who was angered by any suggestion that the missiles be pulled out, he demanded a pledge that the United States would never invade Cuba again.
And for good measure, he wanted United States nuclear missiles in Turkey, which were pointed at Soviet forces, removed as well.
On Saturday, October 27, 1962, as the crisis reached a crescendo, Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin went to the Justice Department for a private meeting with Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, who was serving as a confidant for his brother.
Moscow might have been negotiating from a weak position, but Bobby Kennedy didn't press the matter.
His brother was prepared to make a no invasion pledge, he told Dobrynin, and would pull the Jupiter missiles out of Turkey.
The missiles would need to be withdrawn under some pretext and without consulting NATO allies.
Dobrynin agreed to the secret bargain and it was never mentioned in public.
Indeed, Bobby Kennedy was so sensitive about the secret deal involving missiles in Turkey that when his diary of the crisis was later published as ""Thirteen Days,"" the editor of the book, Ted Sorensen, purposely deleted any mention of them.
LIKE THE REST OF AMERICA, Ronald Reagan spent much of October 1962 watching closely the duel between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Reagan had always had his doubts about Kennedy, fearing that he was simply not up to meeting the Soviet challenge.
He was surrounded by ""well-meaning and misguided people"" who failed to understand the threat.
Reagan also astutely noted that by not challenging the Communist move into Laos, Kennedy was signaling his willingness ""to drink the bitter cup of capitulation"" in Southeast Asia.
In the months following the Cuban missile crisis, Reagan made some pointed suggestions about what America should do next.
While the Kennedy administration began pursuing arms control agreements, Reagan wrote an article explaining that the goal should be not to coexist with communism but to defeat it.
Crank up the arms race, he advised in early 1963; there was no way Moscow could keep up.
When Reagan announced for the presidency years later, in 1979, the KGB wrote a secret analysis of Reagan the man.
Once he was elected president, Reagan outlined ambitious plans to undermine and defeat the Soviet Union in a series of secret directives.
Nothing quite like it had ever been undertaken in the history of the Cold War.
Using economic, military, and psychological pressure, he developed a plan to defeat the Soviet empire.
He enacted the largest peacetime military build-up in American history, even though the plan was opposed by the majority of his cabinet.
Early in his administration, William P Clark and Tom Reed came to him to explain the super-secret Continuity of Government program.
In place since the Eisenhower administration, COG was a plan to evacuate the president from the White House in the event of a nuclear war.
Both Clark and Reed could sense Reagan's discomfort as they described the program, particularly the part about being hustled away on a helicopter to a safe location.
The two men left and were forced to revise America's nuclear war-fighting plans.
Even during the heights of Gorbymania, there was very little change in the substance of his policies.
Reagan was quite simply immovable, much to the frustration of the Kremlin.
How we choose to look at the Cold War will determine how we face the strategic challenges of the war on terrorism.
By studying Reagan, we can learn how to forge a strategy of victory and to defeat our enemies.
So as the television cameras carry 40th anniversary reruns of ""Thirteen Days"" with images of a resolute JFK, don't imagine that you are watching the apotheosis of Cold War toughness.
Think back instead to Gdansk, Poland, on a rainy day in September 1990.
This article was first published by the Weekly Standard and is reprinted with permission.
Kennedy made mistakes and clearly was challenged in his dealing with Khrushev.
We should remember that Kennedy was dealing with a Soviet Union near the zenith of it's power.
Reagan was a tired old man who lucked out in having to deal with a weakened Soviet Union on the verge of collapsing under it's own weight.
