However, Kennedy's policies also led to implementing the Bay of Pigs invasion and escalation of the Vietnam War.Kennedy was committed to the rapid economic development of the newly organized nations in Africa and Asia.
Historiography and memory 11 External links Leadership team From election day until late December 1960, John F Kennedy, aided especially by his brother Robert F Kennedy, selected his foreign policy leaders.
At the same time, he ordered a massive build-up of the nuclear arsenal to establish superiority over the Soviet Union.In pursuing this military build-up, Kennedy shifted away from Eisenhower's deep concern for budget deficits caused by military spending.
Adzhubey promised to publish the full text in Izvestiya and Kennedy publicly expressed his appreciation for that.In January 1961, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev declared his support for wars of national liberation.
Khrushchev, however, tended to attribute the responsibility for the invasion not to Kennedy, but to his subordinates.During his meeting with Khrushchev, Kennedy's main goal was to suggest a retraction from the Cold War.
Since he was already thinking about putting up a wall in Berlin, Khrushchev was encouraged to continue down this path.The United States State Department prepared several papers for Kennedy on how to approach Khrushchev.
Diplomatic recognition of China remained out of the question, as a crucial veto power on the UN Security Council was held by America's ally on Taiwan.Tensions escalated between the Moscow and Beijing, as Chinese leader Mao Zedong castigated Khrushchev's ""capitulation"" in the Cuban crisis.
On October 22, 1962 Kennedy informed the nation of the crisis, announcing the quarantine and demanding the removal of Soviet missiles.Kennedy managed to preserve restraint when a Soviet missile unauthorizedly downed a United States Lockheed U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba, killing the pilot Rudolf Anderson.
The crisis was defused largely through a backchannel communication the Kennedy administration had set up with Soviet spy Georgi Bolshakov.As a result of the Berlin crisis, Kennedy's government faced a dramatic increase in the defense budget.
However, this only partially alleviated the payments issue.On June 26, 1963, the President arrived in West Berlin and visited Checkpoint Charlie.
Describing the protection of Israel as a moral and national commitment, he was the first to introduce the concept of a 'special relationship' between the United States and Israel.Kennedy extended the first informal security guarantees to Israel in 1962.
Beginning in 1963, Kennedy allowed the sale to Israel of advanced United States weaponry , as well as to provide diplomatic support for Israeli policies which were opposed by Arab neighbours, such as its water project on the Jordan River.In summer 1960, the United States embassy in Tel Aviv learned that Israel was assisted by France in the construction of what United States intelligence called ""a significant atomic installation"" in Dimona.
Even though David Ben-Gurion had publicly assured the United States that Israel did not plan to develop nuclear weapons, Kennedy tried unsuccessfully to persuade Israel to permit some qualified expert to visit Dimona.
The reason was the threat to Iraqi oil installations—not fear of a communist takeover.Relations between the United States and Iraq became strained following the overthrow of the Iraqi monarchy on July 14, 1958, which resulted in the declaration of a republican government led by Brigadier Abd al-Karim Qasim.
The Kennedy administration's initially ""low-key"" response to the stand-off was motivated by the desire to project an image of the United States as ""a progressive anti-colonial power trying to work productively with Arab nationalism"" as well as the preference of United States officials to defer to the U.K. on issues related to the Persian Gulf.Following Kurdish leader Mustafa Barzani's 1958 return to Iraq from exile in the Soviet Union, Qasim had promised to permit autonomous rule in the Kurdish region of northern Iraq, but by 1961 Qasim had made no progress towards achieving this goal.
The United States repeatedly refused Kurdish requests for assistance, but Qasim nevertheless castigated the Kurds as ""American stooges"" while absolving the Soviets of any responsibility for the unrest.In December 1961, Qasim's government passed Public Law 80, which restricted the Britishand American-owned Iraq Petroleum Company 's concessionary holding to those areas in which oil was actually being produced, effectively expropriating 99.5% of the IPC concession.
The new United States ambassador to Iraq, Robert C Strong, informed al-Bakr of a Barzani peace proposal delivered to the United States consul in Tabriz on August 25; in response, al-Bakr ""expressed astonishment"" over American contacts with the Kurds, asking why the message had not been delivered through the Soviets.
The president was unaware that the two men were at such odds that they had not spoken to each other on the return flight.In October 1963, the president appointed Defense Secretary McNamara and General Taylor to a Vietnam mission in another effort to synchronize the information and formulation of policy.
In meetings with McNamara, Taylor, and Lodge, Diem again refused to agree to governing measures, helping to dispel McNamara's previous optimism about Diem.Taylor and McNamara were enlightened by Vietnam's vice president, Nguyen Ngoc Tho , who in detailed terms obliterated Taylor's information that the military was succeeding in the countryside.
The final report declared that the military was making progress, that the increasingly unpopular Diem-led government was not vulnerable to a coup, and that an assassination of Diem or Nhu was a possibility.In late October, intelligence wires again reported that a coup against the Diem government was afoot.
Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to the coup, excluding assassination, and to ensure deniability by the United States Later that month, as the coup became imminent, Kennedy ordered all cables to be routed through him.
A policy of ""control and cut out"" was initiated to ensure presidential control of United States responses, while cutting him out of the paper trail.On November 1, 1963, South Vietnamese generals, led by ""Big Minh"", overthrew the Diem government, arresting and then killing Diem and Nhu.
Minh responded that he could not hold them that long.News of the coup led to renewed confidence initially—both in America and in South Vietnam—that the war might be won.McGeorge Bundy drafted a National Security Action Memo to present to Kennedy upon his return from Dallas.
According to historian Dallek, Kennedy used this TV interview and a second one on NBC to pressure Diem on government reforms and second, to suggest future United States options.At the time of Kennedy's death, no final policy decision had been made as to Vietnam.
Operation Mongoose, Kennedy Doctrine, and Brazil–United States relations during the João Goulart administration Official motion picture on Kennedy's tour of Latin America in December 1961.
There was a fear that if the United States neglected the region, Castro's Cuba would introduce anti-American political and economic changes.The Kennedy administration came to power in wake of the radicalization of Fidel Castro's Cuba, and saw the region as a Cold War battleground.
Kennedy considered the Congo Crisis to be one of the most important foreign policy issues facing his presidency, and he supported a UN operation that prevented the secession of the State of Katanga.Kennedy sought closer relations with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru through increased economic and a tilt away from Pakistan, but made little progress in bringing India closer to the United States.
Kennedy also hoped to minimize Soviet influence in Egypt through good relations with President Gamal Abdel Nasser, but Nasser's hostility towards Saudi Arabia and Jordan closed off the possibility of closer relations.In Southeast Asia, Kennedy helped mediate the West New Guinea dispute, convincing Indonesia and the Netherlands to agree to a plebiscite to determine the status of Dutch New Guinea.His administration established the Food for Peace program and the Peace Corps to provide aid to developing countries in various ways.
He named G Mennen Williams as his Assistant Secretary of State for African affairs, directing him to tell African leaders that we wanted friendship with them and we wanted to recognize their independence.Kennedy named young appointees to several embassies, such as William Attwood to Guinea and William P Mahoney to Ghana.
According to Nigerian diplomat Samuel Ibe, ""with Kennedy there were sparks""; the Prime Minister of Sudan Ibrahim Abboud, cherishing a hunting rifle Kennedy gave him, expressed the wish to go out on safari with Kennedy.By the spring of 1962 the new style aid made its way to Guinea.
Once there, he was brutally tortured at the hands of Tshombe and subsequently executed via firing squad.Kennedy and his incoming advisers were apparently unaware of the CIA's involvement in Lumumba's death.
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State J Wayne Fredericks of the Bureau of African Affairs, the Kennedy administration's leading specialist on Africa, played a major role in constructing American policy for the suppression of Katanga.On October 2, 1962 Kennedy signed United Nations bond issue bill to ensure American assistance in financing United Nations peacekeeping operations in the Congo and elsewhere.
The goals proved much too ambitious, and the economists in a few years abandoned the European-based modernization model as inappropriate to the cultures they were trying to impact.Kennedy and his top advisers were working from implicit ideological assumptions regarding modernization.
They included David Halberstam, Louise Fitzsimons, Richard J Walton, and Henry Fairlie.Vietnam and the Cold War are the two major issues that faced the Kennedy presidency.
His willingness to negotiate with Khrushchev smoothed the Berlin crisis, and Kennedy's personal diplomacy earned him the respect of Third World leaders.On the two major issues, no consensus has been reached.
