The American Legal Case for the Blockade of Cuba during the Missile Crisis, October-November 1962 Prepublication version.
Jonathan Colman jcolman@uclan.ac.uk April 2018 What became known as the Cuban missile crisis began publicly in the evening of 22 October 1962 with President John F Kennedy’s dramatic broadcast announcing ‘a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba’ to bring about the removal from the island of newly-discovered Soviet mediumand intermediate-range nuclear missiles.
Although Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had agreed by 28 October to remove the missiles, wrangling over Soviet bombers in Cuba meant that the ‘quarantine’ or naval blockade remained in place until 20 November.
Historians have praised the decision to establish a blockade for striking a balance between belligerence and passivity, and for preserving other policy options such as military action or diplomacy.
One of the disadvantages of the blockade, though, from the perspective of the American government, was that it might precipitate legal The author would like to thank Barton Bernstein, Antonio Cerella, Philip Constable, Robert Poole, Laura Stanley, the anonymous referees, and the editors of this journal for their valuable help with this article.
The New Frontier Revisited ,75. controversy, which would in turn undermine sympathy for United States policy.
Washington strove, therefore, in the words of State Department legal adviser Abram Chayes, to win ‘world support’ and ‘the ultimate judgment of history’ by developing and promoting a legal case for the blockade alongside presenting political and security arguments.
It was asserted, in an effort to establish law by precedent as well as to garner political backing, that the ‘quarantine’ fell short of a traditional belligerent blockade and so avoided the implications of a state of war.
This proved hard to accept for some observers, though, as did the reliance on the Organization of the American States instead of the United Nations to authorise the blockade.
Allies backed American policy out of political self-interest rather than out of legal considerations, although evidence from British files demonstrates that the legal position still mattered because of the need to preserve domestic backing for supporting the United States.
This indicates that the legal campaign met with limited success; in fact, even some American officials doubted the lawfulness of the blockade.
Although within the next year or two most American jurists who expressed a view agreed that their government had acted within the law, over the longer term the legal status of the blockade of Cuba has generated mixed feelings.
International law specialists have explored the blockade’s legal propriety, and how far legal considerations influenced American and Soviet behaviour during the missile crisis.
For the influence of international law on the American and Soviet 2 However, historians have tended to overlook the legal side of the confrontation, perhaps out of a reluctance to engage with the perceived complexities of international law, and because of the influential realist conception that international law counts for little when vital national interests are at stake.
This article explores the American government’s making and presentation of the legal case for the blockade, and addresses how the British, Canadian and Australian governments responded.
The research draws on declassified documents – some rarely used before – from American and British archives, alongside the analyses of jurists and historians.
The work provides a fresh angle on the legality of the blockade and on how the United States administration tried to ‘sell’ its policy during the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War.
Legal Thinking About Naval Blockades The law of naval blockades was an aspect of customary international law, which reflects legal customs or habits, and imposes obligations on governments.
First used in the 16th century, the blockade was a form of siege warfare that involved isolating enemy ports or coastline from the high seas to prevent sea-borne commerce with other countries.
A blockade was seen as a definitive act of war, but in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, ‘pacific’ blockades emerged as a supposedly legal means of coercion short of war.
These were considered to be ‘pacific’ because they were confined only to the vessels of the blockaded country, and because they were associated with relatively minor disputes such as the non-payment of debts.
Jurist Lassa Oppenheim noted in 1952 that while there was ambiguity about the admissibility of blockades confined only to the vessels of the blockaded state, there was a consensus that the peacetime seizure and sequestration of the vessels of third party states was illegal.
International law embodies law-making treaties as well as customary law.
These treaties include the UN Charter , the Geneva Conventions , Law of the Sea , the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities , and many others.
The United States government had since 1960 tried to depose the regime of Fidel Castro in Havana through a variety of measures, including the supposedly-covert orchestration of what turned out to be a disastrous attack on Cuba by émigrés at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961.
Delegates in the UN and jurists criticised the action as violating the general principles of international law requiring a state to prevent military expeditions against other states from its territory in peacetime, and of contravening various inter-American conventions opposing interventions.
In the late summer of 1962 – against the background of Castro’s consolidation of power and a Soviet military build-up in Cuba – there were voices in Congress advocating a naval blockade of the island.
However, Abram Chayes, Head of the State Department’s Legal Office, questioned the lawfulness of this option.
He noted that this, however, would be impossible given the Soviet right of veto in the Security Council.
Chayes also suggested that it might be possible to avoid the designation of belligerent blockade by stretching the definition of a pacific one ‘to cover shipping of nations aligned with the blockaded one’, but, even so, the ‘legal and political problems’ would be formidable.
These were disinterested reflections prior to the discovery of the Soviet nuclear missiles.
Around this time, there was a further analysis, for Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, based on speculation in Congress that the Soviets had turned Cuba into a nuclear missile base.
Norbert Schlei of the Department of Justice concluded that ‘international law would permit use by the United States of relatively extreme measures, including various forms and degrees of force, for the purpose of terminating such a threat to the peace and security of the Western Hemisphere’.16 Therefore the justification in Schlei’s argument was one of selfdefense.
As will be seen, the American government did not invoke self-defense in the legal case, but this justification for the blockade did feature heavily in the narrative of American policy.
Likewise, Chayes’ idea of using the OAS as a UN substitute would be a pillar of the legal case – minus his reservations.
The analyses from Chayes and Schlei meant that officials had already explored the lawfulness of the blockade by the time the Soviet missiles were discovered, which meant that there was an off-the-peg legal case available – subject to minor alteration to ensure the best fit.
The Legal Case for the ‘Quarantine’ of Cuba First meeting on 16 October, ExComm (the Executive Committee of the National Security Council) explored whether to attack the missile bases, or to blockade Cuba as a means of inhibiting the development of the bases and pressuring the Soviet Union into withdrawing the missiles.
As ExComm moved towards implementing a blockade, officials considered whether there should be a declaration of war against Cuba to legalise the stop and search of third-party vessels.
By contrast, Assistant Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and former Secretary of State Dean Acheson believed that self-defense provided a sufficient justification for any military action.
Robert F Kennedy believed that OAS support was decisive, and so rendered a declaration of war superfluous.
Although he was keen to convey a stance of firm resolution, and was reluctant to make public concessions, he recognised the potential for a trade involving American ‘Jupiter’ missiles stationed in Turkey, 15 Some Republican senators asserted that the Soviet Union had stationed strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Thus, the American government refrained from declaring war against Cuba.
The inspiration for the choice of word has been attributed to Leonard Meeker , to Dean Acheson , and others, including Richard Nixon, who had used the term earlier.
The term was an attempt to convey restraint in a volatile situation as well as to obviate legal difficulties.
By contrast, a blockade was ‘an operational part of the conduct of war, designed to force a state to comply with the wishes of the blockading country by crushing the economy of the state’.20 Therefore, according to the American government, the ‘quarantine’ was an instrument of peace, not war.
Although obsolescent, the Jupiter missiles were a sensitive issue in relations with Turkey and other NATO states.
The position that only military cargo rather than the necessities of life was designated contraband, and that vessels carrying military cargo would be diverted rather than seized or destroyed, 23 represented the more pacific aspects of the blockade.
At the same time, blockading third-party vessels presented a belligerent aspect that sat ill with existing international law.
Of course, the Soviet Union and Cuba were always going to criticise the United States legal position.
A Soviet legal specialist had argued in Pravda in September that blockading Cuba would represent the ‘same sort of international crime as an armed invasion’, and during the missile crisis Nikita Khrushchev complained that the blockade violated ‘international norms of freedom of navigation on the high seas’, and that OAS authorisation had no legal standing.
A recent analysis has noted that while Soviet officials did not take the initiative in respect of making a case in law,26 there were still worries in the United States administration that Soviet and Cuban legal arguments could gain momentum.
Mission to the UN, RG 84, NARA II; and Morabito, ‘Maritime Interdiction’,1.
Two, there was not likely to be great alarm within the UN at news of the bases, and even if it was accepted that the missiles represented an act of aggression, the organisation would not have been able to authorise the use of force because of the Soviet veto in the Security Council.
Finally, as the President had warned the Soviet Union in September about the danger of stationing ‘offensive’ weapons in Cuba it would be difficult to compromise on the issue.
In respect of the politics of the Security Council, Meeker had anticipated that members Romania, the United Arab Republic, and Ghana would oppose the blockade.
The seven votes required to authorise the measure would be available only if the other states – Britain, France, the Republic of China, Chile, Venezuela, and Ireland – voted affirmatively.
However, there were doubts about the Irish position, and even if there were enough votes available to endorse American policy, the Soviet Union would use its veto to prevent matters from going any further.
The proposed resolution required the prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all ‘offensive’ weapons in Cuba, under UN supervision.
The initiative was purely symbolic, with Chayes noting that it ‘stood no chance of being adopted and was not introduced with an expectation that it would be’.31 There was the possibility of General Assembly authorisation of the blockade using the ‘Uniting for Peace’ procedure, which the United States and Canada had sponsored in 1950 to circumvent the paralysis of the Security Council.
This resulted in UN condemnation of the People’s Republic of China as the aggressor in Korea, but the increase in Assembly members in subsequent years through decolonisation did not bring a corresponding boost in support for the United States.
The result was that, as a British analysis noted, United States officials doubted their ability during the missile crisis ‘to muster a sufficiently impressive majority’ in the General Assembly.
Beyond the Council and the Assembly, Acting Secretary General U Thant strove to mediate.
He proposed a suspension of the United States blockade and of Soviet arms shipments to Cuba, during which the superpowers would negotiate.
By 28 October Washington and Moscow had reached an agreement between themselves featuring an American pledge not to invade Cuba and an unofficial commitment to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey within six months, in return for the removal of the missiles from Cuba.
This enabled the American government to use the UN for its own purpose.
The difficulties in the UN obliged the United States government to look to the OAS to authorise the blockade of Cuba.
On 23 October, Dean Rusk persuaded the OAS’s Organ of Consultation to provide post facto support.
The vigorous response to the discovery of Soviet nuclear missile bases in Cuba was consistent with the Monroe Doctrine, a warning from President James Monroe in 1823 to deter European states against encroaching into the Americas.
Eighty years later, the Theodore Roosevelt ‘Corollary’ used the Doctrine to legitimise United States military intervention in Latin America.
Note that, as Barton Bernstein has suggested, that the favourable OAS verdict was achieved with some ‘deft coercion’ involving the United States provision of economic aid.
Therefore, the United States argument was that the naval embargo or ‘quarantine’ fell short of a belligerent blockade, and that the OAS could properly be used as a regional agency of the UN even without Security Council authorisation.
The legal attempt to justify the blockade was silent about the right of self-defense, that is, the right to respond with force to an actual or imminent armed attack.
Abram Chayes wrote later that presenting self-defense arguments would have suggested that the United States government took the view that ‘the situation was to be governed by national discretion not international law’.41 Nonetheless, self-defense did feature in the general narrative of American policy, with Kennedy describing the Soviet missiles in his 22 October public address as ‘offensive weapons of sudden mass destruction’ that would generate a ‘full retaliatory response’ should any be launched.
American officials tended to think that Moscow’s chief objective behind establishing the bases in Cuba was strategic, to remedy the inferior status of the Soviet Union in the nuclear balance of power.
The doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction would become prominent in the wake of the missile crisis. 10 invasion pledge from the United States government, Soviet representatives maintained that it was now reasonable to remove the missiles from Cuba because the Cuban revolution was now safe.
Western officials tended to see this argument as a post facto rationalization of the climb-down under pressure, but the emergence of new evidence since the end of the Cold War has brought greater acceptance of the defending-Cuba argument.
After reviewing Soviet sources, historian Sergey Radchenko concluded recently that ‘it is no longer safe to claim that Khrushchev was motivated strictly by strategic considerations’.47 Securing an ally in the Western Hemisphere was a tremendous political advance for Moscow, and was to be guarded carefully.
Despite taking the legal initiative, United States officials never gainsaid Cuba’s right to accept the missiles.
There was simply no basis for making that argument – Cuba had consented to the placement of the missiles, and as jurist Quincy Wright noted, a sovereign state is legally free to take, within its own territory and in the absence of treaty obligations to the contrary, measures which it considers necessary for its defense.
The Soviets raised the issue of Cuban sovereignty successfully in the UN Security Council on 24 October.
Vladimir Zorin, according to the British representative in the UN, Patrick Dean, ‘contrived to bring home effectively’ the point that ‘every country has a right to choose what weapons of defense should be stationed on its own sovereign soil’.49 This argument was a compelling one, as some American officials acknowledged.
Fuller conceded that ‘the argument that Soviet missiles in Cuba are offensive while ours in Turkey are defensive is a plain, subjective rationalisation’.50 The American government had in recent years established nuclear missile bases in Britain, Italy and Turkey.
As for Castro’s motives for accepting the missiles, he stated later that they would ‘strengthen the entire socialist camp’ while contributing to Cuba’s defense.
For the Kennedy administration, though, secrecy did make the issue more inflammatory, given that in September the President had warned Moscow that grave issues would arise if Cuba was turned into a nuclear missile base.
Allies in Europe would ‘fret about irresolute American leadership… Third World countries would perceive the USSR as a more assiduous protector of its allies, and Khrushchev himself would be emboldened to act forcefully elsewhere’ – perhaps Berlin.
Additionally, there would be the boost to the President’s ‘domestic Republican opponents’.55 Historian William J Medland has noted that designating the Soviet missiles in Cuba as offensive enabled the United States government to present an international political matter as a security threat.
To be sure, the response to the discovery of the missiles in Cuba could have reflected, without contradiction, worries about politics and prestige on one hand and about physical security on the other, but politics and prestige are not pertinent to the law of self-defense.
Furthermore, any attempt to convey the impression that the Soviets were poised to launch a nuclear first strike from Cuba was mere hyperbole, which means that the invocation of selfdefense in United States rhetoric must be taken with a substantial pinch of salt.
This was evident in the attitudes of the United States’ ‘special’ ally, Britain.
Historian Peter Catterall maintains that this view derived from doubts about the blockade’s ability to facilitate the removal of the nuclear missiles, and about its legality.
It was necessary, as Macmillan pointed out, to address the point ‘that a blockade which involves the searching of ships of all countries is difficult to defend in peacetime’.60 Duly, Kennedy instructed his ‘experts’ to ‘confer’ with British ones ‘to provide the best possible legal case’.61 The legal status of the blockade mattered to London, because there were limits to British sympathy with American policy.
Letters to Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home, who gave a televised, pro-American speech to the International Chamber of Commerce in London on 23 October, are also revealing.
Alongside urging British mediation, many of the correspondents raised legal objections to American policies.
However, the hazy legal status of the blockade provided the amateur lawyers with ammunition.
It should be acknowledged that there was some sympathy in Whitehall with the American legal case.
Leader of the House of Lords, Lord Hailsham noted that in an age when nuclear weapons were ‘ready to go off at a moment’s notice’, there were questions about the relevance of classical law reflecting the technology of the ‘sailing ship and the cannon’ and a clear distinction between war and peace.
Nonetheless, Lord Chancellor Dilhorne summarised the consensus of government lawyers as holding that ‘the “quarantine” could not be justified as “pacific blockade”’, given that it extended to third party vessels without a declaration of war.
It was feared that the term could generate ‘criticism and ridicule’.68 Yet American officials felt that they had selected the best description of the naval embargo, so felt no reason to change.
For his part, Alec Douglas-Home thought that Cuba had been ‘entitled to call for military aid from another government if necessary for the purpose of its defense’, just as NATO countries had consented to American nuclear missile bases on their territory.
He also considered that ‘while it might be possible for the United States administration to justify action against Cuban ships and possibly Soviet ships’, it was ‘in the absence of United Nations authority ... very difficult to justify action’ against the ships of other countries.
Freedom of the seas was a sensitive issue for a country with a proud naval heritage.
Royal Navy frigates in the West Indies made a point of avoiding the blockade to allow the United States navy to focus on Soviet vessels,70 but the fact that Britain had maintained trade links with Cuba meant that British civilian ships could be affected.
There were British vessels in the Caribbean not destined for Cuba, and others that having loaded in communist ports were bound for the island.
The United States Navy was instructed to make only spot checks on friendly shipping, and ultimately no British vessels were detained.
However, the fact that the London government reserved its legal rights in relation to shipping showed that, as historian Christopher Hull has argued, it could take a legalistic stance when national interests were under threat.
Scott, Harold Macmillan ‘subordinated international law to the exigencies of the crisis’.77 The Prime Minister’s pragmatism was evident in how he attempted to silence the legal critics.
The priority was to ‘prevent consolidation of the offensive potential for the Soviet Union in Cuba’.79 Promptings such as these may have had some effect.
The Canadian Department of External Affairs noted the ‘sui generis’ nature of the quarantine, while the Chief of the Naval Staff concluded that because the lawfulness of the action was ill-defined, Canada could accept it without condoning an illegal act.
Nonetheless, as Undersecretary of External Affairs Norman Robertson advised his colleagues, it was wise to avoid public discussion of the quarantine’s legality, given the ambiguity of the issue.
An analysis for Secretary to the DEA Arthur Tange maintained that pacific blockades were serious, but justified, measures when enacted under the UN Charter to prevent the outbreak of war; outside the parameters of the UN, many jurists considered it illegal.
Tange and Minister of External Affairs Garfield Barwick acknowledged the inconsistency of this position given the placement of Soviet strategic weapons in Cuba.
Only the Marucla, a Panamanian-owned, Lebanon-registered, Soviet-chartered ship, was ever detained and inspected.
This reasoning implied that the Soviet bases in Cuba and the American base in Turkey were analogous.
All the same, the U.S. government’s construction of a case in law recognised the fact that the legal propriety of the blockade was very much open to question.
Few of the foreign officials or politicians who expressed a view had confidence in the case, although acknowledgements that the existing legal framework was outdated were consistent with the arguments of Washington.
Promoting The Legal Case after the Crisis After Moscow’s agreement to remove IL-28 nuclear capable bombers as well as the nuclear missiles from Cuba, Washington ended the blockade on 20 November.
Abram Chayes wanted to neutralise legal criticisms of the blockade, including arguments from French sociologist Raymond Aron that power politics had prevailed over law, by outlining the legal case in the journal Foreign Affairs.
Conclusion The United States government’s promotion of the legal case for blockade of Cuba during the missile crisis represented part of a broader effort to win support, including the President’s TV and radio broadcast of 22 October, and briefings to leaders of NATO states and to 95 foreign ambassadors.
Although there was little genuine consultation with allies about how to respond to the discovery of the Soviet missiles,88 allied backing was vital to the moral standing of American policy.
Withana has maintained that the American government’s ‘skilful use of the ideology of international law’ was ‘an important factor’ behind the United States victory, while ‘relatively weaker references to the ideology of international law by Soviet representatives was a factor in shaping the outcome of Soviet acquiescence to United States priorities to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba’.89 Yet there is a consensus that Khrushchev relented because the Soviet Union was in a position of military weakness in the Caribbean and because he recognised the danger of catastrophic escalation.
As has been seen, the Soviet Union occupied the legal high ground during the missile crisis, but was forced to retreat.
The reservations of United States allies about the legal status of the blockade suggest that Moscow was more adept at making a case than might be recognised.
Some Washington officials were sincerely confident that the blockade was legally sound, with Leonard Meeker telling United States representative to the UN Adlai Stevenson that with the ‘quarantine’ the United States had ‘made some unexpected new law’ suited to contemporary conditions.
Yet others, such as Richard N Gardner, had their doubts about the legal position, as has been noted.
The missile crisis demonstrated the scope for inconsistency among government legal specialists, given how on occasions they may be required to provide an objective judgment in law of a particular policy, and then, regardless of the merits of the case, be obliged to advocate publicly the same or a similar policy.
There is a tension in vesting both the judge and advocate functions in the same officials.
Soon after the missile crisis, many jurists in the United States published articles in scholarly journals in which they endorsed the legality of the blockade.
Since then, jurists have been ambivalent about the legal merit of the blockade against Cuba in 1962, with some arguing that it represented a ‘peaceful blockade’, and others maintaining that in the absence of an armed attack it contravened the UN Charter.
The ‘ultimate judgment of history’ has not been as favourable as Chayes and his colleagues had hoped.
Von Glahn, Law Among Nations,658, notes that the blockade had both pacific and hostile characteristics.
