MAY 2021 VOLUME 12, ISSUE 4 A New Virus that Takes Away the COVID Gloom Page 11 Publisher Nathaniel Grant publisher@gam-mag.com Associate Publisher and Editor-in-Chief Bruce Gemmill editor@gam-mag.com Creative Director Ronnie Price Copy Editor Virginia Grant Dear Readers, Memorial Day is May 31.
Many brave men and women have served in the Armed Forces of the United States.
Too many have lost their lives so that we may continue gam|mag is published ten times per year. to enjoy the freedoms we hold dear as Americans.
It is a privilege to be a citizen of The magazine is mailed free of charge to the United States, a gift not to be taken lightly.
Indeed, those who gave their lives in select Washington, DC area businesses, nonprofits, associations, and government battle revered their country, as testified by their deeds.
While reasonable care is taken its Constitutional framework of individual freedoms are worth dying for.
Most of with all material submitted to gam|mag, the publisher cannot accept responsibility us will never have to prove our courage on the battlefield.
But we can still prove our for loss or damage to any such material. resolve by fighting to uphold the way of life we can easily take for granted.
While ensuring that Spring has sprung, and COVID’s threat appears to be waning, thanks to vaccines and all published information is accurate, the publisher cannot be held responsible for people exercising common sense.
We can only hope in-person meetings will soon be any mistakes or omissions.
Our cover story is written in whole or in part of any text, illustrations by Casey Veatch, a well-known owner of a Northern Virginia commercial real estate or photographs is strictly forbidden.
He focuses on the good that has come from the pandemic and reminds us that Americans have always been charitable.
In many cases, COVID has brought out This magazine is intended to provide a the best in us. general guide to the News and the services it provides.
The material in our magazine is given for general information only and Finally, we need your help.
Lately, gam|mag has received “return mail,” and I would does not constitute professional advice. like to ask our subscribers to please inform us of any changes we need to make to our Where appropriate, readers should seek their own legal or other professional advice. mailing list.
I would also like to invite you to include your email address and opt-in The gam|mag accepts no responsibility for so we may send an occasional email.
You have my assurance we will not abuse your loss occasioned to any person acting or inbox by sending a limitless stream of useless babble. refraining from acting as a result of material contained in this magazine.
As always, we appreciate the local businesses who advertise in gam|mag and ask you to consider patronizing their establishments.
We offer substance abuse treatment for adolescents including group, individual and family sessions.
The mission failed, and Cuba's Soviet ally responded by The United States U-2 pilot flew over Cuba at an altitude of 14 shipping missile batteries to be constructed in Cuba in an effort to miles, a top-secret mission that put him at Earth's stratosphere. thwart further invasions.
The United States countered by ordering a Major Rudolph Anderson undertook this daring recon flight as the naval quarantine of the island to prevent ships from world braced for possible nuclear conflict between the United States unloading additional material needed to complete the SAM launch and the Soviet Union.
Each step taken by either side served to escalate previous times, but this flight was different.
Soviet surface-to-air tensions and drive the world closer to unimaginable warfare. missiles had been installed on the island of Cuba, just 90 miles off the Florida coast.
In the Oval Office behind the famous Resolute desk,** Kennedy Aware of the danger, but determined to obtain the critical intelligence had penned the first of many letters to Khrushchev demanding needed, Anderson had doggedly lobbied to fly this mission. the missile sites' dismantling.
Kennedy had also made it clear to Khrushchev that the United States viewed the missile sites as Tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States had aggression toward the Western Hemisphere and that a strike against been high for some time, ever since the presence of missile launch any nation would be considered an attack on the United States.
If sites and Soviet IL-28 bombers had been detected by Anderson's such an event were to occur, the United States would retaliate with five U-2 flights over Cuba.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff had President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev, and raised its military readiness to DEFCON 3 to prepare for a military each side played chicken while the rest of the world helplessly strike on Cuba.
Krushchev knew the President of the United States braced for nuclear conflict. meant business.
Secret communique raced back and forth halfway around the Nevertheless, in defiance, construction of the sites and a Soviet world between the two leaders as they feverishly calculated and arms buildup on the island had continued, as documented by miscalculated each other's next move.
Khrushchev had refused to budge, A series of events had been building up to this moment.
April of 1961, 1,400 American-trained Cuban refugees had invaded Which brings us up to October 26, 1962, the day before Major Cuba to overthrow Fidel Castro's repressive Communist regime Anderson’s sixth and most dangerous reconnaissance mission Page 8 • gam|mag • May 2021 HISTORY NEWS over Cuba.
With the stalemate between the two countries now During the Memorial Day holiday, we can recall with gratitude at fever pitch and nuclear war seemingly imminent, ABC News the valor Major Anderson demonstrated when he flew over correspondent John Scali received an invitation to lunch by active SAM missile batteries giving his life for our country.
We Colonel Alexandr Fomin, the KGB's point man in the United also remember the courage and sacrifice of thousands of brave States.
Intrigued, Scali accepted and met Fomin for lunch at The Americans who have died protecting our cherished liberties and Occidental, a posh Washington, DC landmark.
During lunch, the way of life. conversation turned to the crisis in Cuba.
Fomin informed Scali that the Soviets would remove all offensive weapons if Kennedy A grateful nation gives its thanks. would pledge he would not give any order to invade Cuba.
It must be broadcast the story of his career or choose to quietly inform fought for, protected, and handed on for them to do the same, or United States officials of his rendezvous with the Soviet spy and allow the one day we will spend our sunset years telling our children and our exclusive scoop to yield to his patriotism.
Scali chose the latter with children's children what it was once like in the United States where the hope diplomacy would ease tensions. men were free."" – President Ronald Reagan *To obtain support from the Organization of American States, diplomacy required the term blockade The next day, October 27, as Major Anderson flew his most to be quarantine. critical reconnaissance mission over Cuba, an SA-2 missile blew him out of the sky.
It is called the Resolute desk because it was built from the oak wood from the HMS Resolute, a British exploration ship abandoned in the Arctic Ocean of Canada in 1854.
The United As a nuclear response loomed closer, Krushchev wrote Kennedy States whaling ship, George Henry, discovered the Resolute floating aimlessly in Melville Sound in 1855.
As a goodwill gesture, the United States repaired the ship and returned it to Britain, where a letter to confirm Fomin's offer to Scali was sincere.
However, as a it continued to serve in the Royal Navy for 23 more years until it was decommissioned in 1879.
A condition, Krushchev insisted that the United States pledge not to competition was held for a furniture company to design a piece of furniture Queen Victoria could give to President Hayes using the timbers from HMS Resolute.
Since that time, numerous American invade Cuba and further agree to remove its offensive missiles from Presidents have used the desk in the Oval Office.
Kennedy agreed the United States would not attack Cuba, provided the Soviet Union dismantled all Cuban-based missiles under United Nations supervision.
The President purposely ignored the Soviet demand to remove missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy, to meet with the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, to confirm the United States did agree to remove all missiles based in Turkey, provided this promise not be made public.
The next morning, Khrushchev publicly announced he would remove all missiles from Cuba.
Full Service Catering ana@fordswickedcatering.com • www.fordswickedcatering.com The immediate crisis was over, but the United States had not Full Menu available at fordsfishshack.com finished exerting its power.
Kennedy kept the naval quarantine in place with the demand that the Soviets also remove all Cubanbased IL-28 bombers.
A frustrated and angry Khrushchev relented, and the bombers were ordered back to Soviet soil.
On November 20, 1962, the United States lifted its naval quarantine, and during April 1963, all missiles in Turkey were quietly removed.
Data equaled 1.5% of total 2019 state personal income, according to FFIS. suggests they’ll make the biggest difference in the pocketbooks of Earlier this year, Mississippi Gov.
Tate Reeves (along with Texas taxpayers in Mississippi and West Virginia.
An analysis of the first round of federal stimulus payments in 2020 shows the money provided the biggest average income boost Some Democrats have previously suggested that federal relief for to residents in those two states.
The $1,200 payments to individuals COVID-19 be withheld from states that do not mandate the use and $500 per child doled out nearly a year ago via the CARES of face masks statewide, but that idea did not take hold.
Kentucky residents saw an average 2.1% boost in income thanks to the stimulus checks.
The FFIS organization also noted that states with higher populations of children somewhat distorted the data because the The proposed income limits in the current $1. trillion federal money per child in most cases was a fraction of what each adult relief bill are similar to the income limits for the CARES Act stimulus received.
Some states “with below-average per capita incomes—such checks, so these trends are likely to play out again if the bill passes. as Texas, Arizona, Utah, and Georgia—received below-average payments, due to their larger number of dependents,” the analysis FFIS conducted its analysis by comparing the total in stimulus said.
So, it makes sense that lower-income states would see a greater impact.
Stimulus payments equated to 1% or What’s more, 17-year-olds and adult dependents less of the average income. are also eligible for a payment as part of this plan.
Liz Farmer is a fiscal policy expert, public policy wonk, national journalist, and a fellow at the Rockefeller Institute of Government.
Besides gam|mag, her work can be seen in the Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg, Forbes.com, and other national publications.
Page 10 • gam|mag • May 2021 POSITIVE NEWS A New Virus that Takes Away the COVID Gloom Casey Veatch, Principal, Veatch Commercial Real Estate We are all fully aware of the devastating physical effects COVID-19 percent, and Loudoun County came in at 1. percent.
Unfortunately, my uncle succumbed to it in surprising given that both are consistently in the country's top 2 or 3 the early stage of the pandemic in March of 2020.
It also surprised me because I know so many people known four others who have passed away because of the virus.
No who are very active in giving back to our community. one needs to lose a loved one to experience the ongoing emotional effects this pandemic can bring.
At first, you may think this story of my observations and research Being generous is the right thing to do, and the Bible says if we sounds a little pollyannaish and theoretical.
In our world, when we hear ""reap seems to be a growing, positive social contagion which was released benefits,"" our immediate thought is some material gain.
I know the when COVID began, and it has dramatically benefitted those who Bible means something much more profound than material items contract it.
So, I was pleasantly surprised The wider this disease spreads, the more it helps all of us.The to learn about the many studies that have been conducted on the contagion I am talking about is generosity.
Donating money stimulates the hope is just the beginning of a generosity explosion. same neural pathway that is activated by food, sex, and drugs.
Looking back at a study done in 2017 shared locally by Amy Owen, President & CEO of The Community Foundation of Loudoun & Studies have also shown generosity gives people greater empathy, Northern Fauquier Counties, lower rates of depression, healthier bodies, longer life spans, and shows that the national average for charitable giving rates as a percentage helps us thrive.
Giving to others increases our short-term happiness of discretionary income was 3 percent.
Fairfax County came in at 2.6 gam|mag • May 2021 • Page 11 POSITIVE NEWS A New Virus that Takes Away the COVID Gloom and long-term well-being.
Being generous seems like a very effective It's encouraging to see others less affected by the pandemic way to fight these adverse psychological reactions that many of us giving back to help those struggling to make ends meet.
With all of these the first days of the pandemic, volunteers have kept coming benefits, you can see why it is contagious. into the NVFS Hunger Resource Center.
The generosity of these volunteers ensures we will continue to provide food to more families in need.
Two of my best friends, Brian Jackson and George Light, are perfect examples of demonstrating kindness and benevolence.
Brian, who works for a local government contractor, and his wife, Connie, Jennifer Montgomery, President & CEO Loudoun raise their nephew and niece along with their daughter.
George, who Hunger Relief has his own mortgage company, donated his kidney to one of his good friends. www.loudounhunger.org The increased need for food has grown exponentially, and I see the community generously donating to help meet that need.
All people Because of their propensity to be selfless, I asked them both the need to feel valued and part of the community.
The people who are first thing that came to mind when they heard the word generosity. volunteering and giving strengthen the bonds within our community.
All of our neighbors in Loudoun benefit needs that uplift others in causes that aim to maximize impact."" from this wave of generosity, whether they are the giver or recipient.
I can tell you that my two friends challenge and inspire me to be more giving when I see their acts of selflessness.
They have both Hearing these nonprofit executives express excitement and hope infected many others as well. during such a critical time of need is uplifting.
People are starting to It has also been very moving to see how our community has come together again and not allow fear to keep them apart.
Human service helps us feel more connected to the community and manifests nonprofits have been on the front lines of seeing altruism in action. concrete results.
So many families and individuals are living in crisis today because of the lockdown caused by the pandemic.
In his book, The Treasure Principle, Randy Alcorn breaks down Stephanie Berkowitz, President & CEO of this verse.
He says we need to think about how much we are going to give and plan it.
We should Northern Virginia Family Service never give from a feeling of guilt.
And to benefit fully, you should always give Along with corporate and philanthropic support, individual cheerfully. contributions are critical in enabling nonprofits like NVFS to deliver mission-driven support and services to the community We receive the most benefits from our generosity and positive at large.
Over this past year, our community also stepped up impact on others when we have no expectations of any reward back in incredible ways, fueling our ability to meet our neighbors' to us. ➤ increased needs.
Page 12 • gam|mag • May 2021 POSITIVE NEWS Please keep in mind that this current wave of generosity is not study found that the more involved you choose to be, the more all about money or material goods.
Each of us can give of our time, vitality and self-esteem you have. talent, and treasure.
If monetary giving is not possible now, you can receive and feel the same benefits of generosity by donating time or What other contagion do you know that benefits the giver and talents.
Imagine if each of us started small and allowed the performing a random act of kindness, sending an encouraging text, contagion to grow within us and then watch it spread to others. or doing something really crazy, like writing an old-fashioned letter Imagine what our community would be like if everyone caught the are all good ways of giving that do not involve money. generosity virus and experienced all of its benefits.
Imagine if we could eliminate or significantly reduce isolation, loneliness, hunger, The exciting news for all of us is that we can start small and still depression, prejudice, health issues, and selfishness.
Generosity is become super-spreaders. a remedy that everyone can access.
It is inspiring to see what has happened so far and exciting to think about the possibilities if it continues to grow.
He said, ""You don't need to become a self-sacrificing martyr to feel happier.
A white paper prepared by the Greater Good Science Center at For those of us still employed, we ask this: If you've given in UC Berkeley states that many studies point to the possible positive the past, please continue to give.
If giving is new to you, please consequences of the giver's generosity.
Local philanthropy is essential to a in older adults, and volunteering is associated with delayed mortality. vibrant, healthy community.
You can touch it, track it, and see Generosity appears to have robust associations with psychological it.
A meta-analysis of 37 studies of older adults found that volunteering provided a better quality of life.
Judy L Redpath, CFP®, AIF® is the Founder of VISTA Wealth Strategies LLC Last year ushered in unexpected challenges, the coronavirus • Know your lifestyle costs. epidemic at the top of the list.
We had to change the way and where You may have more than we work with “work from home” becoming the norm and not the enough income to cover exception.
We changed how and when we gather together, with regular, recurring expenses. online meetings becoming an everyday occurrence.
Our social events Taking stock of your earned and galas moved online as well.
We have become more creative in income, other income how we approach situations as we adapted to a new way of life. sources and cash flow will help create a foundation for good financial planning.
What hasn’t changed is how important it is to plan for the future, Keep enough cash in to continue to plan for your financial independence, for your your checking account to children’s education, for the possibility you might have to take care of cover at least two months’ a parent, a grandparent, a sibling or the special expenses that pop up. expenses and monitor your It is easy to put off for another day actions that can make a positive drawdown and balance on a difference in your life. regular basis.
Judy L Redpath Here are key elements that will help you determine if your • Plan for the unexpected. financial house is in good order as well as ideas for ongoing good The car needs new tires, there’s a surprise plumbing bill, you financial planning habits. may not get paid promptly for work you have performed.
Your list may be different, but having cash reserves sufficient to Make Sure the Basics Are in Place cover unplanned expenses is likely to give you peace of mind.
Here are actions you can take now to prepare for a financially secure future for yourself and those about whom you care.
It is different for each person or household, but six months of living expenses is a good starting Page 14 • gam|mag • May 2021 FINANCIAL NEWS target.
If you are closer in your time horizon to leaving the world of work behind, you may want to keep even more in reserves to bolster your cash confidence.
Cash reserves belong in accounts like savings accounts, CDs or short-term bonds that are appropriate for a short-term time horizon of no more than two to three years.
If you are working and are eligible to participate in an employer-sponsored plan, defer as much of your earned income as you can afford and that your plan will allow.
Some plans allow you to elect to defer income on a pretax basis or use a Roth basis.
If you are an entrepreneur or business owner, explore which to renovate or update your current home, send your child retirement plan option make most sense for you and to the college or university of his/her choice, take a fabulous your business to attract, retain and reward yourself and your vacation each year or make sure you can stop working on your employees.
It may be a 401k plan, a SIMPLE IRA or a more timeframe and have enough income and investable assets to exotic plan like a combination 401k plan and cash balance plan sustain you to the end of life, thoughtful planning is likely to that will allow you as a business owner to defer more income in help you achieve your goals. a tax-advantaged retirement account.
There out your financial goals, assigning dates and amounts and the are other retirement plan accounts prospectively available to importance to each goal will help you understand how to move you, including traditional IRAs, Roth IRAs, and cash balance forward in a way that is meaningful for you. plans.
It is human nature to want to focus Setting up an automatic deposit for monthly savings and/ on today, the next vacation, funding college educations, buying or taxable investment accounts in addition to funding your the next home, etc.
While we hope and plan for a long, healthy retirement plan will help you reach your financial goals as life, events outside our control all too often occur. well.
The odds are pretty good that your nest egg will need to last at least 30 years so taking advantage of the time value of money will benefit you.
It is important to review your life insurance and retirement plan beneficiary designations annually or whenever your personal or business situation changes (e.g., a marriage, a • Plan for a long, comfortable life.
It Avoid Making Common Financial Mistakes is important to know what your lifestyle costs you so you can Here are several common financial mistakes we come across plan now for a sustainable lifestyle for the rest of your life. regularly in our work with clients.
We are currently living haven’t spent time reflecting on what’s most important to you in a very low interest rate environment, one that is expected in life and thought about what your goals will cost, if they to continue for some time.
This means that return on cash is are one-time or recurring, and who else may be involved in minimal at best.
The rationale for keeping so much cash might the decision-making, now is a good time.
Making a habit of reviewing the terms and “perfect” time, which does not exist. costs of your policies once a year can save you money as well as give you comfort that key assets are protected against an unplanned event.
What matters most is being consistent about investing on a systematic basis, whether it is through an employer-sponsored plan or systematic If you have the time, interest and knowledge to take care of these investing in taxable accounts.
On any given day, the financial items on your own, make an appointment with yourself and/or your markets can swing positive to negative or the reverse and back spouse or significant other to review your situation at least annually. again.
It’s important to keep a long-term perspective for your Otherwise, engage a qualified financial professional to collaborate long-term investments and not worry about results on any with you on making sure you are doing the best with the resources given day. available to you and to help you navigate as your circumstances and/ or the laws and rules that govern our financial lives change.
It is important Judy L Redpath, CFP®, AIF® is the Founder of VISTA Wealth Strategies LLC in to review your auto and homeowner’s or renter’s insurance Reston, Virginia.
The firm specializes in working with entrepreneurs, business owners, policies annually to make sure you have appropriate coverage professionals and their families across the US, overseeing their family finances, focusing and receiving the best rate possible.
If you are a homeowner, on the accumulation, distribution, preservation and strategic transfer of wealth.
Judy is a recipient of the national Women’s Choice Award ® Financial Advisor 2014-2020 chances are good that the estimated market value of your home and is a 2021 Washingtonian Top Financial Advisor.
Are you getting a discount by insuring a Registered Investment Adviser.
VISTA Wealth Strategies LLC is located at 12020 Sunrise Valley Drive, Suite 180, Reston, VA 20191.
Email Same Day Appointments | 24hr On-Call Provider | Advice Line | Lab Services advertising@gam-mag.com, Hospital Care | Prenatal Classes | Weekend Hours | Lactation Counseling or call 571.375.7200.
With four convenient locations in Northern Virginia, our practice provides comprehensive care for newborns If you want to promote through young adults.
SHANNON E EICKHOFF, PA-C KAREN O’HARA, N.P. gam|mag is the place to be.
We follow the American Academy of Pediatrics/ CDC guidelines on childhood immunizations.
Tell us about the entrepreneurial spirit that business plan was on target.
I was encouraged by the positive drove you to start your own business. response and constructive advice shared by so many people.
Mom and Dad practiced what they preached and set Principles of service are JEMS' core values.
I have tried to exemplify professionals is grateful for the opportunity to be of service to our my parent's resolve to serve our community, charities, neighbors, and customers by listening, showing respect, and finding solutions to friends throughout my life.
It's all a part of the JEMS mission to offer a concierge our actions. level of service.
Of course, that service would be incomplete without giving back to the community.
Everyone at JEMS is encouraged to give of their time, talent, and treasure to benefit others.
In many ways, my entrepreneurial spirit was initially driven by the need to help others.
I knew in my heart that if I ran a business by creative touch, transparency, doing more with less, utilizing and applying the core principles my parents taught us that have guided building on technology, training, and building trusting relationships me through life, I could be successful on my own. that bring success to all.
I had spoken to many colleagues, friends, and associates before becoming a business owner.
I wanted to get feedback from thirdgam|mag • May 2021 • Page 17 ENTREPRENEURIAL NEWS JEMS Hospitality Group Before the COVID 19 pandemic, JEMS was off to a fast start.
Associations must engage their active members even had worked all my professional life on building relationships with though it may be some time before in-person gatherings are once my clients and building that trust.
I initiated processes that helped kickstart our concierge leaving fewer employees to create virtual opportunities that will bring approach to service.
We had the staff to support our rapidly growing value to members. business.
The following year, 2020, COVID-19 dropped in for a Organizations now consider adjusted budgets to reflect the need visit. for increased online presence.
Severely trimmed travel budgets mean alternatives must be identified by meeting planners.
It seems with COVID-19, business has been reinvented reductions have made it necessary for organizations to identify and overnight.
Those hiring us benefit from our tenured staff and strategic assistance, generally realizing significant cost savings.
Everyone has had to pivot or risk going into the failed business dustbin.
I think business models have changed for the better as a result of this shift to virtual meetings.
Organizations now see alternatives that streamline processes, employ We pride ourselves as forward thinkers, and customers appreciate new technology, and contract with knowledgeable third-party how JEMS streamlines events.
Organizations have witnessed increased towards a virtual component in September of 2019 because our attendance using online meetings, one reason being that virtual corporate and association clients are worldwide.
We built a customizable JEMS virtual platform. experiencing reduced revenue flow because in-person events have been curtailed.
Second, it is businesses, associations, and nonprofits have to bring additional value critical to employ a trained team that understands production and both virtually and in-person.
Organizations have to be creative in bringing people together. in-person meeting planning staff can produce a virtual meeting.
For example, virtual tradeshows and exhibits are an excellent way to engage constituents.
It benefits both the association and the My hotel sales and marketing background included extensive exhibitor.
How do you engage the attendee to make sure they are operations and technology experience.
The answer is twofold, as it is up to meeting, including live, pre-recorded speakers, breaks, networking, both to be responsible for engaging. exhibits, and more requires a professional to make that happen.
A virtual meeting is as tricky as producing a live or pre-recorded The exhibitor has to learn a more creative way to get in front of TV show.
A good script is also necessary for One crucial step is to do your homework.
It is not the trend of virtual and hybrid meetings. just offering marketing material and waiting for a response.
It is about the energy, knowledge, and strategy you bring to the virtual booth.
In the trade association industry, there has been a drop-off in membership due to the pandemic.
There also have been no inOn the other hand, the attendee has to be made interested in person meetings or conventions, a primary source of income for making appointments and keeping them.
The incentive has to be Page 18 • gam|mag • May 2021 ENTREPRENEURIAL NEWS compelling, whether that be gamification, entertainment, reduced excellent way for the board to extend their session after the cost of registration, or another creative lure.
After all, they sit for business meeting. hours watching a general session, attending breakouts, and then a 4) Another good idea is to offer a charitable gift during your virtual exhibit.
This simple 6) Including an entertainment element in a virtual meeting is fact makes the hybrid version of an exhibit or meeting much more highly recommended to break boredom or monotony.
Virtual events can be customized to suit the audience. helps book talent and partners with experts to produce shows They can be structured around a general session, keynote speakers, from start to finish.
A well-executed show will WOW any breakout rooms, cocktail networking receptions, or any combination. audience.
I've listed a few ideas we incorporate in our virtual Boatright: The past year has been witness to a litany of change meetings.
Our customers have told us about the energy and interest – not just our industry but also the entire world.
Still, we have so much more to an exciting time to start a business is an understatement, and we've offer for virtual, hybrid, and in-person meetings. certainly had our challenges.
As the COVID-19 vaccines roll out and life returns to everyone to have a signed copy.
We are already seeing our customers chart their plans their home office to help with stress relief, tension and posture. for the rest of 2021 and beyond.
It was a big hit. events hosted in a hybrid capacity with both in-person and virtual 3) There are so many interactive things to offer.
To make matters worse, she witnessed care that was less than she felt each As a child, Cheri Garvin grew up the daughter of entrepreneurs. patient deserved, so she returned to her hometown of Leesburg.
Her parents, Chick and Sharon Shipley, owned the Ben Franklin variety store in the Virginia Village Shopping Center in Leesburg.
Her parents worked hard to maintain employment in 2001 from pharmacist Roberts, who Garvin credits a successful business.
Working at her parent's store, Garvin formed with being an exceptional mentor and person.
It was at this time, the independent, persistent, and financial mindset to succeed as a Garvin met Jay Gill, who was working at the pharmacy, and the two business owner.
Before long, Garvin was college-bound and was developed a quick bond. considering teaching as a profession.
After working eight years at the pharmacy, in 2009, Garvin In 1976, Leesburg-native Bruce Roberts founded Leesburg teamed with Gill and bought the 33-year-old Leesburg Pharmacy.
Roberts Garvin now chuckles, ""I think Bruce saw me as his exit strategy also happened to be the family's pharmacist, and he encouraged when he first hired me.
He’s a Garvin to attend pharmacy school instead of pursuing a teaching visionary, and I’m very practical.
Jay handles business development career. and marketing, while I focus on compliance, finances, and human resources.
Page 20 • gam|mag • May 2021 MEDICAL NEWS Over the next several years, the pharmaceutical industry changed, requiring Garvin and Gill to adjust their business plan.
It also did not help that insurance companies reimbursed their independent pharmacy at rates often below their costs.
The two business partners decided they needed to close Leesburg Pharmacy and focus their efforts on the compounding division of Leesburg Pharmacy.
Garvin and Gill were confident the new business model would enhance profit margins and provide customers with a better experience.
It was a difficult decision, but they parted ways with Leesburg Pharmacy in 2014 and introduced The Compounding Center.
Jay and I both had a passion for compounding medicines because it is the perfect blend between art and science,"" said Garvin.
Each instance provides Garvin and Gill the opportunity to work with prescribers and customers to find a solution that works.
The Compounding • A baby with a heart condition needs medication but can't Center makes medicines from scratch, using its in-house lab to tolerate an adult dose in pill form.
The Compounding Center develop the right formula for whatever challenges each person will make the medication in a liquid form, with the dose faces.
Garvin offered a few examples. appropriate for the baby's age and weight.
Often a patient needs more than one hormone, so The Compounding Center lab blends a custom formula that incorporates multiple ingredients in a cream.
Pets have their issues, too, making veterinary compounding a large percentage of pharmaceutical requests.
Individuals also bring their pets’ medical challenges to the Compounding Center.
Each medical situation is a challenge, allowing them to troubleshoot by creating a solution that works for the individual – human or animal.
They are especially pleased to provide relief for those who have grown frustrated by a lack of success from traditional options.
They're taking their health into their own hands and getting hormone tests and nutrient tests done.
The new field of pharmacogenomics is bringing more awareness of each person's unique genetics that affect how medications work in their body.
It's an exciting time to be in Garvin believes a big part of staying healthy is including the right healthcare,"" shares Garvin. balance of high-quality vitamin supplements.
The Compounding Center stocks its shelves with a full line of pharmaceuticalgrade vitamins and supplements.
The pharmacy also has a large With off-the-shelf pharmaceuticals, remedies can be elusive. showroom of home health supplies and medical equipment.
Garvin says she and Gill like to educate prescribers about how relief is possible with customized compound medications.
While the town has experienced considerable growth, she is pleased that Leesburg has kept its hometown atmosphere and that the historic downtown is even more appealing than ever.
Garvin says that while Keane Enterprises has beautiful plans for the strip center, it will still be several years before The Compounding Center will have to move because of the renovation construction.
Garvin ended this interview by crediting the people who she says are instrumental to the success of The Compounding Center.
I am fortunate to come to work each day and be with an exceptional team genuinely dedicated to our patients.
Phishing is a cyber-criminal impersonating a trusted source of • Phishing E-mail – designed to look like a trusted and e-mail or other forms of communication and tricks the user into legitimate source (i.e., Amazon, vendor customer support, a disclosing information they should have kept private.
Many users bank, etc.). don’t think twice about responding to these e-mails as they are • Spear Phishing – a more targeted form of phishing where crafted to mimic real e-mails and are extremely difficult to detect just the cyber-criminal has already collected data on the user or by a quick glance.
This type of phishing only requires the user to click extremely difficult to spot at a glance.
Malware can also come in • Updating passwords the form of online advertisements encouraging the user to gain more information about a product or information.
Once • Responding to social media connection request clicked, malware is installed on the device.
I know you’ve seen, and even received, the UPS and FedEx e-mails • Smishing – commonly known as mobile phishing.
Phishing, phishing, phishing… don’t types of phishing are employed, but targeted to your mobile click.
UPS and FedEx don’t normally have your e-mail address. device via text message, e-mail from your social media They will reach out to the sender of any package and the sender will account, or any app you have installed on your mobile device. contact you if the carrier is having a problem delivering the package.
This where you get an automated call telling you that you have to take A really good example of a phishing scam that cost one company immediate action to remedy an urgent situation.
A good recent over $1M in one day came into the accounting department of a real example is a caller posing as the IRS telling you that unless you estate settlement company. pay now, law enforcement is on its way to arrest you.
This occurs when a cyber-criminal intercepts two people president of the company informing you of wiring instruction changes e-mailing back and forth to each other and pretends to be both for a loan that is due to close today.
You’re new, you’ve to gain personal information. never gotten an e-mail from the president before, it looks legitimate, and the borrower information and loan number are correct.
As you can readily that same day to the same employee. see, the majority of attacks are directly a result of phishing attacks.
Luckily for this settlement firm, it was able to get the money back through its bank, and the bank pursued the cyber-criminals with the assistance of law enforcement.
The employee was unfortunately fired, although it was not entirely the employee’s fault.
The company bears responsibility for not having information technology policies and regular training and testing in place to equip the employee with the tools to make correct decisions.
Other types of extortion include applying for credit cards There are a number of fraudulent e-mail types of requests that are ; applying for and disguised to fool a user into performing an action.
Once in the organization with services, either as a bundle or individually. user’s network, the criminal gains access to the user’s e-mail contacts However, it can be difficult to cut through the noise of the sales expanding to new targets. pitches and offers in this rapidly changing industry.
A managed services provider or other security expert is better equipped to help guide companies through this process.
Many of these services may How to Protect Against Phishing Attacks already be part of your organization’s technology support.
And, even if they say “yes” to all of the above, you should still consider having a third-party evaluate and test your plan, at least annually.
The numbers may astound you. security are the broad categories in which e-mail security, including phishing defense, is planned, implemented, and managed.
Will Sperow, CEO, BlueBay Technology • Monitoring – Simulation tools are extremely useful to Blue Bay Technology is a technology services organization located in Chantilly and Winchester.
The company specializes in managed IT services, co-managed IT services continually reinforce awareness and strengthen the cyber , managed security services, Microsoft security culture.
Office365 administration and management, Microsoft Azure administration and • Communication – Regularly send out cyber security e-mails management, VoIP services and administration, business continuity planning and execution, business consulting, and hardware and software sales/upgrades.
For more to employees, hold training classes, and create team building information, visit www.bluebaytechnology.com events to engage employees in a positive way.
Jenn Womack The pandemic year 2020 was long, worrisome, and grueling. right up your alley.
This National Historic Landmark displays an Most of us sacrificed get-togethers with friends and family and held immense collection of hand-blown glass, herbal botanicals, medical back on vacations.
With that thought in mind, we thought we'd take a closer look at what our lovely state of The Grave of the Female Stranger, Old Town Alexandri, VA Virginia has to offer.
What we found is that Virginia, with its small towns, sunny beaches, historical venues, scenic roads, and even a few A lesser-known tourist attraction, the grave of the female stranger, unexpected nerdy, spooky, and quirky sites, offers us the ability to do gained popularity in the mid-19th century when several articles many things right here in our own state. recounting the legend behind it were published in newspapers across the country.
The papers told of a couple who arrived in Alexandria by ship in the early part of 1816 and isolated themselves from the Singularly, any one of the fascinating finds listed here will make for public eye.
When the wife became gravely ill, her husband hired a a beautiful day escape, and combining two or more into an adventure local doctor to care for her with the stipulation that the doctor would will make for a lovely weekend getaway. not question their identities.
For this reason, their mere presence became fodder for speculation and rumor.
When the woman perished in October of that same year, her husband had to borrow ALEXANDRIA – Nationally recognized for its rich history, money from a local businessman to bury her.
He repaid the man architecture, restaurants, boutiques, and waterfront events, with a note from the Bank of England and quickly departed.
The following are note later turned out to be a forgery, but the businessman allowed her just a couple of the unique venues you can visit. grave slab to remain with no real recourse.
The most notable is Theodosia Burr The Stabler-Leadbeater Apothecary Museum, Alexandria, VA Alston, the daughter of former Vice President Aaron Burr, who was If you fancy museums, or even architecture for that matter, The mysteriously lost at sea in 1813.
Chincoteague is the gateway to the Virginia portion of plantation in 1976 and his dream of creating a vineyard on the Assateague Island and the Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge. land was realized.
The winery became successful, was labeled one of the best wine destinations in Virginia, and the rest is history.
If you like a white wine with sweet floral notes, do Assateague Island is a 37-mile-long gem that is refashioned by try Barboursville's Phileo. ocean wind and waves every day.
Here you will find sandy beaches, salt marshes, maritime forests, and coastal bays to explore.
There are many landscape for the wild ponies, many waterfowl species, crabs and things to see in Charlottesville.
Check out these excellent stops. late summer sighting of a whale surfacing for air.
Although Poe only studied at UVA for one year, his profound influence and academic excellence led a professor of architecture, Chincoteague Island, VA who was part of the Raven Society, to restore the room to its Poe-era One of the most visited wildlife refuges in the nation, The condition.
Today, while visitors can only view the room through a Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge, is located on the Virginia glass door while listening to an audio display, the Raven Society still portion of Assateague Island.
Here you will find no high rises, uses The Raven Room to initiate new members. boardwalks, or traffic.
Instead, visitors can expect to see various migratory birds, plants, and other animals along the island's 14,000+ UVA's Hidden Chemical Hearth, Charlottesville, VA acres of unspoiled beach, dunes, marsh, and maritime forest.
Located on Virginia's Eastern Shore and Virginia's only resort island, Chincoteague offers a variety of accommodations, places to Sealed behind a brick wall since the mid-1800s the chemical eat , and things to do. hearth was discovered during a renovation project in 2015.
This unearthed hearth may be the oldest instructional furnace for a chemistry course in the country.
It is a Emmet's chemistry courses. community designed for the historian and wine enthusiast in all of us.
The ruins of his wood), underground tunnels, and hidden flues. home are now a tourist destination, located on land owned by one of Virginia's first significant wineries, Barboursville Vineyards.
While there are a couple of cool things to see here, don't blink while driving through The Barbour family used the landscape around their home as it, the total area of the town is 0. miles. pastoral farmland from the mid-18th century through the mid-20th century.
To preserve the land efficiently, James Barbour rotated crops and set sheep to graze in the fields.
According to geologists, both are remnants of the interiors of the volcanoes, where the magma cooled.
Mole Hill is a thrill for the experienced climber, but not so for the more casual hiker.
You must obtain permission from the property owners at Mole Hill Cycles to climb.
The owners have you complete a waiver, they note your estimated arrival and departure times, and then provide you the physical address, granting you access to climb.
While they are a magnificent spectacle , most hikers find that they have to knock webs out of the way to pass.
Each reaches an elevation where, if you aren't an avid hiker, you may experience nausea. unique shopping experiences, countless restaurants, and historical attractions.
The owners have done a great job placing benches and picnic Smith Mountain Lake, Roanoke, VA tables along the paths where you can rest or stop for lunch, and the Virginia's biggest and most famous lake, known to locals as SML, visuals are simply spectacular.
It is an angler's haven as the lake is of soil change as you climb , and if you're lucky, stocked with striped bass and is also home to largeand smallmouth the local fauna will grace you with their presence as you listen to the bass populations, crappies, and bluegills.
Fishing charters are often echoes of the valleys and mountains around you. available through licensed guide services which provide bait, gear, and the expertise to offer a safe and enjoyable fishing experience.
Other fun activities on the water include water-skiing, wakeboarding, The Shops at Dayton Farmer's Market, Dayton, VA boating, sailing, and jet skiing.
Antiques to handmade goods – furniture makers, chocolatiers, a butcher shop, jellies, meats and cheeses, candy, toys, For the landlubbers, SML offers a family-friendly beach for wading crafts – there's something for everyone.
Oh, and lest we forget, the and swimming and several nearby golf courses. excellent café and pretzel vendor.
Since the 1980s, the animal sanctuary and educational center have continued to provide visitors with exciting attractions.
Today, the museum offers us a chance to see and learn ROANOKE – The city of Roanoke is the center of one of Virginia's about a varied collection of species, including snow leopards, cougars, largest metropolitan regions.
It boasts award-winning outdoor red wolves, red pandas, tufted deer, black hornbills, Indian crested amenities, endless trails, public art, museums, craft breweries, porcupines, and many other notable creatures.
From the Abrams place of 2,575 Confederate soldiers who died in this locality.
Creek Wetlands Preserve to Old Town Winchester's historical sites , this glorious town caters to all types of travelers.
All of Here are a couple of our favorite venues. the destinations mentioned above are open and operating as of this writing.
Judge John Handley, an Irish-American lawyer, came to live in Winchester in December 1869.
In 2001, an Isle of Wight County Museum (home of the oldest ham and extensive renovation was completed by Dennis Kowal Architects. peanut), Isle of Wight VA Gorgeous both inside and out, you will not forget this historic The Grave of Stonewall Jackson's Arm, Locust Grove VA landmark.
The Statues of Virginia Beach, Virginia Beach VA The Tombstone House, Petersburg VA Mount Hebron Cemetery, Winchester, VA In one of the state's most historic burial grounds, the lives of famous individuals and ordinary people, young and old, are When you're ready to hit the road, we invite you to revisit this remembered and honored with grave markers that date as far back article and pick a destination that you're sure to enjoy right here in as the 1760s.
Customers have come to expect free or low-cost shipping on their orders , but the reality is that small businesses often don’t have the volume to make those options viable.
And check whether you can negotiate a Know exactly what your packages weigh and what you will pay better price for buying in bulk. to ship them.
Research carriers and rates and become increase your sales by motivating customers to purchase items familiar with how shipping gets calculated.
For example, heavy that will result in free shipping. items aren’t necessarily the priciest — large ones are.
Make it easy for consumers by up more room in trucks. offering flat rate shipping, but again, make sure you’ve done • Check for volume discounts.
If your items are generally a similar size and retailer to qualify for a discount. weight, this can be easy to calculate.
Cash-out refinancing retires your existing mortgage and creates a new, first mortgage on your home.
If you own a home, you’ll have to spend money to maintain and In most cases, you won't be able to refinance your total home improve it in order to protect its value, especially if you hope to sell. value.
Depending on the type of loan you get, you will have to leave 15 percent to 20 percent in the home.
According to Time, Americans spent about $400 billion on home improvements and repairs in 2019.
Cash-out refinancing can be useful since it gives you cash without an additional loan or loan payment.
Getting the loan depends on Several types of home improvement financing are available, the amount of equity in your home and your present financial including home equity loans, a home equity line of credit , circumstances. or cash-out refinancing.
If you have a home worth $200,000 and you have $100,000 left to A home equity loan is a second loan on your house.
You can't rate, lump-sum loan with monthly payments that remain the same cash out all of that.
Let's say you have to leave 20 percent of the home for the duration of the loan term. value.
We’ve been serving the community for more than 70 years providing financial services, guidance, and personalized member service. and for We have the solutions you need with our free checking options, low rate loans, great savings rates and convenient Online and what’s Mobile Banking.
