Midge Decter The EU Google says the EU requires a notice of cookie use and says they have posted a notice.
We need to get behind assertions and look at the numbers and what they mean, or don't mean.
Here is Washington Post Columnist David Ignatius, calling for release of a timeline on the events of 11 September in Benghazi.
Labels: 2012, Benghazi, Long War, National Security Tuesday, October 30, 2012 Intervention For John, BLUF: A means of connection; tie; link.
Nice use of the term ""nexus"" by City Solicitor Christine O'Conner at tonight's City Council Meeting, at about 9:20.
Back to City Life this AM, we spent the first hour looking at foreign policy and it centered around the Mediterranean Sea, specifically Armenia, Syria, Turkey and Libya, with excursions to the former Yugoslavia.
Given the propensity of governments to allow ethnic cleansing and genocide, this is an effort to create an international norm that says other nations should step in and put an end to such activities.
People connected with this approach include former Secretary of State Madeline Albright and current United States UN Ambassador Susan Rice.
Labels: R2P City Life Thought For John, BLUF: Be careful of what you wish for.
As we recall, the German Weimar Republic was replaced by Adolph Hitler's Third Reich.
Labels: QOTD Joseph Pulitzer's School For John, BLUF: The Mainstream Media, like the rest of media, is not fair and balanced.
Labels: MSM Monday, October 29, 2012 Labeling the Opponent For John, BLUF: Some guy in a ""Right Wing"" newspaper says Obama, not Romney, is out of the mainstream on abortion.
Mostly Kad, Renee and I have been tossing back and forth the issue of abortion.
There are serious issues involved and serious people can take opposing positions.
I think I may have been unkind in comparing Kad to Princeton's Professor Peter Singer, both because Prof Singer teaches at an Ivy League School and because Prof Singer is an extremist.
Timothy Carney’s column in the Washington Examiner explains why it’s the Obama, not Romney, campaign that is extreme on the issue of abortion.
It would only make abortion something that would be decided state-by-state rather than imposed from the Supreme Court down, in a one-size-fits-all solution for the country.
But they don’t necessarily, as a political matter, think that if Roe is overruled, their state legislatures should then make abortion unavailable.
The constitutional right ssue and the “legal availability” issue are apples and oranges.
Labels: 2012, Abortion, Culture, Ethics, Human Rights, Obama, Romney Edger Allan Poe Votes For John, BLUF: Voter fraud has a long history in these United States.
Labels: 2012, History, These United States, Voting Sunday, October 28, 2012 The Economic Debate For John, BLUF: The costumes change, but the economic questions stay the same.
Toward the end of January, the Smithsonian will conduct a debate between Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton and Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson, on how to fix the economy—in 1790.
If you are down in the DC area around that time it might be an interesting event.
The challenges facing America after independence resonate with those facing many governments today.
Beset by unpaid debt, a crippled economy, and growing popular discontent, the national government under the Articles of Confederation had proven inadequate to chart a road to recovery.
The new federal Constitution, adopted in 1787, brought fresh hope as well as bitter disagreement among political leaders.
Two of George Washington’s first-term cabinet members, Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson, came to vigorously dislike each other as they clashed on questions of politics and policy, and no issue proved more divisive than the role of the federal government in the fledgling nation’s economy.
A Smithsonian Debate brings these men and their conflicting political philosophies to life in a lively, interactive event—in which the audience plays a key role.
Embracing an expansive view of the powers of the new Constitution, Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton proposed innovative programs to stimulate economic recovery and to create an “energetic” national government.
Secretary of State Jefferson pushed in a different direction, searching for a sustainable balance of power between the central government and the states.
Their debates and disputes highlight differences over policy, the meaning of the Constitution, and the nature of federalism itself—arguments that continue in earnest to this day. 6:45 to 7:45m.
Deliberation Enjoy a glass of wine while developing questions to pose to the debaters. 8:15 to 9m.
Decision Debaters respond to audience questions; a show-of-hands vote selects the winner.
Labels: DC, Economics, History Krugman on the Election For John, BLUF: Princeton Professor Paul Krugman says President Obama showed ""true grit"" re the auto bailout and the bin Laden takedown and thus will win.
Earlier today I was trying to recall the name Paul Krugman as I made a comment about Keynesian Economics, but I couldn't.
I could visualize him, beard and all, and I knew his name began with a K, but it was escaping me and I didn't have time to track it down.
Then, later, I checked the Althouse blog and there it was, a blog post on Professor Krugman, nobel laureate.
Under the title ""Fortune Favors the Brave"" he predicts that President Obama's ""gutsy"" decisions on the auto industry and Osama bin Laden will help propel the President to reelection.
Labels: 2012, California, MSM, Obama Food Conference in Lowell For John, BLUF: Another successful Homelessness Conference in Lowell.
And the Conference, our 7th in a series on ""Keys to Ending Homelessness"", was a success.
As I left a number of people were remaining behind to network and talk about the issues brought to the surface during the conference.
Two women said to me that they wished for more time between the breakout sessions.
Ms Linda King, a Community Development Specialist from Lowell's Department of Planning and Development, did an excellent job setting this up.
Not only were things ready, but she hung around early on to make sure they stayed on track.
I am a dogsbody on the Homelessness Conference and Education Committee.
Thus, this is just one blogger's opinions and does not represent the official position of the City of Lowell, UMass Lowell, the Commonwealth or the Nation.
Labels: Homelessness, Lowell Fiscal Cliff Divers For John, BLUF: There is no national concensus on how to fix a recession, and no concensus amongst economists to help us.
The very notion of a “fiscal cliff” suggests that the country is approaching a calamitous drop-off at the end of the year — and it would be tantamount to suicide to jump off.
But a contingent of policy wonks and Democrats insist that letting the Dec. deadline come and go — thus triggering automatic tax increases and spending cuts — could produce the best outcome for the country.
Once the tax hikes have kicked in, the reasoning goes, Republicans would be hard-pressed to roll them all back and would have to accept a deal on taming the deficit that contains more new tax revenue than GOP lawmakers want.
Later in the story is the acronym CBPP, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Labels: DC, Debt, Economics, The Economy Saturday, October 27, 2012 Race Relations For John, BLUF: Race relations are not getting better, as one might have hoped after nearly four years of the Obama Administration.
Racial attitudes have not improved in the four years since the United States elected its first black president, an Associated Press poll finds, as a slight majority of Americans now express prejudice toward blacks whether they recognize those feelings or not.
This strikes me as an incomplete survey in that it doesn't talk about the attitudes of minorities, only Caucasians.
Here is a poll by United States News and World Report, saying that over the last four years Blacks have come to feel less empowered.
While the economy is Job 1 for a victorious Romney or Obama, working the empowerment of minorities is pretty close as Job 2.
Coupled with that should be improving the way various Americans feel about other Americans—other Americans who don't look like them or have the same background and attitudes.
You know, how people from Harvard feel about people from some Cow College in Idaho.
Labels: Culture, These United States Benghazi, the Administration and the Video For John, BLUF: The Administration made some possibly wrong decisions on 11 September, that got four of our people killed.
The big problem is that they missed the causes because they focused on some dumb video.
Over at Military Dot Com we have a post on testimony by SecDef Leon Panetta and Chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Martin Dempsey.
While forces in the Med were ready, ""it was 9/11 everywhere in the world"" and the military had to be on the alert for a potential crisis in other areas, said Gen.
We understood there was a danger of riots or worse on the eleventh anniversary of the attack on the Twin Towers and the Pentagon.
Someone in the know said that an Embassy in Khartoum, Sudan, was burned, possibly the German.
I am not sure I would go that far, except to say that the Administration has not yet walked the cat back on the video.
Unless and until they do that, including within the Administration itself, we will be going down wrong paths in our relationships with those Arab nations impacted by the Arab Spring.
I give the Administration that they had decisions to make and they did the best they could, given the circumstances, but the outcomes were bad.
What I will not give the Administration is a pass on blaming it on ""the video"" and then instigating the arrest of the producer, who would otherwise have not come to the attention of the local Dog Catcher, let alone serious law enforcement.
Labels: 2012, Administration, Benghazi, Intelligence, Long War, Terrorism Friday, October 26, 2012 Determining Pregnancy For John, BLUF: The Army doesn't knowingly deploy pregnant soldiers.
This Spring the 12th Combat Aviation Brigade, a helicopter unit based near Ansbach, Germany, deployed subordinate units to Afghanistan. it being the Army, there were female soldiers.
To the surprise of one soldier, and her chain of command, she delivered herself of a baby boy some time over the Summer.
The question on some minds was why she was in Afghanstan in the first place.
Army regulations require all female soldiers undergo a urine pregnancy test 30 days before deployment, and those who test positive are to be referred for further evaluation, according to a statement from the Europe Regional Medical Command.
The Army doesn't deploy pregnant soldiers, or at least works to avoid it.
Labels: Life, Military Defining Life For John, BLUF: We have a big murky area that is our consensus as to when life begins.
Washington Post Columnist Sally Quinn takes on the brouhaha over Indiana Republican Senate candidate Richard Mourdock, and his view that life begins at conception and all life comes from God.
Remember, in a few days those readers from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts will get to vote on when life becomes no longer supportable as life.
I write that with a level of trepidation for what my future might hold.
Labels: Culture, Life There Goes The First Amendment For John, BLUF: Tufts, down the street, has banned a Christian group for wanting to be Christian.
Tufts Christian Fellowship has lost its official recognition as a Tufts Community Union student group over alleged discriminatory clauses in the group’s constitutional requirements for its leaders.
The group’s Vision and Planning Team failed to make revisions to their governing document that would bring it in line with the TCU Constitution’s non-discriminatory clause, Judiciary Chair Adam Sax, a senior, said.
Labels: First Amendment Thursday, October 25, 2012 Ripped Off For John, BLUF: Not everything Amazon sells is good value for money.
About a year ago my wife decided we would take a Fiction Writing Course at UMass Lowell Continuing Ed.
Among other items, I wrote a short story on Exercise ABLE ARCHER 83, which you can look up on Wikipedia.
So, when a classmate from the course recently mentioned that there was a book out on ABLE ARCHER, I went to Amazon and ordered it.
The authors, Messrs Jesse Russell and Ronald Cohn copied the above mentioned Wikipedia article, plus Wikipedia articles on NATO, the Soviet RYAN missile warning system and the United States.
So, I basically spent a Double Sawbuck for a nicely printed trade sized version of a couple of Wikipedia articles.
As we all know, Greater Lowell Technical High School lost a Lowell School Committee member, Michael Lenzi, to resignation.
Mr Lenzi has moved to his new home, in Dracut and his former seat is in play.
Today, at about 4:30 PM, I handed my application to be considered for the seat and my one page resume to Ms Jenn Myers, the Mayor's aide.
Other active applicants include former GLTHS School Committee Member and Chair, Mr David Lefarriere, and Property Appraiser and Pawtucketville activist for youth, Mr Ray Boutin.
One in six Americans are in poverty today—the highest rate in a generation.
Taking a new approach is not only risky, but it means choosing between alternatives.
On the other hand, government collected statistics say things are not getting better.
Labels: Congress, Economics, Janesville, Poverty, Ryan St Crispin Day For John, BLUF: Lowell is better, stronger, for being a band of diverse brothers.
Thanks to The InstaPundit for reminding us that this is St Crispin Day.
From this day to the ending of the world, But we in it shall be rememberedWe few, we happy few, we band of brothers; Shakespeare had a way with words.
Democratic intellectuals want you to think that Government is inherently good.
Regardless of who wins the presidential election, we already know now how most of the electoral map will be colored, which will be close to the way it has been colored for decades.
Broadly speaking, the Southern and Western desert and mountain states will vote for the candidate who endorses an aggressive military, a role for religion in public life, laissez-faire economic policies, private ownership of guns and relaxed conditions for using them, less regulation and taxation, and a valorization of the traditional family.
Northeastern and most coastal states will vote for the candidate who is more closely aligned with international cooperation and engagement, secularism and science, gun control, individual freedom in culture and sexuality, and a greater role for the government in protecting the environment and ensuring economic equality.
I was OK at the beginning, well, except for the idea that people in so-called red states don't believe in science, or that Republicans don't believe in science.
I have seen some progressive arguments that make me think they deny Darwin.
But, after I got further into the article I thought it started to contradict itself.
Then I thought it moved into a belief in the inherent goodness of Government.
So, at the end, the author seems to reject the idea that the People are sovereign, and I rejected it.
I am from Western Pennsylvania and am a ""bitter clinger"" and left high school and California when it was still the Old California, before Orange County went Democrat.
Labels: 2012, These United States ""Can't We All Just Get Along"" For John, BLUF: You can pick your friends, but you can't pick your relatives.
In the area of getting your values right, we have a small failure on the part of Actress Halle Berry.
On the Jay Leno show she was asked about a genealogist telling her she was related to former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin.
And, in a very Palinesque sort of way she adds a superfluous ""I mean"" at the beginning of the sentence.
If you look at the side-by-side photos in this article they do have that ""separated at birth"" look.
Regards — Cliff ♠ Turns out Sarah Louise is two and a half years older than her sister Marie Halle.
Labels: Civility, Culture, Hollywood Tuesday, October 23, 2012 The Long War For John, BLUF: The war on terror has been going on since you were a young man.
Next year this date will be the Thirtieth Anniversary of the bombing of the Marine Barracks in Beirut—and also the Barracks used by the French 1st Parachute Regiment, also part of the International Peacekeeping Force.
Labels: Long War Justice Elena Kagan Interviewed For John, BLUF: Political opposites can get along in private, but you knew that.
She will be hunting antelope this coming weekend with fellow Associate Justice Antonin Scalia.
Labels: SCOTUS Chris Matthews and ""The Video"" For John, BLUF: Regarding the Benghazi Attack , forget the video.
The problem is, Chris Matthews has it wrong, as even the President and his supporters are saying it was a planned terrorist attack.
The compounding problem is that the video meme leads to bad judgements and bad decisions.
I put aside the Constitutional issues to focus on the focus on the video early on.
Like in an accident investigation, a too early obvious cause can prevent us from looking deeper.
With the video in hand we didn't need to consider the Eleventh Anniversary aspect, or the demands for release of the Blind Sheik or the Egyptian internal political issues, which can be more safely played out at the United States Embassy than the Presidential Palace, or the attack in Benghazi as being a planned terror event.
And, the video meme was so powerful it still shows up from time to time,g., the above Chris Matthews item from yesterday—40 some days after the event.
If that video meme sits in the back of peoples' minds it could well distort future United States Foreign Policy, to our detriment.
Thus, the importance of keeping an open mind during the first 24 hours of a crisis and the importance of having professional dissenters.
And then there is the problem pointed out by former Assistant Secretary of Defense and Writer Bing West.
Our Ambassador, Chris Stevens, took a calculated risk and almost pulled it off.
He understood that peace and stability wasn't going to come with him isolated in his Embassy in Tripoli.
He was gutsy and that is the kind of men and women we need as out Ambassadors.
Martin Burke, the Republican in the race for the 17th Middlesex Rep District, has a web site up.
Per the OSCE:Although a total of 32 presidential candidates will be on the ballots across the country, only four have attainted ballot access in a sufficient number of states to be potentially elected.
Labels: 2012, Voting The Sun Recommends For John, BLUF: The Sun goes for Romney.
Today's edition of The Sun has an editorial endorsing Governor Mitt Romney for President.
Today I happened to run into the Editor, Jim Campanini, and told him that it was a good editorial, but it wouldn't change my vote.
Labels: Culture George McGovern RIP For John, BLUF: A true WWII hero, George McGvern, has passed away.
He had lived a full life—combat bomber pilot, PhD college professor, legislator and Presdental Candidate.
In her blog post on his passing, Law Professor Ann Athouse notes that Senator McGovern was her first vote for president.
Today I am not sure how a McGovern election would have made a difference, except maybe for the outcome of the 73 War.
We still would have had the Khmer Rouge and still would have had 20,000 Cambodia-Americans in Lowell, and a like number in Long Beach, California, where I voted for Dick Nixon over George McGovern.
The Republicans portrayed Mr McGovern as a cowardly left-winger, a threat to the military and the free-market economy and outside the mainstream of American thought.
Fair or not, he never lived down the image of a liberal loser, and many Democrats long accused him of leading the party astray.
Labels: Uncharacterized Grading the Presidents by Alma Mater For John, BLUF: Non-Ivy Leaguers do better as President than Ivy Leaguers.
Over at National Review Mr Fred Schwartz talks about the impact of the Ivy League Universities on the presidency and presidential performance.
Unofficially, of course, the Ivy League, even avant la lettre, has for centuries been a symbol of everything Middle America hates: rich, snobbish, exclusive, Eastern, and too smart for its own good.
I don't think I can rightly judge this, in that I am from a small trade school in the foothills of the Rockies.
Labels: Education, POTUS Saturday, October 20, 2012 Republican Rally Sunday—UMass Lowell For John, BLUF: Republican Rally Sunday near Marty's Office.
Tomorrow, October 21st is the largest rally of the year with Senator Scott Brown, Senator Kelly Ayotte and Congressional Candidate Jon Golnik.
Doors open at 10:30 am and the rally will begin shortly after at 11:00 am.
If you would like to join us earlier we will have volunteers standing outside the rally with signs at 10:00 am.
Labels: 2012, Kennedy Seat Paul Ryan For Congress For John, BLUF: Congressman Paul Ryan, the Republican Veep Nominee is also running for his seat in the United States House.
Nothing to see here; just move along.Apparently Congressman Paul Ryan is still running for his seat in the United States Congress.
At least according to United States News and World Report, the online version.
Earlier in the day my wife asked how long he would hold his seat and I said until the 2nd or 3rd of January, when the new Congress convenes.
On Inauguration Day he will just move from the House of Representatives to the United States Senate, assuming he wins both races.
Looks like it will be observed on Monday, the 21st, which is also the Observation of Martin Luther King's Birthday.
There is no in-lieu-of holiday for employees who are not regularly scheduled to work on Inauguration Day.
In addition, employees for whom January 21, 2013, is the legal public holiday for the Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., are not entitled to an in-lieu-of holiday for Inauguration Day if the day selected for the public observance of the inauguration of the President is January 21, 2013.
Labels: 2012, VP, Wisconsin Workplace Violence For John, BLUF: The Fort Hood shooting, from November 2009, is considered, by the Federal Government, an act of workplace violence, rather than the act of terrorism the rest of us think it is.
Mr Morrissey references an item in The Stars and Stripes, linked to here.
Almost immediately, evidence arose that Hasan had been in contact with the late and unlamented al-Qaeda leader Anwar al-Awlaki to discuss the legitimacy of conducting jihad within the American military, a scandal that prompted questions about why the military hadn’t intervened prior to the massacre.
Most people assumed that was enough to consider the massacre a terrorist attack, including me.
Because the incident is not considered an act of terrorism, the victims do not get combat-related special compensation that provides disability pay for medically retired servicemembers.
Labels: Administration, Long War, Terrorism Friday, October 19, 2012 Another Homelessness Conference For John, BLUF: This coming Friday Lowell is hosting another Conference on the problem of Homelessness, this time on food security.
I only saw the reruns and I know that the President didn't give a straight answer and that Moderator Candy Crowley's intervention was a mistake and she got her facts wrong—and she basically admitted that, after the fact.
Worse, the Administration has not repented of claiming it is the fault of the video, Innocence of Muslims, and no one is standing up for the First Amendment in this case, including the Mainstream Media, which depends on the First Amendment more than most.
Labels: 2012, First Amendment, Humor, Intelligence, Libya, Long War, Obama, Romney Economy Discussion on WCAP For John, BLUF: The number of people actually holding a job in our Commnwealth is again going down.
He gets beyond the unemployment number to talk about changes in the workforce, both those entering and those leaving, because they are discouraged.
He makes the good point that the unemployment rate may go up as the economy turns around, as previously discouraged workers re-enter the work force.
Sadly, that situation does not explain our current increase in the jobless rate.
Labels: 2012, The Economy Commonwealth Employment For John, BLUF: We are still losing jobs here in the Commonwealth—fewer people working.
Today's Boston Herald has an article on rising Massachusetts unemployment rate.
The Massachusetts unemployment rate rose to 6. percent for September -up from 6. percent in August -even as a separate survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated that the Bay State added 5,100 jobs for the month.
Yes, maybe that is the situation, but my concern is overall employment numbers.
Here comes the Bureau of Labor Statistics with a chart for the last few years.
The numbers are squished together, month to month, but it is clear that today's employment is not as high as it was in December 2006 or January 2008.
AL GORE’S NEWSPAPER ENDORSES ROMNEY: “To say this endorsement by The Tennessean is an eyebrow raiser is an understatement.
This is the same newspaper where former Vice President Al Gore got his start in journalism, that endorsed Obama in 2008.
A long time ago the term Weapon of Mass Destruction meant a nuclear device, an A-Bomb or H-Bomb.
Then the Soviets talked us into including Chemical and Biological weapons.
The accused, Mr Quazi Mohammad Rezwanul Ahsan Nafis, came to our shores in January, on a student visa.
But, to the complaint, if one thousand pounds of explosives is a WMD, what is a small nuclear device at 10 kt of explosive force.
I would note that this terminology being used by police and prosecutors comes to us thanks to the carelessness of the United States Congress.
I am sure our delegation strongly opposed it, but somebody voted for it.
Specifically, the definition includes “any destructive device,” and that phrase in turn is defined in a related statute to include just about any explosive device or propellant-based projective weapon one can imagine.
None of that, of course, is a complete justification for the FBI and DOJ to put emphasis on the WMD phrase in discussing the incident, no matter how accurate it is as a description of the charge itself.
Labels: Nuclear Weapons, Terrorism, WMD Wednesday, October 17, 2012 New NYT CEO For John, BLUF: Once you start a witch hunt you never know where it will end up.
We should, of course, assume that Mr Thompson was clean on this and not involved in a cover-up, but still, it is a bit awkward.
Labels: MSM Another View on the Debate For John, BLUF: Opinions are like noses and they have to be counted until one has a majority.
As I mentioned in a previous post, I didn't watch the Presidential Debate last evening.
I was doing homework for my Saturday morning class at UMass Lowell, Sociology of Genocide.
Here is the lede:The skinny bookworm who sits in the front row can duke it out after all.
Then, he comes out like Jake LaMotta, eyes flashing, gloves up, his malicious intent plain for all to see.
Like Muhammad Ali, after being embarrassed in his first bout with Leon Spinks, he had put in the hours skipping rope, and rehearsed his combinations until he could unleash them at will, from all angles.
Mr Cassidy did think that Candy Crowley had it right when she cut off Governor Romney over Libya.
That seems to be what Ace of Spades thought when he posted a video in which Ms Crowley seems to suggest that Governor Romney was, in fact, correct.
Labels: 2012, MSM ""Terrorism"" Case Overthrown For John, BLUF: The Congress shall not criminalize past actions—for our protection from the Government.
From the InstaPundit we have a comment on the overturn of the conviction of Mr Salim Hamdan, Osama bin Laden's driver.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia has overturned Salim Hamdan’s conviction for providing “material support” to terrorists, including his boss, Osama bin Laden, for whom Hamdan served as a driver.
The court reasoned that during Hamdan’s tenure as OBL’s driver , providing “material support” to terrorists was not a recognized crime under the Law of War.
While Congress passed a statute in 2006 that made material support to terrorism a war crime, it could not have retroactive application.
The court made it clear, however, that under existing Supreme Court precedent, Mr Hamdan and other enemy combatants can be detained indefinitely, until such time as United States hostilities with al Qaeda have ended.
Labels: Constitution, Long War Tuesday, October 16, 2012 Interagency Crisis Process Reviewed For John, BLUF: When it is a crisis, everyone gets involved.
Someone once told me that when Kim Jung-il got a cold all the military staff in Korea reported to the Command Post.
No one wants to miss a crisis and a chance to earn a medal or avoid condemnation for not being responsive.
Readers need reassurance that the United States uses an inter-agency approach to crisis management all the time every time.
All relevant resources are applied to evaluate the situation, limit damage, establish control and stability and restore normality.
That is the way national security crises always are managed in Washington.
In the 4 decades between 1970 and 2010, there never was a time when an American diplomat was injured by hostile action, an embassy or consulate attacked, an aircraft shot down, a ship attacked, an official attacked or kidnapped or many other lesser incidents, especially when they involved damage to United States official persons or property, in which the J3 and J2 in the Pentagon failed to set up a crisis action team or group.
Similar teams or cells would be created in the responsible military commands and every agency involved in national security affairs.
During a crisis, all crisis action teams issue situation updates to the national command authority and to each other, often hourly at first.
The White House Situation Room is always in the loop, if not the real time crisis management clearing house, for all reporting on the crisis, in support of the National Security Council staff and the inter agency crisis management process.
An attack on an ambassador is an attack on the United States and the United States national security enterprise always takes that as its starting point for crisis management.
Every agency is involved plus the military commands, not just State Department, for example.
News coverage of the Benghazi attack does not reflect the basics of United States national security crisis management practice nor the diligence and competence of the people who make it work and would have been on duty on 9-11-2012.
So, either the system fell apart after Mr John McCreary retired from DoD or we aren't getting the full story about Benghazi last month.
It is an interesting read and suggests that at some levels we were closer to the use of nuclear weapons that we supposed.
In particular, there is a link to a three page Top Secret memo from Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Maxwell D Taylor, to the President, ""Evaluation of the Effect on United States Operational Plans of Soviet Military Equipment Introduced into Cuba,"" dated 2 November 1962.
One gets the impression of people groping for a good answer, on both sides, except maybe for Cuban President Fidel Castro.
Baron Dobbs asserts that we learned the wrong lessons and those wrong lessons have misinformed us ever since.
In the latest volume of his acclaimed biography of Lyndon B Johnson, Robert A Caro repeats a long-standing but erroneous myth about the Cuban missile crisis.
Drawing on early accounts of the crisis, he describes a confrontation on Oct., 1962, between American destroyers and Soviet ships carrying nuclear missiles to Cuba.
According to Mr Caro, the Soviet vessels were “within a few miles” of the blockade line, but turned away at the last moment.
The “eyeball to eyeball” imagery made for great drama , but it has contributed to some of our most disastrous foreign policy decisions, from the escalation of the Vietnam War under Johnson to the invasion of Iraq under George W Bush.
But, the point is that while leaders on both sides were looking for a way to back away from nuclear confrontation, the rest of us were learning that hanging tough was the answer.
Kennedy was certainly bracing for an “eyeball to eyeball” moment, but it never happened.
There is now plenty of evidence that Kennedy — like Khrushchev — was a lot less steely-eyed than depicted in the initial accounts of the crisis, which were virtually dictated by the White House.
Tape-recorded transcripts of White House debates and notes from participants show that Kennedy was prepared to make significant concessions, including a public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for American missiles in Turkey and possibly the surrender of the United States naval base at Guantánamo Bay.
And, there is the reference to the President having recently read the over-rated The Guns of August, one account of the run-up to World War One, by Barbara W Tuchman.
But, the key lesson to be learned is that mistakes will be made by statesmen and others.
Labels: DC, History, War Hillary Takes the Fall For John, BLUF: Hillary taking the fall doesn't answer the deeper questions about where we need to go from here.
I admit to being a bit confused by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton saying she was the one responsible regarding the attack on our Consulate in Benghazi, which resulted in the death of four Americans, including our Ambassador, Chris Stevens.
Further, this doesn't get to the most fundamental question, which is how we should view the demonstrations on 11 September.Where they about that video?—not likely.Where they general anti-Americanism?—there is that out there, and it was the anniversary of 9/11, back in 2001, but it would not be the key point.Where they about economic problems in various places?—now we are getting warm.Where they about who will run Egypt and other MENA nations?—I think we are on to something.
There are serious issues in the Middle East and North Africa and blaming some 13 minute amateur video isn't going to solve them.
Further, the unrest in the MENA area could boil over into scapegoating, ethnic cleansing and worse.
Labels: Administration, DC, Long War, MENA Monday, October 15, 2012 Althouse on Warhol For John, BLUF: Life is complicated, complex and confusing.
At the Althouse blog is a short post on Andy Warhol and his sexuality and his spirituality.
It is about Free Speech, the First Amendment, the ability to tell your neighbor he or she is ugly.
Buba opened the door to the issue during a Sun-sponsored debate last week against Democratic incumbent Sen.
He brought a Chick-fil-A drink cup to the debate, and placed it on the table in front of him.
But he said he's more concerned with the 1st Amendment right to free speech.
This summer, crowds converged upon Chick-fil-A's 1,600-plus locations, including Burlington, in a show of solidarity.
Boston Mayor Thomas Menino condemned Cathy's position against same-sex marriage while adding Chick-fil-A restaurants wouldn't be welcome.
I said that we were talking about contracts and that as contracts, everyone should have to go to City Hall or the Town Clerk to execute the contract, in public.
But, the Chick-fil-A brouhaha got out of control when public officials started talking about banning the Restaurants.
While that might be the Chicago Way, it is not what our Constitution and the better angels of our nature call for.
The Constitution for public officials who try to repress a person's right to free speech and the ""better angels"" for those not in public office who try to suppress that person's operations.
If you don't like it, don't watch it, but Government Officials should not be trying to suppress it.
Usually these Sun links die within a fortnight, forcing readers to go to some pay for view site.
Frustration over local problems were the basis for protests and the video was like a brick laying in the street, picked up to throw through a plate glass window.
Labels: 2012, First Amendment Ideology and Economics For John, BLUF: North Korea's rigid ideology means limited development and increased hunger.
We skip over to the Korean Peninsula to look at contrasting systems, North and South Korea.
As someone noted:At the end of WWII North Korea had virtually all of the industry on the Korean Peninsula including all of the electric power generation.
It implemented a set of strongly collectivist policies while the South, after Syngman Rhee was ousted by Park Chung Hee, put in a bit more balanced system.
Hunger situation in North Korea this year worsened from the 1990s despite considerable amount of international aid to the communist nation, a Washington-based food institute showed Saturday.
The 2012 Global Hunger Index published by the International Food Policy Research Institute said hunger remains a serious problem worldwide, with alarming levels in some countries.
North Korea's hunger situation was at the ""serious level,"" the report said, with its GHI standing at 19 points, higher than that of 15. in 1997.
It is North Korean Communism that helps create the problem, but also the ideology of Juche.
The people must have independence in thought and politics, economic self-sufficiency, and self-reliance in defense.
Policy must reflect the will and aspirations of the masses and employ them fully in revolution and construction.
Methods of revolution and construction must be suitable to the situation of the country.
The most important work of revolution and construction is molding people ideologically as communists and mobilizing them to constructive action.
The Juche outlook requires absolute loyalty to the revolutionary party and leader.
And, today, it is Kim Jong-il's grandson, Kim Jong-eun, and, sadly, little has changed.
Labels: Capitalism, Economics, Korea Sunday, October 14, 2012 Norodom Sihanouk For John, BLUF: Former King of Cambodia dead at 89.
Here is the period that interests me, as my second tour in Southeast Asia was mostly spent fighting the Khmer Rouge—unsuccessfully, as it turned out.
The result was a victory for the Khmer Rouge and ""Year Zero"" in Cambodia, as Dictator Pol Pot waged a campaign against those who might provide leadership for a counter-revolution.
Convinced that the United States had been behind the overthrow, King Sihanouk allied himself with the Khmer Rouge at the urging of his Chinese patrons, giving the Cambodian Communists his prestige and enormous popularity.
Their victory in 1975 brought the ruthless Pol Pot to power, with King Sihanouk serving, for the first year, as the figurehead president until he was placed under house arrest and fell into a deep depression.
Over the next four years, the Khmer Rouge regime led to the death of 1. million people and nearly destroyed the country.
Today many Cambodians live in Lowell, and in Long Beach, California, where I graduated from High School some 42 years ago.
The earth hasn't been warming for 16 years and who knows where it will go from here.
Professor Judith Curry, head of the climate science department at Georgia Tech makes just that point.
Where the reporter, David Rose, makes it interesting is a slide from climate models to economic models and asks if they are not also unreliable.
So, he asks, are we going down some expensive path without any real basis in solid knowledge about both the climate system and the economic system.
Every quarter, statistics on the economy’s output and models of future performance have a huge impact on our lives.
They trigger a range of policy responses from the Bank of England and the Treasury, and myriad decisions by private businesses.
Yet it has steadily become apparent since the 2008 crash that both the statistics and the modelling are extremely unreliable.
To plan the future around them makes about as much sense as choosing a wedding date three months’ hence on the basis of a long-term weather forecast.
The most depressing feature of this debate is that anyone who questions the alarmist, doomsday scenario will automatically be labelled a climate change ‘denier’, and accused of jeopardising the future of humanity.
But the evidence is beginning to suggest that it may be happening much slower than the catastrophists have claimed – a conclusion with enormous policy implications.
And, to add to your interest in reading, here is a post that looks at the 40 year old solution to the then coming ice age.
I am sure they have new computers, but their main frame in 1974 was most helpful.
Not a very nice person and he doesn't know how to play well with others.
The Battle Hastings For John, BLUF: The Norman Conquest of England, 14 October 1066, changed our language, for the better.
I forgot that this is the date of the Battle of Hastings, when William the Bastard became William the Conqueror and changed world history.
Labels: England, Freedom, History A Retired Diplomat Comments For John, BLUF: It appears the White House doesn't trust the American People enough to update the Benghazi Story as facts emerge, but belive they have to stick to their original story, no matter what.
Some may be aware that Right Side has taken a jaundiced view of the meme that a 13 minute video out of LA County sparked all the demonstrations in the MENA area, and is especially skeptic of the idea the video had anything to do with the Benghazi Incident.
Now comes a retired Foreign Service Officer with a blog post questioning the Administration's viewpoint.
He threw the entire intel community and the State Department to the wolves.
He claimed that the Embassy in Libya did not ask for extra security, and that the White House was told the attack resulted from an anti-video demonstration gone awry, and not from a terrorist action.
The leaks will come fast and furious to show how the White House was informed and did nothing.
There are now press reports that a United States done was overhead for at least part of the attack; the State Department's Charlene Lamb already has testified that she was monitoring the attack in ""near real time""; we know that the Embassy had requested additional security; and the CIA and State already have made known that they never concluded that the attack was anything other than a terrorist attack.
Nobody has been able to explain the lack of White House response to an attack that went on for at least six hours.
Given his experience out in the economy, competing for profits, it is possible that Governor Romney understands the need to make this part of the government apparatus work.
Labels: 2012, Administration, Bidenisms, Foreign Policy, Libya Voting Time For John, BLUF: Early afternoon is the best time to vote, at least in the Northern Virginia area, but probably here also.
Someone Down in Virginia sent along this EMail note:There was an article on the WTOP web-site about the best time to vote this November 6th.
Please tell all your retired friends to resist the urge to come and vote before breakfast.
The actual best time to vote is after a long, leisurely group lunch, before that afternoon nap.
In Virginia voters will also be asked to consider two Constitutional questions.&nbsp In Fairfax County there will also be 4 Bond issues.
If you wish to vote in the electronic machine, please know how you want to vote before you get there—reading the ballot on the machine can be tedious.&nbsp The issues involved in one of the Constitutional questions are not straightforward.
Contrary to the belief of many, the optically scanned ballots are just as reliable as the electronic machines.We too will face ballot initiatives and it is best to have digested them before you show at the polling place.
But, very important is that absentee voting is not just for those out of state anymore.
And, if you have any questions, check at the Elections Office in City Hall or call a local Lowell Election Commissioner.
Labels: 2012, Voting Saturday, October 13, 2012 VP Debate Update For John, BLUF: Vice President Joe Biden got it wrong regarding exemptions to mandatory providing of contraction for employees.
Apparantly the Vice Presidential debate this last week contained an error in fact.
The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops took exception to this comment:With regard to the assault on the Catholic Church, let me make it absolutely clear.
No religious institution—Catholic or otherwise, including Catholic social services, Georgetown hospital, Mercy hospital, any hospital—none has to either refer contraception, none has to pay for contraception, none has to be a vehicle to get contraception in any insurance policy they provide.
That is a fact.The Bishops, through their spokesperson, says that is not a fact.
That exemption was made final in February and does not extend to ""Catholic social services, Georgetown hospital, Mercy hospital, any hospital,"" or any other religious charity that offers its services to all, regardless of the faith of those served.And so it goes, as we count down to 6 November.
Labels: 2012, Bidenisms, First Amendment, Health Care, Religion Campaign Insults For John, BLUF: The use of derogatory terms based upon gender need to be vetted carefully.
Martha McSally, Colonel, USAF And she is running in Arizona, where a terrible tragedy occurred back in January of 2011 and we all agreed to a new civility.
And, way back in 2001 she did sue Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld over the requirement to wear an Abaya while traveling off base in Saudi Arabia.
Labels: 2012, Aviation, Civility Friday, October 12, 2012 Deterring Iran For John, BLUF: We went after Japan's economy in 1941 and they turned on us and attacked Pearl Harbor and our bases in the Philippines.
From the debate last evening, the VP suggested that given Iran's economy is in collapse we don't have to be panicked about an Iranian nuclear weapon.
I am in favor of doing what we can to educate the Iranians on the consequences of a nuclear detonation and then telling them that if they employ nuclear weapons we will respond in kind, only more so.
Labels: 2012, Bidenisms, Iran, Nuclear Weapons Unintended Consequences For John, BLUF: Ford Motors benefitted from GM $49.
Over at the InstaPundit Professor Glenn Reynolds is sharing his blogging duties while on vacation.
A new Rasmussen survey of consumer sentiment finds that a clear majority of those interviewed are more favorably disposed to buying a Ford product because the famous automaker did NOT go hat-in-hand to Washington for a bailout in 2008, as did General Motors and Chrysler.
Labels: Bidenisms, Culture, Economics, First Amendment Thursday, October 11, 2012 Walter Duranty Prize For John, BLUF: NYT Foreign Correspondent Walter Duranty received the Pulizer Prize in 1932 while submitting FALSE reporting out of the Soviet Union.
Labels: MSM Shooting and Aiming For John, BLUF: Regarding the Benghazi attack, Romney was right from the get-go.
Erika Johnsen, over at Hot Air, talks about the evolving story regarding the events of 11 September 2012.
The title is a reference to the accusation that Governor Romney spoke too quickly about the events in Egypt and Libya.
I believe Governor Romney hit the target in his statement, and he hit the target because he instinctively stood up for American principles, like Free Speech, and for the integrity of our Diplomatic Missions.
I'm sorry, here is the view of Rep Debbie Wasserman Schultz —just because it was wrong desn't mean it was false.
Interviewer Piers Morgan was having trouble with that concept and when CNN is having trouble, so are others.
