It was events in and around Cuba that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war in 1962.
BACKGROUND Before 1959, the USA had many troops stationed in Cuba and had invested large amounts of money.
The country had been run by a dictator called General Batista who was supported by the United States government.
American businesses made huge profits in Cuba, and so the President supplied Batista with weapons to keep him in power.
However, as Batista’s rule became increasingly brutal, the United States government withdrew support.
As a result of his brutality, in January 1959 Batista and his government were overthrown by a Communist revolution.
He was told that there was a secret CIA plot to invade Cuba and overthrown Castro.
On April 17th, 1500 anti-Castro rebels landed at the Bay of Pigs on the southern coast of Cuba.
The invaders were armed and supplied by the USA, and the CIA was confident that other anti-Castro Cubans would join them to overthrow the Communist government.
They couldn’t imagine that Castro’s Communist regime could be popular with the people, and so the invasion would give the Cuban population the chance to get rid of Castro.
The Cuban army had easily defeated the rebels, and so Castro won even more popularity.
Secondly, the Cubans now saw the USA as an active threat to their country, and so Castro asked Khrushchev and the USSR to help defend Cuba.
Source B is from a speech made by the Cuban revolutionary Che Guevara, talking about the results of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Read Source B In your own words, explain Che Guevara’s opinion of the Bay of Pigs.
Seeking protection from future American invasions, Castro turned to Nikita Khrushchev and the USSR for protection.
In the summer, the CIA reported that Soviet ships were headed for the island.
At the docks, Cubans were thrown out of their homes as Soviet troops guarded the ships as they unloaded their cargo.
Spies in Cuba had sent in reports of lorries carrying large objects covered in tarpaulins, and other claimed to have seen huge missiles being set up.
The USSR denied sending nuclear missiles to Cuba, but Kennedy wasn’t so sure.
These images showed what appeared to be missile launching sites being built on the island, capable of firing nuclear missiles at almost any major American city.
He could not allow nuclear missiles to be placed in Cuba to threaten his country, and anti-Communist fear in America was reaching new heights.
In 1960, the USA had been humiliated when the Soviets shot down a U2 spy plane, and in 1961 the communists had built the Berlin Wall.
The Bay of Pigs had further embarrassed the USA, and so now something had to be done – the USA had to take decisive action.
This American photograph shows Soviet missiles heading for Cuba in 1962.
Page 8 President Kennedy met with a number of advisors as part of EXCOMM to decide what to do.
He was particularly keen to get a wider spread of advice after the disaster of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
President John F Kennedy, October 1962 Initially, EXCOMM favoured bombing Cuba.
However, by the third day, 18 October, another option had come to the fore.
One politician commented that a United States surprise attack on Cuba would be “like Pearl Harbour.
Page 10 Kennedy’s Decision… There was no guarantee that the USSR would tolerate Kennedy’s decision.
Meanwhile, the United States air-force was put on standby and nuclear bombs were loaded into the US bombers.
However, the outside world knew nothing of thus until President Kennedy appeared on television on October 22nd.
He announced the blockade and told the Soviet leader, Khrushchev, to stop supplying missiles to Cuba.
Page 11 Khrushchev’s Response… Khrushchev was no fool – he didn’t want to start a nuclear war.
He had to work with Kennedy to find a solution without appearing weak to his people, and so a delicate political tightrope now had to be walked.
On the 24th October, 12 Soviet ships heading for Cuba either stopped or changed course.
In the USA, Kennedy mobilised troops, ready for a possible invasion of Cuba.
Kennedy and Khrushchev talked on the telephone and Khrushchev sent two letters to Kennedy.
No more weapons to Cuba and those within Cuba withdrawn or destroyed, and you respond be ending your blockade and also agree not to invade Cuba.
You are worried by Cuba because it is 90 miles from America, but Turkey is right next to us.
The sub and three others had orders to sneak past the American naval blockade to set up a secret submarine base at Cuba, but the B-59 became trapped by the aircraft carrier USS Randolph and eleven US Navy destroyers.
On the 27th October, despite being in international waters, the Americans began to drop practice depth charges to force the Soviet sub to the surface.
The submarine had been out of radio contact with Moscow for several days and so had no idea whether war had broken out or not but, believing that it had, the captain wanted to retaliate by launching a nuclear torpedo.
Such action could only happen with the agreement of the three senior officers.
The captain and the political officer were in favour, but Arkhipov argued against.
Arkhipov persuaded the captain to surface and await orders from Moscow, which the B-59 did in the midst of the American fleet, before returning to Russia.
Arkhipov’s action in preventing a first nuclear strike almost certainly averted all-out nuclear war.
Many people across the world feared that nuclear war could start at any minute.
On one occasion, the United States Navy boarded a Soviet merchant ship, but thankfully the USSR did not retaliate.
Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev wanted a nuclear war, but neither could allow themselves to be seen as weak.
Therefore, the two men came up with a solution that worked for both sides.
Kennedy told the American public that the USSR had agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba.
However, he didn’t tell the United States public that there was another side to the deal.
Krushchev had negotiated the removal of American missiles from Britain, Italy and Turkey, and this allowed him to announce a positive result to the Soviet people.
Both Kennedy and Krushchev could present themselves as “winners” to their people, but it was actually negotiation and diplomacy that had saved the day.
The two leaders installed a “hotline” from the Whitehouse to the Kremlin to ensure that they could communicate directly and easily to prevent future problems.
Explain how Kennedy and Khrushchev used negotiation to stop nuclear war.
