President John Kennedy notified Americans of the missiles and emphasized that his government was ready to employ military force to neutralize this seeming threat to its national security.
Following this declaration, a lot of people were in fear that nuclear war was almost unavoidable.
However, this possible nuclear war was mitigated when the United States gave in to the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev’s offer to remove the missiles and in return have the United States vacate the Cuban territories.
The installation of the nuclear-armed Soviet missiles in Cuba was a new threat to the U.S national security.
As Sechser & Fuhrmann posit, the Soviet Union started installing nuclear weapons including medium-range R-12 missiles and intermediate-range R-14 missiles into Cuba in September 1962.
In mid-October, an American spy plane captured photos of missile sites under construction on the island.
After learning of these deployments, President Kennedy seemed to be puzzled by Khrushchev’s possible intentions.
It was apparent that Khrushchev intentions were not only to defend Cuba’s Fidel Castro’s Regime but also to supplement the Soviet capacity to hit the United States mainland.
Notably, missiles were installed just 90 miles from the United States shores.
As a result, the United States felt vulnerable with these missiles based on a neighboring country and in striking range of almost all its cities.
On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy explained in a T.V. address that these missiles posed a threat to the country’s national security.
Following Kennedy’s address, the majority of the Americans felt that nuclear war was inevitable.
As Sechser & Fuhrmann assert, Kennedy had already warned Khrushchev that “the gravest issues would arise” if Russia introduced bases or ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Although Kennedy had the option of launching air strikes against the missile construction sites, he decided to come into terms with Khrushchev that would see the Soviets remove the missiles in exchange that the United States would not invade the Island.
Unmistakably, the United States won by giving in to Khrushchev's demands.
Notably, the majority of its people were threatened by the missiles since they were in close striking range of the majority of its cities.
The United States also preserved the complexion of the nuclear rivalry that it had dominated before the installation of the Cuban missiles.
Therefore, by giving in to Khrushchev’s demands, the United States not only avoided the breach of its national security but also dominated against the USSR in regards to nuclear superiority.
The United States did not lose anything by agreeing not to attack Cuba and to remove its missiles from Turkey.
Instead, the United States was able to dissociate Khrushchev from his primary objectives.
As stated by Sechser & Fuhrmann , Khrushchev’s motives were to defend Castro’s regime, supplement the Soviet’s capacity to hit the United States mainland with nuclear missiles and to gain an advantage in Berlin after he had failed to eject American forces from the city from 1958 to 1961.
Notably, Khrushchev succeeded in his motive to defend Cuba from the United States aggression by having the United States promise not to invade Cuba.
He also succeeded in getting the United States to remove its missiles from Turkey.
However, he failed to accomplish his motive to hit the United States mainland.
Undoubtedly, the United States understood the significance of protecting its people from dangerous attacks.
Thus, its act to give in to Khrushchev’s demands should not be mistaken to mean that it was a weaker side.
Instead, the country understood that it could lose nothing either by removing its missiles from Turkey or promising not to attack Cuba.
In the end, the United States succeeded in protecting lives that could have been lost if the country was to engage in a nuclear war.
It also appears that Khrushchev conceded to the United States demands more than the United States yielded to his demands.
According to Sechser & Fuhrmann , there are several indications that Khrushchev was willing to give in to the United States demands to avoid the imminent nuclear war.
When explaining the need to withdraw missiles from Cuba, Khrushchev admitted that the Soviet was willing to retreat to save the entire human race.
