Case Closed Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK Gerald Posner TO BOB LOOMIS, MY EDITOR, WHO NURTURED THIS PROJECT FROM ITS INCEPTION, AND TO TRISHA, MY WIFE, MY PARTNER, MY LIFE Contents Author’s Note Preface 1.
The House Select Committee and Latest Developments AFTERWORD IMAGE GALLERY APPENDIX A THE BALLISTICS OF ASSASSINATION APPENDIX B THE NON-MYSTERIOUS “MYSTERY DEATHS” ACKNOWLEDGMENTS NOTES BIBLIOGRAPHY INDEX Author’s Note The response to the hardcover publication of this book surprised both me and my publisher, Random House.
We were initially worried that the book might be lost in the publicity surrounding the publication of other books espousing convoluted theories.
But we had underestimated the extent to which, after thirty years of virtually unchallenged conspiracy conjecture, the conclusion that Oswald acted alone in assassinating JFK had evolved, ironically, into the most controversial position.
While the media’s response was overwhelmingly positive, the reaction from the conspiracy community was the opposite—not simply negative, but often vitriolic.
There was little effort to study my overall evidence and conclusions with anything that approached an open mind.
Indeed, there was a concerted counterattack to discredit both the book and its author.
There were panel discussions at conspiracy conventions in Boston and Dallas and special publications focused solely on contesting the book.
A conspiracy-based “research center” in Washington, D.C., issued a “media alert” about Case Closed.
The release consisted of five pages alleging the book was misleading and flawed, but the alert misstated my arguments and distorted the evidence in the case.
Harold Weisberg, one of the deans of the conspiracy press, found his first publisher to bring out a book titled Case Open, a broadside attack attempting to diminish the impact of my work.
It was, as one journalist commented, as if overnight I had become the Salmon Rushdie of the assassination world.
I was accused of treason by a buff who ran a Dallas “research center,” and my wife and I were subjected to several months of harassing telephone calls and letters.
Faxes and letters to the media also charged I was a CIA agent, or that the CIA had written my book, or that I was part of a conscious effort to deceive the public and hide the truth.
Television and radio producers were harassed by callers attempting to have my appearances cancelled.
Some reviewers who wrote favorably about the book received intimidating calls or letters.
My publisher was subjected to the same treatment, and even my editor, Bob Loomis, was publicly accused of being a CIA agent.
Although I had expected that individuals who had invested their adult lives into investigating JFK conspiracies might react angrily to a book that exposed the fallacies in their arguments, the vehemence of these personal attacks surprised me.
It took little time to discover, however, the extent to which many people who believe in a JFK conspiracy do so with almost a religious fervor and are not dissuaded by the facts.
Case Closed was probably subjected to greater scrutiny by more “critics” than any other book published in recent years.
Several emendations in this book are the result of what some charged as fraudulent omissions in my discussion of various aspects of the case.
Because Case Closed attempted to deal with all the major issues in the assassination, plus countless arguments raised by conspiracy critics in the three decades following the Warren Commission, many of these, especially those addressed in footnotes, were condensed.
To fit all of my research into a single, manageable volume, I did not have the luxury of presenting and explaining each nuance of every issue, but instead focused only on primary arguments.
For instance, in a few pages I addressed the theory that JFK’s corpse was stolen from Air Force One and medically altered, although the author of that theory took over seven hundred pages to present it.
Obviously, not every point raised in his book could be dealt with in Case Closed.
However, there was not one aspect of the assassination in which I did not study all of the available evidence before reaching any conclusion.
Conspiracy critics, often complained that I had omitted some information that they contended contradicted one or another of my conclusions.
In this edition, I have reinstated material included in earlier drafts but cut for the sake of brevity, to further explain the layers of intricacies in this case.
The remainder of the updated text in this edition has nothing to do with contentions raised by conspiracy buffs, but rather is the result of new scientific evidence or documents uncovered since the hardcover publication.
Also, new disclosures about Oswald’s visit to Mexico City provide important insights into the extent of his instability only two months before JFK’s visit to Dallas.
These, and other significant discoveries, such as a 1962 CIA debriefing of Oswald, have been added to the book.
The updated and restored information in this edition has only strengthened the book’s original conclusion that Oswald and Ruby acted alone.
Not only am I familiar with the content of many already released, but I have spoken to individuals who are familiar with the still-classified documents.
None of the government documents to be released alters the judgment reached in Case Closed.
Photographic tests reveal that the backyard photos of Oswald holding his weapons, contested as fakes, are authentic; ballistics and computer studies confirm the so-called magic bullet theory, long derided by conspiracy theorists as impossible; and neutron activation tests provide the final link that Oswald tried to assassinate General Edwin Walker, a crime for which many considered Oswald innocent.
After thirty years of studying the case the critics have failed to produce a single, cogent, alternate scenario of how the alleged conspiracy happened or who was involved.
There is more than enough evidence available on the record to draw conclusions about what happened in the JFK assassination.
But apparently most Americans, despite the strength of the evidence, do not want to accept the notion that random acts of violence can change the course of history and that Lee Harvey Oswald could affect our lives in a way over which we have no control.
It is unsettling to think that a sociopathic twenty-four-year-old loser in life, armed with a $12 rifle and consumed by his own warped motivation, ended Camelot.
But for readers willing to approach this subject with an open mind, it is the only rational judgment.
Preface More than two thousand books have been written about the assassination of President John Kennedy.
Many not only assail the Warren Report but also propose myriad suspects—including the CIA, anti-Castro Cubans, the FBI, and the mafia—for ever-expanding conspiracy theories.
Writers have identified nearly thirty gunmen, by name, as the second or—depending on the theory—the third, fourth, or fifth shooter at Dealey Plaza, the site of the assassination.
In the critical literature, Lee Harvey Oswald has evolved from being the lone killer to being part of a conspiracy to being an innocent patsy to being a hero who vainly tried to save the President by warning the FBI of the plot.
The public has been particularly receptive to conspiracy theories in this case.
Oswald’s curious past, especially his defection to the Soviet Union and his apparent pro-Communist philosophy in the middle of the cold war, showed the alleged assassin was anything but ordinary.
Nightclub owner Jack Ruby’s killing of Oswald within forty-eight hours of the assassination raised the suspicion he had been silenced.
Within days of Oswald’s death, public opinion polls confirmed that two thirds of those queried doubted he acted alone.
Besides the skepticism over Oswald’s murky background and his murder, strong psychological reasons prompted the public’s early embrace of conspiracy theories.
The notion that a misguided sociopath had wreaked such havoc made the crime seem senseless and devoid of political significance.
By concluding that JFK was killed as the result of an elaborate plot, there is the belief he died for a purpose, that a powerful group eliminated him for some critical issue.
Public receptivity to the theories is also fed by suspicions that politicians lie and cover up misdeeds while intelligence and military officials plot against the nation they are supposed to protect.
Today, the Warren Report is almost universally derided, mostly by people who have never read it.
The early critics used the Warren Commission’s work as the springboard for their own efforts.
They dissected the twenty-six volumes of testimony and exhibits and raised questions about its conclusions by highlighting inconsistencies and errors.
The next generation of critics used the doubts sown by the initial writers and went far beyond the issues addressed by the Commission.
Focusing on matters such as the history of the mafia or clandestine CIA operations, many of these books championed complex theses involving dozens of conspirators.
He is referred to only briefly and often presented as a sterile figure.
With Oswald stripped of character, the reader is seldom given any insight into understanding him.
His intricate personality and temperament are obscured under a deluge of technical details about trajectory angles and bullet speeds.
During the past three decades, hundreds of questions have been raised about the assassination.
However, the truth in the case can be uncovered by reviewing original documents and testimony and interviewing those involved.
Despite a seemingly intractable quagmire of conflicting evidence, it is possible to find reliable and accurate information about the assassination and, by so doing, answer the riddle of what really happened as well as what motivated Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby.
The breadth of the issues in the Kennedy assassination dissuades many reputable journalists from pursuing the subject.
Others are discouraged because the JFK murder has, regrettably, become an entertainment business, complete with board games and shopping-mall “assassination research centers” stuffed with souvenir T-shirts and bumper stickers.
As in every famous case, people have come out of the woodwork for their fifteen minutes of fame.
Some publicity seekers have even implicated themselves in the murder conspiracy.
These more sensational claims may sell books, but they bring us no closer to understanding what really happened.
The only casualty is truth, especially in a society where far too many people are content to receive all their knowledge on an important issue from a single article or a three-hour movie.
In this book, Oswald’s life is investigated in some detail, and to a lesser extent, so is the life of Ruby.
As the story progresses, arguments raised by the leading conspiracy critics, such as Anthony Summers, Mark Lane, Jim Marrs, and others, are resolved in the text or in footnotes.
Also, beyond, the human stories, there are separate chapters about the medical and ballistics issues, the Warren Commission and its critics, and the late New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison.
Many people, understandably, believe that the truth in the Kennedy assassination will never be discovered.
But the troubling issues and questions about the assassination can be settled, the issue of who killed JFK resolved, and Oswald’s motivation revealed.
Tippit, only the third Dallas policeman in a decade to die in the line of duty, was killed shortly after the President.
Dealey Plaza, the site of the presidential assassination, was in pandemonium.
Dozens of witnesses sent the police scurrying in different directions in futile search of an assassin.
While most police mobilized to hunt the President’s killer, more than a dozen sped to Dallas’s Oak Cliff, a quiet middle-class neighborhood, to search for Tippit’s murderer.
Within minutes, more than six squad cars sealed the theater’s front and rear exits.
Police armed with shotguns spread into the balcony and the main floor as the lights were turned up.
McDonald began walking up the left aisle from the rear of the building, searching patrons along the way.
Soon, he was near a young man in the third row from the back of the theater.
McDonald instinctively lurched forward just as his assailant pulled a pistol from his waist.
They tumbled over the seats as other police rushed to subdue the gunman.
The gun’s hammer clicked as the man pulled the trigger, but it did not fire.
After the suspect was handcuffed, he shouted, “I am not resisting arrest.
As the police exited, the crowd surged forward, screaming obscenities and crying, “Let us have him.
The suspect was pushed into the rear seat between two policemen while three officers packed into the front.
Detective Paul Bentley reached over and pulled a wallet from the suspect’s left hip pocket.
The police told the suspect he could hide his face from the press as they entered the building.
He was put into a small interrogation room, with several men standing guard, as they waited for the chief of homicide, Captain Will Fritz.
He had the suspect’s billfold in his hand, and he pushed two plastic cards forward.
Although the identity of the suspect remained in doubt for only a few more minutes at that Dallas police station, the search has continued for the answer to the broader question of who Lee Harvey Oswald was.
Understanding him is the key to finding out what happened in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
Oswald was born on October 18, 1939, into a lower-middle-class family in a downtrodden New Orleans neighborhood.
His father, Robert Edward Lee Oswald, died two months before his birth.
His mother, Marguerite, was a domineering woman, consumed with self-pity both over the death of her husband and because she had to return to work to support Lee, his brother, Robert, and a halfbrother, John Pic, from the first of her three marriages.
Marguerite played an important role in Oswald’s development, and conspiracy critics cast her in a positive light.
High-strung, and failing to keep any job very long,* she committed Robert and John Pic to an orphanage.
Instead, she shuttled him between her sister and an assortment of housekeepers and baby-sitters.
Marguerite had let a couple move into her home to help care for Lee, but had to fire them when she discovered they had been whipping him to control his “unmanageable” disposition.
The atmosphere was relaxed, and Lee’s older brothers watched out for him during his stay there, which was quite uneventful.
In early 1944, Marguerite unexpectedly checked her sons out of the Bethlehem Home and moved to Dallas.
She relocated there because of her personal interest in a local businessman, Edwin Ekdahl, whom she had met six months earlier in New Orleans.
Lee’s new stepfather worked for a utility company and extensive travel was part of his job.
Robert and John Pic were placed in a military boarding school and Marguerite and Lee traveled with Ekdahl.
The business trips and short relocations were so extensive that Lee missed most of his first year of school, but by late October, they settled in Benbrook, Texas, a suburb of Fort Worth.
Just after his sixth birthday, Lee was admitted to Benbrook Common Elementary.
But young Oswald was no longer concerned about the frequent moves or his absence from school because he had found a friend in his stepfather.
Lee’s halfbrother, John Pic, recalled, “I think Lee found in him the father he never had.
Ekdahl often walked out, staying at a hotel, and in the summer of 1946, Marguerite moved with Lee to Covington, Louisiana.
Lee was ecstatic when his stepfather moved back in, but he hated the fighting and separations.
The uncertainty in the marriage prevented Lee from ever settling into a single neighborhood and school.
In September 1946, he enrolled in a new school, Covington Elementary, but was again in the first grade, because he had not completed the required work at Benbrook.
After five months, Marguerite withdrew him from Covington and they moved back to Fort Worth, where Lee enrolled in his third school, the Clayton Public Elementary.
He finally finished the first grade, but soon after he was registered for the second grade in the fall, they moved again.
A schoolmate at Clayton, Philip Vinson, recalled that while Oswald was not a bully, he was a leader of one of three or four schoolyard gangs.
In January 1948, Ekdahl moved out permanently, and he started divorce proceedings in March.
Soon after, Marguerite moved to a run-down house in a poor Fort Worth neighborhood, adjoining railroad tracks.
Unable to afford the tuition at military boarding school for her other two sons, Marguerite moved them in with her and Lee.
Robert Oswald and John Pic described the new home as “lower-class” and “prisonlike,” and they found Lee even less communicative than when they had previously left the household, often “brooding for hours” at a time.
But with the constant moving, he did not easily fit in with his schoolmates and seldom made friends.
Lee was brought to court to testify, but refused, saying he would not know the truth from a lie.
While the divorce dragged along, he stayed home alone with a pet dog, a gift from a neighbor.
That summer, Marguerite and her sons moved once again to Benbrook, Texas.
By the autumn they returned to Fort Worth, the thirteenth move since Lee’s birth.
With her marriage over, Marguerite now gave Lee all her attention, spoiling and protecting him.
Afraid he could be hurt in physical activities like sports, she instead encouraged gentler pursuits like tap dancing, but he preferred to stay home by himself or with her.
Until he was almost eleven years of age, Lee often slept in the same bed with his mother.
According to Pic, who admittedly resented his mother more than Robert did, Marguerite’s attitudes made the home atmosphere depressing.
She was jealous of others, resented what they had, and constantly complained about how unfairly life treated her.
Even Lee’s wife, Marina, later said that “part of the guilt” was with Marguerite, because she did not provide him the correct education, leadership, or guidance.
She did not encourage him to attend school when Lee whined that he did not like it.
Instead, his mother told him he was brighter and better than other children, and reinforced his feeling that he learned more at home by reading books than from listening to his teachers.
Neighbors noticed the odd relationship between the overbearing mother and the introverted youngster.
Bell, a neighbor in Benbrook, remembered Lee as a loner who did not like to be disciplined.
Another neighbor, Hiram Conway, lived two doors away from Lee in Fort Worth.
Conway noticed that on the way home from school, Oswald looked for other children to throw stones at.
Conway’s impressions were formed from watching Lee from the age of nine to almost thirteen.
Lee hurled the knife at Pic, in front of a startled Carlton, but it missed and struck the wall.
Lee, who had grown closer to Robert than anyone else in the family, bought a copy of the Marine Corps handbook.
Although only twelve, “he was going to keep up with me, to learn everything I was learning,” recalled Robert.
But he soon realized Marguerite had no intention of moving and finding her own apartment.
Tension in the household grew as Pic’s wife and Marguerite often argued.
Lee added to the strained atmosphere by fighting loudly with his mother and often striking her.
One day, Marge asked Lee to lower the volume on the television, and instead he pulled out a knife and threatened her.
When Marguerite rushed into the room and told him to put it away, he punched her in the face.
While he was at the Pics’, Lee enrolled in Trinity Evangelical Lutheran School, but was only there several weeks before moving with Marguerite to a one-room basement apartment in the Bronx.
At P.S. 117, he missed forty-seven of sixty-four school days and was failing most of his courses when his mother pulled him out.
In January 1953, they moved again in the Bronx, their third time in five months.
Two hearings regarding Oswald’s truancy were set, but Marguerite and Lee did not show up.
In April, a judge declared him a truant and remanded him to Youth House for three weeks of psychiatric evaluation.
Social workers noted he made no effort to mix with the other children while there.
The probation officer assigned to the case, John Carro, remembered it because it was unique.
At Youth House, Oswald told Evelyn Strickman, his caseworker, that he felt his mother “never gave a damn” about him.
He vividly remembered Oswald eleven years later when he testified before the Warren Commission.
Hartogs gave seminars for other professionals in which he discussed interesting and unusual cases discovered at Youth House.
The reason Hartogs considered him so interesting was “because he came to us on a charge of truancy from school, and yet when I examined him, I found him to have definite traits of dangerousness.
Hartogs’s diagnosis was “personality pattern disturbance with schizoid features and passive-aggressive tendencies.
Instead, he recommended that Oswald be placed on probation so long as he was under guidance, preferably from a psychiatrist.
On several occasions, Marguerite refused to bring him to court, claiming he had returned and adapted well to school.
One of his teachers, H Rosen, said, “When we spoke to him about his behavior, his attitude was belligerent.
Placing him was difficult since most of the residence homes for which he qualified were overcrowded.
At the start of 1954, to avoid Lee’s placement in an institution, she fled the jurisdiction and returned with him to New Orleans.
Marguerite dropped whatever else she was doing to take food to his room, where he locked himself away to listen to records and read books. “e was a lot more difficult this time to understand or control than he was when he was younger.
Lee had developed a “loud and quite disturbing voice” and used it to order Marguerite around the house; although Lee “was getting a little unbearable,” his mother obligingly acquiesced to his dictates.
Evans’s husband, Julian, also noticed that Lee had changed, “was arrogant.
Once Julian took Lee, with some other children, to fish at a small pond.
The other children either threw small fish back into the pond or kept the larger ones to eat later.
Lee just laid everything he caught in a row at his feet and then, when he tired of fishing, walked away, leaving them dying on the bank.
I don’t think anybody even came close to it, because the way he was, nobody could figure him out.
He didn’t want you to get too close to him …” Frustrated by Lee’s coldness, Julian abandoned his efforts.
Bennierita Sparacio, a classmate, said, “I could remember him so much because he was always getting in fights …”78 Soon after enrolling, Oswald had a bloody fight with two brothers, which attracted a crowd from the school.
A couple of days later, a football player surprised Lee and smashed him in the mouth, knocking out a tooth.
Edward Voebel and several other classmates tried to “fix him up” in the bathroom.
He was just living in his own world …” According to Voebel, Lee was “bitter” and thought he had a raw deal out of life.
Voebel discovered Oswald was an avid reader, and they shared a mutual interest in guns.
Lee owned a plastic model of a .45 caliber pistol, but he wanted a real revolver.
Voebel was startled when Oswald hatched a plan to steal a Smith & Wesson automatic from a local store.
Another Beauregard student who spent time with Lee was William Wulf, the astronomy club president.
Having dropped out days before his sixteenth birthday, Oswald then asked his mother to lie about his age so he could enlist in the Marines.
But though his mother gave her help, the Marines realized he was underage and rejected him.
He further isolated himself, assiduously avoiding his few acquaintances, and thought only of enlisting as soon as he turned seventeen.
Palmer McBride, who worked as a messenger for Pfisterer Dental Laboratory, met Oswald, who was working there in the same capacity.
Because both enjoyed classical music, on several occasions Oswald went to his home and they listened to records in McBride’s bedroom.
After McBride commented that he thought Eisenhower “was doing a pretty good job,” Oswald bristled that Ike “was exploiting the working people” and that if he had the opportunity, he would like to kill Eisenhower.
McBride did not report the threat because he did not think Oswald would act on it.
On other occasions, Oswald lectured McBride about the “virtues of Communism,” how “the workers in the world would one day rise up and throw off their chains,” and he often praised Khrushchev.
McBride once accompanied Oswald to his apartment, and there Lee “seemed quite proud” to have library copies of Das Kapital and the Communist Manifesto.
But he said it was not until he arrived in New Orleans that he discovered Das Kapital on a library bookshelf.
Expecting that Lee would join the Marines on his seventeenth birthday, she decided to return to Fort Worth.
In September, Oswald enrolled at Arlington Heights, his twelfth school.
He bought his first real gun, a Marlin bolt-action .22 caliber rifle, which he later sold to his brother, Robert.
Ideology did not control him at that young age, and his desire to enlist preceded his interest in Communism.
And those who knew him best, his mother and brothers, never had any doubts about his reasons.
Lee turned seventeen on October 18, 1956, and joined the Marines one week later.
After the assassination, she almost always refused to give an interview or sit for photographs unless paid.
She said, “He did not use the knife—he had an opportunity to use the knife.
People who present Lee as fairly stable overlook the incident when he punched his mother and threatened Pic’s wife with a knife.
Harold Weisberg, in the first of his six self-published books attacking the Warren Commission, does not even inform the reader that Marguerite and Lee lived with the Pics.
But he is not even listed in books written by Mark Lane, Josiah Thompson, Jim Garrison, John Davis, Robert J Groden and Harrison Livingstone, Robert Blakey, Henry Hurt, David Scheim, or David Lifton.
Harold Weisberg tells of the tests but does not quote any of Hartogs’s conclusions.
After enlisting, he wrote her infrequently, and saw her only sporadically during the remaining seven years of his life.
When she arrived at the police headquarters on the night of November 22, 1963, Marguerite did not even know Lee and his wife, Marina, had a second child.
There, he was given a series of aptitude tests and scored slightly below average.
On December 21, 1956, after three weeks of training, he shot 212, two points over the score required for a “sharpshooter” qualification, the second highest in the Marine Corps.
Shortly before he left the Marine Corps, in May 1959, Oswald again certified himself on a firing range.
In early May, he was routinely promoted to private first class and given a clearance to handle confidential material.
Allen Felde, a fellow recruit who served with him at both San Diego and Camp Pendleton, said he was a “left-winger” who was not popular with the other recruits and was avoided by most of them.
He used weekend passes to escape, returning the almost one hundred miles to his native city of New Orleans.
Kerry Thornley, a Marine who knew him well, recalled, “Well, definitely, the Marine Corps was not what he had expected it to be when he first joined.
He soon griped about the strict discipline, and even got into a fight in the barracks.
But in July 1957, his fortunes changed when he was transferred to the Marine Corps Air Station in El Toro, California, and was informed he was to be sent in six weeks to Japan.
The foreign posting opened a new vista for him, one he felt he deserved.
He arrived at Yokosuka on September 12 and was posted to the Marine Air Control Squadron One , based at Atsugi, about twenty miles west of Tokyo.
Most of the Marines had seen the strange-looking plane either take off or land, as had many of the townspeople.
He worked in a radar bubble, and although he and other radar operators sometimes heard requests for wind speeds at 90,000 feet, giving them an idea of the startling altitude the plane achieved, they knew little else about it.
None of the operators in the MACS-1 unit were involved in the U-2 reconnaissance flights.
I rushed into the cubicle to find Oswald sitting on a foot locker looking at a wound in his arm.
Pete Connor admitted that he and some others had been baiting Oswald and initially thought he had fired the shot to scare them.
Oswald was taken by ambulance to the United States Navy hospital in nearby Yokosuka, where he recuperated for more than two weeks.
Although the Marines intended to bring court-martial charges against him for possessing an unauthorized gun, they postponed the proceedings until he returned to Japan.
Oswald’s unit finished its Philippine maneuvers in four weeks, but did not immediately return to Atsugi since the internal war in Indonesia had heated up.
But his dissatisfaction intensified as he was assigned to KP duty for the duration, a punishment for the derringer incident.
His deteriorating attitude was reflected in his semiannual performance rating of 3.9, slightly below the minimum required for an honorable discharge.
Within a month, on April 11, a summary court-martial was brought against him for the unregistered weapon with which he had wounded himself.
Oswald was infuriated, convinced he had been singled out for enough punishment with three months of KP duty.
The more dissatisfied he became with the Marine Corps, the more he looked for another horizon for fulfillment, and the Soviet Union was increasingly the likely candidate.
He may have been influenced by Japanese Communists who encouraged him to defect.
The club was frequented by officers and foreign businessmen who ogled the one hundred beautiful hostesses, some of whom were informants for Japanese and foreign intelligence agencies.
By the time he defected in the fall of 1959, he had saved $1,500, nearly 75 percent of his Marine salary during two years of service.
But some of his fellow Marines saw him with a striking and well-dressed Japanese woman on several occasions, and later during his stay in Japan, he was seen with a Eurasian woman who reportedly spoke Russian.
Corporal Thomas Bagshaw recalled Oswald “was almost frail, shy and quiet,” when he arrived at Atsugi.
When Oswald spent his liberties reading instead of bar-hopping and chasing women, others ridiculed him.
Oswald,” threw him in the shower fully clothed, and provoked him in every possible way.
In the Marines, he was far from the toughest and, at five feet nine inches, hardly the biggest in his unit.
Initially, he did not fight back, instead walking away from any provocation, the anger bottled inside.
After a couple of abusive months, Oswald decided to mix with his fellow Marines.
Initially, he tried to be funny, thinking it might allow him to be accepted.
But those who knew him said he was absolutely humorless and failed completely.
He then began socializing, visiting nearby bars, drinking for the first time in his life, and even having his first sexual experience with a bar girl as some of his newfound buddies cheered him on.
Slowly, he became more aggressive, using his knowledge of current affairs to belittle others, especially officers.
Miguel Rodriguez, the man he blamed for his long stint on KP duty during the Philippine posting.
At the Bluebird Cafe in Yamato, Oswald poured a drink on Rodriguez and challenged him to fight.
This prompted a second court-martial, on June 27, where Oswald was sentenced to twenty-eight days in the brig and fined $55.35 His suspended sentence of twenty days from the first court-martial was reinstated.
In a performance review, he was given his lowest rating since joining the Marines, and a previously granted extension of overseas duty was canceled.
Even asking to go to the bathroom required standing at attention and repeatedly screaming a request until a guard gave permission.
A few days after arriving, the constant razzing from his colleagues and his overall frustration at the Marine Corps resulted in a breakdown.
One evening while on guard duty, Oswald started firing his M-1 rifle at shadows in the woods.
The following day he was transferred out of MACS-1 and placed on general duty.
On November 2, Oswald ended his fourteen-month tour of duty in Japan and sailed for the States.
He spent a one-month leave in Fort Worth with his mother and brother, Robert, with whom he went hunting.
On December 21, he boarded a bus and reported for his new Marine assignment, the Air Control Squadron Nine, at El Toro, California.
It was there that Oswald, disgusted with the Marines, flaunted his Russian studies and Communist leanings.
Court-martialed twice, he seemed no longer to care what the Marines did to him.
He walked around the camp with his hat pulled so low over his eyes that he could barely see.
Extremely sloppy, with unshined shoes and his shirt partially hanging out, looking like a caricature of the cartoon character Beetle Bailey, he bid “Hello, Comrade” to acquaintances.
Fellow Marine Nelson Delgado became friends with Oswald soon after his arrival at El Toro.
It was then that Castro was leading his revolutionary army toward Havana.
Oswald and Delgado shared a mutual respect for Castro, so much so that they eventually spoke about going to Cuba to fight in the revolution.
Oswald kept pressing Delgado for information on how he could get to Cuba, and finally Delgado recalled, “I started getting scared.
He started actually making plans …”50 Delgado’s enthusiasm waned as Castro’s commitment to Communism was exposed in the press.
But Oswald told him the United States media was full of propaganda that distorted Castro’s position.
He put his hands in his pockets, pulled his cap low over his eyes, and sat by himself.
He also found Oswald “impulsive,” burdened by a “persecution complex,” and said that he never showed any affection to anyone, and nobody ever showed any in return.
None of his fellow Marines reported that he proselytized Communism during basic training or during his fourteen months in Japan.
He complained about the Marines, but that was not thought to be unique.
Oswald did study the Russian language, but not in the conspicuous way that he did later at El Toro.
While he may have been considered a Russophile, he gave the Marines no reason to believe he might be a security threat.
Only after arriving at El Toro, and following his two court-martials and nervous breakdown while on guard duty, did Oswald flaunt his controversial and brazen behavior.
By then, he had been busted to buck private, had spent time in the brig, and was already known as an eccentric troublemaker.
Instead of working as a trained radar operator, he had been reduced to doing janitorial work around the base.
When an El Toro mailroom clerk informed his operations chief, Captain Robert E Block, that Oswald was receiving leftist literature, Block confronted him.
Oswald dissembled that he was merely trying to indoctrinate himself in the enemies’ philosophy, according to Marine Corps policy.
In March 1959, he applied for admission to a small liberal arts school in Churwalden, Switzerland, the Albert Schweitzer College.
After a discharge from the Marines, Oswald was expected to fulfill a three-year inactive-reserve commitment.
During that period, foreign travel was only allowed for a valid reason.
A candy jar had fallen off a shelf while Marguerite was at work and hurt her nose.
Although several doctors could find nothing wrong with her, she claimed she was totally disabled and finally found a physician who agreed.
She sent her own affidavit, as well as affidavits from a doctor and two friends, attesting to her injury and maintaining she could not support herself.
Oswald’s request for a dependency discharge was approved two weeks later.
On September 4, 1959, he was transferred to another squadron, the H&H, in preparation for his release.
That day he also applied at the superior court of Santa Ana, California, for a passport.
Oswald was discharged from the Marines on September 11, 1959, and he traveled by bus to Fort Worth, where he arrived at his mother’s house in the early morning hours of September 14.
The next day he shocked Marguerite by informing her that he was about to board a ship and was going to work for an import-export business.
It is difficult to tell you how I feel, Just remember this is what I must do.
But Delgado was not posted with Oswald when Lee qualified as a sharpshooter.
Those in charge of the marksmanship branch who were familiar with Oswald’s record praised his ability and said he was easily capable of carrying out the JFK assassination.
It “was an easy shot for a man with the equipment he had and his ability,” said Sgt.
Two fellow Marines believed he had a “secret” clearance, though they admitted it was merely a hunch and not based on direct knowledge.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated the question in the late 1970s, reviewing all relevant military files, and concluded Oswald did not have a higher clearance.
Another Marine, David Christie, stayed away from him because he thought he was gay.
Although he seldom went to bars with other Marines, several recall that while stationed in Japan, Oswald visited a transvestite bar in Yamato, a club with which he seemed familiar.
When stationed in California, Oswald once crossed with a group of Marines to Tijuana, Mexico.
Lieutenant John Donovan, the officer in charge of Oswald’s radar team, said he remembered one day when Oswald discussed the U-2’s radar blips with him.
Yet other Marines in Oswald’s unit do not recall any radar operations at the time Donovan claims the incident happened, at Cubi Point in the Philippines.
Moreover, Donovan testified before the Warren Commission in 1964 and never mentioned the U-2 incident in fourteen pages of detailed testimony.
He told the U-2 story for the first time in the 1970s, as if his memory had improved during the intervening decade.
Military records show that Oswald was confined to a hospital for his entire recuperation.
Summers alleges that an unnamed Marine, after the assassination, “heard a rumor” that Oswald was involved in Schrand’s death.
According to Summers, if that hearsay is true it could have provided the CIA a “handle” to force Oswald into intelligence work.
After extensive speculation, Summers finally concedes, “There is no hard evidence that Lee Oswald really was involved in the death of Marine Schrand …” *Oswald appears to have been dyslexic.
Because of his extensive misspellings, when any of his writing is further quoted herein, the author has omitted “” after the errors.
The doctor who treated him said that such notations were made routinely to avoid having the person’s pay jeopardized.
Hurt implies the incarceration may have been a cover story so Oswald could continue purported intelligence work.
But another Marine, confined in the brig at the same time, confirmed that he remembered seeing Oswald in a single cell during his imprisonment.
As for the general proposition that Oswald was recruited by the CIA while he was a Marine stationed in Japan, the evidence is unconvincing.
When questioned by the House Select Committee in 1978, he could not remember Oswald’s special cryptonym or the project name from which the disbursements allegedly came.
An intelligence analyst with whom Wilcott claimed to have had a conversation about Oswald was not even posted overseas at the time.
Hemming, a self-promoter who has provided other outlandish and unproven “disclosures” about the JFK assassination, says that while Oswald never said he was an agent, Hemming had a hunch he was.
Michael Eddowes, a British author, later wrote an entire book contending that Oswald had been switched with a KGB assassin while in the Soviet Union.
He led an effort to exhume Oswald’s corpse, winning the support of Lee’s mother and wife.
In 1981, the body was dug up from its Texas grave, and forensic pathologists confirmed it was Oswald.
Incredibly, the issue still lives, as some conspiracy buffs now claim the body of the real Oswald was swapped back into the grave before the exhumation.
Oswald later told Delgado he had been in contact with the Cuban consulate in Los Angeles, but Delgado thought he was lying until he saw a letter in Oswald’s belongings with a gold seal on it and assumed it was from the Cubans.
On another occasion, Oswald received a visitor at the base, and although Delgado did not see the person and did not even know if it was a man or woman, he assumed it might be someone from the Cuban government.
Although Delgado’s speculation has no factual foundation and is only his hunch, some critics use it to assert Oswald may have had a Cuban intelligence connection.
The Cuban government has officially denied having had any contact with Oswald in 1959.
Garrison writes that Thornley “had not served with Oswald as long as a number of others and had not even lived on the same part of the base.
The other Marines’ affidavits did not contradict Thornley’s testimony—they only said Oswald did not talk to them about the same things he discussed with Thornley.
Thornley is not even listed in the indexes for books by Robert Groden and Harrison Livingstone, Henry Hurt, John Davis, David Scheim, Mark Lane, and Josiah Thompson.
However, since he intended to apply for a Soviet visa in the less-trafficked consulate in Helsinki, the statement on the application provided him an excuse for traveling to Finland.
That request was the beginning of one of the most controversial episodes in CIA history, the case of Yuriy Nosenko,* a key to unlocking important pieces of the Oswald puzzle.
Nosenko sought permanent asylum in the United States in January 1964, only two months after the Kennedy assassination.
He claimed to be a lieutenant colonel responsible for compromising Americans visiting Moscow.
That meant Oswald was under his jurisdiction when the Marine first defected to the Soviet Union.
After the assassination, he was temporarily assigned to investigate whether there was ever any KGB-Oswald relationship.
According to Nosenko, although Soviet intelligence kept Oswald under surveillance, it viewed him as mentally unfit, had not debriefed him, and had no relationship with him.
If that was true, it meant the KGB and the Soviet Union were absolved of any complicity in JFK’s murder.
If it was false, Nosenko could be a phony defector, intended, among other things, to deflect the Warren Commission from focusing on evidence of the real Soviet role with Oswald.
When Nosenko contacted an American diplomat in 1962, the CIA was immediately notified.
It dispatched thirty-seven-year-old Tennant “Pete” Bagley and an agent fluent in Russian, George Kisevalter, to meet Nosenko four times at a safe house near Geneva’s center.
Nosenko said he was dissatisfied with the Soviet system and asked for some money in exchange for information.
CIA transcripts reveal that at those meetings, Nosenko provided critical leads on a number of intelligence cases.
However, Bagley was shocked when he returned to CIA headquarters because the chief of counterintelligence, James Jesus Angleton, was convinced that no matter what Nosenko said, he was a KGB plant.
The reason for Angleton’s distrust was another defector who had arrived in America six months earlier, Anatoliy Golitsyn.
Golitsyn had told the extremely cynical Angleton that the CIA was penetrated by a high-ranking KGB agent code-named Sasha.
The possibility that the CIA was compromised, as British intelligence had been by Kim Philby, was Angleton’s worst fear.
Accepting Golitsyn’s revelations without hesitation, he embarked the CIA on a twenty-year hunt for a phantom mole that destroyed careers of good officers and split the Agency.
Not only was Angleton convinced the mole existed, but Golitsyn further warned him that the KGB would send “defectors” intended to deflect the interest in Sasha.
His information was dismissed either as stale or as exposing expendable KGB operations.
Completely unaware the CIA thought he was a double agent, Nosenko prepared for his eventual goal, defection.
For the remainder of 1962 and all of 1963, he committed to memory the details of more than three hundred new leads and almost two thousand names for the Agency.
The same two agents who had met him in 1962, Bagley and Kisevalter, flew in from Washington.
At a second meeting, a week later, the disagreement over his defection continued, with Nosenko increasingly concerned the KGB might uncover his treachery.
Five days later, in the final meeting, Nosenko announced he had received a cable ordering him home immediately.
He feared the KGB had unmasked him and his return meant arrest and execution.
Confronted with this fact, Nosenko explained he fabricated the story because he feared that otherwise Bagley would not allow him to defect.
The story about the cable accomplished its purpose, forcing the CIA to spirit him to the West.
The questions raised about his declaration that he was a lieutenant colonel are more complex.
Many assassination-conspiracy books say that CIA document experts determined that Nosenko could not have held the rank or position he claimed in the KGB and that travel papers he had in his possession had been concocted to give his defection credibility.
In the spring of 1963, however, he was appointed to lieutenant colonel by his close friend Major General Oleg Gribanov, the director of the Second Chief Directorate.
His travel document did say he was a lieutenant colonel, but since he defected before the chairman’s approval, the CIA could not verify that rank.
The Agency mistakenly assumed the higher rank was part of a false legend prepared for Nosenko.
He did not know that his CIA debriefers were only interested in exposing him as a liar.
A deep-cover FBI informant at the Soviet mission to the United Nations, code-named Fedora, personally confirmed to Hoover that Nosenko was bona fide and that his defection had caused an uproar in the highest Kremlin circles.
The FBI believed Nosenko about Oswald and supported his request to testify before the Warren Commission.
Richard Helms, then deputy director of plans, met privately with Earl Warren on June 24, 1964, and informed him the CIA doubted Nosenko’s credibility.
Helms warned that if the Commission used his information and it was a lie, it would ruin the rest of their work.
Nosenko did not testify and is not even mentioned in the Commission’s twenty-six volumes.
Helms did not tell the Chief Justice that since early April, with the backing of attorney general Robert Kennedy, Nosenko had been under hostile interrogation, treated as a captured spy rather than a voluntary defector.
The FBI was denied access to him, and his CIA jailers expected him to crack within a few weeks.
Robert Kennedy called frequently to discover whether he had confessed yet.
Nosenko’s ordeal had started on April 4, 1964, when he was driven to a three-story safe house in a Washington suburb.
After an hour of questions, Stoiaken made a big show of discussing the prearranged results with some of the CIA personnel.
Nosenko was stripped, inspected inside his mouth, ears, and rectum, and then marched into the house’s tiny attic, which would serve as his prison for more than a year.
The only furniture was a metal bed fastened to the middle of the floor.
Guards watched him twenty-four hours a day through a wire mesh screen built into the door.
The room had no heat or air-conditioning, and during the oppressive Washington summers it was like a furnace.
Nosenko was given little food, allowed to shower only once a week, and not allowed a toothbrush or toothpaste.
There was no television, radio, reading material, exercise, or cigarettes.
The interrogations, which began within days, were extremely aggressive.
He was constantly attacked as a KGB plant and told his only chance for freedom was to confess.
Over the months, the CIA agents became increasingly frustrated that he refused to admit he was a bogus defector.
Robert Kennedy had long since stopped telephoning for an update, and the Warren Commission had released its report.
On August 13, 1965, after sixteen months closeted in the attic, Nosenko was moved by the CIA to a new prison, a top-secret facility constructed especially for him.
Located on the grounds of the CIA’s training facility, Camp Peary, it made the attic seem luxurious.
On a heavily wooded site on the ten-thousand-acre compound, Nosenko was locked inside a ten-foot-by-ten-foot windowless concrete bunker.
A single bare bulb illuminated the room’s only piece of furniture, a metal bed so small that his feet hung over the edges.
The bunker accentuated the weather, either brutally hot or freezing cold.
After four months, he was finally allowed to walk in a small enclosed yard that had been constructed outside his jail.
It was the first time in nearly two years he had seen daylight or been in fresh air.
The yard was encircled with a twelve-foot-high chain-link fence, and several feet beyond was an eighteen-foot-high fence of solid material.
The CIA did not want anyone, even at Camp Peary, to see what had become of him.
When his jailers finally allowed him to brush his teeth after two years in captivity, he was so starved for something to read that he secretly kept a printed piece of paper from the toothpaste package.
Though it was only a list of ingredients, he kept rereading it until his guards saw him and confiscated it.
Another time he painstakingly created a makeshift deck of cards from shreds of paper napkins.
The guards watched him for several weeks and destroyed it on the day he completed it.
Meanwhile, each subsequent Soviet defector who knew of the Nosenko case vouched for his bona fides.
Nosenko had been tried in absentia and was to be executed on his recapture.
Angleton concluded that in the decade after Golitsyn, the Soviets sent twenty-two phony defectors to the U.S.25 Today, the CIA and FBI consider every one of those defectors as bona fide.
Instead of being persuaded by growing evidence that Nosenko might be authentic, Angleton and Bagley grew increasingly impatient and debated drugging him to hasten his breakdown.
Nosenko is positive he was drugged, recalling injections by CIA doctors, followed by days of panic and terror.
In October 1966, two and a half years after he was placed into solitary confinement, and shortly after the incidents with drugs, a second polygraph was administered.
During the exam, the doctor inserted a gloved finger inside Nosenko’s rectum and, over his protests, wriggled it around for some ten minutes.
Nosenko is certain this was done to anger him and stimulate his blood pressure, a key factor in affecting polygraph readings.
But instead of asking yes and no questions as on the first test, he spent an hour calling Nosenko a “liar” and asking demeaning questions about alleged homosexuality.
Then Stoiaken took a lunch break, leaving Nosenko strapped to the machine.
When Stoiaken returned a couple of hours later, he continued the questioning for another two hours.
No matter how Nosenko responded or what the polygraph showed, Stoiaken said he was a liar.
His desperation was evident when he soon made a list of how the festering case could be closed.
Although undecided about Nosenko’s bona fides, he knew the matter had to be resolved.
Within several months of Helms’s taking office, he assigned a complete review to Bruce Solie, a sixteen-year veteran and the Agency’s most experienced spycatcher.
To offset Helms’s moves, Angleton and Bagley produced a nine-hundred-page report detailing why Nosenko was a plant.
Without deciding whether Nosenko was bona fide, it took Solie six months to determine that the Angleton/Bagley work was seriously flawed, more an unchallenged prosecutor’s brief than an impartial report.
As a result of Solie’s preliminary conclusions, CIA guards entered the concrete bunker, blindfolded, handcuffed, and shackled Nosenko, and stuffed him into the backseat of a car.
Instead, they drove him to a small CIA safe house in a Washington suburb.
After three and a half years, he was no longer in solitary confinement.
He was soon moved to a farmhouse, where he was given a comfortable bedroom, ate normal meals, and could exercise.
However, he was still the Agency’s prisoner, and during 1968 Solie interviewed him, often six days a week.
He found a very different man than the one portrayed by Angleton and Bagley.
In early 1968 the Soviet Division of the CIA, technically responsible for defectors, received a new director, Rolfe Kingsley, and he ordered a complete review of his department’s Nosenko files.
In debriefing files tucked away in a safe, he was astonished to discover the defector had provided six solid leads about Soviet penetration of European allies.
When the information was turned over to foreign governments, Soviet spies were arrested.
In August 1968, after eight months of interviews with Solie, Nosenko had a third polygraph, the only valid test he was ever given.
He passed it, including those questions about whether he was telling the truth about Lee Harvey Oswald.
It was the first CIA document to accept Nosenko as a bona fide defector.
J Edgar Hoover received a copy and dispatched FBI agents to interview Nosenko for the first time in over four years.
They discovered nine new counterintelligence cases and seventy-five leads on pending cases.
Although still confined to the farmhouse, he was allowed to read books and newspapers and given a small black-and-white television.
Starved for news, he asked for the 1964–67 copies of the World Almanac.
In December, almost five years after his arrival in the U.S., he was allowed to visit public places, as long as CIA handlers accompanied him.
While Angleton watched with frustration, the Soviet Division’s independent review also declared Nosenko a bona fide defector.
In March 1969, Helms employed him as an independent consultant on the KGB, at a salary of $16,500 per year, and arranged for limited compensation for his illegal imprisonment.
By April, five years after he was locked into an attic, he was released from all security restrictions.
All six directors of Central Intelligence who followed Helms agreed that Nosenko was a bona fide defector.
The FBI never wavered from its initial determination of his bona fides.
The official CIA position today is that Nosenko is the most valuable KGB defector to come to the West as of 1964.
Yet despite the gross injustice done to him, and the historical correction at the CIA, some still disparage his bona fides.
Assassination critics are not the only ones to use the first polygraph results to impugn Nosenko’s bona fides.
First, it commissioned an independent polygraph expert, Richard Arther, president of the Scientific Lie Detection, Inc., to evaluate Nosenko’s three polygraph tests.
He reached his conclusion solely by reviewing the official, typed reports of the test.
Second, the Select Committee used Nosenko’s statements from hostile interrogations to impeach his current testimony.
In its own investigation in 1967, the CIA discovered there were massive errors in the translation of the interviews conducted before and during Nosenko’s imprisonment.
Not only did the interrogators often misunderstand his broken English, but Bagley and Angleton further distorted the record by overlaying their own interpretations into the transcript.
Those were the answers often used by the Select Committee to establish whether Nosenko’s 1978 testimony was consistent and truthful.
While Nosenko pleaded that the hostile interrogations not be used against him, the committee’s counsel persisted.
Finally, Nosenko refused to answer any more questions and the interview abruptly ended.
Nosenko has been questioned twice about his CIA treatment, but the interview he granted for this book is the first that focused on Oswald.
Although he is no longer a full-time counterintelligence consultant for the Agency, there are still paramount concerns for Nosenko’s security.
Nothing about him can be reported, particularly personal details that might compromise his new identity.
When Edward Jay Epstein briefly interviewed him in the mid-1970s, the same restrictions applied.
Nosenko claims that after swearing him to secrecy, he revealed the state.
In the interview for this book, those questions were put to him, and the substance of his answers are included in this and the following chapter.
That ensured all foreigners were in regular contact with personnel of the Soviet tourist agency, Intourist, which, according to Nosenko, was an organization made up entirely of KGB informants or agents.
An Intourist guide, Rima Shirokova, played an important role in Oswald’s first weeks in Russia.
Oswald arrived in Helsinki on October 10, 1959, and applied for his visa from the Soviet consulate on October 12.
The Soviets issued his visa in two days,52 and it was valid until October 20, allowing him to take one trip of not more than six days to the Soviet Union.
Questions have been raised about the speed with which the visa was issued.
Nosenko should know, since he was deputy chief of the KGB’s Tourist Division in the Second Chief Directorate.
Thousands of tourist applications were processed annually, and only a cursory review was given the forms, with the names checked against a security watch list.
It was routinely approved, and since Helsinki was not as busy as London, Paris, or other major European capitals, its visa processing was quick.
Since the KGB had no inkling that he was anything but a student visitor, it had absolutely no interest in him until his Intourist guide, Rima Shirokova, informed them that, on his second day in Moscow, Oswald had told her he wanted to defect and become a Soviet citizen.
Oswald’s defection to Russia seemed so well planned that some refuse to believe he accomplished it by himself.
His disciplined savings from his Marine Corps salary, maneuvers for an early discharge, and rudimentary study of the Russian language all suggest long-term preparation.
He confirmed this after his arrival in Moscow, writing to his brother, Robert, that he had thought of defecting for over a year.
October 18, two days after he arrived in Russia, was his twentieth birthday.
Although Oswald had declared his intention to defect, Nosenko is adamant the KGB did not interrogate him.
The Soviets had made the U-2 a top priority and finally shot one down on May 1, 1960, less than seven months after Oswald’s arrival.
First, he wasn’t in the Marines any longer, but even if he had come to us in a uniform, we still would have had no interest.
We had better information already coming from KGB sources than he could ever give us.
The media section of the KGB would have seen Oswald’s public interviews, but they would not necessarily have transferred that information to us.
Even if we knew about Atsugi, it is unlikely we would have spoken to him.
Intelligence experts on the U-2 concur that Oswald could not have contributed to its eventual downing, as some have suggested.
Though Oswald was not interrogated in depth, he was questioned by KGB informants, including Shirokova.
On October 19, he was interviewed by Radio Moscow correspondent Lev Setyayev.
While the purported reason was to record Oswald’s impressions as a tourist for broadcast overseas, Setyayev was also an informant for the KGB.74 Based on the information it received, Nosenko’s department vetoed Oswald’s request for citizenship.
Webster, another defector who had arrived shortly before Oswald, was happy for three or four months, but then he missed the conveniences of home and wanted to go back to America.
It was an unusual person who decided to defect as a civilian to Russia.
And, of course, we could never totally dismiss the idea that any of these defectors might be a provocation from American intelligence.
The official was discouraging about his chance for obtaining citizenship but said he would check on extending his visa.
Later that afternoon, Oswald’s citizenship request was officially denied and he was told he must leave Moscow within two hours.
He was late by ten minutes, and then by twenty minutes, so she went to the duty clerk on his floor.
She got the manager of the hotel and told him she was worried about Oswald, and together they went to his room.
I think ‘when Rimma comes at 8. to find me dead it wil be a great shock. somewhere, a violin plays, as I wacth my life whirl away.
Oswald was transferred to a psychiatric ward at Botkinskaya, where he was kept for three days.
A transcript, maintained in the KGB files, of a conversation with the doctor who sewed up Oswald’s slashed wrist indicated that he was capable of more irrational acts.
The KGB certainly knew it was right not to grant Oswald citizenship, but now it was faced with the difficult decision of what to do with him.
There were two choices—to force him onto a plane for coerced deportation, or allow him to stay temporarily without granting him citizenship.
After Khrushchev’s return, the Soviets were acutely aware of how the treatment of visiting Americans might affect the new relationship between the countries.
Because of his suicide attempt, Oswald gained the attention of the USSR’s leaders.
By telling Oswald he had to leave, he was so unstable he might try and succeed in killing himself.
If we forced him onto a plane for deportation, there was still the image of a student being manhandled by the Soviet security forces.
Nosenko’s department took more than two months to decide finally what to do with him.
Meanwhile, Oswald continued to try to impress his new hosts with his zeal for the Russian system and his distaste for America.
On Saturday, October 31, after three days in which he stayed in his hotel room waiting futilely for word from Soviet officials, he stormed into the American embassy and tried to renounce his United States citizenship.
He declared he was a Marxist, tossed his passport across the consul’s desk, and said he intended to give the Soviets all the information he had acquired as a Marine radar operator.
American consul Richard Snyder was still smarting from a recent would-be defector who had quickly changed his mind afterward.
Snyder knew Oswald’s act would be irrevocable, and thought he was too young at twenty to make such a permanent decision.
He put him off by claiming it was too late in the day and the paperwork could not be finished in time.
Although Snyder told him to return Monday to finish the revocation, he did not.
He was apparently satisfied that his bravado had adequately impressed the Soviets, and wrote in his diary that he was “elated” by his scene at the embassy.
In the belief his mail might be read by the Soviets, Oswald was explicit in denouncing the United States when writing to his family.
While Oswald ended the year in Moscow spending most of his time studying Russian in his hotel room, the KGB decided his fate.
The local KGB in Minsk was ordered to monitor Oswald once he arrived there.
Under no conditions could any officer establish an operative relationship with Oswald.
They could not approach him except in the course of their surveillance.
In those days no KGB agent would think of violating an order from Moscow.
Then on Friday, November 22, 1963, he was working late at KGB headquarters at Dzerzhinsky Square when somebody ran in with the news that President Kennedy had been shot.
Turning on the radio, Nosenko and several other agents monitored the reports until the confirmation of the President’s death.
But if Nosenko was shocked by the assassination, his biggest surprise was yet to come.
According to Nosenko, that news sent shock waves through the KGB and the Kremlin.
He was initially relieved, because it appeared the local KGB had followed its orders of only conducting surveillance on Oswald.
The other files were just the ordinary reports of the local surveillance.
But the first would show if there was any intelligence approach to Oswald.
Later, Nosenko was relieved to discover it referred to a lieutenant colonel in the MVD, the local militia—he was an uncle of Marina, the woman Oswald had married.
Nosenko is adamant that defection was his goal since 1962 but that 1964 was his first opportunity.
Yet by the fall the KGB had reportedly reached an arrangement with Norman Mailer for access to the file.
Two went to China, one to East Germany, and the remaining eleven to Russia, four of those with their wives.
When a tourist left his room, he was required to give the key to the clerk for safekeeping.
The early entries seem to be written after the events described, but the later ones, reflecting life in Minsk, appear contemporaneous.
He maintains the spelling is too good to belong to Oswald, a terrible speller.
But the diary is replete with misspellings and Oswald’s trademark transpositions.
Handwriting experts used by both the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee determined the diary was written by Oswald.
It was created in response to a State Department request about defectors in general.
Some exaggerate her uncle’s position to suggest an intelligence connection for either Marina or Lee.
He arrived in the provincial capital on January 7 and was met by Roza Kuznetsova, an Intourist worker who would become a friend.
There, he discovered that as the only American defector in the city, he was a minor celebrity.
The next day he met the mayor and was promised a rent-free apartment, something that normally took years to achieve.
On January 13, Oswald began his job as a metalworker at the Belorussian Radio and Television Factory, an enormous complex that employed over five thousand workers.
He was initially disappointed with his work, since he had told Soviet officials he was instead interested in going back to school to study economics, philosophy, and politics.
His monthly income, between his salary and a Red Cross subsidy, was a very comfortable $150.
By March, extraordinarily fast by Soviet standards, he was placed in a one-room apartment in a middle-class complex at 4 Kalinin Street.
Although his room had no telephone or television and neighbors described it as sparsely furnished and dismal, it was in a good building and afforded a fine view from two small balconies of the Svisloch River.
As an American defector at the height of the cold war, he was an oddity, and Russians, who called him Alik, because Lee sounded too Chinese, went out of their way to ask him questions about America and to help him settle into his new homeland.
Oswald was more social and contented than at any other time in his life.
From his first days at the factory, he formed a friendship with the plant’s deputy engineer, Alexander Ziger, a Polish Jew who had immigrated to Argentina in 1938, and then to Russia in 1955.
Ziger spoke English, and he and his wife, Maria, often entertained Oswald at their home.
Eventually Lee briefly dated the Zigers’ daughters, Anita and Eleonora.
For several months, Oswald took Roza Kuznetsova, the In-tourist worker who also acted as his interpreter, to the movies, opera, or theater almost every night.
One was Pavel Golovachev, a young co-worker and son of a highly decorated World War II pilot; also, Kuznetsova introduced him to Ernst Titovets, a medical student who spoke English.
By the summer, he bought a 16-gauge shotgun, joined a hunting club, and went on several excursions in the countryside.
Within two weeks of meeting Oswald, KGB agent Aleksandr Kostyukov approached eighteen-year-old Golovachev outside his apartment building and pressured him to meet with agents several times a week to supply information about Alik.
At other times the KGB used informants to engage him in anti-Soviet conversations.
When Oswald went hunting in the nearby woods, KGB agents followed to ensure he did not try to observe military or restricted sites.
He heard nothing about his request to attend a university, and the factory work had become tedious.
He later said he “perhaps fell in love with her the first minute” he saw her.
They dated through the fall of 1960 and spent New Year’s Eve of 1961 with her family.
It was another of his failures, following on the footsteps of school and the Marines.
His diary entry for January 4, only two days after Ella’s rejection, reveals his disillusionment with Russia was now pronounced.
He told them no, asking only that his temporary papers be extended a year.
His changing opinions about the Soviet Union were reflected in his deteriorating performance at the factory.
Over several months Oswald became increasingly lazy, and took to propping his feet on a table and complaining about not being paid enough.
In his diary, he whined about the trade-union meetings and the compulsory mass gymnastics, attendance at political lectures, and weekend crop work.
Always rebellious against authority, he slowly discovered the Soviet system was much more regimented than he had ever imagined.
Expecting to find a classless society, the fulfillment of Marxist theory, he instead recognized that the Soviets promoted a privileged Communist party class while forcing most of the population into compliant workers’ collectives.
But instead of abandoning his Communist philosophy, he merely concluded that the Soviet system was a perversion of Marxist goals.
He considered himself the pure ideologue, not corrupted by petty desires for privilege and material accumulation.
As Russia’s luster dimmed, Oswald found America less objectionable than when he had defected.
Oswald answered a week later, March 5, saying he could not leave Minsk without Soviet approval and requesting that everything be resolved through the mail.
On March 24, the embassy again wrote that he would have to visit Moscow.
The State Department, already notified of Oswald’s change of heart, had decided to return his passport only if he personally appeared at the embassy and the consular staff was satisfied, after talking to him, that he had not renounced his United States citizenship.
Boring but at the last hour I am introduced to a girl with a French hair-do and red-dress with white slipper I dance with her.
Born out of wedlock, she remained unsure of her father’s real identity throughout her childhood.
Her mother died when Marina was fifteen, and unable to endure a terrible relationship with her stepfather, Marina had moved from Leningrad to Minsk in August 1959.
Marina’s comments about her first encounter with Oswald have mistakenly raised suspicion that he must have had “official” help to be so fluent in the Russian language.
Such conjecture was fueled when Lee Rankin, the Warren Commission’s chief counsel, once indicated he was trying to “run down” a report that Oswald had studied at the Monterey School.
After investigation, the Commission was convinced Oswald had never been there.
The Monterey School is not an intelligence facility, and its student rosters show Oswald was never enrolled there and never attended a single class.
Since the autumn of 1957, however, when he was in the Marines, he had been studying the language, sometimes with the help of an officer in his unit who shared his interest.
By the end of 1958, Oswald was so disillusioned with his Marine service that he flaunted his interest in Russian while posted to the El Toro air base.
On February 25, 1959, seventeen months after he began his “crash course,” Oswald took an Army Russian equivalency examination.
He often sat in the barracks testing himself against the dictionary, a Russian paper, or a textbook.
By the time of his defection in October 1959, two years of efforts produced meager results.
Richard Snyder, the embassy consul, said, “He did not know very much Russian.
I don’t think he could have gotten along on his own in Russian society.
From the middle of November to the end of December 1959, while in Moscow, he wrote, “I have bought myself two self-teaching Russian Lan.
It was not until the fall of 1960, nearly a year after his arrival, that Oswald wrote in his diary that his Russian was improving.
But even after two and a half years in Russia, his language ability was limited.
In Minsk, his upstairs neighbor Mayya Gertsovich said he spoke Russian poorly.
The day after the dance, Oswald was admitted to a hospital to have his adenoids removed.
He asked Marina to visit, and feeling sorry for him, she stopped by daily.
Her association with a foreigner carried a certain prestige, and she liked the attention from her friends.
They were married twelve days later, April 30, 1961, in the Minsk registry office.
Henry Hurt writes “Nothing about Oswald’s time in the Soviet Union is more peculiar and beguiling than his marriage to Marina.
While she says she liked him more than any of her other boyfriends, she admits that a great inducement was that he had his own apartment.
George de Mohrenschildt, Oswald’s good friend, later said, “She said it was her dream some day to live in an apartment like that.… was one of the greatest things she desired … and she finally achieved her dream.
In that letter, he also asked for assurances that he would not be prosecuted for any crimes if he returned to the United States Around the time that Oswald told Marina of his intention to return home, she had begun complaining about him to some friends.
She confided to her neighbor Mayya Gertsovich that he was a tyrant, fought constantly with her, brought home little money from his job, and was demanding in peculiar ways.
He refused to allow her to wear makeup and was obsessed that she stay ultra-thin, almost boyish, in her figure.
But those early problems were temporarily diverted when Marina discovered in June that she was pregnant.
Marina had learned about Ella, felt ambivalent about having the child, was repulsed by sex with him, and thought she had made a mistake by marrying.
His changeable nature was evident not only in his relationship with Marina but even in small matters.
While in Russia, he initially attended dances with Ernst Titovets, and then tired of them.
He bought a camera, started developing a photo hobby, and then just as quickly dropped the project.
Oswald purchased a radio so he could listen to Voice of America , but his listening became sporadic over the months, † He was extremely enthusiastic when he had purchased a single-barreled TOZ shotgun and joined the plant’s hunting club.
But after a few outings, he tired of the sport and sold the gun to a secondhand store for 18 rubles.
By the beginning of July, the embassy had still not answered his May letter disclosing his marriage and his wife’s desire to join him.
Oswald decided to visit Moscow, obtained Soviet permission to travel, and unexpectedly arrived at the embassy on Saturday, July 8, 1961.
It was the same day of the week he had arrived in 1959 to try and revoke his United States citizenship, and again he was asked to return Monday.
Oswald telephoned Marina in Minsk, and she joined him in Moscow,* waiting outside the embassy while he met with American consul Richard Snyder, the same official who had encountered him in 1959.74 Snyder found him remorseful.
Unknown to Snyder, Oswald told him several lies—that he had never applied for Soviet citizenship, had not made derogatory statements about the U.S., and was not a member of the factory trade union.
He truthfully told Snyder that he had never given the Soviets any military information and that the KGB had not debriefed him.
Convinced Oswald had learned his lesson, Snyder had him fill out an application for renewal of his American passport.
The renewal was necessary since his passport was set to expire on September 10, 1961, and Snyder considered it very unlikely that the Soviets would issue an exit visa in the next two months.
Waterman’s decision was further reviewed and approved by the chief of the Passport Office’s foreign operations division, as well as the legal division.
On the next day, Tuesday, July 11, Oswald reappeared at the embassy, this time with Marina.
Even if Marina had told the truth, it was not an automatic disqualification, as some Russian wives of American citizens had previously been admitted to the United States although they were Komsomol members.
As for Marina’s membership in a Communist trade union, McVickar concluded it was mandatory and did not adversely affect her application.
He informed him that they were doing everything possible to leave the Soviet Union.
Marina and Lee returned to Minsk on July 14 and then began the work of obtaining permission to leave the country from Soviet authorities.
When the news of their effort spread in Minsk, Marina was pressured to change her mind.
Only four days after their joint appearance at the United States embassy, Oswald wrote to the embassy, complaining “there have been some unusual and crude attempts on my wife at her place of work.
The Russian officials had reams of forms to fill out, all in triplicate, and Marina recalls that her apparently dyslexic husband had to bring five or six blank forms home for each one he managed to complete error-free.
In his diary he wrote, “On August 20th we give the papers out they say it will be 3½ months before we know wheather they let us go or not.
Two of her aunts tried to scare Marina by telling her that the United States was racked with poverty and unemployment.
In December, Oswald wrote a letter to Senator John Tower of Texas, seeking his assistance in budging the Soviets. “he Soviets refuse to permit me and my Soviet wife … to leave the Soviet Union.
She was not the daughter of a prominent family or a government official.
She was not considered so wonderful herself …”93 A little over a month after the news of Soviet approval, Marina gave birth to a daughter, June.
As he concentrated on his daughter, his mania to return to the States subsided, and in February and March his regular flow of letters to the United States embassy dropped to only one.
After she interviewed with consul John McVickar at the embassy in July, he recommended to the State Department on August 28, 1961, that her visa application be approved.
Two months later, October 1961, State informed the United States embassy in Moscow that Marina was eligible for an immigrant visa.
State told INS that it “believes it is in the interest of the United States to get Lee Harvey Oswald and his family out of the Soviet Union and on their way to this country soon.
In point of fact, their approval to come to the United States was not easily obtained from either government, nor was it speedy.
Instead of providing evidence of conspiracy, it is a classic study of how bureaucracies strictly follow narrowly drafted regulations, mixed with some blunders and inefficiency.
From the time Oswald visited the United States embassy in Moscow, it took nearly a year before he returned with his family to the States.
It took Marina six months to get an American visa, and since 1953, the average time for Soviet citizens seeking to immigrate had been between three and six months.
The Soviet exit visas for both of them also took six months, with the average being four months.
He frequently complained, blaming both Russian and American bureaucratic incompetence.
Several weeks after the INS approval, the State Department granted Oswald’s request for a repatriation loan so he could pay for transportation to the States.
On June 1, he signed a promissory note for $435.71.99* On that same day, Oswald, Marina, and June left by train for Rotterdam, from where they had reserved passage on a ship to the U.S.100 The Zigers and Pavel Golovachev went to the train station to see them off.
Maybe he’ll go back and not like it there and then he’ll want to come back here.
Summers speculates that Oswald stopped over in West Berlin—without Marina—and then continued west on his own.
They share the same visa stamps, with the exception that his passport is not marked on the entry to the West, at Helmstedt.
Marina’s passport, a Soviet document, would automatically be stamped at a crossing to the West.
As for Oswald’s American passport, the decision to stamp it was at the discretion of the border guards.
He was indifferent toward her for most of the journey, but occasionally they argued, with Marina again feeling he did not love her.
They finally arrived at Hoboken, New Jersey, on June 13, 1962, in the midst of a heavy downpour.
They were met by Spas T Raikin, a representative of the Traveler’s Aid Society, which had been contacted by the State Department.
The next day, with a $200 wire transfer from his brother, Robert, they left by air for Texas.
He was as deflated as when the Russians initially ignored him after his defection.
Robert recalled, “He seemed, perhaps the word is, disappointed, when there were no newspaper reporters around.
He wanted to announce his discovery that Russia was as bad as the United States Oswald later wrote his own questions and answers, the ones he had hoped to be asked.
I liv no man I, have lived under both systems, I have sought the answers and although it would be very easy to dupe myself into believing one system is better than the other, I know they are not.
In his diary, Oswald wrote that he believed the money was authorized by the Soviet Interior Ministry to reward him for his anti-American statements.
Some contend he was put to work in Shop Number 25, an experimental plant in a restricted area.
Summers also notes there was a Soviet intelligence school in Minsk, with the inference there is a connection with Oswald.
Epstein believes that Oswald may have received Soviet training in propaganda and street demonstrations while there.
Before his arrival in Minsk, the KGB external surveillance in Moscow had code-named Oswald Nalim, a Russian fish.
Titovets gave Oswald passages by Hemingway and Shakespeare, among others, to record on the tape.
They were just standing there loafing around and I didn’t like their faces, so I just shot them all with a machine gun.
In it, Oswald referred to an earlier letter he said he had sent to the embassy, but none was ever received.
When the Soviets intercepted his February letter, Oswald’s Red Cross subsidies were terminated.
The only person he informed of his plans was his friend Alexander Ziger, who advised him not to tell any of his other acquaintances.
One of the Americans, Robert Webster, was an even more extreme case than Oswald in that Webster had successfully renounced his American citizenship.
By 1963, thirty-six defectors to Communist countries had come back to the United States *During this six-week period, the KGB file, informants’ statements, and Oswald’s own writings confirm he stayed in his central Moscow hotel and worked on improving his Russian.
Marina’s friend lived in the same apartment complex as another American defector.
Henry Hurt admits, “It could, of course, be mere coincidence …” *Oswald told Marina he had once slept with a peasant girl, Nella, and “there was so much of her” that it made him physically sick.
When he saw a girl he liked, he commented to Marina, “She’d suit me fine.
To KGB counterintelligence, that meant the former Marine did not even grasp the fundamentals of simple radio devices and could not have had any intelligence training.
After returning to the U.S., Oswald complained to his brother, Robert, that the firing pin on his rifle was defective.
At the bottom of the form, four acts were listed that would indicate a person had forfeited his American citizenship.
All the prohibitions related to actions in a foreign state, including swearing allegiance, serving in the armed forces or the government, or voting in an election.
On Oswald’s form, have not was apparently stricken, indicating he had committed one or more of the prescribed acts.
In approving Oswald, therefore, it appeared that Snyder had bent the rules.
The author tried to examine both the original and the carbon at the National Archives in 1993, but neither could be located by the archive’s staff.
Marina needed a birth certificate for the United States authorities, and the “new” one was merely an official copy of her original.
Some in the KGB thought Oswald might try to use the bombs to force the issue of his exit visas.
But he abandoned his project shortly after receiving permission to emigrate.
When Marina ran a fever and had too much breast milk, he offered to suck the milk.
She was further surprised when he swallowed it instead of spitting it out as she expected.
The State Department loan, together with $200 he had saved, was almost the exact amount needed for train and sea travel to America, the cheapest form of transportation.
A lookout card, a warning tag attached to a person’s passport file, should have been posted to Oswald’s when he received the loan, to make sure he repaid it.
After the assassination, the State Department’s legal adviser, Abram Chayes, admitted that it was a bureaucratic mistake, which some view as evidence of wrongdoing and even conspiracy.
The State Department held the clause applied to Oswald since his “unstable character and prior criticisms of the United States” made his presence in the USSR damaging to United States prestige.
She testified to the Select Committee that they stayed in a cheap boarding-house, and Oswald paid for the stay.
Raikin was actually chosen because he was a native Russian, and the State Department, unsure of the quality of Oswald’s Russian, thought it best to have a translator meet Marina.
She told Lee she intended to write a book about his defection, and they were arguing before the end of the weekend.
Oswald had smuggled the notes out of Russia, and told her he wished to publish them as a memoir.
For the next three days, Oswald sat in her office helping her decipher his writing.
When Bates had typed ten pages, about a third of his notes, he said he was out of money, but turned down her offer of continuing the work for nothing.
To obtain some feedback on his “memoirs,” he found Peter Gregory, a Russian-born petroleum engineer who worked part-time as a language teacher at the Fort Worth Public Library.
Dressed in a poorly cut heavy flannel Russian suit, he visited Gregory twice at his office, not only to show his memoirs, but also to inquire about possible work as a translator.
Through Gregory, Oswald’s presence became known to a local Russian community of emigres, most of them middleor upper-middle-class, politically conservative, and staunchly anti-Communist.
There were a couple of dozen families living between Fort Worth and Dallas, and most of them attended the area’s single Eastern Orthodox church.
They were always curious about current conditions inside the USSR, and after Oswald met Gregory, the word quickly spread that an American who had lived there for a couple of years had returned with a young Russian wife and baby.
Within a week, Gregory and his son, Paul, visited Marina and arranged for her to earn some money by giving Paul Russian-language lessons over the summer.
Members of the émigré community were not the only ones talking about the couple from Russia.
Several journalists called Oswald after he settled into Robert’s home, but he refused to be interviewed, still piqued because no one had met him at the airport.
But he received another call during the first week that was more difficult to refuse.
Special agents John Fain and B Tom Carter conducted the two-hour interview.
Oswald denied he had had any contacts with the KGB or that he had threatened to disclose military secrets, and even disavowed his attempt to renounce his citizenship.
He also flatly disowned any effort on his part to become a Soviet citizen, and promised to inform the FBI if any Soviet agents approached him in America.
Just two days before the FBI interview, Oswald had hit Marina for the first time in one of their fights.
He had been rude over the telephone to one of the local Russians, Gali Clark.
At the dinner table with Robert and Vada, Oswald told Marina of the call, and she was angry with him.
He kept smiling and told her in Russian that he did not want Robert to know they were fighting.
When she walked away from the table, he rushed after her and had a cold look in his eyes she had never seen before.
He slapped her hard around the face and threatened to kill her if she spoke a word to Robert or Vada.
Marina was so stunned she ran from the house and wandered the neighborhood for two hours, wondering what to do.
Marina excused Lee’s outburst because she felt that without a high school diploma and with no job skills, he was under tremendous pressure to find work.
To make things worse, his mother showed up again after he had been at Robert’s a month and announced she had given up her job and rented a small Fort Worth apartment that Marina and Lee could move into.
She intended to live with them, sleeping in the living room and paying the rent.
Only three days later, after being referred by the Texas Employment Commission, Lee finally landed a job as a sheet-metal worker for the Louv-R-Pak division of Leslie Welding Company, a manufacturer of louvers and ventilators.
He hated the menial work, and his foreman later remembered he never mixed with any of the other workers.
Lee, as usual, was very cool to his mother, but she now blamed Marina for alienating her son.
She also suspected Marina really spoke more English than she indicated and speculated that her daughter-in-law, and maybe even her son, had become Russian spies.
When Marina and Lee played a Russian version of tic-tac-toe, Marguerite worried they were passing secret codes.
On the day Robert picked them up, August 10, Marguerite screamed and cried in front of the house, even chasing the car down the street as it drove away.
Marina feared she might have a heart attack, but Lee coldly told her, “She’ll be all right.
On the evening of Thursday, August 16, agents John Fain and Arnold Brown drove to the end of the block on which Oswald lived and waited for him to return from work.
At 5:30, as they saw him walking home, the agents slowly drove alongside.
Fain noticed he had changed since the first interview, seven weeks earlier.
Although Oswald still refused to say why he had defected to the USSR, he again promised to contact them if he heard from Soviet agents.
Based upon his answers, together with information in reports from two confidential informants that Marina and Lee had nothing to do with the local Communist party, Fain recommended the case be closed.
With Oswald more tense and withdrawn than usual, the arguments and his physical abuse of Marina increased.
At a dinner party on Saturday, August 25, the senior Gregorys invited the Oswalds for dinner.
He had hesitated about meeting a defector from the Soviet Union, but he wanted to hear from the Oswalds what was happening in Russia.
Since Marina had lived in Bouhe’s birthplace, she told him what she could about the city since his departure.
Frail and caring constantly for her infant daughter, she evoked both sympathy and affection.
The Soviets were initially fascinated to hear his stories about the United States But now the emigres’ interest in Russia was satisfied by Marina.
They avoided his favorite subject, politics, and he had no use for them.
Katya Ford remembered, “I had heard of them … from Mr George Bouhe … who had told us that there was a young Russian girl came to Fort Worth.
Elena Hall, another emigree, was at the Oswald home and says he got “real mad” and yelled at Bouhe and Marina.
Anna Meller, another Russian, also saw Oswald get “mad people tried to help Marina.
Paul Gregory reported that during his Russian lessons, Lee sat on the sofa reading Lenin and later praised both Khrushchev and Castro.
Meller, on her third visit, noticed Das Kapital and Communist literature on a small table.
Bouhe saw an assortment of Communist books, including works by Marx and Lenin.
He was “aghast,” and flipped open the covers and noticed some were Fort Worth Public Library books.
They thought that it would punish Marina if they cut him out of the community, and none of them wanted to do that.
Marina told Meller she had walked into the door during the middle of the night, but Meller knew the “girl trying to hide something …”46 George Bouhe also saw Marina with a black eye, but when he asked what happened, she told him that Lee hit her.
De Mohrenschildt simply stopped at the Mercedes Street apartment and introduced himself.
But eventually he was the only person who grew to like the introverted youngster.
As opposed to many others who met Oswald, de Mohrenschildt never found him arrogant.
Oswald had a ninth-grade education, was humorless and introverted, and, at the age of twemy-two, had a provincial view of the world despite his time in Japan and Russia.
For most people, it was difficult to get more than a few sentences out of him during a conversation, and he disliked socializing.
De Mohrenschildt, an oil geologist, was a handsome six-foot-two-inch, fifty-one-year-old sportsman and adventurer who had been involved in diverse business ventures on five continents.
Perennially tanned, he was a womanizer and partygoer who also happened to hold numerous university degrees and had the right to call himself a baron since he was born into an aristocratic Russian family.
Married four times, friends of the Bouvier family, including the parents of Jacqueline Kennedy, he was loud and boisterous, able to drink heavily without ever showing the effect, and had a wild sense of humor.
Following a 1957 geological survey in Yugoslavia, the CIA’s Domestic Contact Division interviewed him.
Summers postulates that de Mohrenschildt monitored Oswald for the CIA, at Moore’s request.
Although extremely different on the surface, the two men had a similar rebellious streak that often made them outsiders.
Emigres remember that if he was talking to someone who was a right-winger, he advocated Communism, and in front of leftists, he praised fascism.
At a local Dallas social club, whose members included some of the city’s most prominent Jewish businessmen, he gave a speech where he praised the Nazi SS chieftan Heinrich Himmler.
He and his wife, Jeanne, often walked Dallas streets, or drove their convertible, attired only in bathing suits, even during the winter months.
Voshinin said he was constantly trying to pose as “a big shot” and she normally discounted 30 to 40 percent of what he said because of exaggeration, and some 90 percent of his wife’s stories.
Instead of being the aristocratic baron portrayed in many books, totally at odds with the lowly Oswald, it is evident that de Mohrenschildt shared with Oswald an outcast’s perspective on life.
And the politics of both de Mohrenschildt and his wife was another common bond with Oswald.
Not only were the de Mohrenschildts aggressive atheists,64 but Igor Voshinin considered both of them leftists.
Declan Ford, the husband of emigree Katya Ford, said de Mohrenschildt had “a reputation for being a leftwing enthusiast …”66 In his own Warren Commission testimony, de Mohrenschildt admitted he was politically the furthest left of the Dallas Russians.
He said that Communism “is a system that can work and works, and possibly for a very poor man, and a very undeveloped nation it may be a solution.
De Mohrenschildt was his mentor, almost a political and social guide whom Oswald respected.
He relished the opportunity to talk to someone he viewed as his intellectual equal.
And de Mohrenschildt cultivated Oswald by doing something few had ever done—he was attentive to him.
If you asked him some questions about him, he was just out of this world.
He noticed Oswald was egocentric, and “that is probably the reason he was clinging to me.
He would try to be next to me—because let’s face it, I am a promoter and a salesman.
And he said—he sort of smiled—you could see that it was a delightful idea.
Oswald said that he was behind in his rent and complained he couldn’t find a higher-paying job.
They advised him that Dallas would have better prospects than Fort Worth.
Before the day had finished, Elena Hall invited Marina and June to stay in her home while Oswald looked for work in Dallas.
Marina and June moved to Hall’s home, while Oswald went to Dallas looking for work.
Hall learned that Oswald was “cruel to her, and they would argue for nothing, just nothing.
Living in a strange country, unable to speak the language, and without her family, she felt trapped.
Now she told Hall of how “cold” Lee was to her, and that she never wanted another child with him.
Marina assumed Lee would oppose it, and decided to do it before they reunited.
Over the next two weeks, Oswald spent weekends at Hall’s house with Marina and June.
Both de Mohrenschildt and Bouhe tried to find work for the unskilled Oswald.
Oswald scored well on tests given by the Texas Employment Commission, indicating aptitude for clerical work.
Knowing he needed money badly, Helen Cunningham, a counselor in the commission’s clerical and sales division, decided to get him any job she could find.
She sent him first to an architect’s firm to be a messenger, but he was not hired.
On October 11, she referred Oswald to Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall Co., a graphic-arts company, to fill the post of a photoprint trainee.
He was hired, and was delighted since he had a longstanding interest in photography.
His employment at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall has created considerable controversy.
The company prepared advertisements for newspapers, magazines, and trade publications and was also under contract to the Army’s Map Service.
But Jaggars’s work for the government was almost entirely unclassified.
The small percentage that was confidential involved the setting of words, letters, and figures for maps, but at no time did the company have any idea of what the material correlated to—the actual maps were never at Jaggars.
Oswald did not have one, did not work with the Army maps, and never had access to that section.
Garrison is correct that Oswald learned a good deal about photographic techniques at Jaggars, but mistakenly assumes it was for an intelligence employer.
Oswald worked hard, but his efforts were part of a fantasy world he slowly invented, one that made it increasingly difficult for him to differentiate reality from illusion.
When he lived in Russia, he once told Marina he “would love a life” of a spy.
One of the emigres, Lydia Dymitruk, once noticed a book, How to Be a Spy, on his living room table.
He asked another co-worker, Dennis Ofstein, to teach him advanced photographic techniques.
He constantly requested overtime, and tried to stay late on many days to practice with the plant’s equipment.
At first, he tried his talents at making calling cards for himself and de Mohrenschildt.
Then he created samples of his work and sent them to two leftist publications to which he had subscribed shortly after his return to the U.S., The Worker, the Communist party newspaper, and The Militant, the Socialist Workers party paper.
Oswald tried to join the Socialist Workers party, but it did not have a Texas branch.
After months of honing his skills, and enrolling in an evening typing course, he was ready to try more sophisticated applications.
Although there is no direct evidence, it appears likely that it was at Jaggars, where he had the necessary equipment, that he could produce poor forgeries of a Selective Service Notice of Classification and Marine Corps Certificate of Service, both in the name of Alek Hidell.
The document experts who examined the forgeries said Oswald had made photographic reproductions of his own Selective Service and Certificate of Service cards, blotted out the information he did not want, made new copies on which he typed the Hidell data, and prepared another print as the final copy.
Oswald feared the FBI had him under surveillance, but he felt safe using Hidell and the supporting documents whenever he thought his own name might attract government scrutiny that he wished to avoid.
He later told Bouhe he was temporarily staying at the Carolton Boarding House in Oak Cliff, but records show he was never there.
The next day, the Oswalds, with the help of de Mohrenschildt’s daughter, Alexandra, and son-in-law, Gary Taylor, packed their meager belongings at Hall’s house.
Alex Kleinlerer, who also arrived to help, witnessed yet another outburst aimed at Marina.
He summoned her “in a commanding tone of voice just like … you would call a dog,” recalled Kleinlerer.
He screamed at her in Russian and, while she had the baby in her arms, slapped her twice, hard across the face.
Marina, who called it a pigsty, so hated the new apartment that when she first saw it she almost refused to move in.
The Taylors, who had come along in the rented van, thought the place was terrible.
But Oswald persuaded her to try it—they could fix it up, and it was three rooms for only $68 a month.
On Monday, November 5, they had a violent argument and Marina ran from the house.
From a nearby gas station, she called Anna Meller and, sobbing, pleaded for help.
The Mellers paid for a taxi to bring her to their one-bedroom apartment.
The following day, the emigres held a conference regarding Marina’s predicament.
Bouhe told her that if she left Lee, the community would help her, but if she went back, she was on her own.
De Mohrenschildt—probably the only person who could even have attempted it—drove to the Elsbeth Street apartment the next morning to fetch Marina and June’s belongings.
It was the first time de Mohrenschildt had ever seen him angry, but it drove de Mohrenschildt to even greater fury.
Before de Mohrenschildt finished packing Marina’s goods, Oswald even helped.
She was annoying him all the time—‘Why don’t you make some money?,’ why don’t they have a car, why don’t they have more dresses, look at everybody else living so well, and they are just miserable flunkies.
After a week with the Fords, Marina and June moved to the home of an emigre couple, Frank and Valentina Ray.
He arrived in the late afternoon, and Marina and Lee went into a guest bedroom and spoke for an hour.
Lee engaged Frank Ray in a discussion on economics, and eventually gave Ray a lecture about the shortfalls of capitalism.
Marina was even more distraught because now she had lost the support of the emigres by returning to him.
For Thanksgiving, Oswald tried to break out of the isolation by reaching out to his own family.
Marina, Lee, and June went to Robert and Vada’s house for the holiday, and Lee saw and spoke to John Pic for the first time in ten years.
It was the last time Pic ever saw him, and Robert would not see Lee again until after the assassination.
De Mohrenschildt brought the embattled couple to a December 28 celebration of the Russian New Year at the Fords’ house.
For the provocative de Mohrenschildt, it was an ideal way to crash the party.
Oswald spent most of the night talking to Yaeko Okui, a Japanese woman who had been brought to the party by Lev Aronson, the first cellist of the Dallas Symphony Orchestra.
Oswald talked to her about Japan and briefly discussed economics with Aronson.
That night she wrote an old boyfriend in Russia, complaining how Lee had changed, that she was lonely, and that she wished she had married him instead.
The letter was returned within a week for insufficient postage and Oswald discovered it.
Marina’s future letters had to be approved by Lee before he gave her postage money.
One note that had his full approval arrived at the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C., at the end of the year.
Despite the prodding of acquaintances and his family, Oswald steadfastly refused to teach her, claiming he was afraid he would lose his weak mastery of Russian.
He also told a reporter in Moscow that he wanted to write about the Soviet Union.
But five months after having Bates type the notes, the fickle Oswald told an acquaintance that he had no intent to publish his memoirs, as they were not meant for people to read.
Between 1958 and 1963, the CIA did not automatically debrief returning defectors, instead allowing the FBI to report significant results from its interviews.
Of the twenty-two American defectors who returned to the United States during those five years, the CIA only interviewed four, and all interviews related to particular intelligence matters.
However, in 1993, documents discovered at the National Archives indicated that the Domestic Contact Division, through a CIA employee, Andy Anderson, had probably debriefed Oswald in 1962.
As of early 1994, neither the interview notes nor Anderson had been located.
Yet other CIA employees confirmed they knew of the debriefing and those familiar with its contents described it as innocuous, showing that Oswald knew nothing about Soviet intelligence.
After the death of JFK, the CIA evidently feared that any pre-assassination contact with Oswald might be embarrassing and therefore denied the existence of the file.
As discussed further in Chapter 17, the desire to protect their reputations led both the CIA and the FBI to often hide or destroy the extent of their early contacts to Oswald, actions that were later misinterpreted by critics as the cover-up of a murder conspiracy.
Some contend that Oswald must have had United States government backing, since the Justice Department never charged him with any crime.
But there was no evidence he ever gave military information to the Soviets—there was only his threat to do so when he first defected.
His unsubstantiated assertion was not enough to build a case against him.
On one occasion, after she had let his mother in, he exploded and slapped Marina about the face and head.
Fain later said he did not want to upset Oswald’s wife by talking to him in the house, so the car was the only alternative.
But the FBI agents parked the car directly in front of Oswald’s house and conducted the interview in full view of the neighborhood, not a very effective means of protecting an alleged informant.
The House Select Committee, which reviewed the question of whether Oswald was ever an FBI informant, concluded there was no evidence the FBI even considered it, much less proposed it to Oswald.
Seventeen agents were secretly reprimanded for the preassassination investigation of Oswald.
When some of the agents protested to Hoover that Oswald did not meet the criteria for the FBI’s security index, he replied “no one in full possession of all his faculties” could make such a claim.
Hoover believed that agents with early contact to Oswald too willingly accepted his word that he was not in touch with Soviet agents or subversive elements and, at the very least, he should have been the subject of a more rigorous investigation.
But Hoover kept this criticism private since he feared its disclosure would hurt the Bureau’s reputation.
The DCD was an overt CIA branch and annually interviewed over twenty-five thousand United States travelers who visited Communist-bloc countries during the cold war.
Near the YMCA, in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas, there are many small rooming houses, where owners rent rooms at daily or weekly rates.
Although he probably stayed at one of those houses, he never told Marina which one.
Since the 1960s, a DD-1173 has only been issued to reservists if they suffered an injury while on active duty, or were a civilian employee overseas.
Although some critics try to attach importance to the card by questioning why it was issued to Oswald, they usually omit that such cards were routinely issued to reservists through most of 1959, the year of Oswald’s discharge.
That Oswald was given such a card is more evidence that he had no relation to any United States intelligence agency, none of which could afford to risk exposing an undercover agent with a military privileges card valid for three years.
It appears he later changed the card’s photo to one taken of him in Minsk, the same one he put on his forged Hidell Selective Service Notice of Classification.
The DD-1173 also has an added stamped date, “October 23 1963,” as well as “JUL,” both of which give the appearance of extending the expiration date of December 7, 1962.
Since the dates are clumsily stamped within a circle, some have interpreted them as part of a postmark, but they appear to have been done with Oswald’s cheap rubber-stamping kit.
Since the original card is now in such poor condition, it is impossible to definitely settle forgery questions.
Regarding his statement that Marina nagged Lee, Marina told the author, “It’s a lie.
On the twenty-fifth, he sent two postal money orders, totaling $106, to the State Department as the final installment on his repatriation loan.
He also made the final payment on the $200 loan his brother, Robert, had given him the previous October.
On January 28, he sent a mail-order coupon with $10 in cash to the Los Angeles-based Seaport Traders and ordered a Smith & Wesson .38 special revolver.
After the assassination, handwriting experts confirmed Oswald had signed both Hidell and Drittal.
He no longer just slapped her, but now delivered multiple punches to her head.
Marina remembered that late in January he began arguing over “trifling reasons” and was “very unrestrained and very explosive …”5 Whenever he wanted sex, he forced himself on her.
Once when she called him “crazy,” he grabbed her by the throat and threatened to kill her if she ever called him that again.
Their first night away from their flat was on February 13, when the de Mohrenschildts invited them to a dinner party at their house.
Oswald spent the evening talking to a young German geologist, Volkmar Schmidt.
De Mohrenschildt was surprised to see them getting along at all since he had expected that Schmidt, a right-winger, would antagonize Oswald.
De Mohrenschildt gave him a lecture about the dangers posed by people like Schmidt and other right-wing fanatics.
Marina thought Oswald acted differently after the conversations that evening.
No one in Dallas had political sway over him except de Mohrenschildt, whose opinion he respected.
The News had extensive coverage that General Edwin Walker had joined right-wing evangelist Billy James Hargis in Operation Midnight Ride, a five-week national tour to fight the threat of Communism.
General Edwin Walker had been the commanding officer of the 24th Army Division under NATO, but President Kennedy relieved him of his post in 1961 for distributing right-wing literature to his troops.
He was a virulent anti-Communist and strict segregationist who quickly became a prominent voice in the right-wing John Birch Society.
In 1962, he ran for governor of Texas, and while he lost in a six-man primary to John Connally, he received over 138,000 votes.
Following the press coverage of Operation Midnight Ride, the papers and local radio and television had additional stories about the general, focusing on his radical anti-Castro stance.
De Mohrenschildt never hid his own distaste for the John Birch Society and people like Walker.
A couple of weeks after his order for the revolver, and near the time of the de Mohrenschildt party, Marina noticed Lee spent several evenings in the kitchen, poring over maps of Dallas and a bus schedule.
When she asked him what he was doing, he said he was trying to find the quickest route from his job at Jaggars to the typing course in which he had enrolled.
The typing institute was only a few blocks from Jaggars, a walk of less than five minutes.
That same day, February 14, when Oswald read the news coverage about Walker’s Operation Midnight Ride, he and Marina also celebrated their daughter June’s first birthday.
While he was temporarily pleased with the news, it did not stop him from instituting a new punishment for her.
Oswald recognized Marina’s predicament and knew the threat of sending her back to Russia was one that further tormented her.
On Friday evening, February 22, the Oswalds attended a small dinner party given by Everett Glover and his roommate, Volkmar Schmidt.
Schmidt was curious about Oswald, and Glover remembered “it was a gathering for a fairly specific reason, to look at this fellow and let some other people look at him and see what they made of him …”15 The de Mohrenschildts were also at the dinner, as were several of Glover’s friends who were studying Russian, including Ruth Paine, a thirty-one-year-old beginner in the Russian language, whom Glover had met through a madrigal singing group from the local Unitarian church.
Despite the language barriers, Ruth spent most of the evening trying to talk to Marina.
Ruth Paine was a Quaker, scrupulously honest, with a strong conscience.
Although she could not always understand her, Marina immediately liked her sincere and direct approach.
Ruth and her husband, Michael , were ACLU members, and in 1963 Texas they were part of a liberal political minority.
The de Mohrenschildts left early; they had heard Lee expound often before.
Oswald told the group he was a Marxist who had failed to find the ideal society.
The dinner party did not provide Marina much of a break from Lee’s abuse.
Although he knew she was pregnant, he continued to pummel her for the slightest infraction.
Marina later reported that the week after she had been forced to write the Soviet embassy was the most violent of their marriage.
On the next night, Saturday, Oswald flew into a rage over Marina’s inability to cook a Southern dish, red beans and rice, which he demanded for dinner.
As he tended to the baby, Marina looked at her bruised face in a mirror and decided her life was useless.
Within a few minutes she had taken the clothesline rope, climbed onto the toilet seat, and looked for a place to hook the rope.
Only a block away from their current apartment, it had a balcony and a small private room he could make into a study, and cost eight dollars less a month.
It had been forwarded from the Elsbeth Street address and was from Ruth Paine, requesting permission to visit.
Marina wrote a short note to Ruth, providing the new address and welcoming her.
She and Marina took a walk in a nearby park, and Marina confided her pregnancy.
The Soviet embassy replied to Marina’s request for a return to Russia on March 8.
It asked for complete applications, a biography, letters to the Soviet ambassador, passport photos, several letters from Marina’s relatives living in the USSR, and some indication of professional interest, all in triplicate.
In the midst of their quarrels, Oswald even went further and had Marina prepare a response, an application, and a biography to at least start her file, all of which she finally sent on March 17.25 Meanwhile, he began promoting his political philosophy.
The results were evident in a letter published in the March 11 issue of The Militant.
He took at least two photos of the back of Walker’s house, and one that depicted an entrance to the general’s driveway from a back alley.
Two other photos show rail tracks about half a mile from the Walker home.
The day after his Walker vigil, Monday, March 12, he clipped a coupon from the February issue of American Rifleman and sent a $21.45 money order to a Chicago-based mail-order house, Klein’s Sporting Goods.
He ordered, under his alias A Hidell, an Italian military rifle, a 6.5mm Mannlicher-Carcano, complete with a four power scope.
Robert Sam Anson says it “had a reputation for being notoriously inaccurate” and that the Italians had dubbed it “the humanitarian rifle” since it never was known to hurt anyone.
With a 4x scope, even an untrained shooter could fire at a target like a marksman.
The Carcano is rated an effective battle weapon, good at killing people, and as accurate as the United States Army’s M-14 rifle.
The Carcano’s bullets, 6. millimeter shells, are 30 to 50 percent heavier than the average bullet of that diameter, and travel with the same velocity, 2,100 feet per second, as the Russian AK-47 assault rifle.
Some game hunters use the 6.5mm shell to bring down animals as large as elephants.
The bullets manufactured for Oswald’s Carcano were made by Western Cartridge Company, and the FBI considered them “very accurate … very dependable,” never having misfired in dozens of tests.
The FBI’s Frazier concluded the Carcano was a good rifle for the assassination.
Oswald was anxious for his rifle, and the pistol he had ordered in January, to arrive.
That same week, Marina was cleaning the apartment and came across photos of a house she did not recognize.
She asked Lee what they were, but he didn’t answer, and later kept his study clean himself so she would not have to enter.
Lee had always been secretive; even in Russia he closeted himself to one side of the apartment and scribbled notes about his Soviet experiences, refusing to share any of them with her.
She did not know he had ordered a revolver or rifle or that he had forged identifications in another name.
By coincidence, the rifle from Klein’s and the revolver from Seaport Traders were shipped on the same day, March 20.
He went first to the post office, where he picked up the rifle, and then traveled across town for the revolver that was sent to the offices of REA Express.
It was leaning against the corner of Lee’s study, a raincoat partially hiding it.
There, unknown to Marina, he compiled a blue looseleaf folder, an operations manual for an action he was planning against Walker.
It was filled with photographs of the general’s house and a safe place to stash a rifle, as well as maps of a carefully designed escape route.
Later, when Marina discovered its existence, he told her it was “a complete record so that all the details would be in it.
She had an opportunity to develop her budding friendship with Ruth Paine.
Ruth stopped by to visit the Neely Street apartment again on March 20, and the following week took Marina and June for a visit to her house in Irving, a Dallas suburb.
With the recent letter to the Soviet embassy fresh in her mind, Marina told Ruth about Lee’s insistence she return to Russia and her desire to stay in America.
That disclosure, coupled with Lee’s refusal to teach Marina English, angered Ruth.
Since her command of Russian was poor, Ruth decided to put her thoughts into Russian in a letter instead of struggling through a conversation.
She decided to invite Marina to live with her, so there would be another option besides staying with Oswald or returning to Russia.
She even carried it with her on another visit to Neely Street, but did not give it to Marina.
She protested that she had never taken a photo in her life, but he assured her it was simple.
He returned to the apartment and in a few minutes emerged dressed all in black, a revolver tucked into the waist of his pants, a rifle held in one hand, and a camera and some newspapers in the other hand.
Marina became a “little scared” as she worried about taking the pictures correctly and whether anyone in the neighborhood could see him.
Then he walked over and reset the shutter and she did it again, and again.
Marina was flabbergasted and asked why June would want a picture of him holding guns.
The backyard photos have become one of the most debated issues in the conspiracy press.
The critics are led by self-appointed photo expert Jack White, who has made a small business from producing videos, booklets, and lecture series on why he believes the photos are fake.
His primary arguments are alleged shadow inconsistencies, conflicting body proportions, a variant chin, and suggestion of a grafting line between the mouth and the chin.
While the Warren Commission’s FBI photo experts concluded the shots were real and there was no evidence of retouching, the technology did not exist in 1964 to settle the issue dispositively.
However, by the time of the House Select Committee on Assassinations in the late 1970s, science could resolve the matter.
Twenty-two of the nation’s leading experts studied the backyard photos, utilizing sophisticated photo enhancements and measurements to determine their validity.
Because of microscopic frame edge marks and scratches left by a camera on a negative, they concluded that Oswald’s Imperial Reflex took the photos, to the exclusion of any other camera ever made.
Once it was determined Oswald’s camera took the shots, the photo experts tested to see if the photos were composites.
Twenty-one photos, revealing fifty-six different and unique marks on the rifle found at the depository, were compared to enhancements of the photo of the rifle Oswald held in the backyard shots, and the panel concluded the rifle was the same, to the exclusion of all others.
Finally, HSCA handwriting experts determined that Oswald’s handwriting was present in an inscription on the back of one of the originals.
From the prints he developed, Oswald told Marina he intended to send one to The Militant.
The quality of his work had deteriorated since the beginning of the year, when Jaggars tried to give him more responsibility.
The area in which they worked was small and required that workers be considerate of each other as they moved about the room.
Instead, Oswald charged around the shop, constantly knocking into other workers and never uttering an apology.
Finally, some became so frustrated with his “selfish and aggressive” actions they almost had fistfights with him.
Oswald was also spotted reading a Russian paper, Krokodil, in the firm cafeteria, and his supervisor, John Graef, had enough.
It was the only job he had ever liked, and since he had spent almost everything he earned, the dismissal was crushing news.
He did confide in a co-worker, Dennis Ofstein, that he had been dismissed.
Oswald said “he would look around and if he didn’t find anything else he could always go back to the Soviet Union …” recalled Ofstein.
He again sought help from the Texas Employment Commission, but it was unable to find him new work.
The day after Oswald was informed of his discharge, Tuesday, April 2, he and Marina went to dinner at Ruth Paine’s house.
It was his first meeting with the Oswalds, and he was immediately “shocked” by Lee’s “cruel” conduct toward Marina.
Paine’s father had been an avid Trotskyite, and Michael was intensely interested in politics.
Lee’s defection to Russia was one of the reasons Paine wanted to meet him.
That half-hour talk was the most open and informative he ever had with Oswald.
Lee told him of his early attraction to Marxism, “without ever having met a communist,” and his search for the “paradise of the world” when he defected to Russia.
When Paine tried to have a debate with Oswald, he found it was not possible.
Soon, the conversation turned to Dallas’s most prominent far right representative, General Edwin Walker.
The evening ended on the sour note, again, of Lee’s mistreatment of Marina.
After the supper, Ruth informed her husband that Lee had been calling Marina a “fool” during dinner and telling her that she did not know anything.
Michael thought Marina was in “bondage and servitude,” but he did not express his distaste to Oswald.
Three days later, Friday, Lee checked out of work a few minutes after 5:00 P.M., and as he approached the apartment in a rush, he ran into Marina outside with the baby carriage.
He disappeared inside the flat for a moment, and when he returned she noticed he was carrying his rifle, hidden under his Marine Corps raincoat.
At the bus stop, they argued, with Marina telling him not to come home and that she hoped the police caught him.
When he returned at 9:00 P.M., Marina again warned him about the police, but he told her not to worry since no one could hear him where he practiced.
The FBI later studied the Love Field bus route and found that a five-minute ride took Oswald within walking distance of a protected levee.
Firearms experts testified after the assassination that a marksman such as Oswald would need to fire only ten rounds to adjust the scope and become familiar with the peculiarities of that rifle.
Around April 4 or 5, Jeanne de Mohrenschildt stopped by for an afternoon visit.
It was her first visit to the Neely Street apartment, as the de Mohrenschildts had been busy preparing to move from Dallas to Haiti, where George had another of his ambitious business projects in the works.
While Marina showed Jeanne around the apartment, she opened a clothes closet and the rifle was leaning against the corner.
On the following day, he left the apartment with his rifle, and when he returned home that evening, he no longer had it.
He later told Marina that he buried the Carcano near some railroad tracks only some minutes’ walk from Walker’s house, probably the same tracks he had photographed.
On Monday, April 8, Oswald left in the evening on a bus, which Marina assumed was to take him to his typing course, but she did not know he had already quit the class.
Instead, he traveled to Walker’s house, where he intended to assassinate the general.
But he later told Marina he discovered that the Mormon church whose parking lot was adjacent to General Walker’s home had services scheduled for Wednesday evening, providing him a better chance of not standing out in the otherwise quiet neighborhood.
On Tuesday, Oswald continued the charade over his job, telling Marina that it was a holiday.
She recalled he had tears in his eyes, blaming the FBI for inquiring about him and costing him the position.
By the time she put June to bed, between 8:00 and 9:00, she wondered why he was not home.
She paced between the rooms, and on a supposition, opened the door to his small study.
I think the Embassy will come quickly to your aid once they know everything.
I left you as much money as I could, $60 on the second of the month, and you and Junie can live for two months on $10 a week.
She was frantic by the time Oswald returned at 11:30.90 He was pale and out of breath from walking quickly.
Oswald could not understand that the radio was silent about the assassination.
Although Marina was appalled that Lee had tried to kill someone, she never seriously thought of turning him in to the police.
Not only was she completely dependent on him, but her Russian upbringing made her fear the police.
She worried what would happen to her, alone in the U.S., if her husband was charged with murder.
There was no way she could have imagined that by postponing any decision on the Walker shooting, she would find herself in seven months in the very situation she hoped to avoid, only with a much more prominent victim.
The general had been sitting behind a desk in his dining room, working on his income taxes, when the shot was fired.
Oswald had likely taken a position inside Walker’s backyard fence, leaning against the general’s station wagon to brace himself for the shot.
He was less than one hundred feet away from the window, which had no covering to block his view into the brightly lit room.
He went upstairs to get a gun and it was several minutes before he noticed his right forearm was bleeding, the result of bullet fragments.
What saved Walker’s life was the wooden frame across the middle of the double window.
Upon close examination, it turned out that the bullet had passed through a wire screen, then grooved along the bottom of the wooden bar, and then through the glass.
When it struck the wooden frame, the bullet was deflected so minutely that it passed through Walker’s hair instead of into his skull.
He told Marina that he had planned the Walker assassination for two months, and then he showed her his operations book, crammed with photographs of Walker’s residence, a map, and pages of handwritten notes.
She thought he had been writing his memoirs, as he had when they lived in Russia “He said that this was a very bad man, that he was a fascist, that he was the leader of a fascist organization, and when I said that even though all of that might be true, just the same he had no right to take his life, he said if someone had killed Hitler in time it would have saved many lives.
I told him that this is no method to prove your ideas, by means of a rifle.
In the initial reports the police mistakenly identified the mangled bullet as a .30–06.
A Walker aide said he had seen an unlicensed car near the general’s house several nights before the shooting.
A fifteen-year-old neighbor, Walter Kirk Coleman, said he saw two cars speed away from the scene right after the shooting.
Then she asked him what he intended to do with his notebook of Walker photos and assassination plans.
Marina was convinced there was only one guarantee that Oswald would not try again to kill Walker.
By Friday, he tried to return to a normal routine, filing a claim for unemployment benefits.
They had just gone to bed that night when there was loud pounding at the front door.
Marina’s heart jumped, as she feared it was the police, until she heard George de Mohrenschildt’s deep voice.
Less than an hour after his return with it, he decided Marina was right about his operations book for the Walker assassination.
Lee was burning most of the evidence over the washbasin.0† By April 17, Oswald had told Marina he was ready to move to New Orleans.
The decision seemed to improve his mood, which had been miserable after his failure to kill Walker a week earlier.
The Oswalds even joined Ruth Paine and her two children for a picnic on Sunday, April 21.
But as soon as Marina began to relax over the Walker episode and Lee’s receding temper, another incident sent her into a panic.
She asked him to join her in the bathroom, and when he entered she jumped out and slammed the door shut.
Bracing her feet against the nearby wall, she struggled as hard as she could to keep the door closed against his efforts to push out.
At first he was furious, but as he calmed, Oswald agreed to strip to his underwear, and stayed home reading the remainder of the day.
The next day he informed her that Nixon had not come to town after all.
She was expecting to spend the morning visiting Marina and instead was shocked to see Lee Oswald fully packed and ready to move.
She helped him load her 1955 Chevrolet station wagon and drove him to the downtown bus station.
Adding those to his luggage, he was set for the overnight bus trip home to New Orleans.
Copies of Oswald’s tax returns show he had little money left after paying monthly expenses.
Although the Paines were temporarily separated, they remained very friendly and saw each other frequently.
But the campaign in question, of H Stuart Hughes, was covered in the September 7, 1962, issue of Time, to which Oswald subscribed.
Others claim that Oswald did not write the letter since it does not have his trademark misspellings.
But The Militant did not have the original, and admitted its policy was to edit for syntax, grammar, and spelling.
He may have taken other photos that day, but only those five have survived.
Both were sent second class and should have arrived in Dallas in six to seven days, well in time for the March 31 photos.
It is unrealistic to think that anyone making a composite photograph would make three versions, thereby allowing photo experts more basis for comparison in uncovering any fake.
Some critics have used the number of photos to attack Marina’s credibility since she originally said she took one, then later admitted to two or more.
A digital computer enhancement showed a grain pattern unique to each photo.
When the entire print is scanned, any disruption in the minute pattern is clear evidence of fakery.
In 1993, two former Militant staffers reportedly admitted that one of Oswald’s backyard photos had indeed arrived at their office before the assassination.
That photo, together with some English-Russian language records, was apparently sent to de Mohrenschildt from New Orleans sometime after May 4, 1963, the date that House Select Committee handwriting experts determined Oswald had inscribed on the rear.
Oswald could have carried out his demonstrations on any day from Sunday, April 7, until the afternoon of Wednesday, April 10.
Although he practiced with his rifle and also conducted some surveillance at General Walker’s house on those days, he had time to distribute the pamphlets.
The House Select Committee utilized an advanced technique to subject the bullet to neutron-activation tests, and determined the Walker slug was a Western Cartridge Company 6.5mm bullet, the same type of bullet, made by the same manufacturer, as that used later in President Kennedy’s assassination.
Contrary to press reports that he saw two men get into separate cars and race away, he told the FBI that he only saw one car leave, and it moved at a normal rate of speed.
Other neighbors contradicted Coleman’s story, saying no cars left after the noise.
If he did see a departing car, it was probably because church services had just finished.
The pastor told the FBI that on Wednesdays, services began at 7:30 and finished at 9:00, leaving the area busy with people.
A photo of evidence taken from Oswald’s flat after the assassination shows the hole was in the print at that time.
Also, the photo was taken from such a distance that the license plate of the car would not have been legible in any case, and it was later determined the car belonged to a Walker aide, Charles Klihr.
But Jeanne had forgotten about her solo visit to Marina on April 4 or 5.
She confused the sighting of the rifle and the joke her husband made about the shooting and thought they both happened on April 13.
But Marina is clear about two separate visits, and more important, Oswald did not retrieve his rifle until Sunday, April 14, a day after the de Mohrenschildts’ visit.
So Mrs. de Mohrenschildt could not have seen the rifle on April 13 as she thought, but only on the earlier visit on either April 4 or 5.
Several hours later, de Mohrenschildt killed himself with a shotgun blast to the head.
However, most books fail to disclose that de Mohrenschildt was quite mad by the time he gave his final interview.
For nearly a year before his death, he was paranoid, fearful that the “FBI and Jewish mafia” were out to kill him.
He twice tried to kill himself with drug overdoses, and another time cut his wrists and submerged himself in a bathtub.
After he began waking in the middle of every night, screaming and beating himself, his wife finally committed him to the Parkland Hospital psychiatric unit, where he was diagnosed as psychotic and given two months of intensive shock therapy.
After his treatment he said he had been with Oswald on the day of the assassination, though he was actually with dozens of guests at the Bulgarian embassy in Haiti the day JFK was killed.
Despite de Mohrenschildt’s imbalance, Epstein and others still quote the final interview as though it were an uncontested fact.
John Davis, in more than six hundred pages of Mafia Kingfish, covers the shooting in a single sentence, and rejects it as unproven.
David Scheim, in Contract on America; Jim Garrison, in On the Trail of the Assassins; and David Lifton, in Best Evidence, do not even mention the Walker shooting.
Even the House Select Committee on Assassinations dropped the entire Walker incident into a single footnote because it could not find any accomplices to fit into its eventual conclusion of an overall conspiracy.
Vice-President Lyndon Johnson was due in Dallas within a day, but Marina is certain the name was Nixon.
Oswald was dyslexic and could have confused the news about Nixon’s anti-Castro plans with the visit of the “VicePresident,” a title still used to refer to Nixon.
Also, Nixon may have just been the excuse given to Marina, and it is possible Oswald had second thoughts about agreeing to let Walker live.
The fact that Oswald could not physically fulfill his stated mission does not extirpate the seriousness of the incident, and again highlights his increasing instability.
He told Lillian, and his uncle, Charles “Dutz” Murret, that he wanted quickly to find a job and have his wife and daughter join him.
He read the help-wanted section in each day’s newspaper, and left mid-morning to visit the ads he had checked as promising.
Later that day he visited the cemetery where his father was buried and a groundskeeper helped him find the tombstone.
Back at the Murrets’ he pored over the telephone book, calling every Oswald until he found an aunt by marriage, Hazel.
When he called on her in the late afternoon, she gave him a photo of his father and said that only two aunts and some cousins where still alive in New Orleans.
Monday, he filed an appeal to Texas’s decision to deny him unemployment benefits since his wages at Jaggars were too low to qualify.
On May 3, Oswald wrote Marina saying that while he still had no work, he was receiving “15 to 20 dollars” a week from the unemployment office, and that was enough money on which to live.
Without rent or food costs, he saved more than when he supported his family in Dallas on his small salary.
He found a job on May 9, two weeks to the day after he arrived in New Orleans.
He claimed his last job was “active duty” in the Marines and that he was a high school graduate and currently a college student.
For references, he listed John Murret, a cousin, without his permission, and then added fictitious names, Sgt.
J Evans, both of whom were on active duty, complete with false addresses.
He explained he had returned with a Russian wife and daughter, and intended to bring them to New Orleans if Evans could help him find an apartment.
Although she did not have any for rent, she made some calls and soon Oswald had given a $5 deposit toward a $65-a-month ground-floor apartment in a two-story house at 4907 Magazine Street.
He returned to have lunch with Myrtle Evans, and they discussed Marina and his daughter as well as his reasons for settling in New Orleans.
That night Oswald telephoned Marina to tell her about the Reily job and the new apartment.
Marina, who worried she might not hear from Lee for some time, was excited about joining him so quickly.
The next day, Friday, May 10, Ruth Paine, her two children, and Marina and June set off in Paine’s station wagon.
The next day, Saturday, Marina and Ruth arrived at the Murret’s, and they spent an hour talking to Oswald’s aunt and uncle.
Initially, Marina thought the Murret home was the place Lee had rented, and she was very pleased.
But when he took her to their new apartment on Magazine Street, she was disappointed to find it dark and dirty, with little ventilation, and cockroach-infested.
Ruth slept in the living room with her children while the Oswalds took the only bedroom.
Four days later he wrote Vincent Lee, the president of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, requesting formal membership and saying he wanted to open a Fair Play branch office in New Orleans.
Also, Oswald’s attraction to Fair Play for Cuba as an instrument for exercising his pro-Castro sentiments fit with his view of Marxism/Leninism.
Marina and Ruth and Michael Paine said Oswald was a Trotskyite Marxist.
Without waiting for a formal reply from the national office, Oswald acted as though he had permission to start an independent chapter.
Picking up where he left off with his Dallas demonstration on behalf of Fair Play, he decided to begin passing out leaflets in New Orleans, but on a grander scale.
On Wednesday, May 29, he went to the Jones Printing Company, opposite the side entrance of the Reily company.
Next, also with Mailers’ Service, he placed an order for three hundred 2½-by-3½-inch membership cards.
Lee sent Oswald an official membership card, and in a three-page typewritten letter offered him advice regarding a possible New Orleans chapter.
Lee also told Oswald that a review of the committee’s records indicated there were probably “too few members … in the New Orleans area” to make a successful chapter.
Lee’s response was the friendliest Oswald ever received to any of his letters to leftist organizations, and it strengthened his faith in Fair Play for Cuba.
Meanwhile, Oswald’s preoccupation with Fair Play led him to neglect Marina.
She could not have a normal relationship with him while his obsession was Castro.
As soon as you left all ‘love’ stopped, and I am very hurt that Lee’s attitude toward me is such that I feel each minute that I bind him.
It was not long before their New Orleans neighbors were talking about the bad relationship between the new couple.
When they had sex, Oswald would sometimes roll over when finished, turn his back to Marina, and say, “Don’t touch me, and don’t say a word.
In another letter, Marina told Ruth, “You know that Lee either yells at me or is silent, but never talks.
On Tuesday, June 4, the same day a letter arrived from the Soviet embassy suggesting she travel to Washington to discuss her request to return to the USSR, Lee involved her in his fantasy political world.
When he returned that evening from work he “wrote this down on a piece of paper and told me to sign it on this card,” Marina recalled, “and said that he would beat me if I didn’t sign …”37 She signed the “Hidell” as the chapter president for Lee’s Fair Play for Cuba membership card, as well as on a couple of blank cards.
Unaware of his Marine colleague Heindel, Marina assumed the alias was a rhyme for Fidel.
Hideel .40 Oswald wanted to travel and planned to apply for a passport, and apparently thought the vaccination certificate might be needed for visas to some countries.
On this occasion, instead of threatening to send her to Russia on her own, he insisted he would join her in the Soviet Union.
Besides himself and Hidell, he listed Marina as well, giving a false home address for all three.
As Oswald began to implement his Fair Play for Cuba activities, he slacked off at his work at Reily.
Charles Le Blanc, his supervisor, was increasingly dissatisfied with Oswald’s performance.
Le Blanc later estimated that Oswald probably spoke one hundred words to him during his two and a half months at Reily.
Le Blanc, thinking Oswald was referring to the Reily Coffee Company, told him yes, that he had been employed there for eight years.
When Le Blanc said he “loved it,” Oswald again just turned around and walked away without saying anything else.
As he had on other jobs, he stayed to himself, ate lunch alone, and made no friends among the workers.
Some remembered that during their coffee breaks he often sat in a chair and stared blankly into space.
Oswald further alienated his co-workers, recalled Le Blanc, by walking past and aiming his forefinger at them.
It was run by Adrian Alba, a gun enthusiast, who subscribed to American Rifleman, Field and Stream, Argosy, and National Rifle Association magazines.
Oswald sat in the garage reading these and often borrowed the magazines overnight.
Alba remembered Oswald as inquisitive about guns and specifically about which caliber bullet was the most deadly on a human target.
Alba had ordered a .30-06-caliber rifle and Oswald offered to buy it sight unseen.
On another occasion, he saw a Japanese rifle at the garage, and again wanted it, but Alba would not sell.
He later told a story, repeated by many conspiracy writers, that he saw Oswald approach a car occupied by an FBI agent from Washington.
If true, Alba’s story is the critical link to establish a covert government connection to Oswald.
Although Alba was interviewed immediately after the assassination, on at least three occasions by the FBI, and later extensively testified to the Warren Commission, he never mentioned this story.
He did not disclose it publicly until 1978, fifteen years after it allegedly happened, when interviewed by Anthony Summers.
Alba’s excuse for not mentioning the story earlier was that he claimed he forgot it until his memory was triggered years after the incident, while watching a television commercial.
The 1970 commercial was for a local furniture store and portrayed an elderly man walking up to a car, leaning over toward the window, and inviting the driver into the store.
On June 8, he was reminded of his weak finances when he could not afford to provide for Marina’s prenatal care.
On that day, he took her to the New Orleans Charity Hospital, but since she had not lived long enough in Louisiana to qualify as a resident, they refused to treat her free of charge.
Although Marina never recalled him saying anything bad about President Kennedy, she said that shortly after the hospital incident, he complained that “his papa bought him the Presidency.
He wrote to The Worker requesting more Communist party literature, announcing his formation of a local chapter of Fair Play for Cuba, and sent honorary membership cards to “those fighters for peace” Benjamin Davis and Gus Hall, leaders of the American Communist party.
In the late afternoon, the officer of the deck aboard the ship complained to harbor patrolman Girod Ray, who found Oswald and asked if he had permission to distribute the leaflets.
Oswald said he did not need it, and would distribute his pamphlets wherever he desired.
Ray told him that he was on port authority property and without authorization he had to leave, but Oswald argued with him.
He asked her if she liked Cuba and “Uncle Fidel” and said that his demonstrating “will help make people be on the side of Cuba.
Oswald said he intended to travel as a tourist, starting in October, for three months to a year.
Destinations included England, France, Germany, Holland, Finland, Poland, Italy, and the USSR.61 He listed the Lykes shipping line, the same he took during his 1959 defection, as his means of transportation.
But he did begin talking about how dissatisfied he was with the United States.
He said he was lost, and she tried to console him by saying they could stay together in America and still make a better life.
But he refused, telling her it was too difficult for him in the U.S.64 “He was extremely upset,” Marina recalled.
And that it would be better to have less and not be concerned about tomorrow.
A year after returning to the U.S., filled with hatred for the USSR, the mercurial Oswald had second thoughts as his life in the United States seemed in a quagmire over which he had lost control.
Less than a week after getting his new passport, Oswald had Marina write another letter to the Soviet embassy.
A letter from the embassy had arrived on June 4, asking Marina to visit in person or to send a detailed explanation of why she wanted to return to Russia.
She excused the delay in answering due to “certain family problems,” expressed “homesickness” for Russia, and asked for financial help for a return to the Soviet Union.
Make us happy again, help us to return that which we lost because of our foolishness.
Enclosed with the letter was an application completed by Lee for permission to enter the Soviet Union.
One answered him saying that he should be sure he wanted to return, as his next Atlantic crossing was likely to be the last the Soviets allowed him.
Marina again wrote the Soviet embassy on July 8, emphasizing their “impatience” with the delay over visas and asking for expedited service.
A few days later, Marina received a letter from Ruth Paine, who was unaware of Lee’s recent change of mind about returning to Russia.
Ruth invited Marina to live with her if Lee still insisted she return to the Soviet Union.
Yet just as things seemed to stabilize, Oswald was fired from Reily, on July 19.73 It was the third job dismissal in less than a year.
To worsen his sense of failure, his sedulous efforts to find another job through the help-wanted ads met with constant rejection.
In order to continue collecting unemployment benefits of $33 per week, he had to visit the Louisiana Employment Commission personally every Tuesday and report on his job-hunting progress.
He let his fantasies run free and not only listed scores of employers to which he never applied, including NASA, but he also lied extensively on the applications he did submit for work.
Several days after Oswald was fired, Marina received another letter from Ruth Paine, offering to visit New Orleans in midto late September, at the end of a long vacation, and then take Marina back to Dallas to have her baby.
Paine’s offer now looked more acceptable in case Lee could not find work, but he did not relish the idea of Marina returning to Dallas and the Russian community that so disliked him.
On July 25, Oswald was notified that his 1962 demand for a review of his undesirable Marine Corps discharge was rejected.
The Marine Corps had initially given him an honorable discharge and then belatedly changed it to an “undesirable” discharge, based upon his defection to Russia and anti-American statements he made to the press.
That Saturday, Marina and Lee traveled to Mobile, Alabama, with Lillian and Dutz Murret, to visit his cousin Eugene Murret, who was training to be a Jesuit priest.
He confirmed he was a Marxist, although he admitted that he was disillusioned with the USSR.80 In fact, he said he was against most forms of organized government.
On August 1, the New Orleans Times-Picayune ran a front-page story saying that federal agents had seized a ton of dynamite and other materials on a raid of an anti-Castro paramilitary group planning operations against Cuba.
Oswald stamped addresses for his fictional chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee on the printed leaflets.
Another frequent Camp Street visitor was David Ferrie, a rabid anti-Communist who worked with Banister, for some of the most radical anti-Cuban groups, and also for the attorney for Marcello.
Ferrie was a self-ordained ultra-orthodox Catholic bishop and an amateur hypnotist and cancer researcher.
This self-proclaimed fighter pilot and soldier of fortune was eccentric but brilliant.
He suffered from alopecia totalis, a rare disease that left him totally hairless.
He wore a badly fitted red wig and sometimes glued on tufts of synthetic fabric for eyebrows.
Banister, former agent-in-charge of the Chicago FBI office and then deputy police chief of New Orleans, established his own detective agency in 1958.
He even published his own virulently racist journal, The Intelligence Digest.
Many claim Banister was possibly the middleman linking the CIA and the mafia in a plot to kill the President.
None of the building’s five tenants, or the janitor who lived there, recalled ever seeing Oswald visit there, much less rent an office as a tenant.
None ever heard of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee or saw any propaganda from the organization.
One was Jack Martin, a former private investigator who sometimes worked with Banister.
Hubie Badeaux, the former chief of the New Orleans police intelligence division, knew both Banister and Martin.
Anthony Summers interviewed Roberts in 1978, and she told him a different, and wilder, story than the one she gave to the Select Committee.
Summers interviewed Roberts’s daughter, also named Delphine, who claimed she used an upstairs room for photographic work.
Many subsequent conspiracy writers, as well as Oliver Stone in the film JFK, have relied heavily on these statements.
She warmly remembers that she first met Guy Banister when she was demonstrating in downtown New Orleans “for states’ rights, and against the niggers,” with a Confederate flag draped behind her.
She said she not only became Banister’s secretary but his mistress as well.
She claims the only reason she told him the story she did was that Summers, then shooting a television documentary, paid her money.
John Lanne, a former Banister friend and attorney, acknowledges that Roberts refused to speak to Summers unless she was paid.3† As unreliable as Delphine Roberts is regarding the Oswald-544 Camp Street issue, her daughter spins an equally untenable tale.
Summers caveated Delphine Roberts’s story by writing, “It is by no means certain that has told the whole truth …” and attempted to buttress her testimony by citing her daughter.
He easily could have seen the FOR RENT signs at the small corner building.
The building’s janitor, James Arthus, who lived in the basement, told the FBI after the assassination that someone had attempted to rent an office, but he had discouraged him.
But there is a possibility that it was Oswald who talked to Arthus about an office and, if so, that was the extent of his contact to the building, though he still stamped it on some of his leaflets as the “official” office address for Fair Play.
Another explanation is advanced by Ross Banister, Guy’s brother, who is convinced that Banister, who monitored Communist agitators, would have been very interested in Oswald’s Fair Play activities.
Some of its propaganda still carried the old Camp Street address even when Oswald lived in New Orleans.
It is possible that Oswald, who had used phony addresses on dozens of applications and forms, had decided when settling on a false address for his imaginary Fair Play chapter that it should embarrass his nemesis, the extreme right wing and the city’s anti-Castro militants.
The issue of whether Oswald associated with the adventurer David Ferrie during the summer of 1963 is equally important, since Ferrie had extensive anti-Castro Cuban contacts and also did some work for an attorney for Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans godfather.
According to the House Select Committee and its investigator Gaeton Fonzi, the two most credible pieces of information linking Oswald and Ferrie are Oswald’s 1955 Civil Air Patrol service, when Ferrie was allegedly the commanding officer, and a 1963 incident in Clinton, Louisiana, where six witnesses identified Ferrie, Oswald, and a third person, New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw.
Summers suggests Oswald may have been the object of Ferrie’s homosexual advances or, at the very least, his political influence.
Garrison charges that through Oswald’s attendance at several CAP meetings, Ferrie initiated him into the CIA.111 Ferrie was interviewed by the FBI on November 27, 1963, and denied ever knowing Oswald in the Civil Air Patrol.2* CAP records show that while Ferrie was a member through 1954, he was disciplined because he gave unauthorized political lectures to the cadets.
A photo produced in 1993 purported to show Ferrie and Oswald standing on opposite sides of a small group at a CAP cookout.
Another photo, yet to be published, shows Oswald and Ferrie talking to each other.
Yet, even if the two met in 1955 when Oswald was fifteen years old, the question then is whether the two rekindled any association in 1963, only months before JFK’s assassination.
The evidence for a later Oswald-Ferrie relationship is the testimony of witnesses from Clinton, Louisiana.
The witnesses were found by Jim Garrison’s investigators, in 1967, when they interviewed more than three hundred people in Clinton and the neighboring township of Jackson, some 20 percent of the local population.
The allegation is that in early September 1963, Oswald conspicuously appeared in Clinton, a dusty, backwater town of fifteen hundred people, some ninety miles from New Orleans.
At the time of the supposed appearance, the Congress of Racial Equality was organizing blacks to register to vote in the still-segregated South.
According to the way the witnesses now tell the story, on the same day that a long line of black residents waited to sign forms at the registrar’s office, a large, expensive car pulled into Clinton and parked near that office.
One young man got out and joined the line of blacks waiting to register.
Not only is the Clinton episode used to establish the Oswald-Ferrie link, but some give it greater significance.
Since Garrison’s investigators uncovered the Clinton witnesses, evidently no researcher has gained access to the witnesses’ original statements.
The author, however, obtained affidavits, handwritten statements, and summary memoranda to Garrison regarding the initial stories the witnesses told the investigators.
By the time they testified to the Select Committee, they had told their story so often that they had ironed out fundamental contradictions.
The following discussion is based on the witnesses’ original statements.
But Edward McGehee, the Jackson town barber who claimed to have cut Oswald’s hair and advised him about a job at the local mental hospital, said it “was kind of cool” on the day he saw Oswald.
Reeves Morgan, the state representative for the parish, said Oswald visited him at his home to inquire about obtaining the hospital job.
There was a chill in the air, and Morgan recalled lighting the fireplace.
Review of United States Weather Bureau records for the period through September 24 show daily temperatures above 90 degrees, with only a few days dipping into the eighties, with high humidity.
There was certainly no day that was “cool” or required a burning fireplace.
In their testimony at the Shaw trial, and in subsequent statements, all the witnesses described a black Cadillac entering the town.
In his statement to Garrison’s investigators, Corey Collins, the local CORE chairman, said it was a big, black, expensive-looking car, with four doors, and not more than two years old.
Edward McGehee described it as an old, dark-colored, beat-up car, probably a Nash or Kaiser, but probably not a station wagon.
Since the Garrison trial, the witnesses have consistently described only three men—Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw—in the car.
However, originally, they were not nearly as certain on the number of people, much less their identifications.
Corey Collins said the driver of the car was about forty-five years old and wore a light hat that prevented Collins from seeing his hair.
John Manchester, the town marshal, said the driver did not have a hat and his hair was gray.
McGehee also said that only Oswald and the young woman were in the car, with a baby bassinet in the rear seat.7* Andrew Dunn said there were four men and that one of them was Estes Morgan, a local resident.
At the Garrison trial, Dunn described only three men and omitted Morgan.
Town marshal John Manchester said there were only two men in the car and that about that time he also saw Estes Morgan, whom he knew well, in the voter-registration line.
Henry Burnell Clark, on the other hand, said there was only one man in the car.
She also connected Oswald to Estes Morgan, but dropped that association during her trial testimony.
Another hospital employee, Maxine Kemp, testified she did not see Oswald, but saw a job application with his name on it.
A thorough search of the hospital’s records shows no such application existed or had been filed.
Registrar of voters Henry Palmer, at the Garrison trial, gave the most potentially damaging testimony identifying Oswald.
He said that when Oswald was attempting to register to vote, he had interviewed him.
He later told Summers, “I asked him for his identification, and he pulled out a United States Navy ID card.
Not only did he think the visit was in October, but he said there were only two white men in the voter-registration line that morning, and as a result they were very conspicuous.
When he spoke to them, he learned one was Estes Morgan and the other was Lee Oswald.
He said he interviewed both Morgan and Oswald separately in his office, and said Oswald produced a “cancelled Navy I.D. card” and that Oswald told him he had been living in Jackson for six months with a doctor from the hospital.
In his trial testimony and subsequently, he omitted Estes Morgan and the story of Oswald living with a local doctor for six months.
Yet at the trial, under oath, he emphatically picked out Clay Shaw as the driver.
None of the Clinton witnesses had a good explanation for why they had not contacted the authorities if they thought they had seen Oswald.
One, Reeves Morgan, testified he had called the FBI after the assassination.
There is little doubt the Clinton witnesses are telling the truth as they now recall it.
However, their original statements to Garrison’s staff reveal considerable contradictions, so much so that the very heart of their story is invalidated.
Oswald clearly was not in Clinton in October or when it was cold, nor was he there with Marina, nor did he live there for six months with a doctor, or apply for a job at the local mental institution.
Garrison’s staff realized that the local resident Estes Morgan had no connection to Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw and therefore required the witnesses to drop their reference to Morgan being with Oswald.
The evidence shows the witnesses saw Estes Morgan, whom they personally knew, with someone whom they later mistook to be Oswald.
Garrison never mentioned Morgan because he did not support his hypothesis.
It was almost six years after the alleged incident in Clinton that the witnesses first testified at the Garrison trial.
Garrison’s staff, when questioning the Clinton witnesses, had only presented photos of Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw, and incorrectly said that others had already identified those as the people who had visited the town.
This power of suggestion, and later coaching, developed the testimony that today has been repeated so often that the House Select Committee found it convincing.
Irvin Dymond, the New Orleans attorney who led the legal team that defended Clay Shaw in 1967, told the author that the Clinton testimony is “a pack of lies.
His quiet home life, attested to by his wife and relatives, contradicts numerous postassassination tales of Oswald’s supposed late-night cavorting with anti-Castro Cubans, homosexuals, or soldiers of fortune.
He asserts that job was arranged by American intelligence because it wanted Oswald to be nearby to an ex-FBI agent, Guy Banister.
But handwriting experts confirmed the writing on all the applications was Oswald’s, and witnesses later identified him as the applicant in each case.
The lawyer for the Defense Committee was John Abt, the legal counsel Oswald requested five months later, when he was arrested for killing the President.
Officer Ray said Oswald was alone on the day he confronted him on the wharf.
But only a few months earlier, in order to speed up passport applications, the New Orleans office had instituted a state-of-the-art teletype to Washington.
The local newspapers covered the innovation as a major technological advance.
All that was required was for the field office, in this case New Orleans, to telex the names of the applicants, together with their place and date of birth, to the Department of State.
Then Washington checked through a lookout-card file, and if there was no card for that person, it automatically authorized the field office to issue a passport.
Fonzi seems an unusual choice for an inquiry that claimed to be impartial, as he was a committed believer in a conspiracy, having written his first article critical of the Warren Commission in 1966.
After the House Select Committee finished its work and concluded that Oswald shot JFK as part of a conspiracy, Fonzi wrote a scathing 80,000-word article in The Washingtonian attacking the committee for not going far enough in its conspiracy conclusions, and setting forth his own hypothesis of how renegade CIA agents masterminded JFK’s death.
Garrison, during his investigation, found a local resident, David Lewis, who claimed he often saw Oswald in Mancuso’s Restaurant on the ground floor of Camp Street.
The problem was that Lewis swore he saw Oswald there in early 1962, when Lee was still in Russia.
They both said that after Banister’s unexpected death by heart attack in 1964, his wife took possession of all of her husband’s files and barred Delphine from the office, leaving her extremely bitter.
There, Lanne, whom Summers “thought to be fairly mad, certainly odd,” pulled a pistol from his desk, waved it in the air, and told Summers he could not interview his client, Delphine.
Following that discussion, Summers told Roberts that he wanted to do an interview for television.
The problem is that Russo only remembered the story when given drugs and asked leading questions while under hypnosis.
One was that Ferrie’s New Orleans library card had been found in a search of Oswald’s house in Dallas after the assassination.
That was false, and Ferrie produced his library card for the FBI agents in the November 27 interview.
The second rumor was that Ferrie was to use his plane as a getaway vehicle for Oswald.
The FBI discovered that his single-engine four-passenger monoplane had not been airworthy since 1962.
During the late 1960s probe by Garrison, two other photos that purported to show Oswald and Ferrie together in CAP were unmasked as composites.
Jim Garrison used the Clinton evidence in his unsuccessful 1969 trial against Shaw, trying to tie him to Oswald.
Except for their both having white hair, Shaw and Banister did not look alike.
Postulating a second Oswald car trip, especially since he did not drive, compounds the critics’ problems, since Marina testified he was in New Orleans every day during August and September.
While Marina found him somewhat disillusioned, he remained committed to his cause.
But she was concerned because she thought he was increasingly disconnected from reality.
Johnson was responding to Oswald’s letter in which he sent honorary Fair Play membership cards to Communist party directors Gus Hall and Benjamin Davis.
Johnson enclosed Communist literature on Cuba and congratulated Oswald, saying, “It is good to know that movements in support of Fair Play for Cuba has developed in New Orleans …”3 Johnson was one of the highest-ranking United States Communist officials ever to acknowledge one of Oswald’s letters.
People don’t care about that here,” his response was often a tearful reading of the Johnson letter aloud.
On Monday, August 5, he walked into a Cuban-owned general goods store, Casa Roca.
Casa Roca served as the Student Directorate’s unofficial headquarters, as well as a general clearinghouse for Cuban activities in New Orleans.
Bringuier was explaining the Cuban fight against Castro to two fifteen-year-old Americans, Philip Geraci and Vance Blalock, when Oswald walked up to them.
When they told Oswald they were interested in guerrilla warfare, he regaled them with stories of how to derail a train, blow up a bridge, and make a homemade pistol and gunpowder.
He left his Marine Corps training manual for Bringuier as evidence of his good faith.
Then, three days later, on Friday, August 9, one of his Cuban friends, Celso Hernandez, ran into the store.
On the way, they stopped at a nearby restaurant and picked up another young Cuban, Miguel Cruz.
A few minutes later Miguel Cruz dashed in with the news that the American was back at Canal and St.
Oswald had a placard around his neck and was distributing Fair Play for Cuba leaflets.
Bringuier tried to incite the throng against Oswald, telling them he was a Communist who had pretended to befriend the Cuban movement when actually he was a friend of Castro.
Some in the crowd began jeering at Oswald, telling him to go to Russia.
Hernandez snatched the stack of Fair Play pamphlets from Oswald’s hands and tossed them into the air.
Until his confrontation with Oswald, he had no idea that Fair Play was active in New Orleans—or that Oswald was its only member.
Bringuier noticed that in the interrogation room, Oswald was “really cold-blooded.… e was not nervous, he was not out of control, he was confident …”13 The three Cubans raised the $25 bail money and were told to return to court for a hearing on Monday, but Oswald had to spend the night in jail.
Francis Martello, the former deputy commander of the New Orleans police intelligence division, saw one of Oswald’s Fair Play leaflets and decided to interview him.
Oswald lied throughout the interview, telling Martello that he had lived at Mercedes Street in Fort Worth since his honorable discharge from the Marine Corps in 1959.
He said that besides Reily, he had worked at the city’s largest brewery, Jax.
Oswald had been worried about the FBI’s interest in him since the first interview in Fort Worth, and was convinced it had cost him at least two jobs with its inquiries.
If the FBI did not know he was arrested, he thought, it would shortly, and Oswald probably figured it best to summon the Bureau to him as if he had nothing to hide about his Fair Play for Cuba activity.
That Oswald called for an FBI agent is strong evidence there was no association between him and the Bureau.
But Summers charges that the evidence of a special relationship is evident because it happened on “a Saturday morning, not the most likely time for an agent to respond speedily to a request by an insignificant prisoner.
According to another FBI agent who later worked on the Oswald file, Warren de Brueys, “Quigley would never have spoken to Oswald if it had not been a Saturday.
One of the responsibilities of the duty agent is to check with the local police and see if there are any cases that might interest the Bureau.
If he hadn’t, he would have been kicked in the butt for failing to do it—he would have been censured because that was part of his duty.
In fact, Quigley typed a five-page, single-spaced report of his hour-and-a-half interview.
While Oswald said he had spoken to Hidell several times on the telephone, he had never met him, his number had been disconnected, and he did not remember what the number had been.
It was a note from Hidell, said Oswald, that told him to pass out the leaflets at the corner where he was arrested.
He claimed he attended two Fair Play meetings at different apartments, had been introduced to five different members each time, only by their first name, but could not remember any of them.
He said there were no regularly scheduled meetings, but someone would call him when one was planned.
Once he said a meeting was held at his own house, but he could not explain how he had informed the other members since he claimed not to know their names or telephone numbers, and he had no telephone.
Quigley’s report on his bizarre jailhouse interview quickly became part of Oswald’s growing FBI file.
Uncle Dutz was out of town at a Catholic retreat, Aunt Lillian was in the hospital with an ear infection, and the only person at their house was his cousin Joyce Murret, who was visiting from Beaumont, Texas.
Martello, intrigued by Murret’s disclosures, returned for a second interview.
He told her to get Marina, who had $70 in savings, and bring her to the station.
When Joyce got off the phone with him, she instead telephoned her mother.
She was afraid to leave her two children while she traveled across town to see Marina.
Bruneau paid Oswald’s $25 bail, and he was released late Saturday afternoon.
Troubled by her memories of Walker, she had checked the closet and was at least relieved to see the rifle leaning against the corner.
She was angry when he told her of his arrest, but also so pleased he was home safely that she fed him and then helped him to bed.
When he heard the news of his nephew’s arrest, he was “horrified” and promptly went to the Magazine Street apartment.
It was the first time he had visited the Oswalds’ home and he was shocked to see a picture of Castro hanging over the mantel.
Dutz told him to get a job to support his family and to straighten out his life.
He was angry over his nephew’s demonstrations on behalf of Castro, and the relationship between the Oswalds and the Murrets cooled considerably after Lee’s arrest.
Monday, August 12, was the day scheduled for the court hearing for Oswald and Bringuier and his two associates.
Early that morning Carlos Bringuier went to the National American Bank to make a deposit.
Stuckey had previously done a newspaper interview about Bringuier and his anti-Castro efforts.
He said there were many anti-Castro groups in New Orleans, but it had always been difficult to find pro-Castro advocates.
At the trial later that day, Stuckey sent a cameraman, Johann Rush, to get some film for the evening newscasts for the television branch of WDSU, but the judge refused to allow the short hearing to be filmed.
Inside the courtroom, which was split into segregated white and black sections, “Oswald entered the room and sat in the black section,” says Bringuier.
The judge dismissed the charges against the three Cubans and fined Oswald $10.
On the way out of the courtroom, Rush briefly interviewed Oswald, just enough time for Lee to say he was a Marxist.
Oswald was pleased that his efforts for Cuba had finally begun to receive public attention.
Such coverage, he thought, would eventually help him gain a visa to Cuba, the place Marina said he spoke of increasingly during August.
Lee, Fair Play’s president, Oswald wrote that he had “incured the displeasure of the Cuban exile ‘worms’ here,” and that three of them had attacked him.
Friday, late in the morning, he went to the unemployment office, where he offered $2 to anybody who would help him distribute leaflets for half an hour.
Two accepted his offer, and they walked to the Trade Mart, where cameraman Johann Rush captured Oswald’s demonstration for posterity on film for nearly twenty minutes.
His new demonstration had attracted television coverage, and with two “volunteers,” it appeared that Fair Play was more than a one-person operation.
That night he tried to encourage Marina to go to the Murrets’ to watch him on television, but she was appalled that he was seeking publicity for his radical politics and refused to leave the apartment.
It began at 8:00 A.M., when Bill Stuckey stopped by his apartment to ask if he wanted to tape a segment for that evening’s radio broadcast.
Oswald, woken from his sleep, had on just a pair of Marine Corps fatigue pants.
Still, Stuckey was pleasantly surprised by his “clean-cutness” as he expected “a folk-singer type … somebody with a beard and sandals …”33 Oswald showed him his Fair Play membership card and gave him copies of two Castro speeches, a pamphlet titled Ideology and Revolution by Jean-Paul Sartre, and another called The Crime Against Cuba by Corliss Lamont.
Telling Stuckey that Fair Play had twelve to thirteen local members, and emphasizing that he was only the secretary, he agreed to meet at the WDSU station at five that evening to tape a show.
Meanwhile, Bringuier was afraid that the televised demonstration of the previous day might enhance the local standing of Fan Play for Cuba.
Bringuier also embarked on an effort to infiltrate Fair Play’s local chapter to discover what he could about Lee Oswald.
On Saturday, he sent a Cuban associate, Carlos Quiroga, who spoke excellent English, to Oswald’s apartment.
Quiroga pretended to have been given a leaflet by Oswald and expressed his interest in joining Fair Play for Cuba.
He was the first person who ever responded to Oswald’s public demonstrations, and they spoke for nearly forty-five minutes.
Marina later said, “I asked Lee who that was, and he said that is probably some anti-Cuban, or perhaps an FBI agent.
Oswald told Quiroga that Fidel Castro was not a dictator and that if the United States invaded Cuba, he would fight with Castro against America.
There, he taped a thirty-seven-minute interview, which Stuckey, with Oswald’s suggestions, edited to a four-and-a-half minute program that was broadcast that evening.
That is when he considered Carlos Bringuier’s idea of a debate with Oswald.
On Monday, August 19, Oswald, at Stuckey’s suggestion, called the radio station.
Pleased to have another chance at publicity for his Cuban cause, Oswald instantly accepted.
To counter Oswald, Stuckey selected both Carlos Bringuier and Edward Butler, the executive director of the Information Council of the Americas , an anti-Communist propaganda organization.
Stuckey provided a copy of the thirty-seven-minute original interview tape to the local FBI office on Monday.
While he was later talking to an FBI source, Stuckey said he was put through to either the chief or deputy chief of the New Orleans office.
Meanwhile, Butler used his contacts at the House Un-American Activities Committee in Washington independently to uncover information about Oswald’s Russian venture.
Oswald appeared at 5:30 P.M. on Wednesday, in his thick flannel Russian suit, carrying a black looseleaf notebook and looking very uncomfortable in the sweltering August heat.
He was nervous, though he had practiced throughout the day, walking around the apartment reading notes aloud.
When Bringuier arrived, Oswald tried to shake hands, but Bringuier refused, instead trading jibes with him about his Communist beliefs.
At the outset of the show, Stuckey repeated Oswald’s statements from the past Saturday’s interview, in which he had claimed to have an honorable discharge from the Marines in 1959 and then lived in Fort Worth before moving to New Orleans.
Despite his attempt to fend off the attacks and bring the program back to a discussion of “the Cuban-American problem,” the personal attacks increasingly portrayed him not only as a liar but as a Communist and traitor.
Stuckey felt so sorry for him that he took him to Cameaux’s, a neighborhood bar, for some drinks.
He remembered Oswald was “dejected,” and over some beers, he relaxed and opened up a little.
He told Stuckey of his early attraction to Marxism and his subsequent disenchantment with Russia, but also about his unhappiness in the U.S.46 “It was my impression Oswald regarded himself as living in a world of intellectual inferiors,” recalled Stuckey.
But most revealing was Oswald’s statement that the Russians had “gone soft” on Communism and that Cuba was the world’s only real revolutionary country.
Marina could tell that Lee was in a terrible mood when he returned home that night.
Vincent Lee, Fair Play’s national president, had not even answered any of his recent letters.
Oswald feared the radio debate had so discredited him that his already lackluster organizing efforts might be permanently damaged.
He drafted a press release calling for a congressional investigation “of Lee Harvey Oswald, a confessed Marxist and an alien of Castro in the United States” and dropped copies off at newspapers and radio and television stations.
He even considered dropping leaflets by plane over New Orleans, but discovered it was illegal.
Marina noticed a fundamental change in Lee after his radio humiliation.
One of the most worrisome developments was that he began to focus on his rifle again.
He brought it out of the closet and at night began taking it onto an unlit screened porch at the front of the apartment.
At other times, Marina saw him sitting in the dark aiming his gun at imaginary targets.
Marina finally confronted him and asked why he was spending so much time with the rifle.
The State Department had banned travel there, and The Militant ran several prominent stories during the 1963 summer about Americans who visited despite the ban and faced imprisonment upon their return.
Oswald did not worry about the sanctions, because he did not intend to return, and hijacking a plane seemed as convenient and revolutionary as any other means. “ his imagination, his fantasy, which was quite unfounded, he was an outstanding man,” recalled Marina.
For Marina, it was frighteningly like his preparation for the Walker shooting.
He answered her with details of how he intended to use the rifle to force the pilot to fly to Cuba while Marina held the pistol on the passengers and crew.
He trained on his own for days, running about the apartment, clad only in his underwear, practicing leaps and trying to strengthen his legs and arms, things he considered necessary attributes to hijack a plane.
Mexico City had the nearest Cuban consulate from which he could obtain a visa, and he planned to go there by bus, swearing Marina to secrecy.
Under his new proposal, Marina would return to Dallas with Ruth Paine when she visited New Orleans around September 20.
After he got to Cuba, Oswald promised he would either arrange for Marina to join him, or he might return to Russia and meet her there.
She knew Cuba was his first choice, but if he failed to get there, she had no doubt he was willing to return to the USSR.64 But Marina had also come to recognize how changeable he was.
But I am sure that if he had gone there, he would not have liked it there either.
He was frustrated by Vincent Lee’s failure to answer his Fair Play letters and felt that Arnold Johnson was not of a high enough rank to advise him on his new problem.
He explained that he had lived in the USSR and had tried to become a Soviet citizen.
Since returning from Russia, and having “thrown myself into the struggle for progress and freedom in the United States, I would like to know weather, in your opion, I can continue to fight, handicapped as it were, by my past record … to compete with anti-progressive forces above ground or weather … I should always remain in the … underground” .66 Oswald’s excuse for his failures had become the attacks of “anti-progressives” over his Russian defection.
Although he wrote more letters to the Socialist Workers party and The Worker, they were only requests for information and assistance.
Further reports about anti-Castro attacks inside Cuba seemed to strengthen his resolve to go there but did not send him into a fury as sometimes had happened in earlier months.
His appetite for serious political books from the public library ceased, and instead he devoured science fiction and spy novels.
Francis Martello conducted his own investigation of Fair Play for Cuba and Oswald.
Then I contacted our sources for Communist party activity and they were all negative.
In the final report you just say that he does not have connections that call for further investigation.
On Labor Day, Oswald called the Murrets and asked if he and Marina could visit.
It was the first time he had seen his family since the bailout nearly a month before.
It was an uneventful afternoon except for when the Murrets pressed Oswald to teach Marina English, something he still adamantly refused.
That afternoon get-together was the last time the Murrets ever saw or spoke to him.
In the evening, he put on a pair of trousers and sat on the porch, reading one of his library books or tinkering with the rifle.
Marina, as well as neighbors, recalled that while he occasionally went to a local candy shop or a nearby Winn-Dixie store for groceries, he was generally at the apartment.
Jesse Garner, his landlady, used to watch him, dressed only in rubber thongs and bright yellow shorts, stuffing all the garbage cans up and down the block with their refuse, since he was too miserly to buy his own garbage can.
Marina started to worry that once she returned with Ruth Paine to Texas, she might not see him again.
She begged to be taken along to Mexico, but he said it was impossible because of her pregnancy.
On September 7, Castro appeared at a Brazilian embassy reception in Havana and submitted to a rare informal interview with Associated Press correspondent Daniel Harker.
She spent the weekend, and he lied to her that he intended to look for work in Houston or Philadelphia, and then once he found a job, he would be back to fetch Marina.
And unknown to the Oswalds, that same day, the FBI interviewed his landlady, Jesse Garner.
At that point, the New Orleans FBI office became chiefly responsible for Oswald.
Harold Weisberg claimed the first address was a formal-dress shop and the second did not exist.
In fact, Weisberg searched the addresses when he helped Jim Garrison in his 1967 investigation.
Instead, a review of 1963 records reveals there is no mystery or mixup.
The addresses were part of Oswald’s efforts to discover the headquarters of the Cuban exiles.
But it was with the Domestics Contact Division, which interviewed him after the assassination about a nephew who had defected from Cuba to America.
According to Summers, Bringuier also published a right-wing newsletter backed by the CIA-sponsored Crusade to Free Cuba.
Although the fight was not staged, it was certainly prompted by Oswald, and it was intended to enhance his legitimate pro-Communist credentials.
A Tulane graduate student, Harold Gordon Alderman, who had been involved in Fair Play activities elsewhere, had one of Oswald’s leaflets taped to his front door.
Another Tulane student, Vereen Alexander, thought she had met Oswald at a party with other pro-Castro students in the summer of 1963, but no one else confirmed her story.
Though Oswald told his aunt that he visited a language professor at Tulane, subsequent investigations by the New Orleans police and the FBI could not uncover any evidence that he visited Tulane.
He also asserted that while he was on night duty on November 17, 1963, he witnessed an incoming teletype from FBI headquarters in Washington, D.C., warning of a possible assassination attempt against JFK on either November 22 or 23.
However, Walter’s “copy” varied in format and wording from FBI communications.
More than fifty other employees of the New Orleans office repudiated his story.
Walter claimed that his own wife, who also worked in the New Orleans FBI office, would confirm his story.
None of the other fifty-nine FBI field offices ever received such a teletype, although Walter said it was addressed to all of them.
Yet the testimony and evidence show that Bruneau acted, as a personal favor, at the behest of the Murrets and was later reimbursed by Oswald’s uncle.
The other unemployed helper was never identified, although Steele testified the man volunteered from the unemployment line, the same as he had.
Veciana, who claimed to have worked for thirteen years for a CIA case officer known only to him as “Maurice Bishop,” told the House Select Committee that it was Bishop he saw with Oswald.
There are no other witnesses to the meeting, although Veciana claimed it happened in a busy office building.
Some, including Select Committee investigator Gaeton Fonzi, believe that Maurice Bishop was actually David Atlee Phillips, a CIA officer who had been in charge of the Agency’s Mexico City station at the time Oswald visited that city later in 1963.
David Phillips sued a number of journalists who printed the accusation for libel.
Some of the suits were unsuccessful and others were settled out of court.
There are still doubts not only about Maurice Bishop’s identity, but whether he ever existed.
In addition, Oswald was in New Orleans every day at the time Veciana claimed to have seen him in Dallas.
What is often not disclosed is that Pena recanted his story both in an FBI interview and before the Warren Commission.
De Brueys and Pena strongly disliked each other, and the postassassination story was evidently Pena’s means of revenge.
When, in the late 1960s, Pena faced criminal charges connected to an illegal house of prostitution, his defense lawyer was leading conspiracy buff Mark Lane.
For over an hour, Oswald allegedly praised the wonders of a new drug, LSD, and asked if it was legal to import.
After the man left the office, Gillin never again had contact with him, but over the assassination weekend of November 22, 1963, Gillin identified his visitor as Lee Oswald.
Since the CIA was experimenting with LSD during the early 1960s, the incident might be evidence of an intelligence link to Oswald.
The problem is with Gillin’s identification, which has been offered as evidence of another eyewitness account of Oswald’s suspicious behavior.
Gillin had only identified Oswald from the sound of his voice over the television.
Until 1961, he was a source of information for the CIA’s Domestic Contact Division.
He did not know Oswald, did not travel to Mexico with him, and had no other association with the case except for the coincidence that they both applied for Mexican tourist cards.
Some have suggested it is odd that since he was so anxious to get to Cuba, he did not leave immediately after Marina’s departure.
But he had to stay in New Orleans until the morning of Wednesday, September 25, when he could collect his $33 unemployment check, the next to last he was scheduled to receive.
Oswald’s next-door neighbor Eric Rogers saw him Tuesday, the twenty-fourth, the day after Marina left, running to catch a bus across the street.
He was carrying two bags, a small zippered one and his Marine Corps duffel, and he asked the bus driver for directions to the Greyhound bus station.
Oswald was making the same preparations he had in Dallas in April before he moved to New Orleans.
He deposited his bags at the station, not wanting to be burdened with them for the errands he planned for the next morning, and then returned to the Magazine Street apartment to spend his last night in the city.
Lee left the apartment in the early-morning hours of Wednesday, September 25.
At the Lafayette Square substation, Oswald picked up his unemployment-compensation check and mailed a change-ofaddress card, postmarked at 11:00 A.M., listing Ruth Paine’s address in Irving, Texas.
At a Winn-Dixie on Magazine Street he cashed his $33 check, and was then ready to leave his native New Orleans.
Late that night the telephone rang at the Houston home of Estelle and Horace Twiford.
Twiford was not at home when Oswald called, but his wife wrote the message on some scrap paper.
It indicated Oswald was a member of Fair Play for Cuba, that he had some ideas he wanted to discuss with her husband, and that he had only a few hours before he left for Mexico.
He was excited to begin the last leg of his trip, and he felt he had no reason to be secretive any longer since he would soon be in Cuba and permanently away from the United States The usually introverted Oswald was surprisingly talkative to other passengers, even bragging about the purpose of his trip.
They initially slept on the bus, but when they awoke around 6:00 A.M., they engaged Oswald in a conversation.
He told them he was traveling from New Orleans to Cuba via Mexico City, because traveling to Cuba directly from the United States was against American law.
Mexican immigration official Helio Tuexi Maydon stamped Oswald’s tourist card, and at 2:15 he boarded another bus, no. of the Flecha Roja line, for an overnight trip to Mexico City, scheduled to arrive mid-morning Friday, September 27.
At one stop along the route, Monterrey, two young Australian women, Pamela Mumford and Patricia Winston, boarded for the remainder of the trip.
The four seats at the front of the bus were taken by the McFarlands, Oswald, and an elderly Englishman, Albert Osborne, a traveling preacher.
After some time had passed, Oswald walked to the rear and began talking to them.
During their extended conversation, although he never introduced himself by name, Oswald told them that while he was from Fort Worth, he had been in Japan while in the Marines and was sorry he had never been to Australia.
Trying to impress them as a world traveler, he said he had been a student in Russia and “at this stage he showed us his passport that had a Russian stamp on it … and he didn’t mention his Russian wife at all.
At the bus stops Oswald ate alone, and they noticed he was lost with the Spanish menus.
He just pointed to something on the menu and had to eat a full meal each stop instead of a snack.
When they finally arrived at the Mexico City bus station, Oswald dropped his friendly veneer and quickly left by himself.
Lee Dannelly, assistant chief of the administrative division in the Selective Service headquarters in Austin, Texas, was positive that Lee Oswald visited her in the afternoon on Wednesday, September 25.
She claimed the young man called himself Harvey Oswald, said he was registered in the Selective Service in Florida, had just come from the governor’s office, and was trying to correct his dishonorable discharge from the Marines.
A waitress at a nearby coffee shop, Florence Norman, said Oswald had stopped in for several cups of coffee on the same day he visited Mrs.
Since Oswald could not be in Austin and also on the bus on its way to Houston, this discrepancy raises the specter of an Oswald imposter.
The Oswald imposter issue is critical from September 1963 through the assassination.
After the assassination, scores of people came forward believing they had seen Oswald at places other than where he was , almost all of them well intentioned but mistaken.
People placed themselves with Oswald from Hawaii to Florida, from bowling alleys to dance parties.
She said he had been to the governor’s office, but a records check for a six-month period shows no Oswald in the mandatory registration books or any signature that matched Oswald’s writing.
Dannelly claimed another worker had brought Oswald to her desk, but when asked, the other employee, Jesse Skrivanek, did not remember anyone who looked like Oswald or anyone using that name.
Others in the Austin Selective Service office swore they never saw him or heard the name before the assassination.
Actually, there were fifteen Oswalds in the Austin office files, but Dannelly refused to admit she might be mistaken.
Dannelly recounted about Oswald in her story were available locally in the media before she told anyone of the alleged visit.
The FBI discovered that the waitress who claimed she too saw Oswald turned out to have Wednesday, the day of the alleged Oswald appearance, as her day off.
None of the other employees at the coffee shop recalled ever seeing Oswald or hearing of anyone with that name before the assassination.
Another witness who claimed to have seen Oswald elsewhere at the time he was traveling to Mexico is Sylvia Odio.
Her sister answered the door, and the men claimed to be members of JURE, the Junta Revolucionaria, an anti-Castro group that Odio had helped form several months earlier in Puerto Rico.
One of the Cubans said his name was Leopoldo and asked if she was in the underground, and she said no.
Leon said very little, “just a few little words in Spanish, trying to be cute … like ‘Hola,’” she said.
The men said they had just come from New Orleans and were in a rush because they were on their way to either Miami or Puerto Rico.
They also refer to a letter Odio wrote to her father before the assassination, in which she discussed the visit.
A reexamination of the Odio story, however, as well as of her credibility, casts doubts on its accuracy.
Annie Odio cannot corroborate key parts of her sister’s story because she did not hear the American introduced as “Leon Oswald” or the telephone conversation from Leopoldo the following day.
She was not even sure if she mentioned that an American was in the group.
Odio could not positively identify him when shown photos during her Warren Commission testimony.
She was certain the men had visited before Tuesday, October 1, because on September 30 she moved to a different apartment.
Her sister was living with some American friends and came on the last weekend to help her pack for the move.
According to Odio, her sister had arrived on either Thursday, September 26, or Friday, the twenty-seventh.
It was physically impossible for Oswald to visit Odio in Dallas when she claims he did.
There is no doubt that three men visited her, as her sister, Annie, confirms.
The FBI thought it had solved the Odio mystery in 1964 when it found three men who might have visited her apartment near the end of September.
Loran Hall, a prominent anti-Castroite, bore a marked resemblance to the man Odio described as the leader, Leopoldo.
Hall told the FBI on September 16, 1964, that he was in Dallas soliciting funds during September 1963 and had been to the Odio apartment.
The three of them had been arrested in Florida in December 1962, as part of the Kennedy administration’s crackdown on anti-Castro paramilitary operations.
Howard looked like the second of the Cubans/Mexicans described by Odio.
But the most staggering coincidence was that Seymour, who spoke only a few words of Spanish, greatly resembled Oswald.
However, four days later, September 20, 1964, Hall recanted his statement.
When Odio was shown photos of the three and was asked if it was a case of mistaken identity, she stuck to her story and said she could not identify them.
For a possible answer to this, Sylvia Odio herself has to be briefly examined.
By the time of her Oswald story, she had a history of emotional problems.
In Puerto Rico, where she had lived before moving to Dallas in March 1963, she had seen a psychiatrist over her fractious marriage.
According to FBI reports, he decided she was unstable and unable, mentally or physically, to care for her children.
A doctor who was called to treat her once for “an attack of nerves” discovered she had made it up to get the attention of her neighbors.
He described her as a very mixed-up young lady, and was told by others that she had also been under psychiatric care while living in Miami, when she moved to the States in 1961.42 In her divorce proceeding in 1963, she lost custody of her four children, because of charges of neglect and abandonment.
By the time of the assassination, she had been seeing him for more than seven months, at least weekly, sometimes more frequently.
Odio insists she told at least two people, before the assassination, that three men, including Oswald, had visited her apartment.
But when the FBI questioned her in 1964, Connell said that Odio only told her about Oswald after the assassination, and then said she not only knew Oswald, but he had given talks to groups of Cuban refugees in Dallas.
The second person Odio contended she told before the assassination was her psychiatrist, Dr.
When interviewed by the Warren Commission, Einspruch said that during the course of psychotherapy, Odio told him she had seen Oswald at several anti-Castro meetings, and that one of the meetings was held at her house.
He made no mention of the three supposed visitors to the Odio apartment.
When questioned in 1978 by the Select Committee, Einspruch did not mention Odio’s story of multiple Oswald sightings.
Instead, he thought she had told him of the three visitors, but he did not remember hearing the name Leon or about the Leopoldo telephone call before the assassination.
On the day JFK was killed, Odio suffered one of her emotional seizures, passed out, and was hospitalized.
Einspruch spoke to her the day after the assassination, while she was still hospitalized.
He blamed her divorce and the imprisonment of their parents in Cuba for her emotional collapse.
Silvia Herrera, her mother-in-law, went so far as to say that Odio was an excellent actress who could intelligently fabricate such an episode if she wished.
One of the most unusual aspects of the Odio case is that though she thought she had met the assassin, she never contacted any government or law enforcement agency to tell her story.
Carlos Bringuier, the New Orleans anti-Castro leader who was arrested in a street fracas with Oswald, had met Odio once.
Instead , she casually told a neighbor, and that neighbor told the FBI, and that’s the only reason it came out.
It doesn’t sound right, and I know from my own personal experience on what I did and how I felt when I realized I had some contact with the man who killed the President of the United States.
Maybe with all the news after the assassination she became confused and put Oswald’s face and name onto the person she actually met.
There is an accident with four witnesses and they give four different versions and they all believe they are telling the truth, and could even pass a lie detector.
There is not a single piece of corroborating evidence, however, for her postassassination claim that one of the men was introduced as ‘Leon Oswald’ and that the next day one of the Cubans called to discuss a Marine sharpshooter and his Kennedy death threats.
While Odio thought she had been visited by Oswald in Texas, he was actually undergoing one of his most important encounters since he had tried to renounce his American citizenship in Moscow in 1959.
At the Cuban embassy, it was a typical Friday morning for Silvia Duran, the young Mexican woman who worked as the secretary to the Cuban consul, Eusebio Azcue.
Duran remembers him as tentative, but once he discovered she spoke English, he seemed more relaxed.
In a monologue that lasted almost fifteen minutes, he proceeded to tell her he was going to the USSR but that on the way he wanted a transit visa to stop in Cuba, for at least two weeks.
He then began placing documents on her desk, each accompanied with a short explanation.
Duran remembered his Russian residency and work papers, membership cards in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee and the American Communist party, † correspondence with Communist organizations in the U.S., and the clippings from his arrest in New Orleans.
He told her he expected to be promptly issued a visa since he “was a friend of the Cuban revolution,” and that he wanted to leave by September 30, only three days later.
Procedurally, Oswald should have begun filling out a lengthy application, but instead Duran called on Eusebio Azcue to see if he might expedite the process for the young American.
Duran helped him fill out the application, and told him he needed to return with passport-size photographs.
When he returned to the Cuban consulate, Duran helped him complete the remainder of the application and stapled photographs to the original and five carbon copies.
While he had been gone, Duran “semi-officially” called the Soviet embassy to see whether she could facilitate his application.
The staff was noncommittal but indicated the process could take four months.
Oswald began protesting loudly about the extensive paperwork and insisting on his right to get a visa for Cuba immediately.
Again, consul Azcue walked out of his office to see about the commotion.
Azcue also told Oswald that if he had a Soviet visa, he could grant Oswald a fifteen-day visit for Cuba without having to contact the Cuban government.
However, without a Soviet visa, Azcue reminded Oswald, he would have to go through the normal procedures, which could take two to three weeks.
Duran remembered Oswald looked angry, and became so noisy that the new Cuban consul, Alfredo Mirabal Diaz, who was scheduled to replace Azcue within a few months, also came out of his office to see what was causing the disturbance.
When he left the Cuban compound, Oswald quickly walked two short blocks to the Soviet embassy.
Once he arrived, he approached the sentry at the entrance to the compound and demanded to see someone from the consulate.
It was not every day that a young American who had a rudimentary grasp of Russian, and had lived in the USSR for nearly three years, walked into the Mexico City embassy.
Oswald was taken to the consul’s office and joined there by Valeriy Vladimirovich Kostikov, a KGB agent operating under the diplomatic cover of a consul corps officer.
Kostikov was soon joined by another KGB agent, Oleg Maximovich Nechiporenko.
He told the KGB officers that he was desperate to return to Russia, claiming that the FBI was harassing him because of his leftist politics and his Russian wife.
Trying to impress the Soviets that he was an important political activist, Oswald promised that he had interesting information to give them about his time in America.
He regaled them about his work on behalf of Communism, and his efforts to infiltrate the anti-Castro Cubans and the right wing.
He said it was urgent for him to get to Cuba so he could provide information that could help prevent future CIA attacks.
Ernesto Rodriguez, a former CIA contract agent, claimed that Oswald hinted he had information on American efforts to kill Castro.
The Soviet agents, having had no previous contact with him, did not know what to believe and what to dismiss.
The Soviet officers needed to contact headquarters in Moscow to determine whether Oswald was somebody to whom the KGB wanted to grant an immediate visa.
When Nechiporenko put Oswald off until the next day, he informed Lee that the granting of a visa could take up to four monoths.
The cable to Moscow about Oswald, from the KGB agents in Mexico City, ended up on the desk of the agent who had first handled the matter in 1959, Yuriy Nosenko.
Then suddenly a special cable arrived from the Soviet embassy in Mexico City seeking our advice.
Of course, Oswald didn’t know he was being turned away because he was nuts.
According to Nechiporenko, it appears he first went to the Soviets to see if his visa was ready.
He could then take it to the Cubans and get his fifteen-day transit visa.
Initially, he spoke briefly to Pavel Antonovich Yatzkov, a KGB captain operating under the cover identity of a consular officer.
When they finally told him they would not issue a visa, his initial fury turned to depression.
After Oswald left the compound, the three KGB agents discussed their unusual visitor.
Both Azcue and Oswald knew by this time that the Soviets were not going to issue a visa, so Azcue’s reasoning was merely a polite way of rejecting him.
On October 10, 1963, a week after Oswald visited the embassies, the CIA sent a memo about him to the FBI, the State Department, and the Navy.
The CIA described the Oswald who contacted the Soviet embassy as “approximately 35 years old, with an athletic build, about six feet tall, with a receding hairline …”86 The description in the teletype was based upon surreptitious photographs the Agency took of almost everyone who entered the Cuban and Soviet embassies in Mexico City.
The CIA’s Mexico City station had reviewed its surveillance photos and chosen the one it thought was Oswald.
Supposedly, when the CIA station chief for Mexico, Winston Scott, died, his safe was cleaned out, including a right-profile photo of Oswald entering the Soviet embassy.
Three former CIA employees told the House Select Committee they had seen such a photo.
James Angleton, who was responsible for Nosenko being branded as a KGB plant, personally flew to Mexico after Scott’s death and cleaned out his desk and safe.
Angleton is now dead, and if there was such a photo, he was the last to know of its whereabouts.
As the House Select Committee learned in its investigation, the CIA does not now have any photos of Oswald entering the embassies.
As for sound tapes, the Agency may have recorded as many as eight conversations it originally thought to be of Oswald, either on the telephone to the Soviet embassy or during his visits there.
W David Slawson, a Warren Commission staff counsel, said that the CIA’s Winston Scott played part of a poor-quality tape recording that purported to include Oswald, several months after the assassination.
In 1976, according to The Washington Post, David Phillips, a former chief of CIA operations in Latin America, indicated a transcript of an Oswald phone call to the Soviet embassy still existed.
If we kept everything we recorded, you couldn’t find enough warehouses to store them.
So once something is transcribed, we don’t need the tape, and it’s reused.
Keeping the tape might be more of an indication that there was a special interest in this fellow.
However, since there isn’t a tape, no one is sure that we recorded the right person.
Just like we made an error in photographing the wrong man, there’s a good chance that we might have recorded the same man we photographed, thinking the entire time we had surveillance on Oswald.
Their argument is bolstered by Cuban consul Azcue, who testified before the House Select Committee that the man he argued with for fifteen minutes at the Cuban embassy does not look like the photographs of Lee Harvey Oswald.
He described the man at the embassy as ten years older, with dark blond hair, and thinner.
However, Lopez’s report was sealed by the Select Committee, fueling the debate over the issue.
But the evidence is overwhelming that the real Oswald visited both embassies.
Except Azcue, the other employees at the Cuban embassy, Silvia Duran and Alfredo Mirabal Diaz, positively identified the visitor as Oswald.
In 1978, Cuba finally gave the original of Oswald’s visa application to the United States government.
Handwriting experts for the House Select Committee verified that the two signatures on the applications belonged to him.
The six passport-size photographs that Duran told him to have taken, and then stapled to the top of each application, are definitely of Oswald.
In the unlikely event an imposter brought back those pictures of the real Oswald, he would have to hope that Duran would not notice he was submitting photos of someone other than himself.
Moreover, Oswald argued loudly at the Cuban embassy on at least two occasions after he had brought in his photos, attracting the attention of several employees.
The incoming consul at the time, Alfredo Mirabal Diaz, only walked out of his office because of the commotion, and later testified that the man at the Cuban embassy was the same as the man in the visa photos.
An imposter, trying to pass off photos of Oswald as himself, would not create two noisy scenes in which people had a chance to study and remember him.
While the Cuban evidence is clear that the real Oswald brought the photos and signed the applications, until recently there had been no Soviet confirmation regarding the visits to its embassy.
However, in 1992, one of the KGB agents who met with Oswald finally broke his silence and helped settle any lingering doubts.
Oleg Nechiporenko announced that he had met Oswald on September 27 and 28, 1963, in Mexico City, and said “without hesitation” that it was the same man who was arrested two months later for killing President Kennedy.
The other KGB agents who met Oswald in Mexico City, Valeriy Kostikov and Pavel Yatzkov, also confirmed they had seen the real Oswald.
The Warren Commission concluded that since he was dejected and frustrated after his confrontations at the two embassies, he spent the remainder of his time quietly, and alone.
The Commission relied on the statements of employees in Oswald’s hotel and at nearby restaurants.
He spent on average between 40c and 48c for each meal, often refusing dessert and coffee, because he evidently did not realize it was part of the set price.
Oswald’s map of Mexico City, found in his possessions after the assassination, had pen markings on it.
Other locations include museums, parks, general sight-seeing landmarks, and even a movie with English subtitles.
He later told Marina about his tourist activities, even claiming he had gone to a bullfight.
Silvia Duran, the Cuban embassy employee, admitted to the House Select Committee that she advised Oswald that it would help his visa application if he could get a letter from a Mexican in good standing with the Cuban revolutionary hierarchy.
He told them his name was Lee Harvey Oswald, a name Contreras and his friends remembered because it was also the name of a popular cartoon rabbit.
Contreras adds weight to the imposter Oswald story by claiming the man was five feet six inches at the most, at least three inches shorter than the real Oswald.
He told Contreras and his friends that he was a painter from Texas, dissatisfied with the United States and harassed by the FBI, and was hoping to go to Cuba but could not get a visa.
He had found the right group, as Contreras and his associates were strongly pro-Castro and viewed the United States as a great imperialistic power.
They also personally knew consul Azcue, and promised to put in a good word for Oswald.
But later that night, when Contreras spoke to Azcue and a Cuban intelligence agent, he was told to break off contacts with Oswald as the embassy was suspicious he might be a provocation from American intelligence.
Oswald supposedly came back to Contreras and his friends and even spent the night at their apartment, most likely Sunday, September 29.
But when he left in the morning he was still begging for help to get to Cuba.
Summers wrote that when the CIA received information about Contreras’s claim in 1967, it did not adequately pursue it, allowing leads to grow cold in the subsequent decades.
Although the House Select Committee failed to find Contreras, Summers located him in Tampico, Mexico, and judged him truthful.
When the author tried to interview Contreras in 1992, he refused, dodging telephone calls for several weeks.
The author discovered, at a Washington, D.C., archive, Summers’s original notes about his September 23, 1978, interview with Contreras.
The notes disclosed that Contreras told Summers that while Oswald said he was from Texas in earlier years, he lived in San Francisco at the time he was visiting Mexico City.
Also, Summers needed a translator to speak with Contreras, but Oswald did not speak Spanish and there is no explanation for how they supposedly communicated.
Contreras also claimed that Oswald told him about his police problems in New Orleans, but those events did not take place until nearly four years after Contreras claimed he met Oswald.
In his interview notes in 1978, Summers lists the date that Contreras met Oswald as 1963, yet Contreras told Redhead he was not even living in Mexico City in 1963 when Oswald visited.
However, that it was presented as credible and relevant about Oswald’s activities in Mexico City, in a best-selling book, is instructive about the pitfalls that beset the research on this subject.
There are other stories that emerged from Oswald’s trip to Mexico City that often passed as true but, upon closer inspection, are also not credible.
In an article in the National Enquirer with a byline by Comer Clark, a British reporter, Castro was said to have claimed in an impromptu 1967 interview that “Lee Oswald came to the Cuban embassy in Mexico City twice.
The Select Committee concluded Calderon’s statement was “braggadocio” and that Oswald did not voice a threat against President Kennedy while at the Cuban embassy.2* On November 25, 1963, only three days after the assassination, a young Nicaraguan, Gilberto Alvarado, went to the American embassy in Mexico.
He startled United States officials by claiming that in September he had visited the Cuban embassy and overheard a conversation among Oswald, a Cuban, and a black man.
Alvarado also asserted that he had tried to warn the embassy before the assassination, but was ignored.
Then, when requestioned by the Americans, he said the Mexicans had coerced him to retract.
Later he said he was no longer sure of the date, and the person only resembled Oswald.
Although Ambassador Thomas Mann, the United States representative in Mexico at the time, was not convinced the Alvarado story was completely false, Alvarado is now so discredited that few repeat his story.
When he was later returned to the U.S., he was sentenced to twenty years’ imprisonment, and he told the House Select Committee that while in Cuba he had worked in a Cuban intelligence facility.
The committee said that although there was independent confirmation of other allegations Ramirez made, the FBI and CIA were unable to substantiate the existence of an “Osvaldo-Kennedy” file.
When he had decided to defect to Russia in 1959, he had obtained a Soviet visa in Helsinki within a few days.
He had fully expected the same to happen with the Cubans, especially in light of his extensive political activism.
Returning to America was tantamount to admitting defeat, but with limited funds, he could not stay much longer.
Colonel Nechiporenko claims he spoke to him at least once, and Oswald asked if there had been any change about granting him a visa.
Oswald then walked the several blocks from his hotel to the Chihuahuense travel agency, and spent $20.30 for a ticket on a Transportes del Norte bus from Mexico City to Nuevo Laredo and then by Greyhound into Texas.
On the following day, Tuesday, October 1, Oswald paid his hotel bill through that night.
Other passengers recall that at the border crossing, he was pulled off and questioned about his Mexican tourist papers, because initially the border guards thought his fifteen-day visa had expired.
It was over fifteen days since the visa was issued, but Oswald showed them his entry stamp to prove he had not been in Mexico past the prescribed time.
When it was resolved and he returned to the bus, other passengers heard him grumbling about the bureaucrats at the border.
He arrived at Laredo at 3:00 A.M. and did not finish the last leg of his trip until 2:20 in the afternoon on Thursday, October 3.
Every event in Oswald’s life prior to September 26 happened before it was publicly known that the President would visit Texas.
Even Oswald’s trip to Mexico was planned before the announcement, and if he had been successful in obtaining a visa to Cuba, Kennedy and Oswald would never have crossed paths in another two months.
Critics who write about suspicions of a conspiracy before this date never explain how Oswald was supposedly brought into a plot that had no possible sense of time and place, two indispensable ingredients.
He was so nervous about having sat next to the man accused of killing JFK that he denied he had, although the other passengers and his travel documents show he did.
Osborne told one of the other passengers that in his conversation with Oswald, Lee told him he had been to Mexico before.
It is not known if Oswald was talking about his Marine Corps visit to Tijuana or if he was lying about visiting Mexico on other occasions.
Mumford and Winston were in a Las Vegas hotel room watching television news about the assassination when suddenly Oswald was shown in the Dallas jail.
They immediately identified him, startled that he even had on the same sweater he had worn on the bus.
Only those instances most often advanced by the critics will be considered in this and the following chapter.
He had been a business tycoon before Castro’s revolution, and Odio came from a wealthy and pampered background.
Odio said that the Cubans gave their war names, but she assumed Leon Oswald was a real name for the American.
However, she evidently never considered the possibility that Oswald would have been a perfect war name for any anti-Castro Cuban since the name had been in the newspapers, radio, and television in New Orleans as a virulently pro-Castro advocate.
The Soviets had both consular and diplomatic branches in the same building.
They will be referred to in this chapter as the Cuban and Soviet embassies.
He told his wife he first went to the Soviet embassy, but the author’s interpretation of the Cubans’ testimony is that he might have visited them first.
However, two of the employees at the Cuban embassy claimed that Oswald had one.
After the assassination, the American Communist party denied that he was ever a member.
The card may have been counterfeit, made at the same time as his Hidell identifications.
The CIA refuses to confirm or deny whether it ever recorded a conversation between Oswald and the Soviets made from the Cuban embassy.
He then hired a Californian, Brian Litman, to represent him, and he began working on a book based on his meeting with Oswald.
Kostikov’s identity has been known since December 1963 and caused initial concern for the Warren Commission since the CIA said he was reportedly chief of KGB terrorism squads in the Western Hemisphere.
But Oswald actually entered through the embassy’s front entrance and met with the KGB officers in a windowed, nonsecure consul’s office.
In this scenario, an imposter made high-profile visits to two Communist embassies so that Oswald’s leftist credentials would be enhanced.
However, after the assassination, the CIA discovered it had a photo of him in its Minsk file.
In 1961, the Agency’s Domestic Contact Division had made copies of some pictures taken by tourists.
The unidentified American was not of interest until the Agency realized, several years later, who he was.
Because it is so protective of sources and its means of obtaining information, even years after the event, its lack of full disclosure is often interpreted as evidence of conspiracy.
But the CIA’s failure to be forthright is an inherent part of the intelligence trade, and is not unique to its handling of the Oswald case.
The descriptions he gave to the House Select Committee were based on his recall of an event fifteen years earlier.
But when told by the committee that the visa-application signatures had been verified as belonging to Oswald, Azcue wavered.
A Mexican author, Elena Garro de Paz, said she saw Oswald at a “twist party” at Duran’s brother-in-law’s house over the weekend of September 27.
Garro claims Oswald had two companions and that she overheard consul Azcue, also at the party, tell another person that there was no alternative but to kill President Kennedy.
While Duran admits there was a twist party at her brother-in-law’s house around this time, she is adamant that Oswald was not there.
It is highly unlikely that Duran would have invited Oswald and Azcue to the same party after the almost violent fight they had on Saturday, September 28.
Another instance, in which a former police official, Salvador Diaz Verson, claimed to see Duran and Oswald at a restaurant, Caballo Blanco Parren, on Saturday, September 28, also remains uncorroborated.
But the Cuban government later explained that the move had been planned for more than six months, and that his replacement, Alfredo Mirabal Diaz, had been there for several months.
The Alvarado story must certainly have contributed to LBJ’s early suspicion.
At first, this seemed an important confirmation of Alvarado’s story, but the Gutierrez claim also crumbled upon subsequent investigation.
Then, within days of the Gutierrez allegation, a CIA source pinpointed a Cuban, Gilberto Lopez, who had contact with the Tampa branch of Fair Play for Cuba, as a conspirator.
According to the source, Lopez rushed into Mexico the day after the assassination, went to the Cuban embassy in Mexico City, and was spirited to Havana on a Cubana airlines flight that had waited hours only for him.
While the Warren Commission’s investigation of this story was weak, the Select Committee extensively researched it.
While the Committee was troubled by the CIA’s original handling of the Lopez report, it did not discover any evidence that established a link to the assassination.
There is also a possibility that Oswald telephoned again the following day, Tuesday, October 1.
The CIA may have intercepted one of these telephone conversations, in which Oswald spoke to a guard, who told him that only by personally visiting the embassy could he obtain any further information.
Twiford’s name, address, and two telephone numbers were found in Oswald’s book after the assassination.
One was a disconnected number, which was still listed in the 1963 Houston phone book.
The second number in his address book was Twiford’s valid one for September 1963.
It appears Oswald arrived in Houston, looked up the Twifords in the phone book, and wrote the number in his address book.
He had fully expected he would be calling her from Cuba, and he could not bring himself to talk to her that first day.
Instead, he went directly to the YMCA, where he had stayed a year earlier when he had moved to Dallas to find work.
Later that same day he checked in at the Texas Employment Commission, filed a claim for the last of his unemployment checks, and emphasized that he needed to find work quickly.
He listed his address as 2515 West 5th Street in the Dallas suburb of Irving, which was Ruth Paine’s house, where Marina was staying.
The following day, Friday, October 4, Oswald reviewed the newspaper’s help-wanted ads and applied for work as a typesetter at the Padgett Printing Company.
He made a favorable impression on the plant superintendent, Theodore Gangl, who was prepared to hire him.
However, before committing himself, he telephoned one of Oswald’s references, Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, and spoke to Robert Stovall.
He told her to send Ruth Paine to pick him up and bring him to the Paine home in Irving, but Marina explained that Ruth had just donated blood at the hospital in case it was necessary during the baby’s birth, and she was too tired to make the trip.
He hitchhiked the twelve miles to the Paine’s home and arrived within the hour.
Alone with Marina, he began to complain bitterly about his mistreatment by the embassies in Mexico City.
He described how they shuttled him back and forth, each waiting for the other to act first, and denounced the “bureaucrats” and the “red tape” that had frustrated his goals.
She said he never again talked of “Uncle Fidel,” fighting in the Cuban revolution, or of visiting Havana.
Once he vented his frustration about the embassies, he told her about the rest of his trip.
He gave her postcards of bullfights as well as a small silver bracelet inscribed with her name, which he claimed he bought in Mexico, but probably purchased at a Dallas five-and-dime store.
Considering his setbacks, he was affectionate and kept saying how much he had missed her, with his only real distraction being the concern for finding work.
When Ruth drove him to the bus station on Monday, October 7, after a relatively quiet weekend, he asked if Marina could stay until he found a job and a new apartment.
He paid the $7 weekly rent in advance, registered under his real name, and moved in that same day.
He searched daily for work, telephoning and visiting the employment commission and prospective employers, but had no success.
He was angry when he left for Ruth Paine’s house, convinced that his landlady’s abrupt rejection meant the FBI was back on his trail and had been asking about him.
For the second weekend in a row, Marina and Lee did not argue, perhaps because the baby was due any day.
They were concerned that since Lee was so cruel to Marina, he might be violent toward them as well.
Marina was the only one who knew about Lee’s Mexico City trip, but she misunderstood how that affected him.
She viewed his apparent withdrawal from political action as a turn for the good.
To Ruth and Michael Paine, he now seemed just like someone who was trying hard to support his family and find work.
Even when the commission sent him for low-paying jobs like a clerk-trainee at Burton-Dixie, at $1.25 per hour, he was not hired.
According to Ruth, Oswald feared that he was losing some job opportunities because he could not drive and could only work at places reached by public transportation.
On Monday, October 14, Ruth, who had errands in Dallas, drove him into the city.
Later that day, while having coffee with some neighbors, she had a conversation that would have a profound impact on future events.
Ruth, Marina, Dorothy Roberts, and Linnie Mae Randle were discussing Lee’s difficulty in obtaining work.
Roberts and Randle were also young mothers, and they clearly empathized with Oswald’s predicament, especially since Marina’s second child was about to be born.
Linnie Mae Randle recalled that Wesley Buell Frazier, her younger brother, “had just looked for a job, and I had helped him try to find one.
Randle said that Buell had applied for jobs at Manor Bakery and Texas Gypsum Company, but both involved driving a truck, so they were not practical for Lee.
The phone was taken to Mr Truly … and I talked with him …” “She said, ‘Mr Truly,’” recalled Roy Truly, “‘you don’t know who I am but I have a neighbor whose brother works for you.
Except for weekend visits to his wife, they later reported he never went out at night or had a single visitor.
Instead, according to Johnson, he stayed inside his room “95 percent of the time,” and the remainder silently in front of the communal television “with the other men renters and he wouldn’t speak to them.
I would say, ‘Good afternoon,’ and he would just … give me a dirty look and keep walking and go on to his room.
The next day, Tuesday, October 15, Oswald went to Dealey Plaza, in downtown Dallas.
He told him he had just been honorably discharged from the Marines, where he had office duties.
One position was in a storage warehouse some distance from Dealey Plaza.
Truly decided he seemed earnest enough to hire him as a clerk at the main building, to fill book orders, at $1.25 per hour.
Truly told him to report to work the following morning, October 16, which was the start of a new pay period.
He told her it was good to be working with books, and the work would not tire him.
His primary responsibility was to fill textbook orders, by finding the books in the seven-floor Depository and then bringing them to the first floor, where the orders were processed.
The work atmosphere was a relaxed one, and people left Lee alone, which he liked.
At the first-floor recreation room where the workers ate lunch and sometimes played dominoes, Oswald sat by himself, reading day-old newspapers.
But one person who engaged him in a brief conversation that first week was Buell Frazier, Linnie Mae Randle’s brother.
When Frazier discovered that Oswald’s wife was staying at the Paines’ house in Irving, he realized they were neighbors, as Frazier lived only a block from the Paines.
When he arrived at the Paines’, he was startled by a small surprise birthday party Ruth and Marina had planned.
Marina remembered that Lee was so touched that he had tears in his eyes.
He was emotional the remainder of the evening, crying and apologizing to Marina for what he had put her through.
It was another quiet weekend, until Marina began her labor Sunday evening.
Around 9:00 P.M., Ruth drove her to Parkland Hospital, while Lee baby-sat with the household’s three children.
Ruth returned after checking Marina into Parkland, and although Oswald was in the guest bedroom with a light on, he did not come out to ask any questions.
Ruth stayed up, telephoning the hospital until she heard before midnight that Marina had given birth to a second daughter.
Ruth told Lee the following morning before he left with Frazier for work.
Frazier drove Oswald to the Depository on Monday, October 21, and then took him back to Irving that evening.
Ruth was surprised that he did not want to go to Parkland until she discovered he feared that if the hospital knew he had a job, he would have to pay for Marina’s stay.
But Ruth had already told the hospital the previous evening that he was employed, and she assured him that his salary was so low that the maternity care was still free.
He had promised Marina that he would never again try to kill Walker, but now that he had returned to Dallas, he could not escape thinking about the right-wing general.
Walker was more active than ever in politics; he was talking of again running for political office, and the failed assassination attempt had even created a backlash of sympathy for him.
On Wednesday, Oswald attended a right-wing rally at which Walker addressed 1,300 people.
It is not known if Oswald was stalking him that night, as he had for nearly two months before first trying to kill him.
That incident received widespread media coverage and could only have exacerbated Oswald’s inherent fears about the growth of the political right.
The Walker surveillance was news that would have greatly upset Marina, but he did not tell her.
He did, however, report his activities to Arnold Johnson of the American Communist party.
On Friday, October 25, at Ruth’s house for the weekend, Oswald and Michael Paine had a long political discussion.
He was definitely not a proponent of nonviolent change, the Gandhi method.
Paine told him that he had attended a John Birch meeting that same night.
Paine visited in the hope of opening a dialogue between left and right.
He told the group about his visit to the Walker meeting at which a John Birch spokesman had made anti-Semitic and anti-Catholic attacks.
Krystinik almost got into a fight with Oswald when he attacked the free enterprise system, but the older man won Lee over with some kind words about Cuba.
In the car on the way home, Oswald told Michael that he thought the older man was a Communist, since he talked favorably about Cuba.
However, both Michael and Ruth noticed that Lee’s more convivial attitude that existed since his return to Dallas was disappearing.
He snapped at Marina for failing to get him iced tea or to iron his shirts correctly.
If he finished eating ahead of the others, he often just left the table, without saying a word, and watched television in the living room.
Never did he offer the Paines any money toward Marina’s or his daughters’ upkeep.
It was the same Lee they had come to know, and dislike, a year earlier.
During these first three weeks that Oswald settled back into Dallas, he was not aware that the FBI had taken a renewed interest in him because of his Mexico City trip.
On October 25, the same day Lee attended the ACLU meeting, local Dallas field agent James Hosty learned that “another agency had determined that Lee Oswald was in contact with the Soviet embassy in Mexico City in the early part of October …”45 That notice greatly increased Hosty’s interest in Oswald, as he was now possibly an espionage case.
Once the New Orleans office discovered that Oswald had filed a change of address from his Magazine Street apartment to Irving, Texas, it notified the Dallas FBI that Oswald might have moved there.
Hosty was assigned the case, and he first had to determine whether Oswald had actually moved to Texas.
On October 29, Hosty went to Irving and asked a neighbor of the Paines some questions.
He learned that a Russian-born, Russian-speaking woman was living with Ruth Paine.
On Thursday, October 31, Hosty ran a credit check on the Paines and conducted some more interviews with those who knew them.
Since he did not consider Ruth Paine “a hostile witness,” he did not bring along another agent for the interview.
In the mid-afternoon, Hosty parked in front of a neighboring house and knocked on the Paines’ front door.
After telling her the FBI was not a witch-hunting organization, he slowly turned the conversation to Cuba.
When he said he knew of her husband’s Fair Play for Cuba work in New Orleans, Marina told Hosty, with Ruth translating, “Oh, don’t worry about him.
That Friday, Frazier dropped Oswald off at the Paines’ only a few hours after Hosty had left.
He became nervous and agitated, and demanded to know everything that was said.
Ruth gave him the number and address for Hosty and noticed Lee sat quietly through dinner.
He pulled Marina aside and instructed her that if the FBI visited again, she was to write down the make, color, and license number of the agent’s car.
The following Monday, November 4, the Secret Service in Dallas was instructed by the White House to examine three potential luncheon sites for November 22, the date chosen for the President’s Dallas visit.
One site, the Women’s Building at the State Fairgrounds, lacked the necessary food-handling capacity, and the Market Hall was already booked for that date.
That left the Trade Mart, and though it presented additional security problems, Forrest Sorrels, special agent in charge of the Dallas office, was convinced that special precautions could protect the President.
Meanwhile, Hosty had received a report from his New Orleans counterpart, Milton Kaack, and immediately saw that Oswald’s New Orleans FBI interview was filled with lies.
This time he was accompanied by Gary S Wilson, an agent just out of training school.
She went around the side of the house and memorized Hosty’s license-plate number, but she could not determine the car’s make since she could not read English.
Although Marina may not have been upset by Hosty’s second visit, Ruth feared that Lee would indeed be.
When Oswald called each day that week and asked if the FBI had visited again, Marina said no.
But when Oswald returned to the Paines’ house Friday, November 8, Marina told him.
He was “seriously bothered by their having come out and inquired about him.
But he took a break while using it to go with Ruth, Marina, and the children to the State Driver’s License Examining Station in Oak Cliff.
However, Ruth had forgotten it was a local election day and it was closed.
They then spent some time at a local five-and-dime store before returning to Irving.
On Sunday, she was up before Marina and Lee and, while walking through the living room, saw a handwritten draft of the note Lee had been working on the day before.
Although she had noticed it on Saturday, on this day it was folded so that she could see the words “The FBI is not now interested in my activities …”68 She knew that was not true.
Since there was no address, she did not know where the letter was being sent.
I had not planned to contact the Mexican City Embassy at all so of course they were unprepared for me.
She was not only confused about why he would write such a note but also upset that he would do it in her home.
Marina noticed he was anxious, putting the letter through the typewriter twice before he had it in decent condition.
On his Monday holiday, when he was not working on the letter, Marina found him withdrawn, and he spent much of his time alone in the backyard.
Oswald was with Marina and Ruth from Friday the eighth until he left with Buell Frazier to drive to work on Tuesday morning.
However, after the assassination, some claimed he had been at the Sports Drome Rifle Range that weekend practicing with his Carcano.
Other witnesses came forward and said they had also seen him there the following weekend.
Since his time was accounted for, critics again raised the issue of an imposter, claiming that someone tried to frame him by sending a sharpshooter, with a similar weapon, to the range so people could later testify that Oswald was a good shot.
But a review of the witness statements shows an honest mistake in identification.
There was no Oswald in the sign-up sheets at the range—an imposter certainly would have at least printed his name in the register to substantiate the frame.
Four witnesses who originally thought it was Oswald could not later identify him when shown photographs.
Others said the “imposter” had a new and brightly polished rifle and a Tasco scope , and they described the rifle as having the wrong type of wooden stock and a barrel that was too long.
Depending on the witness, “Oswald” drove a 1940 or 1941 Ford truck, or an old-model Chevrolet, or a Ford Hardtop, or a dark, modern four-door sedan.
Garland Slack, one of the practice-range witnesses, said that “Oswald” had long hair and big ears.
But Slack admitted, ‘You see, you read the papers and you get to where you imagine things and you find yourself imagining that you saw somebody …”79* It is likely that on the same day Oswald sent the letter to the Soviet embassy in Washington, he also walked into the FBI office at 1114 Commerce Street, near the Depository, and asked if Agent Hosty was in.
Only after the assassination, when he confronted Oswald in jail, and Oswald, upon hearing Hosty’s name, became very excited and started yelling, was it confirmed that the note was from Lee.
According to Hosty, Shanklin first demanded to know why he had a note from Oswald.
Then two days later, after Oswald had been killed by Jack Ruby, Hosty was again called into Shanklin’s office.
There, his chief produced the note and, according to Hosty, said, “Oswald is dead now.
Although Shanklin, in testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee, said he never knew about the note until 1975, Hosty is more credible.
Some, such as agent Kenneth Howe, said they had even shown it to Shanklin.
When Hosty retired in 1979, the FBI returned more than $1,000 of the salary that had been withheld from him in 1964, when he was suspended for not having spotted earlier that Oswald was a potential threat and transferred to Kansas City from Dallas.
The destruction of Oswald’s note was against FBI regulations and is one of the Bureau’s worst breaches of trust in the case.
It allowed skeptics to question the FBI’s overall role and relationship to him.
To compound the problem, the FBI hid the existence of the note from the Warren Commission.
Despite extensive testimony before the Commission, Hosty never mentioned it, claiming later that he had never been asked.
It is evidence, at least in this instance, of the FBI’s negligence and impropriety.
Bill Alexander, the assistant district attorney who drew up the murder indictments against Oswald and later prosecuted Jack Ruby, told the author, “I worked with those fellows at the FBI over many years.
By Sunday, when Oswald was killed, Hoover was already convinced that Oswald was guilty.
They were afraid the note would be seen as something they were derelict in following up on.
And Oswald was dead, so they figured, ‘What the hell, we don’t need it anymore,’ and they destroyed it.
One of the first things she did was show him the letter Oswald had drafted for the Soviet embassy.
She wanted to know what to do, especially if she should contact Hosty before his next visit.
He mistakenly thought the salutation “Dear Sirs” was “Dear Lisa” and thought Oswald was merely writing to a friend.
Ruth, discouraged, put the letter aside and decided not to call Hosty but instead wait for his next visit.
Once it was chosen, the Secret Service was directed to determine a motorcade route that would allow forty-five minutes for the President to travel from Love Field airport to the Trade Mart.
On that same day, agents Forrest Sorrels and Winston Lawson drove over a possible route.
They then met with Dallas police, who reviewed the route the following day, November 15.90 The Dallas Times Herald announced the Trade Mart selection on November 15, and the following day listed Main Street as the parade’s primary artery.
On November 18, Secret Service and Dallas police again drove the route and confirmed its selection.
She did not think it was a good idea, because Michael was staying that weekend to celebrate his daughter’s birthday, and Lee might have worn out his welcome with the three-day holiday weekend just past.
Marina also sensed some resentment from Ruth toward Lee, but did not know that Ruth had found a draft of the letter to the Soviet embassy.
When he later telephoned Marina over the weekend, he told her that he had returned to the driver’s license bureau to get his learner’s permit, but the line had been too long and he left.
Gladys Johnson, his landlady, said that except for a single walk, Oswald did not leave the house and only made calls to Marina.
At Marina’s request, on Sunday, November 17, Ruth telephoned the number at North Beckley.
Ruth said, “I was in the kitchen where the phone is while Marina talked with him, she clearly was upset, and angry …”96 Marina asked him where he had been the previous night, and he told her he was using a different name because of the FBI, but also became angry with her for calling the rooming house.
Their relationship was strained at times since his return from Mexico but better than it had been in New Orleans.
Oswald did not call Marina on either Tuesday or Wednesday, the nineteenth and twentieth.
The others at the rooming house noticed he sulked and did not use the phone.
Oswald was simmering alone and did not want any contact with people, even his family.
That Tuesday, the Dallas Times Herald detailed the exact route of the presidential motorcade.
The left turn onto Elm Street meant the cars would pass directly in front of the Depository.
The city’s only other newspaper, the Dallas Morning News, provided the same exacting details on both November 19 and 20.102 There was no change in the motorcade route, and there was no doubt about the Elm Street crossing.
Oswald, who thought his contribution to his revolutionary cause would be the death of Walker, was suddenly faced with the possibility of having a much greater impact on history and the machinery of government.
Failed in his attempts to find happiness in Russia or the U.S., rejected by the Cubans, barely able to make a living in America, frustrated in his marriage, and hounded, in his view, by the FBI, he was desperate to break out of his downward spiral.
Lee and other Communist leaders to acknowledge his efforts and letters.
Lee Oswald always thought he was smarter and better than other people, and was angered that others failed to recognize the stature he thought he deserved.
Now, by chance, he had an opportunity that he knew would only happen once in his lifetime.
On Thursday, November 21, Oswald broke his routine of eating a meager breakfast at the rooming house.
Instead, he treated himself to a special breakfast at Dobbs House restaurant.
Before 10:00 that morning, he approached Buell Frazier and asked if he could have a ride to Irving that evening as he needed to “get some curtain rods.
It was likely later that day that he used brown paper and tape at the Depository to fashion a bag over three feet long.
Marina saw Frazier’s car stop near the Paine home that afternoon near 5:00, and Lee stepped out.
He had not called in advance as usual to ask permission before coming to Irving.
It was also the first time he had ever broken his routine and arrived on a Thursday instead of a Friday.
He tried to start a conversation with me several times, but I would not answer.
One final time, while on the front lawn, he begged her to join him in Dallas.
Marina apologized to Ruth that Lee had appeared without any warning, but Ruth said not to worry, that it was his way of making up for their quarrel.
And he said, ‘Ah, yes,’ and walked into the kitchen …”109 During the rest of the evening the atmosphere in the house was cordial.
Ruth did not notice there was any special tension between Marina and Lee.
Marina remembered that after her last refusal to join him in Dallas, Lee mostly stopped talking.
During dinner, Marina asked him about the President’s visit, assuming that talking about politics, his favorite subject, might improve the atmosphere.
At 9:00, he looked into the kitchen, where Marina was washing the dishes.
Marina thinks his tension finally gave way to sleep, but not until nearly 5:00 A.M.115 The following morning when the alarm sounded, it was Marina, half-asleep, who urged him to get up.
Usually, Marina prepared breakfast for him, but that morning she remained in bed.
He walked out the door without kissing her, something he always did before leaving.
When Marina fully awoke, she went to the kitchen, but he was gone and the coffeepot was cold.
Returning to the bedroom, she was startled to see that he had left $170 on top of their bureau.
It was a remarkable sum for the Oswalds, and she knew it must be almost all their savings.
On the bureau, in a hand-painted demitasse cup that had belonged to her grandmother, Lee had placed his wedding ring.
That argument ignores the fact that no motorcade route had even been proposed by the date Oswald was hired at the Depository.
Moreover, such a theory means that Linnie Mae Randle, who suggested the Depository, and Ruth Paine, who told Oswald about it, were part of the conspiracy, as were Roy Truly and the Texas employers who rejected Oswald for jobs earlier in the week.
Even Robert Stovall, Oswald’s former employer, who scuttled his hiring at Padgett by a poor recommendation, would have to be part of the plot.
However, he still maintained subscriptions to journals he thought important—The Militant, The Worker, Time, and some Russian periodicals.
Michael, an absolute believer in the privacy of the individual, was tempted to look inside the blanket tied with string, but never did.
Some who contend that Oswald was an FBI informer overlook the work done by the FBI just to determine where Oswald was living at any given time.
If he had been an informer, the FBI would not likely have needed several weeks to find where he was between his departure from New Orleans and his arrival in Dallas.
Oswald’s address page with Hosty’s number became controversial after the assassination for another reason.
When the FBI gave the Warren Commission copies of Oswald’s address book, typed by the FBI, it omitted any references to Hosty.
It turned out the person who typed it only concentrated on “leads,” and assumed since Hosty was not a lead, the information was unnecessary.
Most critics mistakenly conclude it was a deliberate cover-up, even though the original address book was available for inspection at the National Archives.
It could not be the real Oswald since he was occupied with Marina and Ruth in Irving that entire day.
Bogard said he had written Oswald’s name on a business card, which he had thrown away, and also claimed to introduce Oswald to his manager, who could not remember such a meeting.
None of his fellow workers supported Bogard’s story, although one did remember a five-foot-tall “Oswald,” not a very good imposter.
Once rejected by the Soviet and Cuban embassies, he had no intention of staying in Mexico, but he evidently wanted to make the Soviets believe he had a more exotic reason for not staying.
At the Irving Barber Shop, the barber remembered cutting the hair, five or six times, of a man who wore coveralls, had black hair and hairy arms, came with a fourteen-year-old boy, and drove a black Ford.
Two employees in the Irving Furniture Mart said “Oswald” drove up in a blue-and-white Ford and came in with Marina and two children, looking for the nearest gun store.
Marina was taken to the furniture store by the Warren Commission and flatly denied ever having been there.
The story that “Oswald” sent a money order from Western Union was discredited when the sole witness was contradicted by his co-workers, was himself unable to identify the man he saw as Oswald, and said he could not remember the name used.
Finally, there was the story of the Irving Sports Shop, where a clerk claimed to have found a tag with the name Oswald, indicating he had a telescopic sight drilled onto his gun.
The owners of the shop checked their records and found they had never worked on a Carcano.
Subsequent investigation found that the clerk, apparently an attention-seeker, had made anonymous calls about Oswald and his gun to the local media and that the gun store tag was in his handwriting, not in Oswald’s.
However, the receptionist, Nanny Fenner, believes it was the first business day after the holiday.
The receptionist, Fenner, later claimed that she was able to see the note because it slipped out of the unsealed envelope before she gave it to Hosty.
According to her, it was a much more explicit threat, “Let this be a warning.
I will blow up the FBI and the Dallas Police Department if you don’t stop bothering my wife.
But Hosty says the way the note was folded, it would have been impossible for Fenner to see, and if it had made an explicit threat, he would have followed up on it that same day.
Instead, it was so general that he tossed it into his mail tray and forgot about it until he saw Oswald at the jail.
If this was just propagated by Hollywood, it could be dismissed as irrelevant.
In this speculative scenario, Oswald is actually a hero who vainly tried to thwart the impending disaster.
It also requires the leap of faith that Oswald, armed with the most important information of his life, a plot to kill JFK, merely dropped it off in an unsealed envelope to Hosty, and then failed to ever follow up with a telephone call or another visit.
And when finally arrested and charged with the crime, instead of telling the Dallas police and the FBI that he had actually tried to warn them ten days before the assassination, Oswald quietly sat in the station and denied his guilt.
He later testified to the Warren Commission that once he determined Oswald “was not employed in a sensitive industry,” he did not take a priority over the other twenty-five to forty cases assigned to him at any one time.
He first wanted to “determine the nature of his contact with the Soviet embassy … and wait until New Orleans forwarded the necessary papers to me” before taking the next step, a full interview of Marina.
Hosty currently complains that he was never notified that Oswald had met with Kostikov, a known KGB agent, while at the Soviet embassy.
Those parallel streets converge at one end of Dealey under a railroad bridge dubbed the Triple Underpass.
The opposite side of the plaza from the underpass is ringed by office buildings, none taller than eight stories.
Two small pergolas are on each side of the plaza, situated between the buildings and the underpass.
In front of that fence is a patch of grass that gently declines to the curb of Elm Street.
That section, including the corner of the fence, is called the grassy knoll.
They contend that those responsible for the motorcade route altered it at the last moment so Oswald could have a clear shot.
Anyone familiar with Dallas traffic would immediately know that the only access from Main Street onto the Stemmons Freeway, the route the motorcade needed to take to get to the Trade Mart, was to turn right from Main onto Houston Street, then proceed one block to Elm, where a left turn would put the car less than a thousand feet from the Stemmons entrance.
If the motorcade proceeded straight along Main Street, it would be forced to cross a concrete divider in order to enter Stemmons.
In any case, Main and Elm are parallel roads that run through Dealey Plaza.
Elm Street provides a direct-line shot, while Main Street provides a longer cross-shot.
The panel of doctors told the Commission that if Marina had treated Oswald with kindness that night, it might have changed his mind about the assassination.
Cameron said, “I think what Marina had a chance to do unconsciously that night was to veto his plan without ever knowing of its existence, but she didn’t.
The Commission stayed away from the psychiatric conclusions in its final report.
She saw Oswald walk across the street toward her house, carrying a long package parallel to his body.
He held one end of the brown-paper-wrapped object tucked under his armpit, and the other end did not quite touch the ground.
He went to Buell’s car, opened the right rear door, and laid the package across the backseat.
Then he walked to the kitchen window and stared at Linnie Mae until she called out to her brother that he was waiting for his ride.
Usually, they went in together, but on that morning, though they were early, Oswald quickly left the car and walked ahead.
Frazier watched him enter the Depository, carrying the package next to his body.
Later that morning, between 9:30 and 10:00, he was staring out a first-floor window toward Dealey Plaza, when a co-worker, James “Junior” Jarman, approached him.
Oswald asked why crowds were gathering outside, and Jarman told him the President was due by in a couple of hours.
When asked if he knew which direction the motorcade would take, Jarman said the cars were expected to pass directly in front of the Depository.
On the sixth floor of the Depository, five men were laying a plywood floor.
The sixth floor was a 96-foot-by-96-foot open storage space, only broken by support posts and stacks of books scattered about.
On the south side of the floor, seven large double windows looked directly over Elm Street and Dealey Plaza.
On the opposite north end, there were two adjoining elevators and a staircase.
At 11:40 one of the workers, Bonnie Ray Williams, spotted Oswald on the east side of that floor, near the windows overlooking Dealey Plaza.
When I got back upstairs, he was on the sixth floor … in that vicinity … toward the window up front where the shots were fired from.
Now all alone, Oswald had enough time to assemble the Carcano and move cartons of books to form a sniper’s nest in the southeast corner.
The cars could be seen as they entered Dealey Plaza on Main Street, turned right onto Houston Street, and headed toward the Depository.
In front of the building, the motorcade turned left, providing a clear view from the window as the cars moved toward the Stemmons Freeway entrance.
Because of the laying of the new floor, workers had moved many of the book cartons, weighing up to fifty pounds each, to the sides of the room.
It protected the sniper from being observed by anyone who wandered onto the sixth floor.
Boxes were also arranged as a brace upon which the rifle would rest when shot.
An FBI agent, in his first attempt, put the Carcano together, using only a dime as a tool, in less than six minutes, and in under two minutes with a screwdriver.
Many have tried hard to prove Oswald was not on the sixth floor at this time, relying on his protestations, after his arrest and during his police interrogation, that he had been in the first-floor lunch room with “Junior” Jarman, and had gone to the second floor to buy a Coke near the time of the assassination.
Carolyn Arnold, a secretary to the Depository’s vice-president, waited fifteen years before telling Anthony Summers in 1978 that at 12:15 she entered the second-floor lunch room and saw Oswald sitting in one of the booths.
Her interview with Summers was the first time she ever publicly told the story about seeing Oswald in the lunch room.
But Arnold had given two different FBI statements shortly after the assassination.
In one, she said she “could not be sure” but might have caught a fleeting glimpse of Oswald in the first-floor hallway, and in the second statement said she did not see him at all.
Four other women worked with Arnold and watched the motorcade with her that day.
They support her original statements and not the story she told fifteen years later.
Virgie Rachley and Betty Dragoo accompanied her when she left the second floor at 12:15.
More important, contemporaneous statements of other workers who were in both lunch rooms say Oswald was in neither.
Junior Jarman, with whom Oswald claimed to have had lunch, denied even seeing him during his lunch break.
Troy West was inside the first-floor domino room eating lunch from 12:00 to nearly 12:30 and did not see Oswald during that half hour.
Danny Arce and Jack Dougherty ate in the first-floor room up to 12:15 and said there was no sign of him.
Robert Reid both ate in the second-floor lunch room and were there at 12:15, when Carolyn Arnold claimed Oswald was there, but neither saw him.
Billy Lovelady went to both lunch rooms after 12:00 and did not see him either.
Nineteen-year-old Bonnie Ray Williams returned to the sixth floor to eat his lunch and see whether any other workers had gathered to watch the motorcade.
The books in the southeast corner, however, were “stacked so high” that he “could not possibly see anything …”29 The day after the assassination he told the FBI he left by 12:05 and went to the fifth floor, where he found two friends, Junior Jarman and Harold Norman.
While reliable testimony from the Depository places Oswald, alone, on the sixth floor by noon, witnesses in Dealey Plaza also confirmed there was a man in the sniper’s-nest window.
There is some confusion, however, because some witnesses say they saw one, and sometimes two, men before the shooting who did not look like Oswald.
Summers points out that one of them had dark hair and complexion and might have been Mexican.
Summers does not inform the reader that in her FBI statement, Henderson said the men could have been “Mexican, but could have been Negro,” and she was not certain of what floor they were on.
On the fifth floor, directly below Oswald’s sniper’s nest, were three young black men—Bonnie Ray Williams, Junior Jarman, and Harold Norman—looking out the windows.
Her FBI statement indicates that Henderson saw two of those three young men on a high floor.
There are other witnesses who claim they not only saw two men, either in the Depository or in Dealey Plaza, but that the men also had a rifle.
Julia Ann Mercer said she was caught in a traffic jam at Dealey on the morning of the motorcade and noticed two men in a green Ford pickup.
One took a gun case from the rear of the truck and then disappeared into the grassy knoll.
She later identified the truck’s driver as Jack Ruby, and said Oswald was the man with the rifle.
However, subsequent investigation revealed that the truck, which had stalled, belonged to a local construction company; it had three men inside, and they did take tools from the rear of the truck to fix it.
They were under constant surveillance by three Dallas policemen, and all of them left when another truck arrived to push the stalled vehicle away.
It was the hospital ward and it also contained an overflow of mental patients.
The gunman was reportedly standing at military parade rest with a high-powered rifle across his chest.
Then Rowland claimed to see an “elderly Negro” man on the same floor, this time on the other side of the building, in the sniper’s nest.
But Rowland had previously given seven statements to the Dallas police and FBI and never mentioned the black man.
Rowland’s wife, who was with him at the time of the assassination, did not see either man, nor did he tell her that he had seen a black man.
Turner and Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels that he saw a single young white male, with brown hair, holding a rifle.
Rowland claimed that there were women and children on the nearby Triple Underpass ;47 that the crowds started to laugh after the first shot ;48 and that fifty police converged instantly on the grassy knoll after the shots .49 According to his wife, Rowland lied under oath about a series of small but telling issues, ranging from graduating from high school, to his grades, to the job he held, even to what he claimed he did on the morning of the assassination.
Walther limited her sighting to the third, fourth, or fifth floor but “positively” not the sixth.
She claimed one man had his arms extended and was holding a machine gun outside the window, for all to see.
Walther also said a second man, with another gun, stood directly behind the first one.
But Carolyn Walther was not alone when she watched the motorcade from her vantage point.
Robert Edwards and Ronald Fischer, a college student and a county auditor respectively, were at the corner of Houston and Elm, directly in front of the Depository.
Just before the motorcade arrived, Edwards glanced at the building and saw a man in the southeast corner of the sixth floor.
He never registered at Parkland, and as a result, the suspicion arose that the seizure was a staged distraction that allowed a team of assassins to take their positions unnoticed by the crowd.
He was Jerry Belknap, an epileptic who had suffered seizures since childhood and had evidence he had paid the $12.50 ambulance charge.
He left Parkland without registering because he felt better when given water and an aspirin, and there was such a rush of people at the emergency room, he realized he was not going to be quickly treated.
After Belknap was removed from Dealey, the police quickly cleared away the small knot of people that had formed around the scene, and the crowd returned to its festive waiting for the arrival of the President.
The large Hertz sign on top of the Depository showed 12:29 when the first car of the presidential motorcade made the turn from Main Street onto Houston and proceeded toward the Depository.
It was a security car and included Dallas police chief Jesse Curry, Sheriff Bill Decker, and the local chief of the Secret Service, Forrest Sorrels.
The driver was the oldest man in the White House security detail, William Greer.
Next to him in the front seat was another Secret Service agent, Roy Kellerman.
In the car’s fold-down jump seats were Texas governor John Connally and his wife, Nellie.
In the rear bench seat were President Kennedy and the First Lady, Jacqueline.
As the President and his staff had requested, the plastic bubble top was off, leaving the car as an open convertible, and no Secret Service men rode on the running boards attached to the rear.
The motorcycle escort was limited to four, and kept at a comfortable distance from the limousine.
A 1956 Cadillac convertible filled with Secret Service agents and presidential aides followed JFK’s car.
Johnson, Texas senator Ralph Yarborough, and some Secret Service agents, was next in line.
The remainder of the motorcade included local dignitaries, some press cars, and finally two buses, one for VIPs and one for additional press.
Agent Forrest Sorrels, in the car ahead of the President, looked at his watch.
In the car behind the President, Agent Emory Roberts independently radioed the Trade Mart, “Halfback to Base.
Jackie Kennedy, dressed in a pink wool two-piece suit, with a pillbox hat, was hot under the unfiltered midday sun.
Some thought it was a firecracker or a backfire from a police motorcycle.
By the second shot, many realized it was too loud to be anything but gunfire.
The President’s arms jerked up into a locked position level with his neck.
Governor Connally pushed back into his jump seat and then fell over into his wife’s arms.
The President, strapped into a brace for his bad back, remained propped upright, his head lolling slightly to the left.
Jacqueline Kennedy leaned toward her husband, looking at him quizzically.
Incredibly, Greer, sensing something was wrong in the back of the car, slowed the vehicle to almost a standstill and turned in his seat to see what had happened.
As he turned, there was a stomach-wrenching sound, as if a grapefruit had been struck with a baseball bat.
The final bullet tore off the right side of the President’s head, sending a red mist of blood, brain tissue, and skull fragments upward and to the front.
As he fell partially across the backseat and toward the floor, Jacqueline began climbing out the rear and onto the trunk.
Secret Service agent Clint Hill, riding in the backup car, responded rapidly, running to reach the car just in time to mount the rear bumper and push her back inside.
At that moment Greer slammed on the accelerator, and the President’s car sped out of Dealey Plaza.
Some threw themselves on the ground to avoid the gunfire; others screamed or began running.
Many in the crowd followed him, running—strangely—into the area where the gunman might be instead of away from danger.
Because of the ensuing bedlam, Dealey Plaza produced a mass of contradictory statements from scores of witnesses.
In even the simplest auto accident, eyewitnesses almost invariably present different, and sometimes completely conflicting, accounts.
The crowds had concentrated on the presidential motorcade, a mesmerizing event for many.
They were not expecting rifle shots over a few seconds, and to complicate matters, the plaza is an echo chamber.
In the turmoil that followed, it is little wonder that witnesses standing next to each other often heard and saw things differently.
However, the statements can be sifted for internal inconsistencies and judged for credibility.
Testimony closer to the event must be given greater weight than changes or additions made years later, when the witness’s own memory is often muddied or influenced by television programs, films, books, and discussions with others.
We all read a lot of things, and sometimes inadvertently adopt things we hear from others.
However, on this issue, there was more agreement than on any other postassassination matter.
Of the nearly two hundred witnesses who expressed an opinion on the number of shots whose testimony or statements are in the National Archives or the twenty-six Warren Commission volumes, over 88 percent heard three shots.
Although almost every conspiracy theory that proposes more than one assassin relies on there having been four or more shots, the writers seldom disclose that fewer than one in twenty witnesses heard that many.
While the consistency of opinion on the number of shots is persuasive, the echo patterns in Dealey make locating the direction of the shots more difficult, and the witness statements reflect that.
And significantly, only four witnesses, 2 percent, thought they came from more than one location.
But even these writers acknowledge that most of the shots came from the rear.
However, the conspiracy critics often manipulate the witness statements to make the Depository seem a less popular choice.
The author reviewed Thompson’s work witness by witness and discovered substantive errors.
In his “Master List of Assassination Witnesses,” Thompson puts witnesses such as Amos Euins, Mrs.
Foster, Roy Kellerman, James Underwood, and Emmet Hudson in either the undecided or grassy knoll column.
Thompson does not remind the reader that the building at that corner is the Depository.
Unless the witness named the Depository, Thompson does not place him in that category.
The worst confluence of echoes affected those witnesses close to the grassy knoll.
Abraham Zapruder, the Dallas dressmaker who took the home movie of the assassination, stood atop a concrete divider wall on top of the knoll.
He had worked in that area for more than ten years and knew that echo patterns made it impossible to pinpoint the direction of sounds.
Roy Truly, Oswald’s supervisor, was standing across the street from the Depository, but said the echo confused him so he believed the gunfire originated from the grassy knoll.
The committee agreed there were three shots from the rear , and that two of those struck President Kennedy and Governor Connally.
Channel One was for normal police business, and Channel Two for traffic concerned with the motorcade.
A police motorcycle had its radio switch stuck in the “on” position for over five minutes around the time of the assassination.
All the sounds within the range of that open microphone were inadvertently recorded.
The committee speculated that if the open mike was in Dealey Plaza, it might have recorded the shots.
The absence of any sounds of gunshots seemed to show the mike was not in Dealey Plaza* Still, sound experts searched for inaudible “impulse patterns,” claiming that such patterns could indicate gunfire, and they found several unusual ones.
Then an “acoustical reconstruction” was done at Dealey on August 20, 1978, with a Carcano fired from both the Depository and the grassy knoll.
The “impulses” created at the reenactment were then compared to those on the original dictabelt recording.
The Select Committee’s first experts—Bolt, Beranek and Newman—concluded there was a 50 percent chance of a fourth shot, acoustically located at the grassy knoll.
The committee then turned the dictabelt and sound reenactment over to Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy, of Queens College, for further study.
All that was needed to wrap up the scientific breakthrough was “proof” that the open mike was in Dealey Plaza.
McLain, an ex-Dallas policeman who was riding to the left rear of Vice-President Johnson’s car, testified that his mike was often stuck in the open position, but he did not know if it got stuck that day.
That was enough for the final report to conclude that McLain’s cycle had the open mike.
However, it was not long after the report was issued that the Select Committee’s rushed work began unraveling.
First, when McLain returned to Dallas, he finally heard a copy of the dictabelt recording.
They knew that if I heard that tape I wouldn’t testify for them, because I would immediately know that wasn’t my cycle.
The sirens on the Dallas police cycles were footactivated, and the faster the cycle traveled, the louder the siren was.
Yet on the dictabelt recording there are no sirens, except nearly two minutes after the supposed shooting, when a siren approaches the vehicle with the open mike and then passes it.
If the open mike had been on McLain’s cycle, a siren should be heard on the recording from almost immediately after the shots until the arrival at Parkland.
Trying to fit McLain into its acoustics conclusion, the committee then suggested he might have sat in Dealey Plaza for two minutes after the shots, forgot to turn on his siren, then raced to catch up with the motorcade, but then fallen back.
But that does not fit the photographic or eyewitness testimony about McLain’s actions.
People kept running forward, and we had to run the bikes toward them to push them back.
Finally, when McLain’s cycle was speeding toward Parkland, the dictabelt recording reveals the engine on the cycle in question is idling, not racing.
Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles has been relentless in pursuing many of the questions unresolved by the Select Committee, and he determined the open mike was on a motorcycle stationed at the Trade Mart, where the President’s luncheon reception was scheduled.
However, even worse news was due the House Select Committee’s acoustics conclusion.
In one of the most unusual turns in the case, in July 1979, Steve Barber, a rock drummer living in a small Ohio town, purchased an adult magazine, Gallery, which included a plastic insert recording of the dictabelt evidence.
At the point on the tape where the experts decided there were four shots over a six-second period, Barber heard the barely audible words “Hold everything secure …” That matched with “Hold everything secure until the homicide and other investigators can get there …”—words spoken by Sheriff Bill Decker, in the lead motorcade car, on police Channel Two.
But Decker spoke those words nearly one minute after the assassination, when he was instructing his officers what to do at Dealey Plaza.
If the cross-talk Barber discovered was correct, it meant the Select Committee’s experts had picked up sound impulses of “bullet shots” one minute after the actual assassination.
The National Academy of Sciences appointed a distinguished panel of twelve scientists to study the Select Committee’s acoustics work.
Dubbed the Ramsey Panel, after its chairman, Professor Norman Ramsey of Harvard, it concluded in 1982 that the committee’s work was “seriously flawed”89 and that Barber’s analysis was correct.
Moreover, the Ramsey Panel, in a ninety-six-page report, blasted the Select Committee’s conclusions about a grassy-knoll shooter and a fourth shot, saying there were “serious errors” in its work and there “was no acoustic basis” for such a claim.
Three critical ear-witnesses were Oswald’s young co-workers Bonnie Ray Williams, Junior Jarman, and Harold Norman.
During the assassination, they were on the southeast corner of the fifth floor, under the sniper’s nest.
Since the flooring was being replaced on the sixth floor, there was only a thin plywood covering, with cracks in the planks allowing some light between the floors.
While they were watching the motorcade below from three separate windows, they heard the first rifle shot.
Bonnie Ray Williams said the shots were “loud.… sounded like it was right in the building … it even shook the building, the side we were on.
It was Harold Norman, directly under the sniper’s nest, who heard the most important sounds.
Before anyone discovered Oswald’s Carcano on the sixth floor, Norman had correctly described a bolt-action rifle being fired directly over his head.
They noticed two of the young black men on the fifth floor straining to look at the window above.
The final piece of the acoustical puzzle over the number of shots fired at Dealey Plaza is available now in the confirmation of a story that has long been rumored in Dallas.
Since the assassination, local media gossip had it that a journalist had recorded the sounds of Dealey on November 22 and that later the recording was accidentally erased.
The author finally located the reporter, Travis Linn, now a professor of journalism.
But despite his reluctance, he finally agreed to tell, for the first time publicly, the story of the only sound recording known to have been made of the assassination.
Finally, we shut down after Kennedy’s death had been announced, and I caught a ride up to Dealey.
I remembered that I had asked L’Hoste to set up the recorder, but he was gone.
And I looked around and found the tape on top of one of those pedestals.
You couldn’t really even see it, as the pedestals are tall, the tape recorder is pretty small, and you would have to look for it.
It was an early version of a cassette recorder, which had to be rewound manually with a crank.
In order to play it on the air, it had to be transferred to a reel-to-reel tape machine.
And while I was in the process of dubbing it, I was called by my news director to go out, with a TV guy, to Lee Harvey Oswald’s apartment.
The way it worked is you got the cassettes, and after you dubbed out of those little cartridges, you then bulk-erased the cartridges and went on to another assignment.
When asked if he heard the sounds of shots on the tape when he first played it back, Linn had no hesitation.
I can tell you without any doubt that there were three shots and they were rifle shots.
In those days after the assassination, the stories were coming in so quick, just bang, bang, bang, that there was no time to think about it.
You just don’t have time to do thumbsuckers and think of what might have been.
Robert Jackson, a Dallas Times Herald photographer, was riding in the motorcade in an open convertible, with four other reporters.
During the time the shots were being fired, Jackson and the other reporters began looking around the Plaza for the source, and he glanced up to the top of the Depository.
James Crawford, a deputy district court clerk, was standing on the corner across the street from the Depository and not far from Jackson and Couch’s car.
Earle Cabell, the wife of the Dallas mayor, was four cars behind the President’s in an open convertible.
The first shot was loud and sounded like it came from over his head, instinctively making him raise his head and look over his body at a ninety-degree angle.
Another witness who had a clear view of the sniper’s nest was fifteen-year-old Amos Lee Euins.
He was small for his age, and someone had lifted him atop a concrete pedestal by the reflecting pool across the street from the Depository.
While he could not describe the shooter, he ran to a policeman and told him what he saw.
But the person who saw more that day in Dealey Plaza than any other witness was construction worker Howard Brennan.
The first time he noticed a man in the southeast corner of the sixth floor was several minutes later.
He guessed he was five feet eight to five feet ten inches tall, white, slender, with dark-brown hair, and between twenty-five and thirty-five years of age.
Poised in the corner window of the sixth floor was the same young man I had noticed several times before the motorcade arrived.
There was one difference—this time he held a rifle in his hands, pointing toward the Presidential car.
He steadied the rifle against the cornice and while he moved quickly, he didn’t seem to be in any kind of panic.
Brennan’s eyes locked on the solitary figure steadying his rifle for the final shot.
There was no particular emotion visible on his face except for a slight smirk.
The policeman left for a few minutes and returned with Dallas police inspector Herbert Sawyer.
Brennan repeated his story, and Sawyer walked to a nearby car and reported the first description of the suspect.
Brennan could have picked Oswald from the lineup, but did not do so because he feared others might be involved in the assassination, and if word leaked that he was the only one who could identify the trigger man, his life would be in danger.
The FBI had already given him a twenty-four-hour guard , heightening his concern.
He said he saw the assassin as well as he saw the three men on the fifth floor, and he identified them as they came out the Depository within a half hour of the assassination.
The last point on which the critics try to disparage Brennan’s credibility is his eyesight.
Brennan said his eyesight for anything at a distance was “extraordinary,” allowing him when in a car to read license plates of other cars from a couple of hundred feet.
Some reported “some commotion,” or “a puff of smoke” near the grassy knoll, but not one witness gave a contemporaneous statement about a second gunman at Dealey.
However, since that day, new witnesses have stepped forward, sometimes years later, claiming to have seen the real assassin.
Some people have actually confessed to being the phantom grassy-knoll shooter.
While many reports can be dismissed out of hand , the major witnesses for a conspiracy deserve scrutiny.
Jean Hill was standing on the southern side of Elm Street as President Kennedy’s car passed.
She was with her friend Mary Moorman, who snapped a Polaroid of the rear of the President’s car almost at the moment of the fatal head shot.
Cited in books and articles, and the author of her own book, The Last Dissenting Witness, Hill is a frequent television guest and speaker at assassination symposia.
On the day of the assassination, she gave a statement to the sheriff’s office and signed it as correct.
In her November 22 statement, she also said the President looked at her when he was first shot, but then later changed that to say she jumped to the edge of the street and yelled, “Hey, we want to take your picture,” and that is why JFK looked over.
The Zapruder home movie shows Hill never moved or said a word as the President passed, and she was not even looking at him when he was first shot.
Although Hill claimed she scrutinized the car’s passengers, she did not know Mrs.
According to Hill, there were two shots, then a pause, and “three or four more shots rang out …”133 She testified that the first three shots were from a bolt-action, and the remainder might have been from an automatic.
On the day of the assassination, she told the sheriff’s department that she saw “some men in plain clothes shooting back …” No one returned gunfire.
In her original written statement, she saw a “man running toward the monument” on the other side of the plaza, and started running after him.
Later, she told a reporter that the man looked like Jack Ruby, but backed off the Ruby identification because “quite a few people,” including her husband, made fun of her testimony.
She told the Warren Commission, “When I ran across the street, the first motorcycle that was right behind nearly hit me,” and she explained how she dashed across the road, past the motorcade traffic, to chase the stranger.
Summers writes, “Hill had run impetuously across the road, dodging between the cars while the motorcade was still going by.
She was ahead of the field in the parking lot …”139 In one version, Hill claims she lost sight of the man as he ran over the railroad tracks.
However, another Dealey witness, Wilma Bond, was behind and to the east of Hill, and took a series of still photographs that day.
While they show a crowd climbing the small incline leading to the fence on the grassy knoll, just minutes after the shooting, Jean Hill is still either sitting or standing next to Mary Moorman.
In one of the photos, the rear of a large bus at the tail end of the motorcade is passing under the Triple Underpass.
That means that most of the motorcade had left Dealey Plaza, yet Hill was still in her original position and had not yet taken a step to cross the road to chase the character as she described.
In her original statement, Hill said when she got to the grassy knoll, the police were turning people back, so she returned to Mary Moorman.
She told Jim Marrs, “I was looking around but I couldn’t see anything, when these two guys came up behind me.
One of them said, ‘You’re coming with us,’ and I replied, ‘Oh, no I’m not.
But then the other guy put a grip on my other shoulder and they began hustling me past the front of the Depository.
Finally, Hill was interviewed within half an hour of the assassination by a local Dallas television crew.
However, over the years her story changed to include a grassy-knoll shooter.
By 1986, she told Jim Marrs, “I saw a man fire from behind the wooden fence.
Another witness who is used by the critics to support the claim of a grassy-knoll shooter is Jesse Price.
He was on the roof of the Union Terminal Annex, on the southern end of the plaza.
Realizing that Price would lose all credibility if the reader knew he thought there was a final shot five minutes after the first, Marrs just omitted the offending language.
In conclusion, Marrs says, “Price was never called to testify to the Warren Commission,” implying that the Commission wanted to avoid such a witness because it was not seeking the truth about what had happened at Dealey.
Judging from Price’s affidavit, the reason he was not called is obvious.
He had a clear view of the parking lot and the back of the fence from which the supposed second gunman fired.
Three cars drove into the parking lot between noon and the assassination, looking for a space but, seeing it filled, left.
Bowers also noted two men behind the fence, some fifteen feet apart, who apparently did not know each other.
They were standing near the point where the fence met the Triple Underpass, some fifty feet from where critics believe a second gunman fired.
Anyone behind the fence becomes a focus of suspicion, but Bowers testified that at least one—and maybe both—was still there when the police arrived after the assassination.
There has also been import attached to Bowers’s statement that at the time of the assassination “there was some commotion” near the parking area.
He told the Warren Commission, “There was a shot, a report, I don’t know whether it was a shot.
In his affidavit, taken the day of the assassination, he was confused about several issues, thinking that Mrs.
The other three, who were all on the overpass with Holland, do not support the proposition that the smoke resulted from gunfire.
Moreover, on the day of the assassination there was a stiff wind blowing north to south, gusting up to twenty miles an hour.
A puff of smoke would not rise from a rifle and sit stagnantly in the air when the winds were so stiff.
Finally, in 1963, there was a steam pipe along the wooden fence near the edge of the Triple Underpass.
A Dallas policeman, Seymour Weitzman, burned his hands on that pipe when searching there immediately after the shots.
If there was smoke, it is most likely that it was either exhaust fumes or steam from the pipe.
Gordon Arnold identified himself as a twenty-two-year-old soldier home on leave on November 22.
According to his story, he ran into men with CIA identifications behind the grassy knoll before the assassination.
During the shooting, he was standing only feet in front of the picket fence when a bullet whizzed past his left ear.
He knew it was live ammunition being fired directly behind him, and he hit the ground.
Arnold, who claimed he had a camera, said that after the assassination two men in police uniforms approached him.
One kicked him while another, brandishing a shotgun and crying, confiscated his film.
He soon became a main figure in a documentary that claimed Kennedy was killed by a team of Corsican mercenaries, and his story is repeated in recent books.
The problem is that it appears that Arnold was not even at Dealey Plaza on the day of the assassination.
People on the grassy knoll near where Arnold says he was are clearly visible in the pictures taken of the knoll.
Although Arnold claims he is not visible because he is lying flat on the ground, photo enhancements show no such person.
Unaware that shots had been fired, he claimed to see a man in a suit and tie in the railyard behind the grassy knoll.
That gunman then tossed the rifle to a man disguised as a railyard worker and the second man disassembled the rifle, put it into a sack, and walked away.
Although Hoffman did not go public until 1978, he had contacted the FBI in 1967, three and a half years after the assassination, and told a less sensational version.
Dallas policeman Earle Brown, who was stationed as security on a railroad overpass above Stemmons Freeway, said there was no civilian there.
Three other policemen on three-wheel traffic cycles were near where Hoffman claimed to be.
Photographs and independent testimony reveal there were four large railway freight cars over the Elm Street tunnel that day, effectively obstructing any view from Stemmons into the rear of the grassy knoll.
Moreover, in 1963, a large Cutty Sark billboard also filled some of the space between the freeway and the railroad tracks.
It is almost impossible for Hoffman to have seen what he described.2* There are other eyewitnesses sometimes used to establish a second gunman at Dealey, but each has even greater credibility problems than the primary witnesses discussed above.
Malcolm Summers, who was at Dealey, now says that he ran into a man, wielding a gun that looked like a machine pistol, on the grassy knoll.
In an affidavit given the day after the assassination, Summers said he stayed at Dealey for twenty minutes after the shooting, but did not mention confronting anyone with a gun.
A deputy sheriff, Roger Craig, said he saw a green Nash Rambler with a luggage rack, with suspicious men inside, drive away from the Depository soon after the assassination.
Craig said that back at police headquarters, he entered the room where Captain Will Fritz was questioning Oswald and mentioned the station wagon.
Tilson, who was off duty on the day of the assassination, was in his own car with his daughter, Judy.
He said he was near Dealey Plaza when he heard about the shooting on his police monitor.
Then he noticed a man walk away from the railroad tracks behind the grassy knoll, throw a package into the backseat of a black car, and drive away.
Tilson says he caught up to him when the man stopped for a red light, and then followed him at normal speeds over city streets, onto the DallasFort Worth Turnpike.
Eventually, Tilson claims his daughter copied down the black car’s license plate number, and then he turned off the freeway to call the information into the homicide detectives.
A photograph taken by Mel McIntire, snapped at almost the precise moment Tilson says he spotted the fleeing man, reveals no car, black or otherwise, in the location Tilson pinpointed.
Dallas police radio logs for the day do not show any alert for such a car as Tilson described, nor is there any record that he gave a license number or made any such call to the homicide detectives.
Finally, Tilson himself acknowledges that his daughter, his only witness, no longer confirms his story.
He claims to have lost the paper on which his daughter, who was eighteen years old at the time, had supposedly written the car’s license, and she “doesn’t recall” writing down the number.
Some early eyewitness evidence used to support a conspiracy has been quietly abandoned by the critics and is now discredited.
On the day of the assassination, a man near the presidential motorcade opened and closed a black umbrella as the shots rang out.
Some, such as Robert Cutler, the publisher of the Grassy Knoll Gazette, said the umbrella contained a poisoned flechette that shot into the President’s throat and neutralized him so a team of five assassins could finish the job.
Jim Marrs and Oliver Stone believe the “umbrella man” gave a signal to the team of assassins waiting in ambush.
However, the House Select Committee located the umbrella man in 1978, after publishing a drawing made from photographs taken that day and asking for public assistance in finding him.
Louie Witt did not even know he was the subject of such controversy, still had the same umbrella, and explained he had gone to Dealey to heckle the President with it.
Photographs taken at Dealey Plaza also showed a man standing next to Witt, and soon there were those who said he appeared to be Cuban and that he seemed to occasionally speak into a walkie-talkie.
Witt himself said the man was black, and he never had anything that could be remotely confused with a walkie-talkie.
Across the street from Witt was a stocky woman in a long coat and with a scarf tied around her head.
Dubbed by conspiracy buffs as the “babushka lady,” she can be seen in other photos taking her own home movie of the motorcade.
Oliver also said she saw David Ferrie at Ruby’s Carousel Club so often that she thought he was the assistant manager.
The House Select Committee interviewed her in executive session and decided not to use her as a witness.
Still, Jim Marrs devoted substantial space to her story and seemingly accepted her claim of being the babushka lady.
Finally, there is controversy over a picture taken by Associated Press photographer Jim Altgens showing the presidential car just as JFK and Governor Connally reacted to their first wounds.
In the doorway of the Depository is a crowd of people, and one looks like Oswald.
Yet the real question is why, when the original evidence is considered, this ever became such an important issue.
Billy Lovelady, a worker at the Depository, testifying before the Warren Commission, immediately identified himself as the man in the doorway.
Other co-workers testified they were on the Depository’s steps with Lovelady.
When shown the same photograph, Danny Arce, Buell Frazier, Harold Norman, Mrs.
Donald Baker, and William Shelley all, without hesitation, identified the man as Lovelady.
Yet despite the implausibility that it was Oswald, that issue survived until the House Select Committee finally undertook an anthropological photo study and concluded the man in the doorway was indeed Lovelady.
In the Terminal Annex building on the southern end of Dealey Plaza was the United States Post Office.
The first and second floors were parcel post, the third mail processing, the fourth letter mail, and the fifth was both the cafeteria and the postal inspectors’ offices.
No one, apparently, including the Dallas police or the FBI, ever interviewed the employees there to discover what they saw.
Most are now retired, some deceased, and their memories nearly three decades after the event are not what they would have been within days of the shooting.
The six interviewed for this book each remembered hearing three distinct shots, and most important, three of them watched the assassination with a pair of binoculars.
Because of the angle of their building, they looked at the President’s car directly in line with the grassy knoll.
One employee, Francine Burrows, had gone to Dealey Plaza to watch the motorcade.
In the Zapruder film, she is seen in a beige raincoat, running toward the limousine near the point of the fatal head shot, and has never been identified until now.
Burrows was within twenty-five feet of JFK when he was shot and was also looking directly toward the grassy knoll.
Instead, she remembers three shots, and says, “I was very close to him when he got shot.
Initially, Randle said the package was approximately 27 inches long, and Frazier estimated a little over two feet.
Both Randle and Frazier said it looked like the same one Oswald carried that morning.
Although Oswald claimed to have curtain rods in the bag, none were found at the Depository.
However, the corner enclosure had a door with a glass window, so anyone coming up the stairs would see the sniper.
Moreover, the windowsills on the seventh floor are considerably higher than on the sixth, making it difficult to fire a rifle from a seated position.
Also, the sixth-floor ledge partially obstructs the line of sight from the seventh floor.
One was the first-floor domino room, where the warehouse workers ate, and the other, on the second floor, was usually used by office personnel.
But Shelley later admitted he saw him at 11:45 A.M., before others noticed him on the sixth floor.
Piper thought he saw Oswald at noon filling orders on the first floor, but he is clearly mistaken as five witnesses had placed Oswald on an upper floor, left behind by the elevators by that time.
However, that did not stop Mark Lane from beginning his book Rush to Judgment with an excerpt from Mercer’s statement.
At the angle from which Rowland looked at the building, it is impossible to see inside the sniper’s nest because of the right wall, and also to see anyone more than a few feet behind the window.
Critics interpret shadows on the film as evidence of two men, one in and one adjacent to the sniper’s nest.
The films taken by Charles Bronson and Robert Hughes were independently enhanced by the Itek Corporation for CBS, by the House Select Committee on Assassinations, and by public television’s Frontline program.
But he admitted to the police that he had changed his shirt when he returned to his rooming house after the assassination.
Shot by Dallas dressmaker Abraham Zapruder, the 8mm color film followed the President’s car from the moment it made the turn from Houston onto Elm and stayed with it through the entire assassination.
Perched on a concrete divider on top of the grassy knoll, Zapruder had an almost unobstructed view of the motorcade.
A vivid example of the pitfall of relying exclusively on eyewitness testimony is that when the ocean liner Titanic sank in 1912, there were nearly seven hundred people on lifeboats watching it go down.
The ship was almost nine hundred feet long, three football fields in size, yet the survivors were split as to whether it sank in one or two pieces.
The author disagrees with Thompson’s reading of several witnesses, and also with his omission of one.
The bullet that missed the motorcade never struck any of the spectators directly in its flight path, nor was an extra bullet ever found at Dealey Plaza *In 1991, the Today show showed a version of the Zapruder home movie of the assassination, supposedly with sounds from the dictabelt superimposed over it.
Today never informed its audience that the four bullet sounds were re-created in a studio and dubbed onto the recording.
There was a replica of the Liberty Bell at the Trade Mart, and passersby frequently gave it a rap.
Others, like Mark Lane, question why they could hear the bolt action and shells hit the floor but not hear the assassin run across the floor after the shooting.
Also, there is the question of why the three moved to the opposite corner of the building after the shooting.
At first he followed those running toward the grassy knoll, but he soon ran to the nearest building, the Depository.
There, he ran into a young man leaving the building and asked, in great agitation, for the telephones, and the man pointed.
Oswald later told the Dallas police that as he left the Depository, a young Secret Service agent with a blond crewcut asked him for the telephones.
There were no Secret Service agents at Dealey immediately after the assassination.
MacNeil had short blond hair, and Oswald must have confused the press badge on his jacket as a Secret Service identification.
According to Linn, another journalist to have missed a coup was Ron Reiland, the only reporter who got inside the Texas Theater when Oswald was arrested.
He photographed the arrest, but mistakenly shot it with a filter over the lens, and nothing developed.
When Reiland walked outside, he pulled the filter off and all those photographs, of the crowd spitting and kicking at Oswald, were overexposed.
Some use the testimony of Senator Ralph Yarborough, who said he smelled gunpowder as he drove through Dealey Plaza, to suggest a shot had been fired closer to the grassy knoll.
Although a stiff north-south wind did blow the odor of gunpowder further into the plaza, Yarborough was in the Vice-President’s car, two behind the President, and was right in front of the Depository as the shooting began.
But the Commission did settle the issue, despite the best efforts of some to obfuscate it.
After the assassination, Sorrels did not return to Dealey until nearly 1:00 P.M., SO Brennan could not have given him the description broadcast at 12:45.
The author stood at the very spot where a grassy-knoll shooter is supposed to have fired at the President.
Although the shooter was purportedly standing on a car bumper, in order to aim over a five-foot fence, he would have been completely exposed at the rear, making it impossible to fire from that location without being seen by witnesses.
In addition to more than a dozen who could have seen such a shooter, three witnesses were only a few feet in front of the fence, and they never saw anyone behind the fence.
However, there is some doubt as to whether Bowers saw anything during the assassination.
He admitted that thirteen railroad tracks converged on his station, and not only was he busy at the time of the assassination, but immediately after hearing the final shot, he had to throw a “red-on-red” signal, which blocked all trains.
However, Yarborough has since clarified that he was referring to Bill Newman, who was at the foot of the grassy knoll with his family and threw himself, his wife, and their two children onto the grass.
Even without the billboard and railroad cars, the foliage between the freeway and the railyard makes it difficult to see very much.
The picture does not show Craig in the inner office where Oswald was kept, but instead in a separate outer office.
He had to decide how to slip the gun into the Depository and where to take a sniper’s position.
His lack of preparation is evident by the fact he only had four bullets with him, though the rifle’s clip could hold six.
They were all he had left from his last practice session, and he evidently did not have time on Thursday, November 21, to buy more.
Having never before seen a presidential motorcade, Oswald had little idea of what to expect for security, but knew it would be a far more difficult task than taking aim at the retired General Walker.
He could not be sure whether the President would have the bubble top on the car,* or if Secret Service agents would ride on the rear of the limousine partially blocking his view.
Lookouts might be posted in tall buildings, perhaps even in the Depository, and he could not be certain of finding a deserted floor or area from which to shoot.
Oswald also wanted to escape, although he probably had not planned much beyond getting away from the Depository before the police sealed the area.
After firing the final shot, he slipped through the narrow gap he had created between the cartons of books.
Oswald rapidly descended the stairs until he heard the sound of footsteps running up.
He ducked off at the second floor, and dashed into the adjoining lunch room.
But suddenly a voice called out, and when he turned, he was face to face with a Dallas policeman with a drawn revolver.
He yelled for directions to the stairs or elevator, and the building manager, Roy Truly, rushed him through a pair of swinging doors to the closest elevator.
They sprinted to the nearest staircase, that in the rear of the building, and started up, with Baker behind Truly.
When Baker reached the second floor, “I was kind of scanning the rooms,” he recalled.
I don’t know how come I saw him, but I had a glimpse of him coming down there.
Baker recalled that Oswald was moving as fast as he was and was “hurrying” through a second door, which would have let him enter the office and conference area where Baker could not have seen him.
It was not until he went to police headquarters later that afternoon that he realized he had encountered the suspect within minutes of the last shot.
He went to the soda machine and purchased a Coke as he decided how to leave the Depository.
He could return to the staircase Baker had just run up and leave from the rear of the building, or he could continue from the lunch room, past the offices, and down another staircase out the front of the Depository.
Immediately after the shots, two construction workers, George Rackley and James Romack, volunteered to help the police by keeping a watch on the rear exit.
During the five minutes they were there, before they were replaced by police units, no one left from that exit.
The building’s front was not covered for at least ten minutes, and possibly longer.
On his way past the second-floor offices, Oswald ran into another Depository worker, Mrs.
She had panicked after the shots and ran into the building to her office.
In her own reconstruction of her actions after the assassination, Reid returned to the office area in just under two minutes, which would dovetail perfectly with Baker and Truly’s encounter with Oswald thirty seconds earlier.
She saw Oswald just after he left the lunch room where Officer Baker had confronted him, and he was walking toward the front stairs.
I didn’t pay any attention to what he said …”7 Reid noticed the full bottle of Coke, and thought Oswald seemed calm.
Although she considered it “a little strange” that he should be wandering in the second-floor offices just moments after the assassination, she soon forgot about him.
He was outside the Depository less than three minutes after he fired the final shot, and for the first time he saw the pandemonium he had created.
After his arrest, he maintained that when he learned of the shooting, his immediate thought was there would be no more work for the day, so he simply went home.
Although politics was his favorite subject, he was not interested, apparently, in whether the President had been hit or if the assassin had been caught.
Oswald could have taken either of two buses, one that would drop him off right at his address, the Beckley line, or one that would let him off several blocks away, the Marsalis line.
Waiting for a bus at Dealey Plaza was too risky, so he began walking east on Elm Street, away from the Depository, to find a bus.
The driver, Cecil McWatters, remembered Oswald because he pounded on the door in the middle of the block in order to board.
In a remarkable coincidence, one of the five was Mary Bledsoe, the landlady who had rented a room to him for one week and then refused to allow him to stay further.
Just after he boarded, the traffic became heavy, and the number of incoming sirens increased.
At that announcement, Oswald stood up, asked for a transfer, and got off the bus.
Around 1:00 P.M., Earlene Roberts, the housekeeper at 1026 North Beckley, was trying to adjust the reception on the television after a neighbor told her the President had been shot.
Though it was too warm for a jacket, he took one to hide the revolver he had tucked into the waistband of his pants.
He zipped the jacket as he rushed out of the house a couple of minutes later.
Outside the Depository, some witnesses later claimed they ran into Secret Service agents.
And immediately after the assassination, different groups of law enforcement officials spread out in Dealey—they included Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agents, postal inspectors, officers from the Special Service Bureau of the Dallas Police, county sheriffs, IRS agents, and even an Army Intelligence agent.
By 12:45, the building was sealed and a floor-to-floor search had begun.
Carl Day, chief of the Dallas Police crime scene search unit, photographed the three bullet shells in their original position.
Ballistics tests later determined they were fired from Oswald’s rifle, to the exclusion of any other gun.
He might have been a little nervous, because as he leaned his hand there, the oil or moisture in his hand left a very clear, unsmudged print.
Usually, you can’t get a print that good from cardboard, but he had been sitting there long enough to leave a real fine one.
Day could immediately estimate the chances for recovery of prints, and it was poor.
I knew there could be no fingerprints on that strap, so I picked the gun up by that.
The stock was pretty porous and weather-worn, so there was little chance of any prints there.
Before pulling the bolt back, I satisfied myself there were no prints on the little metal lever.
Then I held the gun while Captain Fritz pulled the bolt, and a live round fell out.
Because of its shape, Day immediately thought it might be the bag used to carry the rifle.
Although he did not find prints on it when he dusted it with metallic powder, the FBI later subjected it to silver nitrate and discovered Oswald’s fingerprint and palm print, the only ones on the bag.
Most important, the palm print was of Oswald’s right hand and was near the bottom of the bag, which concurred with how Buell Frazier and his sister, Linnie Mae Randle, testified he carried the package.
Not everything was available that day—Oswald’s clipboard was not found on the sixth floor, near the stairwell, until December 2.
The three orders attached to the clipboard were all dated November 22, the day of the assassination.
By the time Day left for the lab, the police, with Roy Truly, had gathered every one of the Depository’s employees on the first floor.
The police were not sure whether the assassin merely used the Depository or whether he was an employee.
As a result, while they searched there, they also continued to look around Dealey Plaza.
Over an hour after the assassination, three men were found inside a railway car several blocks away.
Later dubbed “the three tramps,” they became a mainstay of conspiracy speculation.
It was suspicious the police did not take their names, and the men seemed too well dressed to be hoboes.
Over the years, everything from computer enhancements to anthropological studies were used to find out who they were.
Some labeled Watergate burglars Frank Sturgis and E Howard Hunt as two of the tramps.
The tallest one was identified as Charles Harrelson, a convicted contract murderer.
Some self-proclaimed adventurers, like Chauncey Holt, have confessed to being one of the tramps, and spun long tales about their purported roles in the assassination.
The records identified the suspects as Harold Doyle, Gus Abrams, and John Gedney.
Two of the men, Gedney and Doyle, were still alive, and it turned out they were real tramps who had been to the local rescue mission the night before the assassination and were sleeping in the railroad car when the police arrested them.
The men had no connection to the events at Dealey, and the conspiracy press suddenly and quietly abandoned the issue.
While the hunt for the assassin was under way at Dealey, Oswald had left his rooming house.
When Earlene Roberts last saw him, he was at a bus stop across the street.
Tippit, having been ordered to drive into Oak Cliff at 12:45 from his outlying area, saw Oswald walking briskly ahead of him, east along Tenth Street.
He pulled his patrol car to the curb behind Oswald and called him over.
He leaned close toward the passenger side, exchanging some words through the open vent window.
Whatever he said did not satisfy Tippit, who then got out of the car and started to walk around the front toward Oswald.
Tippit did not first call in on his radio that he had stopped someone, nor did he draw his gun upon exiting the car.
According to Dallas police procedures, this indicated that he was merely suspicious, but not positive he had found a suspect.
As Tippit reached the front left tire, Oswald whipped out his revolver and began shooting.
Oswald then began running back toward Patton Avenue, emptying shells from the revolver along the way.
After the shots, Oswald trotted back toward her and she began screaming.
They went to the front of the house, opened the door and the screen to see what happened, and saw Oswald cutting across the corner of their lawn, pulling and shaking the shells from his gun.
William Scoggins, a Dallas taxi driver, was eating his lunch in his cab, parked less than half a block away.
After he heard the shots, he looked up in time to see Tippit fall, and then hid behind the rear of his taxi as Oswald ran toward him.
Perhaps the closest witness to the shooting was Domingo Benavides, who was driving a pickup truck.
He estimated he was only fifteen feet from Tippit’s car when the officer was shot.
He saw Tippit fall over after the first shots and then watched Oswald leave the scene emptying his gun.
There, seven people either came outside or to the windows when they heard the shots.
Warren Reynolds was on the far side of Jefferson Avenue in a car lot he owned and had an excellent view from the porch of his office.
When he looked outside after hearing shots fired, “I saw this man coming down the street with the gun in his hand, swinging it just like he was running,” said Reynolds.
Jack R Tatum was driving through the intersection of Patton and East Tenth Street when the shooting took place.
Although he had a “very good look” at the killer, and had “no question whatsoever” that it was Oswald , he did not make himself available to the Dallas Police.
Tatum told his story for the first time to investigators for the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
A high-ranking Dallas police official who was a member of the force in 1963 told the author there was another witness who had positively identified Oswald as the shooter but was never publicly identified.
Evidently, the man was married and had been at a house in Oak Cliff visiting his mistress for an afternoon tryst.
Although he had no doubt about his identification, the police decided not to use him since they thought they had enough other solid eyewitness evidence of the murder, and the man pleaded that they not involve him, to avoid embarrassing publicity.
Dashing through the gas station across from Reynolds’s car lot, he dropped his light-beige jacket.
All of the Tippit murder eyewitnesses described the shooter with a jacket, and when arrested before 2:00, Oswald had no jacket.
As is typical with eyewitness testimony, though all who were asked identified the jacket when it was shown to them during their Warren Commission testimony, each remembered it slightly differently.
Markham, Scoggins, and Barbara Davis thought the jacket was a little too light.
William Smith, Virginia Davis, Benavides, and Guinyard said the Commission exhibit was exactly like the one they saw in the rear of the gas station.
She even thought he had worn it to the Paines’ house the night before the assassination.
Benavides and Virginia and Barbara Davis found four shells that Oswald had emptied from his gun while escaping.
These shells were matched, to the exclusion of any other gun, to Oswald’s revolver, which he had with him when captured just blocks away.
His pistol was a .38 caliber, rechambered, by the company he purchased it from, to handle .38 special ammunition, a better bullet than .38 regular ammo.
However, that presented unique problems to the ballistics experts when they tried to match the four slugs recovered from Tippit’s body.
According to ballistics expert Joseph Nicol, “This means that the bullet, instead of touching on all surfaces as it goes down the barrel, actually wobbles a little bit.
However, a fourth bullet had enough unique characteristics that it was matched to his revolver to the exclusion of all others.
They instead delve into Tippit’s personal life and charge he was having an affair with a married woman and insinuate the murder was connected to that.
After running through the gas station, he headed west on Jefferson Avenue.
Within a few minutes, police squad cars were speeding east on Jefferson toward the site of the Tippit murder.
Oswald heard the sirens and ducked into the foyer of Hardy’s Shoe Store.
Brewer looked at him because “his hair was sort of messed up and looked like had been running, and he looked scared, and he looked funny.
Just over fifty yards from the shoe store, Oswald stopped near the front of the Texas Theater.
She turned around, expecting to see Oswald, and then realized he had sneaked inside when she was distracted.
Brewer quickly checked both exits and found they were still locked, meaning Oswald was in the theater.
At that point, Postal, who had heard a radio report about the President’s assassination, told Brewer, “I don’t know if this is the man they want in there, but he is running from them for some reason.
Realizing quickly he was not, the police turned up the lights and asked Brewer if he could spot the suspect.
The arresting officers took him into the office of Captain Will Fritz, the chief of homicide.
And with that, we relinquished our prisoner to the homicide and robbery bureau …”79 It was nearly 3:00 when Ruth Paine heard heavy knocking at the front door.
And the man in front said by way of explanation, ‘We have Lee Oswald in custody.
Ruth had no thought that Lee was involved, but instead was excited that he worked at the same building from which the shots came, and that he probably could give them a “first-hand” account of the day’s events.
But Marina was horrified at the news, and feared that Lee might be involved.
At her first opportunity away from Ruth, she sneaked into the garage and found the East German blanket in which Oswald kept the rifle wrapped.
When she saw it lying on the floor, she was relieved, believing the rifle was still inside.
She watched television with Ruth until the announcement came that the President had died.
Marina did not cry but sat silently on the sofa, still concerned about Lee.
The police did not have a warrant, but Ruth allowed them to enter the house.
Carl Day had found partial prints near the trigger guard and at the main barrel of the rifle.
I kept looking at it as it did not stand out real good—it wasn’t a great print.
Day then prepared to take pictures of the stock, using reflected light and time exposures.
But before he could finish, he was told the FBI was sending an agent to collect the rifle and to take it to FBI headquarters in Washington for further tests.
The gun had our powder all over it by then, and I know I wouldn’t have liked to receive it in that condition once somebody else had started their work on it.
Although at least five Dallas police crime lab detectives saw the palm print before it was sent to the FBI, the public did not know that Oswald’s print had been found on the rifle until Dallas district attorney Henry Wade told a reporter in an evening press conference on November 24.92 The FBI then examined Day’s lifted print and confirmed it was Oswald’s when it discovered that irregularities in the lift corresponded exactly with imperfections on the rifle barrel.
The print was important, because it was the first piece of direct physical evidence that placed the rifle in Oswald’s hands.
But the failure of the FBI to find a print in its initial examination has led to accusations that the Dallas police must have concocted the evidence in order to close the case against Oswald.
Oliver Stone, in JFK, created a scene that showed an unidentified man placing the gun into Oswald’s dead hand to obtain a print.
But to add to the conspiracy grist, FBI agent Drain claimed that Day never told him about the print when he picked up the gun.
J Edgar Hoover was furious that his vaunted FBI laboratory failed to pick up any trace of one of the most critical prints in the case.
People who claim there was a planted print don’t know anything about fingerprinting.
You can’t even place a print on something from a card, and that’s all we had on the first night, when I lifted that print.
After lifting the palm print, I could still see traces on the stock with my reflective light.
They either overlooked it or it wasn’t good enough to see by the time that gun arrived there.
Livingston’s book included significant new evidence, which he had in his personal possession, and which had never been seen by the FBI, the Warren Commission, or the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
Some of the most important material was four photographs of the partial fingerprints found on the MannlicherCarcano’s trigger guard.
Since the Livingston photos were different from the ones previously used by investigators for comparison, Public Television’s Frontline program had several fingerprint experts examine the newly discovered evidence.
Captain Jerry Powdrill, of the Monroe, Louisiana, police department, focused on the clearest of Livingston’s four photos.
That was not enough for a positive identification, since law enforcement requires between six and ten matching points.
A former FBI fingerprint expert studied the Livingston photos and agreed with Powdrill that they were inconclusive.
However, the third expert, Vincent Scalice, made a breakthrough using photo enhancements.
Scalice, who had been the fingerprint expert for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, made his own photos of the Livingston prints, at different exposures ranging from light to medium to dark.
Studying the varying degrees of contrast between the photos, Scalice identified eighteen matching points between the trigger guard prints and Oswald’s fingerprint card.
As for Styles and Adams, although they thought they came down quickly, they actually did not arrive on the first floor until at least four to five minutes after the third shot.
The critical testimony is from Victoria Adams, who said that when she got to the first floor, she saw Billy Lovelady and William Shelley.
A Secret Service agent, John Howlett, also completed Oswald’s route in the necessary time.
When Oswald had left the sixth floor he could only descend one staircase, the rear one.
But Oswald had little choice, since to catch the bus beyond the Depository he would have had to walk a longer distance and through Dealey Plaza.
Every Dallas bus driver has a distinctive paper punch that marks the approximate time of issuance.
As a result, after retrieving the transfer, the police quickly knew not only the bus driver but also the time Oswald had taken the bus.
Such an extraordinary departure from normal routine also indicates he was in flight.
Before the taxi left the station, an elderly woman approached and asked Whaley to call her another cab.
Oswald offered her that cab, apparently in the belief that it would be easier for him just to take another one than to wait for Whaley to help the woman.
At the last moment, she must have decided it was also easier just to find another taxi, and she left the cab to Oswald.
Although she did house cleaning for several police officers, she did not recognize the car, and critics charge the unidentified car was passing a prearranged signal to Oswald.
Journalist Hugh Aynesworth interviewed Roberts four times, once on the afternoon of the assassination, and three times during the subsequent few months.
In the first two interviews Roberts did not tell of any incident with a police car.
Aynesworth says that during the last two interviews she “changed her story dramatically,” recalling different numbers on the supposed police car each time she was questioned.
Dallas police records show no car was in her neighborhood at the time she described.
Any of those law enforcement officials could have been confused with Secret Service, agents.
But the photographs and Mooney’s testimony indicate the shells were found in a random pattern.
Another shell is indented on the rim, raising doubts that it could have been fired from a rifle in that condition.
Although the officers quickly admitted their mistake, that initial misidentification led to speculation that a different gun was found on the sixth floor and that Oswald’s Carcano was later swapped for the murder weapon.
There are considerable similarities between a bolt-action Mauser and a Carcano.
While no one can be certain, Warren Commission counsel David Belin had a plausible explanation that was in the draft of the Warren Report but did not make it into the final publication.
That would have taken him to a point on Lancaster Road where a Greyhound was scheduled to leave at 3:30.
The southbound Greyhound would have, with connections, gone to Monterrey, Mexico.
A reconstruction of the time that elapsed since he left the Depository shows it is more than possible.
He then took another two minutes before reaching the bus station and Whaley’s cab.
Whaley, who had thirty-seven years of taxi experience, claimed he knew every shortcut in the city.
Those who were timed in the reconstruction followed the streets; no one is sure if Oswald, who knew the area, had a shortcut to his room.
In any case, he arrived at the rooming house about 12:55 to 12:56, and left again before 1:00.
Bowley and Domingo Benavides, ran to Tippit’s car and called it in over his police radio.
They claim Markham, who was excitable and at times hysterical, identified Oswald by his clothing and not his face.
But when asked if she picked Oswald out of the lineup because of his clothes or face, she said, “Mostly from his face.
CBS newsman Walter Cronkite later asked him whether there was any doubt that Oswald was the shooter.
He fully recovered and testified to the Warren Commission six months later.
The police suspected the perpetrator was actually a Reynolds acquaintance and rival, Darrell Garner.
Some critics suggest that the shooting was connected to the Kennedy case, but no one has given a good explanation for why Reynolds was singled out when more than ten other witnesses who saw and testified to the same thing as he did were left unharmed.
Such statements, usually made years after the shooting, have internal inconsistencies which are so great that some of the witnesses must be questioned for their truthfulness in saying they were even in the neighborhood on that day.
There is no credible eyewitness testimony that undercuts the evidence that Oswald was the shooter.
The FBI was unable to find a local dry cleaner that used that mark, raising the possibility that Oswald had purchased the jacket secondhand, with the laundry mark already in it from another city.
Of the four bullets removed from Tippit during the autopsy, three were Winchester-Western and only one was Remington-Peters.
That indicated that Oswald likely fired five shots and one missed Tippit, leaving an undiscovered Remington-Peters bullet and a Winchester-Western shell.
Eddie Kinsley, an ambulance attendant who took Tippit to the hospital, said that upon unloading the body, he kicked a loose bullet, which had evidently struck a button on Tippit’s uniform, onto the parking lot.
When Oswald was arrested he had six bullets in his revolver and five loose ones in his pocket.
That was before a dozen witnesses saw Oswald kill Tippit, and then Brewer followed him into the theater.
He wrote that while the police scanned the theater, “a man sitting near the front spoke up quietly.
Anson never informed the reader that the man he found so suspicious was actually Johnny Calvin Brewer.
Pepper Jenkins had lunch in the dining room at Parkland Hospital with several people from his anesthesiology department.
Jenkins left to retrieve an anesthesia machine, while the chief nurse, Audrey Bell, went to prepare trauma room one.
The President’s limousine screeched into the rear of Parkland, stopping near the Emergency entrance.
Governor Connally appeared unconscious in the middle seat, lying across his wife, his shirt and suit jacket heavily stained with blood.
Only President Kennedy’s torso was visible as Jacqueline cradled his head in her lap.
Secret Service agent Clint Hill, who had barely clung on to the rear of the car during the high-speed dash to Parkland, seemed dazed as he slid off the trunk.
Because I could not carry on the conversation with my patient, I drew a stretcher and went out to find what was going on.
There were any number of very serious people standing around with submachine guns, and I honestly thought I was not long for this world.
Then one of the Secret Service men grabbed the other end of the carriage and hustled me toward this big black car, and all of sudden Jackie Kennedy sat up and I knew right away there was terrible trouble.
Connally suddenly became semiconscious as the car stopped and, with a great show of determination, helped himself from the car before collapsing into the arms of hospital attendants.
I never saw anyone with a head wound like that, with the amount of brain matter scattered about, that survived.
We put the President on the gurney and wheeled him into emergency room one.
She went in with us as the gurney was rolled into the hospital, walking right beside him, holding his hand.
One of the nurses offered to clean off her clothing, and she said, ‘Absolutely not.
Jenkins, “but the only doctor there when I arrived was Carrico, and Drs.
He was blue-white, had fixed, dilated pupils and slow, spasmodic breathing.
Two nurses, Diana Bowron and Margaret Henchliffe, cut away the President’s clothes and his back brace, which was wrapped with Ace bandages about his waist and thighs.
Carrico placed his hands under the President’s back and felt for any other major wound.
Carrico inserted a breathing tube into the President’s mouth and down his throat, and an automatic respirator was hooked up to the tube.
Jenkins had taken the traditional anesthesiologist position at the head of the table.
He had a shock of hair, a big shock of hair, and he was lying with his head back against me, and by this time we had the EKG hooked up to him, and it showed a dying heart pattern.
Malcolm Perry started a tracheotomy, an operation in which an artificial airway is created by cutting into the throat and inserting a tube directly into the windpipe.
Carrico was trying to get the endotracheal tube in, he saw blood in the trachea,” Dr.
That surgical procedure cut directly over the exit wound on the throat, and therefore, within minutes of the President’s arrival, that wound was obliterated by Dr.
Baxter, Peters, and McClelland inserted a tube into the chest cavity to drain any blood or fluid.
Charles Baxter, “his pulse, which we had gotten to an erratic level near 100, started to decline.
Jackie Kennedy continued to stand on the side, staring blankly at the frantic activities to revive her husband.
Several times, a nurse or Secret Service agent led her outside, suggesting it was better if she did not remain in the trauma room.
On one occasion when she was out of the operating room, Lady Bird Johnson walked around a bend in a corridor, and “suddenly I found myself face to face with Jackie in a small hall.
And on one of her trips back into the room, she nudged me with her elbow.
The doctors spoke about cutting open the President’s chest and massaging the heart muscle.
Jenkins, standing at the head of the table, noticed a priest, Father Oscar Huber, had appeared at the room’s swinging doors.
And I returned to the head of the table and said to the others, ‘I think you better look at this first,’ pointing toward the President’s head.
Kemp Clark, the only neurosurgeon in the room, put on a pair of gloves and quickly inspected the head wound.
Somebody was poised with a knife ready to do open-chest massage, and I almost laid across his chest and said no.
Baxter, the chief of the emergency room, walked over to Jacqueline, and quietly said, “‘Mrs.
She had a look in her eyes, on her face, of terror, disbelief, and bewilderment.
Kennedy there, we were not about to start examining the wounds or turning the body over.
Everyone backed off from that body with the reverence, with the grief, with all the emotions you could imagine.
I wanted to leave, too, but I couldn’t get out of the room because I was hemmed in by the priest and Mrs.
She remained while some nurses and residents wrapped the President in white sheets, a plastic mattress cover, and some pillowcases, and awaited the arrival of the casket.
The attending doctors had decided to fix the time of death as 1:00 P.M. and, since the cause of death was the massive head wound, decided that Dr.
Mac Kilduff, a Kennedy aide, went to a side room, where Vice-President Johnson was under heavy Secret Service guard.
He informed Johnson that he wanted to announce Kennedy’s death, but LBJ told him to wait until his party was away from the hospital.
No one was sure who had killed the President or if it was a conspiracy that targeted other members of the government.
There was a tremendous rush into the hospital corridors by newsmen hurrying to get the word over the wire services.
While the drama with President Kennedy unfolded, another life-and-death battle was being waged with Governor John Connally.
He had bullet wounds in his right rear shoulder, under his right nipple, right wrist, and his left thigh.
Robert Shaw, a thoracic surgeon, took over the Governor’s care at 12:45.
Shaw had moved Connally to surgery and for nearly two hours sutured the Governor’s damaged lung and muscles.
That empty stretcher was placed into an elevator by an orderly and then moved into a hospital hallway.
Darrell Tomlinson, the hospital’s senior engineer, later bumped into it, and when he did, a 6.5mm bullet rolled onto the floor.
But unknown to the Texan authorities, Vice-President Johnson was determined not to leave the state without the President’s body.
Kennedy would not leave the hospital without the President’s body, and urged again that we go ahead and take Air Force One and return to Washington.
I said so, but I agreed we would board the airplane and wait until Mrs.
Theron Ward, a Dallas justice of the peace, was at the hospital but was weak in asserting Texas law.
Charles Crenshaw, claimed that the Secret Service agents drew their weapons and physically forced their way out of the hospital, stealing the bronze coffin from Texas jurisdiction.
Charles Baxter, chief of the emergency rooms, had authorized the body’s removal.
Baxter told the author, “and I got involved in it, my thinking was twofold.
And second, Earl was sort of a sensationalist, somebody always on the fringes, and I did not want him to do that autopsy.
They arrived at Love Field in ten minutes and loaded the casket onto the rear of Air Force One at 2:18.37* Instead of immediately departing, Lyndon Johnson, after conferring with Attorney General Robert Kennedy, waited for a local judge to swear him in as President.
That brief and somber ceremony took place in the front of the plane at 2:37, while a bloodstained Jacqueline Kennedy looked on in shock.
After the ceremony, she returned to the rear of the plane, where she stayed with the casket for the remainder of the trip.
His theory relies on an elaborate shell game involving rapid exchanges of coffins, a decoy ambulance, and a switched body shroud.
He contends that once the body was stolen from Air Force One, a covert team of surgeons surgically altered the corpse before the autopsy later that day at Bethesda.
Yet since the medical evidence only supports the conclusion that JFK was struck by shots from behind, Lifton tries hard to devise a theory of “medical forgery” to exonerate Oswald.
Lifton’s theory involves a massive plot of scores of conspirators in the Navy, Secret Service, and LBJ’s inner circle, none of whom he identifies.
He asserts the conspirators also made the mistake of forgetting to put the President back in the same bronze coffin, since he claims a simple gray metal one arrived at Bethesda.
Even the President’s brain was missing, as the conspirators had to hide it, but another one showed up during the autopsy.
But that remark was an offhand comment by an attending physician at the autopsy and was misconstrued by the two nonmedical FBI men.
Michael Baden, the chief forensic pathologist for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, says, “Lifton just doesn’t know what he is talking about.
He thinks he sees signs of surgery in some of the autopsy photos, but he doesn’t know how to read those pictures.
He’s not a doctor and it’s clear by his work that he doesn’t understand what really happened.
He doesn’t even take into account rigor mortis , which starts two hours after death.
Surgery done on a corpse would look different than one on a living person.
Cyril Wecht, the most vocal medical critic of the Warren Commission’s conclusions, dismisses Lifton out of hand.
I could assemble a whole team of the best surgeons in the country and still not be able to accomplish in a day what Lifton says was done in a few hours.
In a seven-hundred-page book, Lifton spends only two pages on this essential issue.
Fulfilling the military duty that a high-ranking officer should remain as an honor guard with the body of a slain Commander in Chief until the burial, General Godfrey McHugh stayed with the casket after it was loaded onto the plane.
He went to the cockpit to check on the plane’s departure only when Mrs.
During LBJ’s swearing-in ceremony, while almost everybody was in the front, McHugh remained with the casket.
However, I felt that it should be a military hospital, in that he had been President of the United States and was, therefore, the Commander in Chief of the Military.
The casket they lowered was the same bronze one that JFK was placed into at Parkland and which was loaded onto Air Force One in Dallas.
There was no sign of the simple gray casket that Lofton charged contained Kennedy’s body on the arrival at Bethesda.
Sibert and O’Neill helped take the casket inside, and there, waiting for the President’s body, were Dr.
Humes, a thirty-nine-year-old Navy commander, was director of labs of the Naval Medical School in Bethesda.
Boswell, also a commander, was forty-one, and chief of pathology at the Navy hospital.
Humes had been notified at 5:15, when he was at home, that he should return to the hospital.
Canceling a dinner party for twenty-four guests, he rushed to Bethesda, where Admiral Ed Kenney, the Navy’s surgeon general, told him “to be prepared to do an autopsy” on JFK.48 Humes chose Boswell to be his assistant.
Although they had performed several autopsies involving gunshots before, they did not have extensive experience with bullet wounds.
Bruce Smith, the deputy director of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, and asked for a pathologist with experience in gunshot deaths.
He was a ballistics expert, and although he had reviewed records of United States military personnel who had died of gunshot wounds for nearly ten years, he had never done an autopsy involving a gunshot wound.
Humes and Boswell, with help from FBI agents O’Neill and Sibert and Secret Service agents Kellerman and Greer, removed the body.
O’Neill took responsibility for security, ensuring that no unauthorized personnel entered the area or had access to the body.
There is an oft-repeated story of an FBI photographer, without any prior autopsy experience, who allegedly took the photographs.
Because they support the conclusion that the President was shot by two bullets from the rear, there have been attempts to cast doubt on their authenticity.
Robert Groden and Harrison Livingstone, in High Treason, conclude the X rays are fakes and raise doubts about some of the photos.
However, they ignore the extensive work of the House Select Committee in examining that very issue.
John Stringer, who took the photographs, viewed them at the National Archives on November 1, 1966, and verified that the pictures were the ones he had taken.
Human bone structure varies uniquely from one individual to another and can be as good a means of identification as fingerprints.
Twenty-two earlier X rays of John Kennedy were compared to those taken at Bethesda.
Bethesda was a teaching hospital, and its morgue had an amphitheater filled with almost forty people.
Humes recalled that though they were dealing with the President, the autopsy doctors did not allow the crowd to bother them.
We were unfazed by the commotion …”60 The three pathologists found two wounds caused by high-velocity missiles.
The Kennedys were willing to let the doctors determine the cause of death but not to let them conduct an extensive autopsy.
Michael Baden says that a proper examination of the President “could have taken two or three days, and yet they only spent a few hours on the autopsy and the rest of the time working with the funeral director to put the body together in case Mrs.
A lot of things weren’t done, such as inspecting the spine, dissecting the neck organs, tracing out the bullet tracks, and inspecting the clothing.
In 1968, a four-member medical panel appointed by attorney general Ramsey Clark concluded the President was struck by two shots from behind, and reaffirmed the original autopsy report.
In 1975, the Commission on CIA Activities Within the United States reviewed the case, and also confirmed the autopsy results and the Warren Commission conclusions.
In the late 1970s, the House Select Committee appointed a nine-member medical panel of experts with vast experience in gunshot wounds.
Its members were the first forensic scientists and medical examiners to have complete access to all the photographs and X rays, as well as financial support to conduct the latest scientific tests, including neutron activation and photo enhancements.
The Select Committee panel found faults with the autopsy, but confirmed its findings, and held that JFK was struck only by two bullets from behind.
The Neck Wound The autopsy doctors were unable to figure out the path for the bullet that had entered at the rear base of the President’s neck.
They could find no exit for that bullet, even conjecturing that it might have penetrated the back for only a few inches and then fallen out during the emergency treatment in Dallas.
They did not know there was an exit hole in the front of his neck because they had not examined the President’s clothes and did not see the holes made by the exiting bullet through JFK’s shirt collar.
Perry at Parkland had obliterated the neck wound and it was not until Dr.
Humes spoke with Perry over the phone the following day that he realized what had happened.
Of all the doctors involved in treating the President at Parkland, only five—Carrico, Perry, Jenkins, Jones, and Baxter—saw the front neck wound in its original condition before the tracheotomy was performed.
At a press conference following the announcement of the President’s death, Dr.
I did say it looked like an entrance wound since it was small, but I qualified it by saying that I did not know where the bullets came from.
It was a small wound, slightly ragged at the edges, and could have been an exit or entrance.
By Sunday, after working on Oswald, I had learned my lesson, and I handed out a written statement to the press and took no questions.
No one at Parkland ever turned the President over, so they did not see the even smaller hole on his back that was in direct line with the one in the throat.
Jones told the author, “The neck wound could have been either an entrance or an exit.
Carrico and Baxter also agreed the wound could have been either an entrance or an exit.
Pepper Jenkins, recalls, “Even at that time, I was convinced it was a wound of exit because it was bigger than an entrance wound should be.
Entrance wounds, as you look at them, are small and round, and may have a halo around them, black, from the bullet.
In reconstructions of the shot, with 6.5mm ammo, Lattimer discovered the exit wound remained small and tight if the bullet exited near the collar band of the shirt, where the buttoned collar and the knotted tie firmly pushed the neck muscles together.
As Lattimer moved the shots farther away from the collar band, even by fractions of an inch, the exit wounds became larger.
When the House Select Committee’s nine-member forensics panel reviewed the autopsy X rays and photographs, it also examined JFK’s clothing, which confirmed the direction of the neck shot.
The X rays confirmed there was internal injury, a stress fracture to the first thoracic vertebra, caused by the trauma of the bullet passing so close to the spine.
The Select Committee’s medical panel unanimously determined that the neck wound was caused by a rear shot.
The Head Wound The autopsy physicians concluded the fatal shot entered the rear of the President’s skull and exploded out the right side of his head.
Seventy percent of the right hemisphere of the President’s brain was blown out, leaving a nearly six-inch hole on the right side of his head.
The entry on the back of the head was small, not much larger than the 6.5mm bullet that did the damage.
Examination of the inside of the skull indicated the edges of the hole were beveled inward, confirming the entry point.
Fragments of the parietal bone missing from the right side of the President’s head, found in Dealey Plaza, later confirmed outward beveling, indicating that was the exit point.
Less than 1mm of metallic dust particles was evident on the X ray of the President’s brain, and followed the bullet’s rear-to-front path, leading directly to the exit on the right side.
Three fragments were found, one at the entrance point and two near JFK’s right eye, further evidence of the bullet’s path.
There was no photographic, X ray, or personal observation of any other exit on the head except for the large hole on the right side.
If true, this not only contradicted the findings of the autopsy team but was evidence that the President was probably shot from the front, with a large exit hole in the rear of the head.
Several Parkland doctors also thought they saw cerebellum, tissue from the base of the brain, on the stretcher or in the operating room.
If the Parkland descriptions of the cerebellum were true, this raised legitimate questions over the authenticity of the photographs of JFK’s brain, which showed no such damage.
Robert Groden and Harrison Livingstone, in their book High Treason, devote more than thirty pages to highlighting this conflict between the Parkland and Bethesda descriptions of the head wound.
However, it is questionable to rely on the Parkland doctors for any assertion about the head wound since, by their own admission, they did not examine it in detail.
Kemp Clark looked at the wound to determine whether the President could be revived, it was the first time it had been examined.
Baxter recalls, “none of us had the heart to go and examine the head wound while Mrs.
A third of the time, an autopsy shows something was missed by the treating doctors at the hospital.
In unnatural deaths, it is common for the treating physicians to mix up stab wounds and gun shots, and they are wrong half the time about exit or entrance.
The Parkland doctors did not clean Kennedy off—there is just no way they could have hazarded a real guess about that wound, since it was covered with blood and tissue.
If they say they saw cerebellum, they are just wrong because the cerebellum was perfect.
And if they say there was a large hole in the rear of the head, they don’t know what they are talking about since there is nothing there but the entry injury in the rear cowlick.
The mistakes in judgments from Parkland are exactly why we have autopsies.
It’s very clear on the enhanced frames that there is a wound over the right ear, but the back of the head is clean.
High Treason asserts that some doctors examined the wound with a flashlight and that Dr.
Jenkins picked the head up from the stretcher to show other doctors the extent of the rear wound.
The eight principal doctors who attended to JFK on that day all told the author that such reports were false.
Moreover, Groden and Livingstone cite early interviews and some testimony before the Warren Commission to support their hypothesis that the Parkland doctors saw a different head wound than the one described at Bethesda.
They insisted that the explainable differences in the wound descriptions between them and the Bethesda doctors have been exploited by conspiracy writers, who created a controversy where none exists.
Some admitted that their early statements about the wounds, which they now consider to be mistaken, may have contributed to the confusion.
Bill Midgett, who helped wheel the President from the limousine into trauma room one, says, “The President had quite thick hair, and there was a lot of blood and tissue.
The reason I say that is that the President was lying on his back and shoulders, and you could see the hole, with scalp and brain tissue hanging back down his head, and it covered most of the occipital portion of his head.
Giesecke also admits an error in his original testimony when he described the wound as more occipital.
But, for instance, Lifton spent six hours with me trying to get me to say the wounds were like he wanted them.
The truth is there was a massive head wound, with brain tissue and blood around it.
It is definitely pressed down and that would be the damage I referred to in 1964.
The autopsy photo, with the rear of the head intact and a protrusion in the parietal region, is the way I remember it.
The occipital and parietal bone join each other, so we are only talking a centimeter or so in difference.
And you must remember the President had a lot of hair, and it was bloody and matted, and it was difficult to tell where that wound started or finished.
I have been misquoted enough on this, some saying I claimed the whole back of his head was blown away.
He drew a sketch in 1967 for Josiah Thompson’s book Six Seconds in Dallas, which showed a gaping wound in the rear of the head.
In 1988, when I went to the National Archives, the photos showed the President’s brain was crenelated from the trauma, and it resembled cerebellum, but it was not cerebellar tissue.
Crenshaw wrote a book in 1992 in which he claimed he examined the wound, that the hole was in the rear of the head, and that the cerebellum was lacerated.4† Crenshaw, a junior resident at the time, arrived late at trauma room one and assisted for only a few minutes near the end.
He was in no position to make the judgments he sensationally proclaimed in his book.
In fact, his role was so minor that most of the other doctors do not even remember him.
He has to know that what he said is false, and he knows the rest of us know that.
His story is filled with halftruths and insinuations, and those of us who know him know he is desperate.
While almost all the Parkland doctors who treated JFK support the findings of the autopsy team, their confirmation may not be as important as the studies conducted by subsequent panels of experts.
The Clark and Rockefeller commissions, as well as the House Select Committee’s medical panel, affirm the original autopsy conclusions about JFK’s head wound.
All nine forensic pathologists agreed that the beveling of the skull and the damage to the brain meant the small rear hole in the President’s head was an entrance wound.
To most lay people, the rapid backward movement at the moment of the head shot means the President was struck from the front.
It’s not like Hollywood, where someone gets shot and falls over backwards.
Itek discovered that when the bullet hit JFK, he first jerked forward 2. inches before starting his rapid movement backward.
Unless the film is slowed considerably and enhanced, the forward motion is not detectable.
First, when the bullet destroyed the President’s cortex, it caused a neuromuscular spasm, which sent a massive discharge of neurologic impulses from the injured brain shooting down the spine to every muscle in the body.
These are the muscles of the back and neck …”110 They contract, lurching the body upward and to the rear.
At the same instant the President’s body was in a neuromuscular seizure, the bullet exploded out the right side of his head.
Luis Alvarez, a Nobel Prize-winning physicist, focused on that to discover the second factor that drove the President’s head back with such force.
Alvarez established it both through physical experiments that re-created the head shot and extensive laboratory calculations.
He found that when the brain and blood tissue exploded out JFK’s head, they carried forward more momentum than was brought in by the bullet.
That caused the head to thrust backward—in an opposite direction—as a rocket does when its jet fuel is ejected.
Because the bullet exited on the right side of JFK’s head, it forced him to be propelled back and to the left, exactly what is visible on the Zapruder film.
By his movement alone, you can’t tell which direction he was shot from.
You then need to examine the bullets, the bones, tissue, X rays, and photographs to determine from where the bullet came.
There is no doubt that the bullets that hit John Kennedy, both in the neck and in the head, came from the rear.
Spectrographic tests showed residues of copper at the edges of the jacket’s hole, the same metal that jacketed Oswald’s ammunition.
Although it was a well-kept secret at the time, the President suffered from Addison’s disease, a rare illness named after the English physician who discovered it.
That disease slowly destroys the cortex of the adrenal glands, and while it is usually fatal, cortical hormones alleviate many of the symptoms.
The President, in shock from the wounds, was in desperate need of the hormones since his adrenal glands were incapable of producing any.
Malcolm Perry says, “There must be three hundred people who claim they were in there that day, and there’s no way that could be true.
But only one was connected to the assassination, as President Kennedy’s stretcher was never in that location.
That slightly deformed whole bullet was later determined to have been fired from Oswald’s rifle, to the exclusion of all others.
Critics have dubbed it the “magic bullet” because the Warren Commission concluded it was responsible for President Kennedy’s throat wound and all the wounds to Governor Connally.
The coffin had an air-lock mechanism that, when turned, hermetically sealed the lid on the casket.
To get the body out, the conspirators would have had to unstrap the coffin and unscrew the lock, allowing the unit to unseal itself.
After removing the President’s body, something of similar weight would likely have to be placed inside, so people handling the casket would not notice it was too light.
Finally, the casket would have to be resealed and strapped back into its original position before anyone on the plane noticed the unusual activity.
His book Best Evidence eventually became a national best-seller in 1980.
During the mid-1960s, he did his own photo enhancements of the shrubbery on the grassy knoll, and concluded that one tree had been artificial on the day of the assassination, in order to camouflage snipers.
In his enhancements, Lifton believed he spotted a man wearing a Kaiser Wilhelm helmet, another with an electronic headset, one with a periscope, and another with a machine gun hidden in a hydraulic lift.
Despite his prodigious research, some experts still have little respect for his work.
According to Professor David Wrone, a historian and assassination researcher, “In 1967, Lifton had a theory of fake trees, that a construction company put in fake scenery and so forth at Dealey Plaza, and then after the shooting, it was removed.
He thought it helped the assassins get close for the shooting and also confused the people.
Robert Blakey, the chief counsel for the House Select Committee, says, “Lifton is just bizarre.
Billings called Lifton a “master nit-picker” and said his theory was “a preposterous notion” and “at best, the book is a monument to one man’s ingenuity.
Kennedy was given the choice of which hospital she wanted for the procedure, the conspiracy plan would have required teams of conspirator doctors at both Walter Reed and Bethesda, as well as at key civilian hospitals in the area.
Moreover, the body almost remained in Dallas for an autopsy, requiring further conspirators in that medical examiner’s office.
Lifton actually believes that “President Kennedy’s body was never supposed to have left Dallas unaltered.
Even if Connally had not been wounded, it is difficult to imagine how any of the events in Dallas would have been different.
Certainly the President would have been taken to Parkland and an effort would have been made to save his life.
Yet Lifton gives no indication whatsoever of how the medical deception involving Kennedy’s corpse was to be carried out in Dallas.
Forensic pathologists are not just concerned with what caused the death but also with the circumstances around the death.
James Jenkins, a laboratory technician, said that a plain gray coffin, containing the body of an Air Force officer in a body bag, arrived at Bethesda before JFK’s coffin.
But O’Connor and Custer also allege the President had no brain when he arrived.
Custer even asserted that he put both his hands inside the President’s head and it was empty.
They were both interviewed by the House Select Committee in 1978, and neither mentioned what they now claim to have witnessed.
The doctors and FBI agents who removed the body are consistent in their descriptions.
They noticed the damage on the bronze casket that had been done in Dallas, and without knowing how Parkland had prepared the President for the trip, they correctly described the white sheets, plastic liner, and rubber bags that were used.
They charge that while the X rays of the neck and head are forgeries, the conspirators forgot to replace the photographs of the face, which he admits are real.
They claim those photos contradict the X rays since the X rays show the right eye and forehead to be missing, and the photos do not.
In other words, people who were willing to murder the President of the United States were more afraid of the possibility of a future congressional subpoena.
Robert Kennedy, who feared the public display of the X rays and photos would be offensive to the Kennedy family, reached an agreement with the Warren Commission not to publish the materials, and except for Earl Warren, the commissioners did not examine them.
Humes had given everything from the autopsy, including the brain, to JFK’s personal physician, Admiral George Burkley.
They were the first Parkland physicians to see the autopsy photographs, and each confirmed the photos represented what they remembered seeing that day, including a picture of the rear of President Kennedy’s head, which shows no defect.
It has been suggested that the reason the photo shows the rear of the President’s head as undamaged is because the doctor is holding a large flap of skin to cover the rear defect.
Jenkins laughed when the author read him the Groden and Livingstone charge.
This has caused some to charge that Kennedy was shot by a second gunman from another location at Dealey, and that the autopsy team either negligently or intentionally overlooked that wound.
And at that time I was operating a breathing bag with my right hand, and was trying to take the President’s temporal pulse, and I had my finger on his left temple.
Cyril Wecht said that such a finding did not preclude a shot also entering from the front.
In other words, just as Oswald fired from behind and his bullet exited the President’s head, a front shooter fired into the wound created by the rear bullet.
That is Wecht’s way of explaining why there is not another entry hole on JFK’s head.
He first suggested that the front shot may have been a frangible bullet, which would have exploded upon impact in the brain.
Finally, he suggested that the front bullet may have been plastic, and penetrated the brain but did not exit.
He argued that since the brain is not available for examination, his speculation is possible—except that plastic bullets were rarely available until 1968, five years after the assassination.
When the victim, who was lying flat on his stomach on the ground, was shot in the rear of the head, his upper torso and legs arched off the ground, in the opposite direction of the bullet.
Also, when Governor Connally was struck in the rear shoulder by a bullet, he did not fall forward, but is clearly visible on the Zapruder film, his wounded shoulder pushing back into the car seat, toward the direction from which he was shot.
Lattimer also conducted twelve physical experiments that confirmed Alvarez’s work.
In each instance, the jet effect, on mock-ups of human heads struck from the rear by a 6.5mm bullet, caused the specimens to rocket back toward the shooter.
Another argument that the shot must have come from the front is based on the fact that two motorcycle policemen riding to the rear of the President’s car were splattered with blood and brain tissue.
But on an enhanced version of the Zapruder film, the two officers drive right into the head spray, which actually shot up and to the front of the President.
The Warren Commission and the House Select Committee did the best they could with photo and computer technology as it existed in 1964 and 1978.
However, scientific advances within the past five years allow significant enhancements of the Zapruder film, as well as scale re-creations using computer animation, which were unavailable to the government panels.
As a result, it is now possible to settle the question of the timing of Oswald’s shots and to pinpoint the moment when both Kennedy and Connally were struck with a precision previously unattainable.
In 1964, the FBI’s test-firing of Oswald’s Carcano determined that a minimum of 2.25 to 2. seconds was necessary between shots to operate the bolt and reaim.
According to the Warren Commission, the fastest he could have fired all three shots was 4. seconds.
Eleven volunteer marksmen took turns firing clips of three bullets at a moving target.
None of them had dry practice runs with the Carcano’s bolt action, as Oswald had had almost daily while in New Orleans.
Yet the times ranged from 4. seconds, almost half a second faster than what the Warren Commission thought was possible, to slightly more than 6 seconds, with the average being 5. seconds, and two out of three hits on the target.
Based on its 1977 reconstruction tests, the House Select Committee lowered the time between shots on the Carcano to 1.66 seconds, with the shooter hitting all the targets.
This reduced the time necessary for three effective shots to 3. seconds.
The time necessary to operate the Carcano must be compared to the Zapruder film, which serves as a time clock for the assassination.
The FBI concluded that Zapruder’s camera operated at 18. frames a second.
No matter what number of shots they heard, the witnesses are almost unanimous that the head shot was the final one.
The Warren Commission was unsure when the first shot was fired, or if it even hit Kennedy or Connally.
Yet because the Commission thought the first shot would be the most accurate, it implicitly favored the theory that the first bullet hit Kennedy in the base of the neck.
When the President’s car turned in front of the Depository, the shooter had to make a fast decision because soon after the turn, the car disappeared under the foliage of a large oak tree.
Before the President and the Governor disappear behind that sign, neither shows any reaction to being struck by a bullet.
However, when the President emerges from behind the road sign at frame 225, the Commission thought he was reacting to a bullet, which means he was wounded somewhere behind the sign.
Since the assassin did not have a clear shot until frame 210, when Kennedy emerged from under the tree cover, the Commission concluded that is the earliest he could have been shot.
The latest would have been at frame 225, when he appears to be raising his right arm in response to the wound.
The critics have consistently interpreted the Commission’s work to give Oswald as little time as possible to fire all three shots.
In this scenario, Oswald had very little time to fire all three shots, a minimum of 4. seconds and a maximum of 5. seconds.
The Commission admitted this was the “minimum allowable time to have fired the three shots,” but concluded that it was “possible” for Oswald to have done it within that time.
However, the assumption that the first shot struck the President is wrong.
Ear-witness testimony, in combination with the Zapruder film, suggests the first shot actually missed and was fired before the presidential car disappeared under the tree cover, earlier than frame 166.
Buell Frazier, standing on the Depository footsteps, said the President’s car barely made the turn from Houston onto Elm when the first shot rang out.
Howard Brennan, leaning against a concrete railing at the corner of Houston and Elm, said the car had just passed him when the first shot was fired.
At 5:30 P.M. on the day of the assassination, while on a plane returning to Washington, Bennet jotted notes of what he had seen five hours earlier.
The first shot sounded like a “fire-cracker,” but it made him look at the President.
However, the Commission did not rely on these witnesses in resolving the issue of whether the first shot missed.
Since there was also testimony from several witnesses who thought the second shot missed, the Commission refused to decide between them.
New Zapruder enhancements, however, confirm the ear-witness testimony that an early shot missed the President and the Governor.
Beginning at frame 160, a young girl in a red skirt and white top who was running along the left side of the President’s car, down Elm Street, began turning to her right.
Some believe the girl’s reaction was because her father, Phil Willis, standing only ten feet away, told her to stop and come back toward him.
He looked to his right toward the crowd, and then back to his left to Jacqueline, as if to be reassured that everything was all right.
In addition to the reactions of the Willis girl, the President, and Mrs.
Kennedy, Governor Connally’s recollection and actions confirm a shot was fired before frame 166.
The Governor has always been consistent in his testimony, and because he is a surviving participant, his perceptions must be given considerable weight.
The film reveals that the Governor’s head turned from mid-left to far right in less than half a second, beginning at frame 162, when the Willis girl started turning around and the President stopped waving.
The film also provides additional evidence of the moment of the first shot, but in an unusual way.
Dubbed the “jiggle analysis,” it was first postulated by Luis Alvarez, the Nobel Prizewinning physicist.
He checked the film for evidence that when a shot was fired, the sharp noise made Zapruder jerk the camera, blurring the next frame or two.
Despite advance knowledge that shots would be fired, an advantage Zapruder did not have, the men were unable to hold the camera still.
The presence of a jiggle or blur in the film, of course, could be caused by many other factors.
However, while sudden movement of Zapruder’s camera may not prove a shot was fired, its absence is good evidence there was no shot.
Therefore, the question is whether Zapruder had the jerky reaction for an early, missed shot.
The House Select Committee determined there were four such noticeable movements, any of which could be evidence of a shot.
That is enough time for even a mediocre shooter to aim and operate the bolt twice.
Neutron-activation tests done on the whole bullet and the fragments show they represent only two bullets.
Robert Kraus, a firearms expert, told the author, “The bullet definitely could have hit something, especially if you are firing close to a tree.
The bullet could have grazed it and put a groove in the branch, or could have drilled right through it without knocking the branch off.
Just after the car passed, she heard the first noise and “I saw a shot or something hit the pavement.
After the assassination, a deputy sheriff, Buddy Walthers, asked him why he had blood on his face.
And I showed him, and we crossed the street and on the edge of the curb, along Main Street, we found the bullet mark.
When asked which shot hit the curb, Tague says, “I actually can’t tell you which one.
I could try to pick one, but through the years I have maintained accuracy.
The Commission did not talk to him until July 1964, and the FBI did not even get a sample of the curbstone until the next month.
The Warren Commission concluded, “The mark on the south curb of Main Street cannot be identified conclusively with any of the three shots fired.
Under the circumstances it might have come from the bullet which hit the President’s head, or it might have been a product of fragmentation of the missed shot upon hitting some other object in the area”35 The Commission’s guess that a fragment from the head wound might have caused the curb damage is not realistic.
Two large fragments were found in the front of the President’s car, one weighing 44. grains, and the other 21. grains .36 Smaller lead fragments were found under the carpet and near the front seat.
However, those fragments were so spent from the tremendous force expended on Kennedy’s head wound that all they did inside the car was crack the windshield and dent a chrome strip.
They did not penetrate any of the leather seats or the dashboard or cause any other damage to the car or its occupants.
There is a much simpler explanation of how Tague was wounded, and it resolves the issue of what happened to the missed first shot.
Since there was no copper found on the curb, it meant the fragment that struck was not jacketed.
Agent Lyndal Shaneyfelt testified that the lead instead came from the bullet’s core.
Art Pence, a competition firearms expert, told the author, “If a 6.5mm bullet struck a hard tree branch, it could tear itself apart by its own rotational speed.
It would then fragment, with maybe the largest fragment, the tip, being up to one third of the bullet, flying off.
And if the tree was oak”—it was—“it has tremendous compressive strength, and the wood could easily suffer less damage than the bullet that hit it.
The destabilized copper jacket hit the pavement, giving Virgie Rachley the impression of sparks.
On an unenhanced version of the Zapruder film, when the presidential car emerges from behind the road sign at frame 225, President Kennedy’s right arm appears to be rising in response to a bullet wound.
Governor Connally does not appear to show any reaction to his wounds until his mouth opens at frame 235.
That difference of ten frames is just over half a second between the reactions of the two men.
If Connally was hit by another bullet, it had to be fired from a second shooter, since the Warren Commission’s own reconstructions showed that Oswald could not have operated the bolt and refired in 1. seconds.
The House Select Committee came to different conclusions, but it did not eliminate the timing problem.
It actually increased the time between the moment it said Kennedy was wounded and the moment it saw a marked difference in Connally’s posture and facial expressions .40 If the same bullet struck both men, the Select Committee’s difference of 36 frames meant the Governor sat unfazed in his seat for nearly two seconds after being wounded.
The Warren Commission and Select Committee both explained the delay in Connally’s reaction by citing many examples of gunshot victims who had slow reactions and sometimes did not even know they were hit by a bullet.
They pointed out that Connally admitted he did not know about his wrist and thigh wounds until the following day.
However, both government panels ignored his clear testimony about instantly feeling the impact of the bullet in his right rear shoulder.
The latest enhancements show that before the President disappeared behind the sign at frame 200, he was waving to the crowd with his right hand.
Even when the car and his body are obscured by the road sign, the top of his right hand can sometimes be seen waving.
The Governor has also emerged and is fully visible, but all that can be seen of the President is his right hand.
In Zapruder frame 225, the President is almost in full view and his hand is lower, with the elbow resting on the edge of the car.
He was in full reaction to the bullet that hit him from the rear and exited his throat.
Working backward from JFK’s reaction, it is possible to pinpoint the precise time of the second shot.
The Warren Commission was not aware that the President’s spine was damaged by the bullet that entered the base of his neck, since the autopsy physicians did not examine the spine and did not use the X rays in preparing their final report.
The bullet passed so close to the spine that it caused “blast injury,” trauma near the sixth cervical vertabra, C-6 .45 On the X rays there are small splinters of bone at the point of trauma.
The bullet did not even have to hit the spine to cause such an injury—entering the body at nearly 2,000 feet per second and traversing very close would be enough.
Most observers of the Zapruder film, as well as eyewitnesses that day, incorrectly thought the President was grabbing at his throat in response to the bullet that struck him.
But the Thorburn Position is a neurological reflex, and upon examination of the enhanced film one can see that the President’s hands never touch his throat.
Moreover, once C-6 is damaged, the arms would have remained locked in the raised position indefinitely—except the destruction of the right hemisphere of JFK’s brain by the head shot released the position.
Any doubt he suffered the Thorburn damage to C-6 is resolved in the Zapruder enhancement.
In the nearly five seconds that elapsed between the neck and head wound, Mrs.
At one point, she grabbed his raised left arm with her right hand and tried to push it down.
Then she reached with both hands and tried again to push it down, but the film clearly records his resistance.
That is 3. seconds after Oswald had fired his first shot near frame 160, more than enough time for him to cock the bolt, re-aim, and fire again.
Watching the Zapruder film at its normal speed, or looking at photographs of still frames, provides a misleading impression of when the Governor was hit.
Two and a half years later, the Governor examined four-by-five-inch transparencies, and after several hours still felt he was hit at frame 234.
The enhanced film shows several physical reactions that reveal exactly when the Governor was hit, and it is within a half second of when he and his wife originally thought the shot struck.
At 224, the right front of the Governor’s suit lapel flips up from his chest.
Confirmed in a 1992 computer enhancement by Jeff Lotz of Failure Analysis Associates, this jacket movement may be one of the most important timing confirmations in the case, as it established the moment the bullet hit him.
The movement of the jacket took place at the exact area where the Governor’s suit and shirt have a bullet hole, as the missile passed through his right shoulder blade and out under his right nipple.
Since Kennedy and Connally were less than two feet apart in the car, the bullet, with an initial muzzle velocity of more than 2,000 feet per second, passed through them almost simultaneously, at frame 224.
Beyond the movement of Connally’s suit jacket and the Select Committee’s finding that he changed his expression and became rigid at 226, there is other evidence he was struck at this point.
Michael West, shows that the Governor’s light-colored Stetson hat, which he was holding in his right hand, near his chest, started rising.
That violent reaction with the governor’s hat took less than one third of a second.
West, it is “positive proof” of a neurological reaction to physical trauma.
When he took his next breath, his lung collapsed, and that is a very painful situation.
It sends a nerve signal to the brain’s cortex, which in turn will send out his pain transmitters, all in an instant.
Charles Gregory, one of the surgeons who attended to Connally at Parkland, when the bullet passed through the Governor, it compressed the chest wall, and the epiglottis involuntarily opened, forcing air out of his mouth.
Gregory estimated that such an expulsion of air could come up to half a second after the bullet struck.
Gregory had not seen the Zapruder film when he testified, instead basing his opinion on his medical expertise.
His estimate, when applied to the Zapruder film, would indicate that Connally was shot near frame 226.
The enhanced Zapruder film shows the Governor was actually struck just one ninth of a second earlier, at frame 224, the same moment President Kennedy was wounded.
Connally’s reaction to the shot, while slower than Kennedy’s, was still fast.
He showed signs of physical stress within a tenth of a second, and reacted visibly to pain only two thirds of a second after he was hit.
The Governor’s memory of what happened is perhaps the most lucid of the witnesses’ there.
I turned to my right to see if I could see anything unusual, and especially to see if I could see him out of the corner of my eye, because I immediately thought of an assassination attempt.
I didn’t see anything but the general blur of waving and of people moving.
That was the sound he heard that made him start to turn sharply to his right.
On the film, the Governor was still turning back to his original position, just as he recalled, at frame 224.
In the first place, I don’t know anything about the velocity of this particular bullet, but any rifle has a velocity that exceeds the speed of sound, and when I heard the sound of that first shot, that bullet had already reached where I was, or it had reached that far, and after I heard that shot … I started to turn to my left before I felt anything.
It is not conceivable to me that I could have been hit by the first bullet, and I felt the blow from something which was obviously a bullet, which I assumed was a bullet, and I never heard the second shot, didn’t hear it.
Doctors familiar with gunshot wounds say it is normal for the shock caused by the wound to block the sound from the victim.
Yet the Warren Commission still decided that the first bullet most likely hit Kennedy and Connally.
The Governor, who had described a “very, very brief span of time” between the first shot and the one that hit him, knew that was impossible.
While he accepted the Commission’s conclusions about Oswald being the lone assassin, he continued to insist that the first bullet fired did not strike him.
Governor Connally had another difficulty with the Warren Commission’s conclusion about the sequence of shots.
Although convinced he was struck by the second bullet, he thought the President was hit by the first shot.
Yet he admitted that when he turned to his right after hearing the first shot, he did not turn far enough to see the President.
The Zapruder film shows the first shot did not affect the President, either.
If Governor Connally had continued to turn to see the President, he would have seen Kennedy waving to the crowd.
The primary reason that Connally believed the first bullet hit the President was the testimony of his wife, Nellie.
She told the Warren Commission that when she heard the first shot, “I turned over my right shoulder and looked back, and saw the President as he had both hands at his neck.
Then there was the second shot, and it hit John …”62 However, she could not have heard her husband say, “Oh, no, no, no,” at the first shot.
Nellie pulled me over into her lap, she could tell I was still breathing and moving, and she said, ‘Don’t worry.
Connally thought was the first shot was actually the second shot, which hit both her husband and the President.
When she turned to look at the President, she did indeed see his hands up near his neck, but it was in reaction to the bullet that struck him at frame 224, the same bullet that forced her husband into her arms a few seconds later.
In an October 30, 1966, interview with Life magazine, the Governor said, “There is my absolute knowledge, and Nellie’s too, that one bullet caused the President’s wound, and that an entirely separate shot struck me.
The author presented some of the new evidence to Governor Connally during a telephone conversation in May 1992.
He was open-minded that new technologies might provide an understanding of the few seconds in Dealey Plaza not available in earlier years.
Connally was mistaken about seeing the President raise his arms after the first shot,” he says.
Based upon the angles, the second bullet, which went through his neck, could have gone through my back.
Failure Analysis Associates applied the latest computer and film-enhancement technology to answer the question of whether one bullet could have caused the wounds and, if so, where the sniper would have to shoot from for the bullet to do the damage.
Failure Analysis used a technique called “reverse projection” to answer the questions.
Then a camera was placed in relation to where Zapruder was standing, and the lens was set to the same focal length, so the view of the car was identical to that afforded in the film.
Using the Zapruder film, the images of Kennedy and Connally were sketched into the car, and then people who were the exact height and weight of the two men were placed into the seats in the positions shown on the film.
Failure Analysis achieved precision on the placement because it used a sonic digitizer, able to make measurements of the bodies from the two-dimensional Zapruder film, and convert them into three-dimensional space.
Once the car was filmed, it was placed into animation, and located at the exact spot on Elm Street that it was when the second shot was fired, at frame 224.
Then the wounds on the President and Governor were measured and extended into the animation.
The first was whether one bullet could cause all the wounds, and the answer was yes.
The bullet punctured Kennedy’s back, exited his throat, and on a straight-line trajectory entered Connally’s right shoulder.
It struck Connally’s rib, and at a downward angle exited under his right nipple.
Because he had turned in his seat, the Governor was slightly to the right.
The bullet continued through his right wrist and then into his left thigh.
Michael Baden, “is that the bullet came out of Kennedy’s neck, made a right turn to hit Connally’s shoulder, then made another right when it left his chest in order to strike his wrist, and then completely changed directions and made a left to enter his thigh.
Utilizing the information on the wounds and the location of the men and the car, the computer worked backward to provide a “cone” within which the sniper had to be.
CE 399, denigrated as the “magic bullet” by buffs, is described as “pristine” in conspiracy books.
It is deformed; it would be very difficult to take a hammer and flatten it to the degree that this is flattened.
In reconstructions, firing shots into a variety of items, the Warren Commission was unable to duplicate a bullet in the same condition.
Since the bullet that did the actual wounds to both men also had to pass through the President’s neck, the Governor’s chest, and then into his thigh, it seemed to indicate that the stretcher bullet could not be the single bullet.
They fired a 6.5mm shell traveling at over 2,000 feet per second directly into a wrist bone.
Of course you are going to get deformation of the bullet when it strikes a hard object at full speed.
If Governor Connally’s wrist had been hit on the straight fly by that bullet, CE 399, the bullet would be in much worse shape, and so would his wrist.
What the Warren Commission did not understand was that the bullet slowed as it passed through the bodies, and it never hit a hard surface, like bone, on its nose.
Charles Gregory, the treating physician at Parkland for Connally’s wrist and thigh, agreed that based on his examination of the wrist’s entry wound, the bullet had been tumbling and entered backward.
But most of us thought it hit the rib while tumbling, and a sideways hit explains why such a hard bullet is flattened.
When it struck the wrist bone, which is small, it was not deformed, since its velocity was so low.
The 6.5mm slug left Oswald’s rifle at 2,000 feet per second and hit Kennedy at the base of the neck between 1,700 and 1,800 feet per second.
Passing only through flesh, the bullet lost another one to two hundred feet per second and hit Connally at 1,500 to 1,600.
The bullet was traveling slow enough that, while its speed and density were still greater than the bone it was hitting, it was not moving so fast as to deform seriously the metal jacket.
I have seen cases of machine-gun fire at a stationary person, and the bullet paths and injuries produced are never duplicated.
There can be minute differences in the manufacture of the ammunition, the condition of the gun that fires it, and the slightest contraction of any muscle on the victim can cause the bullet to take a different path.
Re-creation tests on dead bones may not be as helpful, since they can be different than live bones.
Bullets react differently to bones with blood going through them as opposed to bones that are dry.
The minutest difference in distance between two bullets fired can affect the path of the bullets, the injuries, and the damage to the bullet.
For the Warren Commission, the Army conducted separate experiments with 6.5mm bullets, one to determine the effect on a bullet that passed through the President’s neck and another to test a bullet going through the Governor’s rib.
The one that passed through the mock-up of the President’s neck was not deformed.
The missile that hit the reconstruction for the Governor’s rib did not have the benefit of first being slowed through the President’s neck.
Yet, still, it only had a slight flattening, similar to CE 399.81 The remaining question about the condition of the bullet was whether a bullet at a reduced velocity could strike the radius bone in the wrist and emerge in good condition.
They lowered the velocity on a 6.5mm bullet to 1,100 feet per second and shot it through a cadaver’s wrist.
The FBI randomly weighed 6.5mm Carcano bullets and determined the average weight was 161. grains.
The stretcher bullet weighed 158.6, meaning only 2. grains of its mass were lost.
However, the Governor had three removed from his wrist during surgery, and two small fragments remained in his wrist and one was embedded in his thigh.
Gregory, who performed the surgery on the Governor’s wrist, said the fragments he removed “were varying from five-tenths of a millimeter in diameter to approximately 2 millimeters in diameter, and each fragment is no more than a half millimeter in thickness.
I would estimate that they would be weighed in micrograms, which is a very small amount of weight.
Gregory described it as “microscopic, five tenths of a millimeter by 2 millimeters … weighing again in micrograms, postage stamp weight …”88 A reconstruction of weights based upon the fragments removed by Dr.
Gregory, in his Warren Commission testimony, also pointed out that the fragments he recovered from the Governor’s wrist were lead, not brass or copper.
By analyzing the trace elements found in bullet lead, neutron activation makes it possible to determine the probability that different fragments were part of one bullet.
Most were convinced that the tests would prove that the fragments from Connally’s wrist did not come from the stretcher bullet.
He discovered that the Western Cartridge Co. bullets made for the Carcano were different from any of the other bullets he had tested during twenty years.
Guinn, the most striking feature, and most useful for identification purposes, was that “there seems to be no uniformity within a production lot.
Guinn concluded that the all the fragments were Western Cartridge Co. bullets manufactured for the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle.
He determined that the fragments from Kennedy’s brain matched the three testable fragments found on the floorboard of the limousine, meaning they were all part of the third shot fired.
His most important finding was that CE 399, the stretcher bullet, was indistinguishable, both in antimony and silver, from the fragments recovered from the Governor’s wrist.
Guinn’s test proved is that the stretcher bullet and the Connally wrist fragments came from the same batch of bullets.
But the great difference in the composition of the metal among individual bullets meant that Guinn’s conclusion was much more specific than that.
He considered the test results as definite as any he had seen in two decades of testing.
This chapter is based primarily on the latest enhancements of that film.
Michael West, a medical examiner in Mississippi, together with Johann Rush, the journalist who filmed Oswald during his Fair Play for Cuba demonstration at the New Orleans Trade Mart; and another completed by Failure Analysis Associates, a prominent firm specializing in computer reconstructions for lawsuits.
The Failure Analysis work was an extensive undertaking for an American Bar Association mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald , held at the ABA’s 1992 convention.
The Failure Analysis project involved 3-D scale generations of Dealey Plaza, physical mock-ups of the presidential car, and stand-in models for the President and Governor, all to determine trajectory angles and the feasibility of one bullet causing both sets of wounds.
Failure Analysis also re-created experiments with the 6.5mm ammunition, using more updated information than was available to the Warren Commission, to further test the “single-bullet theory” and the condition of the missile.
At the ABA trial, Failure Analysis presented scientific evidence for both the prosecution and defense of Oswald.
The only technical breakthroughs were on the prosecution work, and they are presented in this chapter.
The defense presentation was fundamentally flawed and centered on two primary arguments.
The first was why Oswald did not take a supposedly better straight shot as JFK’s car approached the Depository on Houston Street.
Failure Analysis tried illustrating its contention by creating computer animation of Oswald’s view of the car.
Since Connally was sitting in front of Kennedy in the car, he would have blocked part of the assassin’s view along Houston Street, and therefore the computer animation was not an accurate representation of what Oswald saw.
Moreover, the Failure Analysis presentation did not take into account that ballistics experts conclude that a target coming toward and below a shooter is a more difficult shot with a telescopic sight, and that Oswald was better hidden from the view of neighboring buildings by choosing a line of fire along Elm Street.
The second Failure Analysis defense argument was that a glycerin bullet could have been fired from the grassy knoll and not have exited on the left side of JFK’s head.
To illustrate the contention, Failure Analysis shot glycerin bullets into full, plastic, water bottles.
Yet, the mock jury was never told that glycerin bullets are almost completely unstable at the distance between JFK’s car and the grassy knoll.
Also, Failure Analysis did not establish whether a glycerin bullet could penetrate a human skull at the Dealey Plaza distance.
The FBI’s 1964 tests determined that in the first 30 seconds of operation, Zapruder’s camera ran between 18 to 18. frames per second, with the average at 18.
While that is a 3 percent variance, it is statistically unimportant when determining the reaction times of Kennedy and Connally to their bullet wounds.
This is essentially true of the other shots as well, but the tenth of a second is statistically insignificant and does not affect the overall calculation for Oswald’s shooting.
He believes he had called out to his daughter and that is why she turned and stopped.
However, the enhanced Zapruder film shows he was still taking photos of the motorcade, with his camera in front of his face, when Rosemary slowed and turned.
He had not even looked at her by the time she was staring toward the Depository.
There was, however, a crack on the inside of the windshield and a dent in the chrome stripping along the top of the windshield.
Experts concluded that if either of those had been struck directly by a nondeflected stray bullet, the shell would have penetrated the glass or the chrome.
Rather, they were damaged from fragments that came from the President’s head wound.
However, it is unlikely that the first shot hit it, since none of the witnesses recall the sound of a bullet striking metal.
Jack Franzen thought they saw fragments flying inside the car after the first shot.
Two other witnesses, motorcycle policeman Starvis Ellis and railroad worker Royce Skelton, saw something strike the pavement near JFK’s car, but thought it happened after the first shot.
John Lattimer performed shooting experiments with the same 6.5mm ammunition as that used by Oswald, he discovered that the lead core “often” separated from the jacket.
There was no radial damage, but even if that nerve had been hit, he wouldn’t have dropped it.
Baden says it is a “moot point,” since the Zapruder film never shows him dropping the hat.
The bullets were designed to pass through bodies and, if no major organs were struck, only to wound the victim.
That the 6.5mm Carcano ammunition was designed to do exactly what it did on the President and the Governor is often ignored.
Nichols shot a 6.5mm slug through four feet of ponderosa pine boards, and Lattimer put one through two feet of elm wood.
Six months later in his Warren Commission testimony, Shaw recalled the wound as only half that long, but agreed the bullet could have been tumbling.
In a March 1992 interview with the author, he remembered Connally’s injury as a small puncture wound.
At the time it would have to be planted, no one in the supposed conspiracy could know whether the bullets that had been fired at the motorcade were still inside the bodies of the victims.
If the conspirators planted a bullet on the stretcher, and then fragments belonging to three different bullets were found in Kennedy and Connally, the plot would have immediately exposed itself by planting a fourth bullet, since there was only time for Oswald to carefully fire three shots.
The X ray from the side looks like the fragment left there is on the bone, but that is because you have no sense of depth.
John Lattimer squeezed an equivalent amount of the lead core from a 6.5mm bullet and was able to create forty-one fragments the size that Dr.
Q-609, the section of the curbstone near James Tague that was struck by a bullet fragment; CE 569, a fragment recovered from the front floorboard of the presidential limousine; and CE 841, tiny particles scraped from the inside surface of the limousine’s windshield.
I’m Colorful” The interrogation of Oswald began soon after homicide captain Will Fritz arrived at the police station.
Oswald was taken to the third floor, to a ten-by-fourteen-foot room with glass windows covered by blinds.
There, he was questioned at length, at least five separate times, for a total of approximately twelve hours, between 2:30 P.M. on the day of the assassination, Friday, November 22, until just after 11:00 A.M. on Sunday, November 24.
Accounts of the questions and answers come from the more than twenty-five participants, including Dallas police detectives, FBI and Secret Service agents, postal inspectors, and assistant Dallas district attorneys.
Robert Oswald arrived later that evening, as did his mother, Marguerite.
He answered almost every question with another question, and never gave that much information.
The world’s press was just outside Fritz’s door, and when we walked him through the hallways, he would have been the first to yell if we had done something to him.
When Marina visited him, however, she felt his eyes betrayed his guilt.
She knew that if he had been innocent, he would have demanded his immediate freedom and complained to the highest officials.
His compliance, coupled with his assurance that he was not being mistreated, added to her feeling he had committed the crime.
But I knew him well enough to see he looked like the Cheshire cat that had just swallowed the canary.
He had the smug satisfaction of knowing that he had struck a bold stroke for his cause.
Among other things, he denied owning a rifle,9 and asserted he had never used an alias at his rooming house and had no knowledge of the name Hidell.
He said he had not taken a trip to Mexico City,11 was not involved in Fair Play for Cuba, and had not been undesirably discharged from the Marines.
According to Oswald, he never told Frazier he had curtain rods in any package he carried into the Depository.
When pressed in the interrogations, Oswald remained firm and even dismissed the seriousness of what had happened.
I drew up the Tippit charge first because there was no doubt what to write up on that one.
At that time, any district judge in Texas could grant a writ of habeas corpus for any prisoner in the entire state.
My fear was that once you were playing with an ideology like Communism, you didn’t know what was going to crawl out of the cracks.
And when David Johnston started to read him the charge, Oswald said, ‘This isn’t an arraignment.
And I told him in no uncertain terms to shut his mouth, and he was quiet after that.
The theory of the test is that gunpowder residue will react with the paraffin and turn blue on the cast.
Oswald’s hands proved positive; his cheek, however, was negative,19 which raised doubts about whether he had fired the rifle earlier that day.
Yet paraffin reacts to many items besides gunpowder—including tobacco, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, soil fertilizer, and various kinds of food.
Even the positive result on Oswald’s hands was not credible evidence against him, since so many oxidizing agents might have caused the reaction.
The Dallas police had never before even conducted a paraffin test on a shooter’s cheek.
More than three hundred reporters had camped out on the third floor of the jail, with cameras, cables, and wires forming a tangled mess.
Whenever a witness appeared for a lineup or Oswald was escorted through the hallway, the journalists surged forward, shouting questions and snapping photos.
The Dallas police department had never had such a notorious case and was not certain how to handle the press rush.
Chief Curry decided to make Oswald available for a press conference in a small basement assembly room.
Shortly after midnight he was brought into the room, which was packed with one hundred police and press.
A few reporters corrected Wade, pointing out that early press reports said it was Fair Play for Cuba.
Yet one person who spoke from the back row was not even a reporter, but instead a Dallas nightclub owner who had sneaked into the press conference.
Ruby was born Jacob Rubenstein, into an Orthodox Jewish home, the fifth of eight children, on March 25, 1911, in Chicago.
Joseph was often arrested on assault-and-battery and disorderly conduct charges, sometimes filed by Fanny.
At school, he had trouble making friends and thought his classmates often picked on him.
He frequently skipped classes to stay on the streets, and as a result flunked the third grade.
Although he later claimed to have finished the eighth grade, records show he completed only the sixth.
By the age of ten, he was scalping sporting tickets and hustling anything he could sell for a few dollars.
By the time he was eleven, in 1922, his mother referred him—because of “truancy and incorrigible at home”—to the Institute for Juvenile Research of the Jewish Social Service Bureau.
A psychiatric report found Jack boastful that “he could lick everyone and anybody in anything,” suffered from a hair-trigger temper, was egocentric, and was consumed by dual obsessions with sex and street gangs.
It concluded that the household atmosphere was so dreadful that his mother must have a “disturbance.
She might have been an emotionally and materially grossly deprived individual suffering from a severe character disorder—by the same token she could have been of low intellectual endowment or grossly disturbed emotionally to the point of being psychotic” .44 The following year, 1923, a juvenile court determined that Jack and two younger brothers and a sister were not receiving proper parental care, and they were placed into a foster home, where they remained for eighteen months.
Jack continued to run unchecked, with a reputation as an adept street fighter with a flash temper.
Nicknamed Sparky because of his volatile nature, he sometimes carried a stick that he used to beat opponents in fights.
He continued scraping a living from the streets, and while the police took note of him, he avoided any major legal problems.
However, several of his friends were well on their way to becoming full-time criminals.
In 1933, just before he turned twenty-two, Ruby moved to California with several of his Chicago friends, hoping to make more money.
His sister Eva joined him there the following year, after her divorce from her first husband.
In both cities, Ruby still had difficulty making a living—selling tip sheets for horse races at the local tracks, working as a singing waiter in Los Angeles, and selling newspaper subscriptions in San Francisco.
By 1937 his new start in California had fizzled, and he returned to Chicago.
In July, his mother, who had suffered from “a psychoneurosis with a marked anxiety state” for more than ten years, was committed by a court to a mental institution.
She was released three months later, and then readmitted at her family’s request in January 1938.55 Ruby, soon after his return, resumed ticket scalping and hustling small merchandise that he could quickly sell for a profit.
He also became involved in the Scrap Iron and Junk Handlers Union, Local 20467, working as a union organizer.
His friend and union financial secretary Leon Cooke was shot by another Ruby associate, union president John Martin, in December 1939.
In 1941, he started the Spartan Novelty Company with his brother Earl and two friends.
Operating out of inexpensive hotels, they sold everything from punchboards to commemorative plaques of Pearl Harbor and busts of Franklin Roosevelt.
The business quickly floundered, and from late 1942 to 1943, he worked as a salesman for Globe Auto Glass and Universal Sales Co.
As part of a group of local toughs, Ruby and his friends also frequently crashed and disrupted rallies of the pro-Nazi German-American Bund.
An incessant talker, Ruby bragged that he could hit harder than prizefighter Joe Louis.
He exercised at several gyms, and although not a big man , he maintained a reputation as one of the South Side’s toughest street brawlers.
He originally received a deferment in 1941, but in 1943 he was re-classified 1-A and drafted into the Army Air Force.
At the age of thirty-two, he was the oldest in his unit, and he ran some dice and card games, as well as peddling everything from chocolates to cigarettes.
Once, when a sergeant called him a “Jew bastard,” Ruby beat him mercilessly.
He had no disciplinary trouble while in the Army, achieved the rank of private first class, and was honorably discharged on February 21, 1946.67 He returned to Chicago but stayed there for just another year and a half, becoming a partner in Earl Products, a company started by his brothers.
Again, Jack was selling punchboards, key chains, bottle openers, light tools, and salt and pepper shakers.
But he quarreled with his brothers, and they eventually bought out his share for $14,000.69 He decided to follow his sister Eva to Dallas.
She had gone there in 1947 and, with money borrowed from her brothers, opened the Singapore Supper Club, which she ran as a nightclub.
Paul Roland Jones, who represented a group of Chicago criminals, had tried to bribe the Dallas sheriff, Steve Guthrie, in 1946.
Guthrie later claimed that Ruby’s name had come up in conversations with Jones a number of times.
However, a Dallas policeman present during some of the conversations contradicted Guthrie’s account and said he never heard Ruby’s name mentioned.
We talked to every hoodlum in Chicago after the assassination, and some of the top guys in the mob, my informants, I had close relationships with them—they didn’t even know who Ruby was.
During the next sixteen years in Dallas, he owned interests in six nightclubs, losing money in each venture, until he finally managed to turn a small profit at his last one, the Carousel, a strip club.
In 1952, however, his financial woes were so great that he had a mental breakdown and had to recuperate for several months.
He spoke alternately of killing one of his partners or ending his own life.
For a while he thought of returning to Chicago, but decided finally to remain in Dallas.
His money problems stayed with him, and by the mid-1950s Ruby had an excise-tax delinquency with the federal government and had to borrow $5,500 from his brother Sam to pay the debt.
Besides his nightclubs, he tried other businesses, ranging from selling sewing machine attachments to costume jewelry.
He became the manager for a black youngster dubbed “Little Daddy Nelson” and spent whatever money he had promoting the act.
At various times, he sold pizza crusts to Dallas restaurants, anti-arthritis preparations, twistboards, liquid vitamins, and English stainless steel razor blades.
He provided entertainment to Dallas hotels, promoted music records, tried to build and sell log cabins at a Texas lake resort, and even looked into selling jeeps to Cuba.
By the time he was arrested for shooting Oswald, he owed me over sixteen thousand dollars.
Tony Zoppi was a prominent entertainment reporter for the Dallas Morning News and knew Ruby well.
They were fellows always trying to make a name for themselves, always hustling something.
He was a hanger-on who was very impressed by famous people, impressed by ‘class,’ and with anybody that he thought had it.
He knew a tremendous number of people in Dallas, but he didn’t have many friends.
Oh, he wanted friends, but he didn’t have the capacity to make and hold them.
And no matter how hard he tried—and he did try hard to have people like him—he just wasn’t going to get very far in Dallas.
Although his employees generally liked him and found him generous if they were in need, they readily acknowledged he had a volatile and vicious temper.
He beat one of his musicians with brass knuckles, cracked another’s head with a black-jack, knocked another’s teeth out, and put the club’s handyman in the hospital with a severe beating.
To avoid paying the club’s cigarette girl $50 in back wages, he threatened to throw her down the stairs unless she relented in her claim.
He threatened a stand-upcomedian, Robert McEwan, after McEwan had told several “inoffensive Jewish jokes” in his act, and thereafter enforced a strict ban on any Jewish remarks.
On at least twenty-five occasions he badly beat them using either his fists or a blackjack, or else pistol whipped them.
He often ended his fights by throwing the victim down the Carousel’s stairs.
He was not above attacking people from behind, kicking men in the groin or face once he had knocked them to the floor, or even striking women.
Once when a patron pulled a gun on him, Ruby disarmed him, beat him almost to death, put the gun back into the man’s pocket, and then hurled him down the stairs.
Once, a cabdriver came into the club and asked where a patron was who had refused to pay the taxi fare.
He was often malicious, forcing beaten victims to crawl out of the club on hands and knees.
Once he ran after another nightclub owner, Joe Bonds, through a nearby alleyway, shooting at him several times but missing.
Patricia Birch, who had danced for him under the stage name Penny Dollar, recalled he was a fitness fanatic who frequently came into the girls’ dressing room without his shirt, hit his chest like a gorilla, and asked if they thought he had a good build.
At a party, she witnessed him take off his clothes and roll around the floor naked.
Ruby occasionally telephoned some of his dancers and read them obscene poetry or described in detail his private parts.
Sometimes, he warmly welcomed guests to his club, and on other nights, for no apparent reason, told the same guests they were not wanted and could not enter the club.
During conversations, he sometimes switched in the middle of a sentence to a completely different topic, with no explanation.3* According to his star dancer, Jada, Ruby was “impossible, totally unpredictable.
William Serur knew Ruby for over ten years and watched him change for the worse.
He went out of his way to encourage Dallas policemen to visit his clubs, giving them reduced rates and free drinks.
He befriended dozens of them, attended the funeral of one killed in the line of duty, and staged a benefit for the widow of another.
Once he jumped in and helped two Dallas policemen who were being beaten by a group of men.1* “They dropped by to say hello and screen the crowd,” says Bill Alexander, “and it was better than having a bunch of hoodlums there.
Remember, Ruby catered to tourists, and nobody was going to get rolled at his place with the type of police contacts he had.
One of his earliest Dallas friends was Paul Roland Jones, who was convicted of narcotics trafficking and for attempting to bribe the Dallas sheriff.
One of Ruby’s early partners in the Vegas club, Joe Bonds, had a criminal record.
He kept close associations to known gamblers, including a good friend, Lewis McWillie.4* “It was the nature of his business,” says Bill Alexander.
Although there were rumors Ruby dealt in narcotics or even in prostitution, there is no firm evidence that he did anything more than socialize with some people involved in those vices.
Alexander told the author, “The police had a pretty good idea of what happened at Ruby’s club, and there was no dope and he certainly didn’t allow the girls to do anything illegal from the club, because that would have cost him his license.
During fourteen years, he was arrested nine times, for charges ranging from disturbing the peace to assault to carrying concealed weapons.
The Texas Liquor Control Board also frequently suspended his license for violations, primarily for allowing obscene stage shows or for serving liquor after hours.
His legal difficulties, and his associations with criminals, have been the basis of much speculation that Ruby was part of the mafia, and in particular that his killing of Oswald was ordered by the mob to silence the President’s assassin.
The word was on the street that you couldn’t trust him because he was telling the cops everything.
He was a real talker, a fellow who would talk your ear off if he had the chance.
You have to be crazy to think anybody would have trusted Ruby to be part of the mob.
We knew who the criminals were in Dallas back then, and to say Ruby was part of organized crime is just bullshit.
It’s guilt by association, that A knew B, and Ruby knew B back in 1950, so he must have known A, and that must be the link to the conspiracy.
Ruby’s main competition was from the Theater and Colony clubs, owned by two brothers, Abe and Barney Weinstein.
At first, Ruby tried to compete with the Weinsteins’ amateur nights, but soon he complained to AGVA that the union’s constitution prohibited professional and amateur entertainers from working together, and he demanded the Weinsteins be stopped.
AGVA was riddled with corruption and compromised by its mob connections.
Tony Zoppi believes the Weinsteins received preferential treatment because they bribed union officials.
Ruby’s frustration over the Weinsteins’ use of amateur nights peaked during the summer and fall of 1963.
It coincided with a series of AGVA complaints about his Carousel Club as well as a contractual dispute he had with his star stripper, Jada, whom he had signed in New Orleans and brought back to Dallas.
He had hired her in the summer, hoping she could turn around his diminishing fortunes, but fired her by the end of October.
In addition to the problems with Jada, he also went through three masters of ceremonies at the same time.
He had a growing tax delinquency totaling more than $40,000.126 Frustrated that AGVA refused to enforce any regulations against the Weinsteins, Ruby accelerated his campaign to compel some union action.
He had earlier warned an AGVA official, Irvin Mazzei, that he could use “labor connections in Chicago” to pressure the union.
In front of an FBI agent, he physically threatened Vincent Lee, another AGVA official.
He called his brother Earl and asked for names of people who could be helpful.
The House Select Committee did an extensive computer analysis of Ruby’s five home and business telephone numbers for all of 1963.
The Committee checked each number he telephoned, as well as the records of those he called, and determined that most of the increases in his long-distance bill were due to his AGVA problems.
But three of those calls, said the Select Committee, raised the possibility that they might be of significance in the Kennedy case.
However, the author’s investigation reveals the calls were not as mysterious as the Select Committee assumed.
The first was to Chicago bail bondsman Irwin Weiner, who often represented mob figures.
Weiner had refused to cooperate with the FBI in its Warren Commission investigation.
The second call was to a trailer park in New Orleans, to the office of Nofio Pecora, a lieutenant to New Orleans godfather Carlos Marcello.
This October 30, 1963, call worried the committee since it appeared to be a Ruby contact with a high-ranking aide to Marcello less than a month before the assassination.
Harold Tannenbaum, a fellow nightclub owner and friend of Ruby’s, lived in that trailer park, the Tropical Court Tourist Park.
Tannenbaum had arranged the deal that allowed Ruby to bring Jada from New Orleans to Dallas, and Ruby often called him at his trailer-park home and his French Quarter nightclub to complain about his contractual problems with the temperamental dancer.
In 1978, Pecora told the Select Committee that he did not know Ruby, nor did he remember ever speaking to him.
However, Pecora, who ran the trailer park from his one-man office, admitted he occasionally took a message for someone in the park, but did not remember doing so for Ruby.
There is no way to know if Ruby first telephoned Tannenbaum’s home, since if no one was there, there would be no toll record.
Within the hour, Tannenbaum had apparently received the message from Pecora and returned Ruby’s call, collect, for twenty-one minutes.
The third call that stumped the Select Committee actually comprised three calls, two on November 7, and one on November 8, all to Robert “Barney” Baker, an aide to Teamster boss Jimmy Hoffa.
The committee was concerned since Hoffa had such a well-known hatred for both John and Robert Kennedy.
However, Baker and Ruby did not know each other before Ruby called him on November 7, 1963.
He told the agents that on November 7, Ruby had telephoned, but Baker was not in and his wife had taken a number in Dallas.
Ruby introduced himself, explained his labor-union problems with his club, and sought Baker’s assistance.
Baker did not help, nor did he remember the last call the following day.
What is critical is that at the time he spoke to the FBI and talked about Ruby’s AGVA problems, it was independent of knowing that Ruby had also told the police that the conversations were about union problems.
Moreover, Baker, who thought the FBI tapped his phone lines reportedly challenged the agents to check their tapes and listen to the conversation if they had any doubts.
Unfortunately, there apparently was no surveillance of his line.7* Despite Ruby’s intervention with the AGVA board and his pleas to organized-crime figures, no one came to his aid.
His dispute with AGVA was still unresolved the weekend the President was assassinated.
However, the Dallas police department’s policy in 1963 was not to record interrogations.
We had Miranda before the Supreme Court handed it down for the rest of the country.
We had to inform him that he did not have to make any statement, and that any he did make had to be voluntary, witnessed, reduced to writing, and could be used against him.
So our questions for him were strictly to get information, but there was no way they could be used in court.
Even if we gave him the proper warning, and then reduced his statement to writing, if he then refused to sign it in the presence of a witness, it was useless.
He could always say the statement was induced by threats, fraud, or coercion.
On a later FBI inventory of items taken from the Paine household, the Minox camera was listed as a light meter.
Critics charged that the government was covering up evidence of intelligence equipment issued to Oswald.
The author was the first person to ask Paine about the camera and to show him copies of pictures from the film that had been confiscated and developed.
She has lived in Texas since the assassination and has been bombarded by the buffs for nearly three decades.
Marina has been susceptible in the past to the arguments of conspiracy buffs, even the most bizarre ones.
In the summer of 1980 she joined the successful legal effort of British author Michael Eddowes to exhume her husband’s body, under the belief that the man in the grave was actually a Soviet KGB agent who had impersonated the real Oswald, even fooling his mother and brothers.
On October 4, 1981, four forensic pathologists at Dallas’s Baylor Medical Center used dental and medical records to confirm the exhumed corpse was that of Lee Oswald.
The following day, Saturday, November 23, H Louis Nichols, president of the Dallas Bar Association, also visited Oswald.
Ruth did call, but Abt was not at home, and thereby missed the opportunity to represent the accused presidential assassin.
Oswald was arraigned on the charge of killing the President at 1:30 A.M. on Saturday.
According to Alexander, Molina was a leftist who was on the Dallas police’s intelligence watch list, and it was originally thought he might be connected to Oswald.
Shortly after the Inquirer incident, Alexander and two local reporters concocted a story that Oswald had been FBI informer S-179 and had been paid $200 a month.
Lonnie Hudkins, one of the reporters, printed the story, attributing it to an unidentified source.
The fallout was so great that the Warren Commission held a January 22, 1964, executive session to discuss the issue.
Three others were negative on the firing hand and positive on the nonfiring hand.
Only two men were positive on their firing hand and negative on the other.
In another test, the FBI took twenty people who had not fired a gun and tested both their hands.
Birth records were not officially kept in Chicago prior to 1915, and among school records, driver’s licenses, and arrest records, there were six different dates, ranging from March to June 1911.
March 25 is used by the author since it is the date most often given by Ruby himself in his adult life.
Ruby was so upset over the death of his friend that he later adopted the middle name Leon.
Witnesses might have confused Harry Rubenstein, a convicted felon who ran several clubs in Chicago, with Jack.
Once after the war, he returned from downtown Chicago with blood all over one of his good suits.
But Zoppi knew Ruby as well as anyone in Dallas, and his characterizations of the nightclub owner are substantiated by many others.
The rumors persisted because Ruby never married and did have several male roommates, the last of which was George Senator.
Senator referred to Ruby as “my boyfriend,” but said it was only a sign of friendship.
Warren Commission lawyer Burt Griffin, who researched the Ruby issues for the Commission, told the author, “I’m not sure if Senator was honest with us about his relationship with Ruby.
His Dallas rabbi, Hillel Silverman, said Ruby was very shallow intellectually and that he would not know the difference between a Communist philosophy and a totalitarian regime.
Also from Chicago, he had been Ruby’s partner in the Vegas Club in 1953, but their relationship ended when Bonds was sentenced to jail for sodomizing a fifteen-year-old girl.
Ruby remained a part owner of the Vegas and considered it his second club.
At the club, there were rumors that Ruby had an unnatural relationship with the dogs, something he vehemently denied on several occasions.
One of his Chicago friends, Harry Goldbaum, last visited Ruby in August 1963.
They spent an hour in the Carousel’s rear office, where Ruby was taking care of three small dogs for a friend.
However, statements and interviews with both former Dallas policemen and Ruby’s employees indicate that he was acquainted with several hundred.
Between April to October of that year, he met with Agent Charles Flynn eight times, giving information about thefts and similar offenses.
In November, Flynn recommended that no further attempt be made to develop Ruby as a PCI, potential criminal informant, since his information was essentially useless.
Ruby told the Warren Commission he visited McWillie in Havana for one week in August 1959.
The House Select Committee found Ruby made at least two, and probably three, trips to Havana, the longest being for a month and the shortest for one day.
He bought two pistols for McWillie, and may have acted as a courier to bring some money out of Havana.
Ruby always maintained his time in Cuba was for pleasure and not for business.
However, a British journalist later claimed that Ruby met Santo Trafficante in 1959, then a prisoner at a Cuban jail.
Trafficante, later the mafia don of Tampa, denied under oath that he had ever met Ruby, and no one at the prison confirmed the story.
Robert Ray McKeown, a convicted Texas gun runner, later said that Ruby had contacted him, representing Las Vegas interests that wanted the release of three prisoners in Cuba, including Trafficante, and that Ruby offered $25,000 for a letter of introduction to Castro.
However, the telephone calls are not evidence of a conspiracy to kill JFK, since most of the calls were made before the President’s trip to Dallas was even announced, much less before the motorcade route was set.
Even if there was a plot to kill Kennedy and then silence Oswald, it is difficult to imagine that Oswald would have been allowed to get away from the shooting alive.
The three days during which he was interrogated was more than enough time for him to expose the conspiracy.
If he was really a patsy who did not know anything, there was no reason to kill him.
The conspirators could not know where Oswald would be arrested or whether state or federal authorities would have jurisdiction over him.
The only way that Ruby was useful to a conspiracy was to penetrate the police security at the local Dallas jail.
But that Oswald would be captured and placed there was only one of many things that could have happened to him.
Therefore, conspiring with Ruby in September and October made no practical sense.
If he was really given a mafia assignment to kill Oswald, his telephone activity would likely have increased from the afternoon of the assassination until the day Oswald was killed.
But Ruby’s long-distance calls were all made much earlier, not during the assassination weekend.
It is important to follow Ruby carefully to discover whether there is any evidence of a conspiracy.
There, he talked to Max Rudberg about protecting himself from Jada’s pending breach-of-contract lawsuit.
When he left Rudberg, he spent two hours with Connie Trammel, a young woman he had met several months earlier, who was job hunting in Dallas.
Near the end of his time with Trammel, about 1:00, he stopped at the Merchants State Bank and paid the rent for the Carousel.
Bill Alexander and spoke to him about bad checks that a friend had recently passed while visiting Dallas.
After that, he telephoned John Newman, a salesman in the advertising department of the Dallas Morning News, and talked to him about some copy for the weekend ads he wanted to run for the Carousel and Vegas clubs.
Sometime on Thursday he also telephoned a local lawyer who was handling his federal excise-tax problem.
Before heading to the Carousel, Ruby ran into several people on the street.
He gave some of them passes to the club, and tried to make a date with a woman, so he could persuade her to work for him.
The Carousel opened in the late afternoon and closed officially at midnight , seven days a week.
However, she was recuperating from abdominal surgery, and Ruby had to watch both clubs.
He stayed at the Carousel for over four hours and then drove Curtis LaVerne Crafard, known as Larry, a young drifter who was living at the club and acting as its handyman, to the Vegas at 7:30 that evening.
Crafard had agreed to help Ruby oversee the Vegas while Eva convalesced.
Ruby then returned to the Carousel, where he spoke for nearly an hour with Lawrence Meyers, a Chicago sales manager for a diversified line of consumer goods, who was visiting Dallas.
Meyers, who had first met Ruby at the Carousel four years earlier, was a steady customer during his visits to Dallas.
Ruby complained about his contractual dispute with Jada as well as the Weinsteins’ amateur nights and how they were crippling his business.
Shortly before midnight he drove to the Bon Vivant room at the Cabana Hotel, where he joined his Chicago friend Meyers, Meyers’ brother, Eddie, and sister-in-law, Thelma.
When Ruby found out that Eddie Meyers worked for Pepsi-Cola, he spent the conversation trying to interest him in his twist-board product.
It was a $3.95 exercise/diet gimmick composed of a small wooden platform set on ball bearings, on which the user twisted and rotated.
But Myers was not interested and Ruby left the Cabana Hotel by 12:30 A.M. and returned to the Carousel to get the night’s receipts.
By 2:30 A.M., he went to his usual early-morning hangout, the Lucas B&B Restaurant, next door to the Vegas.
On Friday, November 22, Ruby was up by 9:30 and at the Dallas Morning News shortly before 11:00, in order to place his regular weekend advertisements for his two nightclubs.
The President is going to be here today,” and spoke to the other about some diet pills he had recommended.
He then stopped by the office of Tony Zoppi, the newspaper’s entertainment reporter, but he was not in.
Ruby next went to the second-floor advertising department, where he met with Don Campbell, the sales agent he had seen at the Cabana Hotel the night before.
Before 12:40, John Newman, another advertising-department employee, observed Ruby sitting at the same desk where Campbell had left him.
Seth Kantor, a respected journalist and member of the Washington press corps covering the President’s trip to Texas, was at Parkland Hospital after the assassination.
He knew Ruby and had worked for the Dallas Times Herald before moving to Washington.
Kantor was running up some stairs when he felt someone tug at his suit coat.
Ruby later denied to the FBI and the Warren Commission that he had ever been at Parkland that day.
None of the many press photos or television films shot of Parkland show him in the crowd.
Although he knew many Dallas policemen and reporters, no one saw him except Kantor.
However, the House Select Committee determined that Kantor “probably was not” mistaken.
Kantor claimed he saw Ruby between 1:30 and 2:00.42 Newman said Ruby left the News no later than 1:30.43 News advertising salesman Richard Saunders thought he left the newspaper around 1:10 P.M.44 According to the Warren Commission, Ruby arrived at the Carousel Club by 1:45, leaving too little time for him to stop by the hospital.
Actually, Armstrong said that Ruby arrived about five minutes after he heard the radio announcement that the President was dead.
That would have placed his arrival at the Carousel shortly before 2:00.
The club’s phone records show a call to Chicago, to his sister Eileen, at 2:05.48† Ruby not only had the time to stop briefly by Parkland , but had reason to lie about being there, in the same way he later lied about the number of times he was at the jail near Oswald over the weekend.
Visiting Parkland on Sunday, hanging out at the jail over the weekend, might be natural for a fellow like Ruby.
He was like horse-shit, all over the place, wherever anything exciting was happening.
That’s why the President’s assassination and all the follow-up activity at the jail with Oswald and the press attracted Jack like a magnet.
Eileen told him to stay in Dallas and that she would call him later that night.
All those who saw or spoke to him remember his grief was visible and real.
Gladys Craddock, who worked for him as a hostess, said he had great admiration for the Kennedy family.
Wynn Warner, a musician who had worked for Jack, said the President’s murder shattered his world, especially since it happened in Dallas.
It was almost as if the assassination had triggered an emotional collapse for Ruby, who was already under tremendous business pressure.
His stability also might have been adversely affected by his severe dieting, aided by an appetite suppressant, Preludin, an “upper,” which exacerbated his volatile temperament.
Even Ruby later admitted it was a “stimulus to give me an emotional feeling …”57 “He was heartbroken,” recalled his friend Ralph Paul. “ very bad emotionally, and said, ‘I can’t believe it.
Paul informed him that he did not intend to close his restaurant and that Ruby’s competition, the Weinsteins, would probably not close.
Though he was “crying pretty bad,” he called an ex-girlfriend he had not dated in eleven years, Alice Nichols, to express his shock.
Alex Gruber was a boyhood friend living in Los Angeles, and Ruby telephoned him.
Although Gruber felt Ruby was emotionally distraught and needed to talk, the conversation was brief since Jack broke down sobbing and had to hang up.
He stopped by the Ritz Delicatessen, only two blocks from the Carousel, and then went to the club and told Crafard to prepare a sign saying it was closed.
He called the News to cancel his advertisements, but they had already reserved the space for him, so he changed the ads to say the clubs were closed.
But his sister Eva witnessed the real depth of his anguish, and unwittingly contributed to it.
He put in great Jewish men in office …”68 She told her brother that Oswald was a “barbarian,” and said, “That lousy Commie.
He did make the remark, he said, ‘I never felt so bad in my life, even when Ma and Pa died.
But first, he apparently stopped by the Dallas police headquarters—although he told the Warren Commission he was not there Friday night before 11:15 P.M., and it believed him.
At least five witnesses, police and reporters who knew him, reported seeing Ruby on the third floor of the headquarters sometime between 6:00 and 9:00 P.M.74 John Rutledge, the night police reporter for the Dallas Morning News, knew Ruby.
He saw him step off the elevator, hunched between two out-of-state reporters with press identifications on their coats.
The next time Rutledge saw him, he was standing outside room 317, where Oswald was being interrogated, and “he was explaining to members of the out-of-state press who everybody was that came in and out of that door.
He saw him approach the door to the office where Oswald was being interrogated and start to open it.
His home telephone records show that, among others, he called his friend Ralph Paul, his brother Hyman, and two sisters, Marion and Ann, about 9:00 P.M.81 Hyman said Jack was so disturbed about what happened in Dallas that he talked about selling his business and returning to Chicago.
While he waited for the sandwiches, he talked to a group of students at the deli, lamenting the President’s death, saying the assassination was very bad for Dallas and proudly telling them he had closed his clubs out of respect.
When he left the deli, he hoped to stop by KLIF radio, his personal favorite, and drop off some food, but he did not have the station’s private night-line number.
He then drove to police headquarters, past several nightclubs, and noticed most were open.
Ruby saw several detectives he knew, shouted to them, and they helped him get inside.
Eberhardt, who knew Ruby and had been at his club, was in the burglary-and-theft section when Jack “stuck his head in our door and hollered at us.
Ruby told them about the sandwiches he had brought, and then the discussion switched to the assassination.
He told the detectives “how terrible it was for it to happen in the city.
He noticed Ruby in the right-hand corner, with a notebook and pencil in his hand.
Ruby thought Oswald was smirking at his police guards, and in only a few minutes he was convinced that Oswald was guilty.
When the press conference finished, Ruby walked outside the room and saw Dallas district attorney Henry Wade.
In a few minutes he saw that Pappas had an open telephone line and was trying to get Henry Wade’s attention.
Ruby took it upon himself to interrupt Wade’s conversation with several other men, and took the district attorney over to Pappas for the telephone interview.
He also asked if the station wanted a live interview with district attorney Wade.
Wade said Oswald was not insane and that the President’s murder was premeditated.
After that interview, Knight walked the four blocks back to KLIF, and Ruby drove there.
He talked briefly to Knight and several other employees before the 2:00 A.M. newscast.
Again, he expressed his sadness over the assassination, and said he was glad the evidence was mounting against Oswald, whom he bragged he had personally seen.
Although it was approaching 2:30 in the morning, Ruby decided to drive to the Dallas Times Herald.
Harry Olsen was a Dallas policeman, and Kay Coleman was a stripper who worked at the Carousel under the stage name Kathy Kay.
He often visited the Herald at that early morning hour in order to check on his ads for the following day.
He talked to several employees, and they remembered him as “pretty shaken up” about the assassination, but also excited over his involvement with Henry Wade and having seen Oswald.
At one point, shaking the newspaper emphatically in the air, he said, “Poor Mrs.
He wondered whether there was a connection between that sign and the Weissman advertisement.
When he arrived at his apartment, “I very impatiently awakened George Senator,” Ruby remembered.
He was moody; and the first thing come out of his mouth is … ‘Gee, his poor children and Mrs.
He made Senator get dressed and called Larry Crafard, who was sleeping at the Carousel Club, and ordered him to “get that Polaroid with the flashbulbs and meet me downstairs.
He had earlier failed to find Weissman in the phone book, which encouraged his belief that the name was invented in order to blame Jews for the events in Dallas.
It was after 5:30 A.M. when they left the post office and drove to the Southland Hotel’s coffee shop.
There, a copy of Friday’s Dallas Morning News was on the counter, and Ruby picked it up and again saw the Weissman advertisement.
He kept rereading the ad and mumbling that he could not understand why someone would publish such an insulting tirade against the President.
Senator felt Ruby, who had a strange and abnormal stare, was disturbed in a way he had never before seen.
At 8:30, Crafard woke Ruby by telephoning to say there was no canned food for the dogs at the Carousel.
Crafard had been at the Carousel for nearly six weeks, but Ruby’s odd behavior the night before, and now this vicious verbal attack, was too much for the youngster.
Later that morning, around 11:00, he took $5 from the club’s cash register and left Dallas, hitchhiking back to his sister in Michigan.
Crafard, a drifter who did not even know where his wife and two children lived, admitted to the Warren Commission that he had done similar things in the past.
He told only the garage attendant next to the club that he was leaving.
He said no, and when he spoke of the “terrible” assassination, “his voice was shaking …”132 He drove by the Carousel.
At the Nichols Parking Garage next door, at about 1:30 P.M., he told Tom Brown, an attendant, to notify any of his acquaintances who stopped by that the Carousel would stay closed for the weekend.
Near 2:00, he was spotted there by Frank Bellocchio, the owner of a jewelry firm and a Ruby acquaintance for almost eight years.4* Bellocchio was in a discussion with a friend, in which he blamed Dallas for the assassination, when Ruby got involved.
Ruby went into a tirade about the ad being the work of radical groups trying to “stir up anti-Jewish feelings,” claiming Weissman was fictitious and that the ad was dangerous since Jews in Dallas might be blamed for the assassination.
He produced two of his IMPEACH EARL WARREN photos, and when Bellocchio asked for one, he refused since he said it was part of a “scoop” he was working on.
Harkness saw him near a large crowd that had gathered for a scheduled transfer of Oswald at 4:00 P.M.137* Ruby drove back toward the Carousel and stopped at the Nichols garage to check if he had any messages.
Garnett Hallmark, the garage’s general manager, spoke to Ruby, who told him he was “acting like a reporter,” and then got on the phone in the cashier’s office.
He called KLIF radio station twice within a few minutes and spoke both times to Ken Dowe, a news announcer.
As far as Jack was concerned, he was now officially representing KLIF as a reporter.
Ruby then went to Dealey Plaza, where he looked at the many memorial wreaths that had been left overnight.
As he walked around the plaza, he ran into an acquaintance, Wes Wise, a newsman from KRLD radio.
It was nearly 3:30 when Ruby pulled up in his 1960 white Oldsmobile to policeman James Chaney, who was acquainted with him.
Ruby asked if the two men standing several hundred feet away were Chief Curry and Captain Fritz.
When he left Dealey Plaza, it appears Ruby once more went to the third floor of the police headquarters, expecting an Oswald transfer that never took place.
He later denied being there Saturday because, again, he probably feared it might be interpreted as evidence of premeditation.
Earlier in the day, Ruby had put his head through the open window of a remote television truck for NBC affiliate WBAP, and without asking anyone’s permission began watching the monitors that showed the activity on the third floor of the jail.
Later in the afternoon they saw him on their monitors wandering the third floor of police headquarters and approaching Wade in an office, from which regular reporters were barred.
Only the next day, after Oswald was shot, did the van’s reporters learn “the creep” was Ruby.
Philippe Labro, a reporter for France-Soir, a daily French newspaper, ran into Ruby, who asked who he was and what he did.
When Labro told him, Ruby’s response was, “Ooh la la Folies-Bergère,” which Labro was convinced was the only French he knew.
Another French correspondent, François Pelou, saw him later hand out sandwiches to some of the press.
He was aggressive in getting the reporters’ attention, pulling the sleeves of some and slapping others on the back or arms.
As soon as you get a chance, I want all of you boys to come over to my place, the one downtown here is more convenient, and have a drink on me.
Kaufman said Ruby “rambled,” and that he was “upset” about the effects on the Dallas Jewish community.
Jack told him that the ad’s black border was a tipoff that those who placed it knew about the assassination, and Ruby assured Kaufman he was helping the police get to the bottom of the Weissman matter.
Ruby left the headquarters just before 6:00 P.M., the same time Chief Curry told the press they expected to transfer Oswald at 10:00 A.M. the next day.
Using her telephone, he made several calls to local acquaintances, and in each complained about the Earl Warren sign and that competing nightclubs had stayed open.
Russ Knight at KLIF received a brief call from him, and “he asked me who Earl Warren was …”157* By 9:30 Ruby had returned to his apartment.
There, he received a call from one of his strippers, Karen Bennett Carlin, whose stage name was Little Lynn.
She had driven into Dallas from Fort Worth with her husband and wondered if the Carousel was going to open over the weekend, because she needed money.
When he had not arrived by 10:30, Carlin’s husband, Bruce, again telephoned the apartment, and emphasized they needed money for rent and groceries.
On this occasion, Ruby spoke to the attendant at the Nichols garage, Huey Reeves, and persuaded him to lend the Carlins $5 so they could at least return to Fort Worth, and told Carlin to call him the next day about getting more money.9* Ruby telephoned Eva complaining about his deteriorating mood.
He next telephoned Lawrence Meyers, the Chicago friend he had seen Thursday night.
Ruby complained about the “terrible, terrible thing,” and then began talking about Mrs.
Shortly after speaking to Meyers, Ruby drove back to his sister’s apartment.
From there he telephoned Ralph Paul’s Bullpen restaurant and spoke to his close friend.
Paul remembered that Eva was crying in the background and that Ruby told him he had driven around the city to check on his competitors and none of them were doing any business.
Outside the Carousel, he briefly said hello to Harry Olsen and Kay Coleman, the couple he had spoken to for an hour late the previous night.
Inside the club, he made several brief calls to Ralph Paul and made a two-minute call to Breck Wall, a friend and entertainer who had gone to Galveston when his Dallas show had suspended its performances because of the assassination.
Wall was also the newly elected president of the Dallas council of AGVA, the union with which Ruby was having difficulties.
They talked about the assassination, and Norton expressed strong feelings.
He complained he was tired and, only fifteen minutes after arriving, left to return to his apartment.
Jack telephoned Eva at 12:45 to see how she was feeling and then went to bed himself by 1:30.171 On Sunday, Mrs.
Elnora Pitts, Ruby’s cleaning lady, called between 8:30 and 9:00 A.M., waking him up.
He offered to go downtown and send it to her by Western Union, but told her it would “take a little while to get dressed.
His route downtown took him past Dealey Plaza, where he saw the many new wreaths left overnight in memory of the President.
As he drove near the jail, he noticed a large crowd and assumed Oswald had already been transferred.
At the police station, if everything had gone according to plan, Oswald would have been moved to the sheriff’s custody nearly an hour earlier.
Guards were posted at the two driveway ramps, and at the five doorways into the garage.
Then the press was allowed to set up to film the transfer.0* A crowd of several hundred had gathered before 10:00, in front of the jail, to watch the event.
However, the transfer had undergone a series of last-second changes and delays.
Although they had received anonymous telephone threats on Oswald’s life, the police had considered and rejected a secret nighttime transfer.
Their plans stayed in a state of flux as they decided on the best compromise between security and press access.
Only an hour and a half before the planned move, the police decided to make the arrangements themselves, instead of the usual policy of allowing the sheriff’s department to take responsibility.
An hour before the transfer, Fritz decided to bring Oswald through the basement, so the press could have more room to take pictures.
The original plan to transfer Oswald in an armored truck went awry when two armored vehicles arrived that were unusable.
One was too small to hold guards, and the other was too tall to fit under the jail’s eight-foot driveway clearance.
Captain Fritz decided to use the larger armored truck as a decoy and move Oswald in an unmarked police car.
One of the biggest delays to the scheduled transfer was caused by the arrival of postal inspector Harry Holmes for a final interrogation.
I got to church and I said, ‘You get out, I am going down and see if I can do something for Captain Fritz.
Then he patiently waited in line while another customer completed her business.
It was impossible for him to know that Oswald had not been transferred, since there was no television or radio at the Western Union office.
When he got to the counter, the cost for sending the moneygram totaled $26.87.
He handed over $30 and waited for his change while the clerk finished filling out the forms and then time-stamped the documents.
Ruby’s receipt was stamped 11:17.192* When he left Western Union, he was less than two hundred steps from the entrance to police headquarters.
On the third floor of the headquarters, police had informed Oswald shortly after 11:00 A.M. that they would immediately take him downstairs and move him to the sheriffs jail.
Captain Fritz sent for some sweaters, and when they were brought to him, he put on a beige one, and then changed his mind and switched to a black sweater.
If Oswald had not decided at the last moment to get a sweater, he would have left the jail almost five minutes earlier, while Ruby was still inside the Western Union office.
Now, Ruby walked the one block along Main Street and stopped near the eight-foot-wide rampway.
Rio Pierce drove a black car up the Main Street ramp as part of the decoy plan.
That ramp was normally a one-way entrance into headquarters, but Pierce had to use it as an exit since the large armored truck that was originally scheduled to move Oswald was blocking the Commerce Street ramp.
Officer Roy Vaughn stepped away from the center of the rampway, into the middle of Main Street, to stop the traffic so Pierce could safely exit.
He walked down the ramp and arrived at the back of a crowd of police and press only seconds before Oswald was brought past.
If the car that was scheduled to move Oswald had been in its correct position at the bottom of the ramp, it would have blocked Ruby from gaining access.5† Oswald was taken downstairs from the third floor to the basement.
Cramped inside the garage confines were almost thirty reporters and seventy police.
As Oswald walked into the garage, the large clock on the wall turned to 11:21.196 Jimmy Turner, a television director at WBAP, was waiting for Oswald to come out the door when he saw a man walking at the bottom of the Main Street ramp.
He noticed Ruby’s dark suit and hat, and later said the man on the ramp was the same one who shot Oswald.
When Turner first saw Ruby at the ramp, it was only thirty seconds before the shooting.
It cut off the main intestinal artery, and the aorta, and the body’s main vein, as well as breaking up the right kidney.
When they got to the third floor, Ruby, who was excited from the shooting, talked to anybody who came by.
Ruby told Sorrels “he had been to the Western Union office to send a telegram, and that he guessed he had worked himself into a state of insanity, where he had to do it.
He thought he was going to go through the booking, and then he would be released.
Jack actually thought he might come out of this as a hero of sorts, getting the acknowledgment he always wanted in Dallas.
While in jail, Ruby often granted press interviews, and talked to police and investigators and with others.
Eva realized that shooting Oswald was a momentary explosion caused by his violent temper.
In Texas, there was a crime called murder without malice, equivalent to manslaughter in most states.
However, Belli gambled that he could acquit him completely and argued that Ruby’s family had a history of mental illness and that he was insane when he shot Oswald.
He came down here thinking he was going to teach us ‘hicks’ in Texas a lesson.
Well, he put on this god-awful defense, and day by day Jack melted—he just looked worse and worse.
Instead of being a hero, Belli was bringing out all this stuff about Jack’s mother in an insane asylum and how Jack himself was sick.
He just wanted to get on the stand and say, ‘I shot the guy because he killed my President,’ but Belli hacked away at his family in public.
After his arrest, there had been a steady mental deterioration and the conviction hastened his decline.
The very item that kicked off his original interest on the weekend of the assassination, the Weissman advertisement, and his belief that it could have been published to embarrass Jews, grew into an obsession.
He often told her to kill herself because “he thinks they are going to kill out all the Jews and he has made remarks that 25 million Jews have been slaughtered, on the floor below, in the jail.
Once, he tried to split his skull by pounding his head against the wall.
Once he tried hanging, and once he tried to electrocute himself with a light fixture.
He kept a picture of President Kennedy in his cell and kissed it during the day.
Ruby was in this state of mind when the Warren Commission interviewed him on June 7, 1964.
During the course of the questioning he pleaded to take a polygraph to prove “I am as innocent regarding any conspiracy as any of you gentlemen in this room.
Conspiracy theorists have focused on the fact that Ruby asked nine times to be taken to Washington.
They assert that he could not tell the truth about some secret conspiracy to kill JFK while he was in Texas.
When Ruby’s entire testimony is read, however, it is evident his pleas were exactly the opposite, a desire to be taken to Washington to vindicate himself of the rumors that he was part of a conspiracy.
Ruby thought his life was in danger, as part of an extermination program against Jews, primarily undertaken by the John Birch Society.
The “great conspiracy” he spoke about was his belief that his lawyers and the district attorney had plotted to portray him as insane and to prevent him from getting another trial.1* “In his demented frame of mind,” said Rabbi Silverman, “he thought Washington was the only place where he could tell the world that he had nothing to do with Oswald and nothing to do with the conspiracy, not that there was any other story.
The Commission did have a polygraph exam administered on July 18, 1964.
According to the Commission’s experts, Ruby told the truth when he said he never knew Oswald, that he took the Main Street ramp to enter the jail’s basement, that he shot Oswald on his own, and had not decided to do it until the last moment on Sunday.3* On October 5, 1966, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals granted him a new trial on the grounds that his statements to Dallas policemen immediately after the shooting should not have been allowed, and that the original court should have granted a change of venue to another jurisdiction since a fair trial was all but impossible in Dallas.
By December 5, Wichita Falls, Texas, was selected as the site for the retrial.
When the sheriff from Wichita Falls arrived in December 1966 to move Ruby for his new trial, he refused to take him because he seemed too sick.
The Dallas jail had been treating him with Pepto-Bismol for a stomach problem.
At Parkland Hospital, he was first diagnosed with pneumonia, but a day later the doctors realized he had cancer in his liver, brain, and lungs.
Although he had probably had it for fifteen months, none of the jail physicians had seen his condition as a serious one.
Ruby died, officially of a blood clot, on January 3, 1967, more than three years after he shot Oswald.
One of the Houston witnesses claimed Ruby had a scar on the left side of his face.
Scheim says that Ruby returned to Dallas the same afternoon, repeating his high-speed highway trip.
Ruby actually spoke to Don Campbell, a salesmen in the advertising department of the News.
He invited Ruby to the Castaway Club on Thursday night, but Ruby declined Exhibit 3, 3, WC Vol.
Ruby did not know Brading, and while they were both at the same hotel on November 21, they did not meet.
Mary Lawrence described Ruby’s restaurant acquaintance as having a small scar near his mouth.
Beverly Oliver, the woman who claims to be the missing “babushka lady” of Dealey Plaza, said that Jada introduced her to Ruby and Oswald over drinks at the Carousel.
She was also extensively interviewed by reporters soon after the assassination and never mentioned seeing Oswald.
Although Jada is dead, the author spoke to her son, Joe Conforto, who had been involved in a business with his mother.
Some of Ruby’s employees, who initially told the police and FBI they had never seen Oswald, told reporters years later that Oswald had been at the club and used to banter loudly with the stage acts; bump and grind with the strippers; meet with mobsters; hang out with David Ferrie, who supposedly visited from New Orleans for nights of partying; talk loudly about opening a narcotics ring or killing Governor Connally; and, sometimes, get into fist fights.
Bill Alexander, who prosecuted Ruby, told the author, “After Ruby killed Oswald, there was a groundswell of these stories, people who claimed they saw them together.
I would have had the greatest murder case in the world if any of it was right.
It would have made our case easier and I would have pursued it in a moment.
But we checked out every one of those stories, took them all seriously, and I know of no credible witness or evidence that connects Ruby to Oswald at any place, at any time, in any way.
Hansen, said he saw Ruby in front of the Dallas police station and said hello to him at 9:30 A.M. either on Thursday, November 21, or Friday, November 22.
It was most likely Thursday, since George Senator said Ruby left too late on Friday to be at the police station by 9:30.
That was his way, and whenever he came to our offices, it was a visit people remembered.
On the Friday the President was shot, I later learned he had stopped by my office to see whether I was going to run a piece on a new master of ceremonies he was hiring, a guy who did ESP with the audience.
Not only is the timing of such an excursion almost impossible, but the News building was crowded with employees, and no one saw Ruby leave the second floor until after the assassination.
He was a politically conservative twenty-six-year-old, recently discharged from the United States Army.
Lane promised to arrange a meeting in Dallas at which Weissman could confront the story’s source.
The 1:45 call was to Karen Carlin, a stripper, to tell her the club would probably be closed.
The 1:51 call was to Ralph Paul’s Bullpen Drive-In restaurant, but it was also made by Armstrong.
The Carousel’s records show a call to the Bullpen restaurant at 2:42 for less than a minute.
When Ruby discovered Paul was not at the restaurant but instead at home, he telephoned him there.
Later, when he realized that carrying his pistol might be construed as evidence of premeditation, he said he did not have his gun on Friday.
However, a photo of the rear of Ruby, taken in the third-floor corridor that night, shows a lump under the right rear of his jacket.
If he was a mob-hired killer with a contract on Oswald, he would have shot him at his first opportunity.
Certainly, any contract to kill Oswald would not have been one Ruby could fulfill at his leisure.
Yet when he had the perfect opportunity, with Oswald only a couple of feet away, Ruby did not shoot him.
However, Joe Tonahill, one of Ruby’s attorneys, believed that Ruby, without even realizing it, could have easily been led, through the power of suggestion, to have killed Oswald.
Ruby kept the chance meeting with Olsen and Coleman a secret until after his trial was finished.
Some interpret the use of the twistboard as an indication that Ruby was not really that upset over the assassination.
He did not change the time because he remembered it differently but rather because a friend who saw him there remembered being there at 4:00.
Yet those two witnesses say Ruby was at Dealey by 3:00, and their testimony is confirmed by an interview the reporter conducted with Dallas police chief Jesse Curry shortly afterward.
Curry, hoping Fritz would be ready to relinquish Oswald by the afternoon, initially planned the transfer for 4:00 P.M. on Saturday, November 23.
Armstrong, who said he was “fed up” with Ruby’s unexpected temper tantrums, quit on the spot.
However, the first visit to Eva’s apartment was a brief one shortly before 8:00, and then later that night Ruby returned by 10:00 for a longer visit.
Phone records show the call was made at 10:44 P.M., from her apartment.
None of the other workers at the Bullpen who were near Helmick at the time corroborated her testimony.
However, when Paul testified before the Warren Commission in August 1964, Ruby’s murder conviction was on appeal, and it is doubtful he would have said anything that could have been used as evidence of premeditation against his friend.
Telephone records reveal the conversation at the Bullpen lasted nine minutes, but all Paul remembered was that Ruby said the other clubs in town were doing terrible business.
Ruby telephoned the restaurant again at 11:18 and discovered Paul had gone home.
He then telephoned Paul three times at home, at 11:19 for three minutes, at 11:36 for two minutes, and at 11:47 for one minute.
In 1988, he told the Dallas Morning News, “Then in the course of the conversation, he started talking about Oswald.
Wall is only one of many witnesses who recalls more information years after the event than he did in his contemporaneous testimony.
Unless there is a convincing explanation for the alteration or addition to the original statements, the earliest account must be considered accurate.
In this example, Wall’s Warren Commission testimony, where he stated that Oswald was not mentioned during his conversation with Ruby, is the most credible.
They described him wearing clothes he did not own, and their physical descriptions were not accurate.
A witness at Ruby’s apartment complex thought he saw him doing the laundry near 10:00.
The basement was also accessible from an unguarded hallway inside the police and courts building.
Dallas policeman Don Flusche, who was parked across the street from the ramp, knew Ruby, yet did not see him enter, either.
It could not accept the use of the Main Street ramp entrance because it was only happenstance that Vaughn was momentarily distracted when Pierce’s car drove up that ramp a minute before Oswald walked into the garage.
At that time, there was no way that Ruby could have known about Pierce’s car, much less that the Main Street ramp had been changed from an entrance to an exit, unless he saw it.
However, in arriving at its conclusion, the committee did not believe the police testimony since the officers had not said it in their initial written reports.
Because of his frequent visits to police headquarters, Ruby was intimately familiar with the building and could have known about the alternate route described by the Select Committee.
Such a plot would have centered around Karen Carlin, whose plea for money took him to the Western Union office and near the jail.
Some of the others guilty of complicity would include George Senator, for confirming the Carlin story and Ruby’s departure time from the apartment; postal inspector Harry Holmes, for delaying the transfer with his questions; police chief Curry and Captain Fritz, for selecting the basement and abandoning the armored cars; Lt.
Rio Pierce, for driving his car up the ramp a minute before Oswald was taken from the jail; and Officer Roy Vaughn, for turning his back when Ruby walked down the ramp.
Charles Crenshaw, who had been a junior resident and part of the team that tried to save Oswald at Parkland, claimed he had answered a telephone call and it was from President Lyndon Johnson, demanding a deathbed confession from Oswald.
That was the same day that President Kennedy’s memorial service was held in Washington, with an enormous contingent of foreign heads of state.
In apparent retaliation against one of his original attorneys, Tom Howard, he claimed that Howard was responsible for concocting the story that he had shot Oswald because of concern over Mrs.
When the word spread that Oswald had been shot inside police headquarters, the crowd spontaneously broke into cheers and applause.
Ruby later received thousands of letters while in jail, most praising his murder of Oswald.
Campisi, owner of the Egyptian Lounge restaurant, knew Ruby well and visited the jail together with his wife.
The author spoke to a number of experts on organized crime; none of them recalled an instance in which a mob boss issued a murder contract and then visited the arrested hit man in jail.
Max Rudberg, a Ruby friend, said, “Well, everyone was saying the son-of-a-bitch needs killing, and Jack was anxious to please.
It is proof that, even in his final days, he was still protesting the implication that he had killed Oswald “to silence” him.
In the days following Oswald’s death, unfounded but spectacular stories of left-wing and right-wing plots, the complicity of Cuban and Soviet leaders, even speculation about Lyndon Johnson hatching a plan to seize the presidency, swept the country.
To quell the unchecked speculation, government officials announced public investigations into the assassination.
On the first business day after the murder, Monday, November 25, Texas attorney general Waggoner Carr declared that Texas would hold a public court of inquiry.
Lyndon Johnson tentatively approved the Texas commission in conversations with Carr.
Since the crime had happened in Dallas, the Carr panel was to include only Texans and no federal officials.
Johnson had also decided to release the FBI’s initial report on the assassination the day it was finished, though it would contain raw and largely unsubstantiated data.
Nicholas Katzenbach, acting attorney general while Robert Kennedy mourned with his family, worked feverishly behind the scenes to change LBJ’s mind and return control of the investigation to Washington.
Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois, to widespread bipartisan support, suggested the Senate Judiciary Committee examine the case.
There was even a possibility of war if either Cuba or the Soviet Union was found to have sponsored JFK’s death, and Johnson appointed a seven-man panel of distinguished public servants he thought had unimpeachable credentials.
Seventy-two-year-old Earl Warren, chief justice of the United States Supreme Court, was chosen as chairman.
Congressman Hale Boggs, a Louisiana Democrat and the majority whip, and Gerald Ford, a Michigan Republican.
The final members were prominent attorneys—John J McCloy, former president of the World Bank and high commissioner of Germany after World War II, and Allen Dulles, the CIA’s former spymaster.
The members and their mandate were so prestigious that other proposed state and federal investigations promptly gave way to the presidential panel.
It had subpoena power, as well as the right to grant immunity to compel testimony otherwise protected under the Fifth Amendment’s self-incrimination article.
All federal and state agencies were ordered to comply fully with its requests.
The Commission’s general counsel was former United States solicitor general J Lee Rankin, and fourteen lawyers comprised a legal staff; under his supervision.
The staff attorneys determined the facts and were responsible for draft findings.
Major disputes were brought to the attention of the seven commissioners.
The Warren Commission had its first meeting on December 5, 1963, only two weeks after the assassination, and four days later the FBI presented its five-volume report that summarized the Bureau’s preliminary findings.
It conducted some 25,000 interviews and submitted over 2,300 investigative reports, totaling more than 25,000 pages.
Though many critics of the Warren Commission acknowledge that a mammoth examination was accomplished in a relatively brief period, they charge the Commission favored witnesses and documents that supported its early conclusion that Oswald alone killed the President.
Yet this view underestimates the independence the legal staff had within the Commission’s hierarchy.
LBJ, fearful that rumors might start that he had political reasons for delaying the report, wanted the work finished before the presidential nominating conventions.
Warren told the other members, in a January 21 executive session, that it “would be very bad for the country to have this thing discussed” during the coming campaign.
Tempers often flared during the final months as Warren pushed the probe at a pace that meant fourteen-hour days, seven days a week, for the legal staff.
Although the Commission had done an extraordinary job of marshaling information and presenting it in a cohesive and organized manner, in only ten months it was not possible to delve into many issues that would later come to the forefront as nagging and persistent problems.
Since it was so limited in manpower, the Commission was almost entirely dependent on agencies such as the FBI to conduct the actual investigation.
Rankin had referred to “tender spots,” potential embarrassments to the FBI or CIA that might hinder the sharing of information.
J Edgar Hoover was convinced within days of the assassination that Oswald alone had killed Kennedy.
He knew, of course, that if Oswald was part of a conspiracy, the Bureau’s reputation would suffer for not having uncovered the plot prior to JFK’s trip to Dallas.
Because of his iron-clad control over the Bureau, his feelings on the case colored the work the field agents did.
Since Hoover thought the answer to the assassination was straightforward, he believed the Warren Commission could only cause problems by delving into many other areas.
The FBI did not treat the Commission as its partner in search of the truth.
The relationship between the Commission and the Bureau was partly adversarial, because no one wanted to bring that tension out into the open.
On January 22, 1964, Lee Rankin complained to the commissioners, “They would have us fold up and quit.
It also deleted Hosty’s name, address, and telephone number, which were in Oswald’s address book, when the information was sent to the Commission staff.
The CIA withheld information as well, most critically that the Agency and the mafia had embarked on a joint effort to kill Fidel Castro.
I am not convinced, as I look back on it now, that Lee Rankin did not know about the CIA conspiracies to kill Castro.
I don’t have any evidence, but as I look back on the failure to bring us together to speculate, he never encouraged us to think speculatively, and the way Rankin operated with his door always closed, maybe he knew something and it was this secret.
Only Johnson, obviously, the Chief Justice, Allen Dulles, and Bobby Kennedy knew about the CIA plots against Castro.
It might have allowed us to say something reasonably definitive about Oswald’s motive.
It would have put a new dimension on his Cuban activities and opened new areas of exploration.
At the time, the Commission wanted to use the autopsy photos and X rays as the best evidence of how the President was shot, but the Kennedy family refused to release them.
Warren feared that if the Commission had the photos, they might be leaked to the press, and as a result he was hesitant to pressure Robert Kennedy on the matter.
But Howard Willens, a staff attorney, had worked for Robert Kennedy and persisted to obtain them.
None of the other commissioners or staff ever saw the autopsy photographs or X rays, nor did the panel utilize independent forensics experts.
Those drawings were mistaken in the placement of both entry wounds, and that later developed into a significant issue for the conspiracy press.
The tests also calculated the minimum firing time and accuracy by shooting at stationary targets as opposed to a moving one such as Oswald had faced.
The Commission did not have the technology in 1964 to positively establish the single-bullet theory.
But unless one bullet caused the wounds to both Governor Connally and President Kennedy, the Commission could not figure out how Oswald could have fired the three shots within the approximately five seconds they mistakenly allotted to him.
Though advances in neutron activation and photographic and computer techniques now confirm that the theory is correct, the Commission had no way of being certain the single bullet was viable.
The members were almost evenly split in their feelings about the theory, and Senator Russell threatened not to sign a final report that absolutely concluded the single bullet was correct.
Few of the witnesses who contradicted the official version of events testified before the Commission.
If they had been examined, their testimony would have been explainable, but because the Commission ignored them, critics had ammunition for future claims of deliberate omission.
Also, the Commission underplayed Jack Ruby’s underworld associations and did not effectively portray him as the unbalanced and volatile person he was, leaving itself open to criticism that it had failed to pursue the Ruby clues because it feared where those might lead.
Since all the commissioners had full-time careers that entailed substantial responsibilities, they could only spend part of their time at the hearings.
Senator Russell had the poorest attendance record, hearing only 6 percent of the testimony.
Only three of the seven commissioners heard more than half the testimony.
But the most controversial aspect of the Commission’s work may be its conclusion about the possibility of any conspiracy.
There is plenty of evidence in the testimony and the documents that could lead a reasonable person to pursue a conspiracy theory.
There is nothing that then establishes a conspiracy theory, but there is plenty there that would allow a reasonable person to speculate about a conspiracy theory.
Statements like that sweeping ‘no conspiracy’ one does a disservice to our overall work.
In Europe, however, where political conspiracies and government changeovers by violence are an integral part of much longer histories, the Commission’s work was viewed as the official, sanitized version.
Many leading European commentators questioned its conclusions without ever reading the report.
By the time the Warren Commission published its report in September 1964, a network of amateur sleuths was prepared to check its accuracy against the research they had compiled since the day of the murder.
An eclectic mixture of people across the country, many of whom were admitted leftists and were suspicious that a Communist was blamed for the murder in a right-wing city, had independently begun collecting everything printed on the subject.
As they heard about one another, some began sharing information and ideas.
Vincent Salandria, a Philadelphia lawyer, collected newspaper articles that discussed police agencies that might have been involved in the assassination.
Josiah Thompson, an assistant philosophy professor specializing in the Danish philosopher Kierkegaard, began studying ballistics and firearms to better understand what had happened in Dealey Plaza.
Shirley Martin, an Oklahoma housewife, drove to Dallas, with her four children, to interview witnesses.
Lillian Castellano, a Los Angeles bookkeeper, pursued the government and media with her belief that the President was shot from the front by an assassin hidden in a storm drain near the car.
David Lifton, a Los Angeles student, focused on the foliage at Dealey Plaza, who hid in it, and whether it was all real or moved in as part of the plot.
Professor Josiah Thompson said their work was an “obsession” and that “there’s a fantastic way in which the assassination becomes a religious event.
There are relics, and scriptures, and even a holy scene—the killing ground.
The earliest books focused on apparent contradictions and unanswered questions in the report, such as the misidentification of the rifle found at the Depository as a Mauser instead of a Mannlicher-Carcano, or whether the man photographed standing in the doorway of the Depository during the assassination was Lee Oswald or his co-worker Billy Lovelady.
Although the issues raised now seem rudimentary, they were the first to undermine the authority the press had bestowed on the Warren Commission.
None of the early critics created a cogent alternate account to compare to the one set forth of Oswald acting alone.
The books accomplished their goals if they merely raised doubts about the official version.
Their view was that a cover-up of key information had taken place, by the FBI, the CIA, or others in the federal government, and the general tenor was that the extreme right had probably hatched the plot.
The rumors of Soviet or Cuban complicity were never popular with the critics, since they figured it made no sense for the United States government to cover up evidence if it pointed to the guilt of Communist regimes.
Many of the books acknowledged they did not have the answers, and called for a new investigation.
In its own reexamination of the case in the late 1970s, the House Select Committee investigated the first generation of critics and found their work wanting in terms of fairness and accuracy.
Robert Blakey, the Select Committee’s chief counsel, said that many early critics “had special axes to grind.
Assassin or Fall-guy?, but its questions were answered when the Commission’s report was released.
In 1966, Harold Weisberg published Whitewash, the first in-depth attack on the Warren Report.
Weisberg, who later published another five books on the case, was a former Senate investigator who had been dismissed for possibly leaking information to the press.
He unsuccessfully argued with the Commission to be allowed to represent the deceased Oswald at the hearings and to be permitted to cross-examine the witnesses who appeared.
Reportedly, Rush to Judgment has sold more than a million copies in various editions.
Lane’s attack on the Commission was an admitted brief for the defense by a skilled advocate.
Using only the evidence that buttressed his arguments, he persuasively argued that the Commission’s work was seriously flawed.
And while he was careful in his book about whom he accused and about the scope of the conspiracy he said he had discovered, in his dozens of college lectures and radio and television appearances he went much further, charging complicity at the highest levels of government.
Blakey said he was “the best example of a critic who fit the Committee’s ‘unfair and inaccurate’ description …”29 Walter Cronkite, in a four-part 1967 CBS documentary, concluded there were a number of examples in Lane’s work of “lifting remarks out of context to support his theories.
Philosophy professor Richard Popkin, in The Second Oswald, was the first to use mistaken sightings of Oswald to develop the theory of an imposter.
Raymond Marcus, the owner of the retail sign business, published The Bastard Bullet, an attack on the single-bullet theory.
Leo Sauvage, a professional journalist, wrote The Oswald Affair, which raised more questions about the Commission’s evidence-gathering.
In his self-published Forgive My Grief, Penn Jones, Jr., the editor of a small Texas newspaper, introduced the issue of “critical” witnesses who were supposedly dying mysteriously.
At their best, the critics had only exposed the Commission as incompetent, but they had not established it was wrong in its conclusions. 1966 also saw the publication of Edward Jay Epstein’s Inquest, which was originally his master’s thesis at Cornell.
Temperate in tone, it was a careful study of the inner workings of the Commission.
Relying on fresh documents, as well as interviews with five of the commissioners and twelve members of the legal staff, Epstein charged the Commission had sought the “political truth” rather than the factual truth about the case.
A “central question” that bothered Epstein was that the FBI’s report to the commissioners indicated the bullet that struck the President in the neck/shoulder only penetrated a short distance and did not exit, whereas the autopsy and the Commission concluded that it was the single bullet that went on to wound Connally.
When Epstein raised the problem, it appeared valid since the autopsy photos and X rays were still locked away.
It was an issue that festered until the House Select Committee’s forensics panel reviewed all the autopsy X rays and photographs and confirmed that the FBI report was simply mistaken.
Since Epstein had academic credentials, appeared to make an objective examination, and drew moderate conclusions, his book was critically accepted as an important one.
As a result, a series of critical articles through 1966 and 1967 cast further doubt on the Commission’s credibility.
The two puncture points at the top—what gets public notice—are Lane’s book and Epstein’s book.
Sylvia Mea-gher did the index for Inquest, and reviewed Sauvage’s book.
There was no equivalent of the conspiracy network to support the Warren Report.
When the Commission disbanded, the members failed to arrange to defend their work or answer questions.
Although a few books were published in support of the report, they had little impact in slowing the critical onslaught.
Gerald Ford’s Portrait of the Assassin was the first pro-Commission book, published in 1965.39 However, it consisted largely of reprints of testimony from the Commission’s volumes and did not answer any of the early critiques.
By 1967, Charles Roberts, in The Truth About the Assassination; Richard Lewis, in The Scavengers; and John Sparrow, in After the Assassination, wrote slim volumes that contributed little new information about the case; Lewis’s book was largely a hard personal attack on the critics themselves and their motivation.
But they were overshadowed in 1967 by the publication of two significant books, both written by graduates of the buff network, that added to the growing mistrust of the Commission.
In Six Seconds in Dallas, Josiah Thompson tried to determine what happened at Dealey Plaza by focusing on ballistics, trajectory angles, medical evidence, and eyewitness testimony.
Thompson had an advantage since he was the first conspiracy writer who had studied the original Zapruder film, and his book was the first to include drawings of critical frames.
The second book that further damaged the Commission was Sylvia Meagher’s Accessories After the Fact.
Meagher probably knew the twenty-six volumes of the Warren Commission hearings and exhibits better than any other critic.
It was received as an important contribution for research since the volumes originally had only a name index, making it almost impossible to work effectively with the more than 1 million-plus words.
Meagher was a committed leftist, and her politics are clear throughout the book.
Her invective about the Commission was as harsh as that of anyone since Lane’s Rush to Judgment.
Subsequent events, however, had significant impact on the development of the post-Warren Commission review of the assassination.
It was revolutionary legislation that allowed private citizens to apply for the release of federal government files, even including those maintained by the FBI, CIA, and other sensitive organizations.
The government agencies could only refuse to release the documents if they fell under privacy or security exemptions that were set forth in the law.
Since its inception, and a subsequent amendment in 1974, over a million pages of documents have been released about the Kennedy assassination.
One of the little things they did at first was to provide you with atrocious copies.
They would wait for the copy machine to run low or something, and provide terrible copies.
The FBI was repeatedly unmasked for lying to those who filed FOIA requests.
And all the while they had a 48,000-card index in the Dallas field office.
Although the Warren Commission discussed and relied on the results of the Bureau’s spectrographic test in its final report, the FBI steadfastly refused to give Weisberg the underlying data.
To many, that obstinacy added to the growing public perception that the government had something to hide in the Kennedy case.
At times, they do it for political reasons, but other times it is part of their effort to resist disclosure, no matter what is being requested.
In general, the government’s only interest in its records occurs when somebody asks for them, and at that point they go into paralysis.
They suspect that somewhere there must be something that spells trouble.
Nevertheless, the Freedom of Information Act gave added impetus to the effort to extend the examination into the assassination.
In spite of the difficulties encountered by those using FOIA, the momentum against the Warren Commission led to the introduction in 1966 of a congressional resolution to reexamine the case.
Yet the passage of FOIA and the new resolution were overshadowed by another event that had started in July 1966, which temporarily electrified the critics and the nation.
Jim Garrison, the flamboyant New Orleans district attorney, convinced there were suspects in his city who had been part of a conspiracy to kill JFK, had launched the first official investigation into the assassination since the Warren Commission.
However, almost immediately it was referred to as the Warren Commission.
In February 1964, Redlich was publicly assailed for his membership on a civil-liberties panel and for having co-authored an article with a Communist sympathizer.
Actually, Redlich had never worked with the other author, but a magazine had merged their two separate articles together and given them joint credit.
Assassination researcher David Wrone told the author, “I took every footnote in his Rush to Judgment.
I checked them against the text and so forth, for accuracy, fidelity, and all of that.
Warren Commission staff attorney Wesley Liebeler said, “It’s just incredible to listen to him.
Marcus became convinced he could see four to five assassins in the photos of foliage at Dealey Plaza Jones later self-published another three books on the assassination, as well as a conspiracy newsletter.
Eventually, Jones argued that John Connally, President Johnson, the FBI, the CIA, the Dallas police, and the news media were all part of the conspiracy.
As for the supposed mystery deaths of key witnesses, it has become one of the entrenched myths in the Kennedy assassination.
See Appendix B, “The Non-Mysterious ‘Mystery Deaths,’” for a detailed discussion.
Goodhart wrote an article in The Law Quarterly Review that cast doubts on the quality of his work.
Wesley Liebeler, a staff attorney on the Commission, was infuriated that one of his internal memos that criticized “the writing of the report” was misused by Epstein to challenge the conclusions of the investigation.
The Goodhart article was also critical of Epstein for having taken remarks of general counsel J Lee Rankin out of context to imply the Commission was ready to squash any evidence that Oswald had been an FBI informant.
Belin wrote two books defending the Commission’s work and its conclusion that Oswald acted alone.
He also served on the Rockefeller Commission’s re-examination of the case in the 1970s.
Belin, through many articles, lectures, and debates with critics, was virtually the lone public voice for the Commission by the 1980s.
Life magazine had purchased the exclusive rights to the film for a reported $150,000, and Thompson had worked as a consultant to Life on the film.
He later tried to purchase the right to use reproductions of several frames in his book, but Life refused to sell him the rights, so he had drawings recreated from memory.
In 1975, Life gave the film back to the Zapruder family instead of donating it to the National Archives.
As a result, the Zapruder family, in recent years represented by Henry Zapruder, Abraham’s son, has sold use rights for books, documentaries, and films at significant fees, sometimes for tens of thousands of dollars.
However, the author, in reading the twenty-six volumes, made a new card index and compared it to Meagher’s publication.
For instance, under her listing for Oswald’s potential for violence, Meagher does not find a reference until Volume II, and lists a total of only twenty-three incidents in the volumes that relate to that subject.
The author, however, discovered the first supporting reference was in the first volume, and there were more than fifty citations just in the fifteen volumes of testimony.
There are quite a few other examples in which Meagher’s index underplays evidence that incriminates Oswald but meticulously lists references that tend to exonerate him or raise doubts.
It means those who use the index are following each other in making the same mistakes and unwittingly ignoring evidence that buttresses the Commission’s conclusions.
At six feet seven inches, with a bass voice and sharp tongue, Jim Garrison was an impressive figure.
After his discharge in March 1946, he attended Tulane Law School, graduated in 1949, and then moved to Seattle and Tacoma, where he was an FBI agent for two years.
Bored with the Bureau, he returned to New Orleans and in July 1951 asked to be placed again on active service with the National Guard.
According to the Army’s evaluation, Garrison’s neurosis “interfered with his social and professional adjustment to a marked degree.
He impressed others at the New Orleans DA’s office with a quick wit and was even considered the sharpest of more than twenty lawyers.
However, he also developed a reputation for making snap judgments and oversimplifying complex issues.
And it soon became clear he had an ego that revealed a tendency toward arrogance.
When he left the DA’s office in 1958, he again entered private practice.
He legally changed his name to Jim and developed a flamboyant reputation for expensive suits and cigars and multihour, four-martini lunches at the city’s best restaurants.
He unsuccessfully campaigned to be a judge of the criminal court during the 1959 election.
Two years later he was one of four candidates running against the incumbent district attorney, Richard Dowling.
Given virtually no chance of winning, he took the campaign’s first television debate by storm and gained enough momentum to win by 6,000 votes.
His conduct quickly became a preview of what would happen once he launched his JFK investigation four years later.
He often brought sensational charges that garnered headlines, but he seldom prosecuted the cases, much less ever obtained a conviction.
The first warning signs that he might be willing to trample someone’s civil liberties in exchange for media ink came soon after he took office.
He brought malfeasance indictments against the former district attorney and one of his senior assistants.
Instead, he embarked on a cleanup of vice in the French Quarter, and while his work again resulted in no trials or convictions, he received national press attention for his nightly raiding parties.
Garrison was brought to trial in January 1963, acted as his own lawyer, and was convicted and sentenced to pay a $1,000 fine.
While the appeal was pending, he pursued what appeared to be a vendetta against the judiciary, forcing malfeasance indictments through the grand jury against a leading judge, Bernard Cocke.
In two trials, in which Garrison tried the cases himself when his assistants refused, Cocke was acquitted.
In 1964, he held a press conference and announced that members of the state parole board were accepting bribes in exchange for granting early paroles.
Garrison personally represented the city at the judicial hearing, but his case was so weak that it ended with no indictments or arrests.
Next, he turned his attention to the state legislature, saying, “I am convinced that public bribery occurred in passage of House Bill 894.
The legislature unanimously censured him for his unsupported accusations.
When he made public statements, his only concern was whether it was going to get him a headline.
He was now unquestionably one of the most powerful political figures in the State …”13 1965 was an election year for both the mayor and the district attorney.
Early that year, signs appeared around the city proclaiming VOTE FOR GARRISON but not listing the office, fueling speculation he might run for mayor.
He had occasionally spoken of higher office, but instead he ran for reelection.
His opponent, criminal judge Malcolm O’Hara, urged voters to reject a man whose “ugly force … compels him to destroy everyone who fails to bow to his will.
Although he had earlier attacked vice in the French Quarter, he now lobbied for a full pardon for a Bourbon Street stripper, Linda Brigette, who had been convicted for lewd dancing.
Aaron Kohn, an ex-FBI agent who headed the Metropolitan Crime Commission, criticized Garrison since Brigette danced for a club connected to New Orleans mob boss Carlos Marcello.
The publicity put pressure on Garrison to take action against the local mob.
It asked Marcello questions for just over ten minutes, and did not return an indictment.
While Garrison was ostensibly building a reputation as a corruption fighter, there is evidence he was developing a special relationship with Carlos Marcello.
During his earlier raids on Bourbon Street clubs he had assiduously avoided those dominated by the local godfather.
The man he hired as his chief investigator, Pershing Gervais, had previously been fired from the police for stealing payoff money, and later admitted he was friendly with Marcello.
During his second term as DA, Garrison dismissed eighty-four cases against Marcello associates.
JFK’s murder was something that had been on his mind since his first term, but he now decided to pursue the case.
The investigation, which began in secret shortly after the second term commenced, was initially based on two different leads.
The Bureau quickly determined that Martin’s information was false and that Ferrie had not been to Dallas in six years.
Martin turned out to be totally unreliable, a drunk who had spent time both in prison and mental institutions.
He had fabricated the tale about Ferrie and Oswald when he heard a radio report that Oswald had been in the Civil Air Patrol in the mid-1950s, an organization to which Ferrie had belonged.
They had not only worked together in the past but were the only two members of their own radical offshoot of the Catholic church.
Martin acknowledged he was drunk when he made the first call to the district attorney’s office, and confessed that his motivation was revenge for Ferrie’s having excluded him from several recent cases.
I used to competitively roller-skate for years, and I had never ice-skated.
To Garrison, however, the trip to the Winterland Ice Skating Rink was highly suspicious.
Breck Wall, the Dallas head of AGVA who spoke to Ruby on the night of Saturday, November 23, was in Galveston performing in a show.
Ferrie, Beauboeuf, and the second teen, Melvin Coffey, had stopped in Galveston.
Although they did not know each other, the fact that Ferrie and Wall had been in the same city was too much of a coincidence to the DA.28 Garrison also claimed Eva Grant, Ruby’s sister, had been in Houston on Saturday when Ferrie arrived.
Since Ferrie did not ice-skate with his friends but may have made some telephone calls from a pay phone, Garrison believed that the trip to the rink was obviously a cover, and the rink was actually the message center for the conspiracy.
He insisted that Ferrie, a licensed pilot, was waiting for a message that would allow him to spirit one or more of the assassins out of the country.
The second lead that revived Garrison’s interest in the assassination was a story told by Dean Andrews, a three-hundred-pound, forty-four-year-old jive-talking attorney with a reputation for exaggeration and showmanship.
After the assassination, he told the FBI that he recognized Oswald from the newspaper photos as a person he had done legal work for during the summer of 1963.
He never identified any of the people he said had accompanied Oswald to his office, nor did he have any records substantiating the consultations, because, he said, his office had been rifled and the papers were missing.
He claimed that on November 23, the day after the assassination, a man called “Clay Bertrand” telephoned him while Andrews was in the hospital recovering from pneumonia Bertrand allegedly asked if he would defend Oswald for killing the President.
Andrews, who had a reputation as an ambulance-chaser, had a ramshackle office near the New Orleans port.
Much of his work was immigration cases for the city’s poorest clients, and he could not explain why anyone would want him to represent the accused assassin.
He described Bertrand as “the one who calls in behalf of gay kids normally, either to obtain bond or parole for them.
I would assume he was the one that originally sent Oswald and the gay kids, these Mexicanos, to the office …34 He could not provide any more information about Bertrand, had no files on him, and no means of contacting him.
In April, five months after the assassination, the FBI had confronted Andrews with the fact it had combed New Orleans and failed to find anyone who had ever heard of the name.
Yet when he appeared before the Warren Commission three months later, in July, he revived the original tale.
When pushed by Commission counsel Wesley Liebeler about the existence of a Bertrand and the call asking him to defend Oswald, Andrews again backed off, saying, “I would tell that I was smoking weed.
In October 1966, Garrison began calling Andrews, as well as some of Ferrie’s friends, into the office for discussions.
He now remembered the name of Oswald’s Mexican associate—Manuel Garcia Gonzales.
Later, when Andrews admitted it was a hoax, he said he told Garrison the first name that came to his mind because “I don’t know what he’s up to.
In late November 1966, Garrison shocked the rest of his staff when he announced that he had decided that Clay Bertrand was actually Clay Shaw, a prominent civic figure and the man who had almost single-handedly led the historic restoration of the French Quarter.
Shaw, the former president of the prestigious International Trade Mart, was an active member of the city’s social elite as well as a poet and a playwright.
Garrison knew he was gay, and that provided a link to Ferrie, also homosexual.
One of Garrison’s assistants pointed out that Shaw was six feet four and had shocking-white hair, while Andrews had described Bertrand as five feet eight and with sandy hair.
Reporters for the New Orleans States-Item obtained the papers, which listed the office’s investigation into the Kennedy case.
He could break the case, since he had the power of subpoena, not to mention a courtroom that protected him from libel for anything he said.
Mark Lane, who billed himself as the “unpaid chief investigator for the DA,” advised Garrison on the evidence and had complete access to the district attorney’s files; with William Turner, of Ramparts, he compiled information for an “official history” of the case.
Perm Jones, with Allan Chapman, who believed a worldwide conspiracy of intellectuals controlled the television networks, reported on developments in Texas.
Vincent Salandria, Richard Popkin, and comedian Mort Sahl gave general advice.
When he learned that Ferrie had known ex-FBI agent Guy Banister , he extended the probe toward Banister and the anti-Castro Cubans.
He was David Lewis, a shipping clerk who claimed to have seen Oswald, Ferrie, Banister, and anti-Castro activist Carlos Quiroga at a meeting in New Orleans.
The only problem was that Lewis was adamant it was in early 1962, when Oswald either was in Russia or had just returned to Texas.
But Garrison was so desperate to build a case against Ferrie that he tried to intimidate and cajole witnesses to provide the necessary testimony.
Also they would be, we would make a hero out of him instead of a villain, you understand.
We can change the story around, you know, enough to positively, beyond a shadow of a doubt, you know, eliminate him into any type of conspiracy, or what have you.
He discussed “cross fire” and escape routes, and said either Ferrie and Shaw, or Oswald and Shaw, were arguing in the apartment, and Beauboeuf overheard them.
I told them no way, and when they heard we had recorded Loisel, they went nuts.
Louis Ivon came to my house and put a gun down my throat and threatened to kill me because I had exposed them.
Finally, I made a deal with him to sign a statement that it was all blown out of nowhere, just in order to get him off my back.
He soon discovered that Novel knew Ferrie and claimed to have knowledge of his antiCastro connections.
Garrison decided to use Novel as a witness, and called him repeatedly to the DA’s office.
In a meeting with Novel, Garrison suggested that Ferrie was stonewalling the investigation by lying, and that one solution might be for Novel to shoot Ferrie with a tranquilizer dart and then inject him with sodium pentothal to obtain the details of the assassination plot.
At one point, Novel also saw apparent forgeries of letters, purportedly from Oswald to Ferrie, in the district attorney’s office.
On February 21, Novel, appalled by Garrison’s tactics, left for Ohio, where he had once lived.
Garrison announced it was a suicide, interpreting a rancorous letter to a friend as a suicide note.
But Ferrie was under tremendous strain from Garrison’s probe, and he looked so bad in the days before his death that his acquaintances believed the pressure was too much for him.
Garrison had set up a camera across the street from his apartment, and they followed him everywhere.
Ignoring the coroner’s report, he said, “ knew we had the goods on him and he couldn’t take the pressure.
I was trying to avoid a confrontation with him, because I knew he would stop at nothing to make his case.
They wanted to see if Quiroga was stupid enough to touch it, and then they would have brought the gun and buried it somewhere in a hole and then found it and charged Quiroga with being part of the conspiracy.
You cannot imagine what they were willing to do to succeed in their case.
I had not come to America and worked fifteen hours a day to allow Garrison to destroy my life and ruin everything I worked for.
They took me next door and they gave me a couple-hour test, a real fishing expedition.
Instead, he focused on Dean Andrews’s story about Clay Bertrand, although he only had his personal hunch that Clay Shaw was Clay Bertrand.
He was not bothered that one of his best assistant district attorneys, Andrew “Moo” Sciambra—like the FBI—had talked to every informant in the French Quarter and found no one who had ever heard the name Clay Bertrand.
On February 24, only two days after Ferrie died, a pack of reporters stopped Garrison as he left a luncheon and asked if he was close to solving the assassination.
A few minutes earlier he told another group of reporters, “The key to the whole case is through the looking glass.
Only two days after Shaw’s arrest, Garrison agreed to meet Jim Phelan, of The Saturday Evening Post, in Las Vegas, at the Sands Hotel.
He liked an earlier article Phelan had written about his Bourbon Street cleanup and had decided to give him the exclusive story behind Shaw’s arrest.
John Kennedy was everything that Dave Ferrie was not—a successful, handsome, popular, wealthy, virile man.
If they were all homosexuals, in Garrison’s opinion, it was too much of a coincidence.
Near the end of his ten-hour series of interviews with Phelan, the district attorney feared the Post article was in jeopardy because Phelan was still skeptical about the weak supporting evidence.
Garrison then walked to the dresser in his hotel room and picked up a thick manila envelope.
He had also given a February 24 television interview to WDSU-TV in New Orleans, in which he said he knew Ferrie and that Ferrie did not like Kennedy.
When Sciambra showed Russo photos of Oswald and Shaw, Russo thought he might have seen Shaw twice, once at a gas station and once at the Nashville Street Wharf.
As for Oswald, Russo drew a beard on the photo and said it resembled one of Ferrie’s roommates .65 Two days later, on February 27, at Garrison’s request, Russo submitted to sodium pentothal at Mercy Hospital in New Orleans.
While interrogating Russo, who was in a semiconscious state, Sciambra introduced the name Clay Bertrand for the first time.
Esmond Fatter, whom Garrison had hired, though he had no background in using hypnosis to elicit criminal testimony.
Fatter, in his interrogation of Russo, used a memorandum supplied by Garrison’s office.
While Russo was in a trance, it was Fatter who insinuated the idea of a conspiracy and Clay Shaw.
At one point, Fatter said, “Picture that television screen again, Perry, and it is a picture of Ferrie’s apartment and there are several people there and there is a white-haired man.
Having seen a photo of Shaw on February 25, and having met him in person on February 28, Russo was ready to incorporate him in his dream state at Fatter’s suggestion.
Shortly after introducing the image of Shaw during the hypnotic trance, Fatter said, “Let your mind go completely blank, Perry.
There will be a Bertrand, Ferrie, and Oswald and they are going to discuss a very important matter and there is another man and girl there and they are talking about assassinating somebody.
Garrison, who had just received the packet from his office, had impulsively given it to Phelan without first reading the material himself.
Russo told his newly developed story about being at a party at Ferrie’s apartment, where Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw discussed the details of an assassination plot.
Shaw was brought into the courtroom, and Russo placed his hand over Shaw’s head and identified him as “Clay Bertrand,” the name he said Shaw used at Ferrie’s party.
Garrison also produced a surprise second witness, Vernon Bundy, a black heroin addict, who was in prison for a parole violation.
He testified that when he was shooting heroin along the lakefront during 1963, he saw Shaw meet Oswald and give him some money.
The first time he ever publicly presented the story was at the preliminary hearing.
The judges took less than half an hour to rule that Shaw should be held for trial on the charge of conspiring to kill the President.
On June 19, NBC News aired the devastating results of an investigation into Garrison’s work.
The show disclosed the extent to which the district attorney’s office had tried to bribe and intimidate witnesses into giving favorable testimony.
Not only did NBC reveal the incident with Al Beauboeuf, but Fred Lemanns, who owned a Turkish bath, said Garrison offered him money to open a new club if he would testify that Shaw had visited the baths with Oswald and had used the name Bertrand.
Russo admitted to reporter Walter Sheridan that his testimony against Shaw was a mixture of truth, fantasy, and lies, but he feared that if he changed his testimony, Garrison would charge him with perjury.
Niles told NBC he was at the party but said no one was there who even resembled Oswald or Shaw.
Moffitt denied being there, and said she had never even met Ferrie until 1965.
In addition, NBC had uncovered two fellow inmates of Vernon Bundy, John Cancler and Miguel Torres.
Torres also disclosed that the DA’s office had offered him a deal if he would testify he had been at sex orgies at Shaw’s house and knew Shaw used the name Bertrand.
Furthermore, NBC revealed that both Russo and Bundy had failed friendly polygraph tests administered by Garrison.
Within several weeks of the NBC show, William Gurvich, Garrison’s chief investigator, resigned and headed for Washington, where he told Robert Kennedy that Garrison’s case was a sham and there was no basis to arrest Shaw.
NBC gave him an unprecedented half hour of unedited national airtime to respond to its expose.
Buttressed by the buffs, he captivated a public all too willing to believe that JFK had been killed by a complex conspiracy and that one brave prosecutor was fighting the cover-up forces.
Depending on which show he was on, he said the assassination “was a Nazi operation, whose sponsors included some of the oil-rich millionaires in Texas,” or at other times it included the Minutemen, the CIA , the FBI, White Russians, or anti-Castro Cubans.
Audiences responded positively to his charges of Nazi involvement, and Garrison elaborated on that concept over several months.
Garrison warned that America was “in great danger of slowly evolving in to a proto-fascist state” and that “our government is the CIA and Pentagon …”He claimed that Jack Ruby was a self-hating Jew who had smuggled guns with neo-Nazis and that “Oswald would have been more at home with Mein Kampf than Das Kapital.
Garrison charged William Gurvich and Tom Bethell, another aide who quit in disgust, with theft of part of his files; John Cancler, the inmate who spoke to NBC, was hit with contempt of court; Gordon Novel, who resisted extradition from Ohio, had burglary charges placed against him; and Walter Sheridan, the reporter behind the NBC investigation, and Richard Townley, who had assisted in its preparation, were accused of attempted bribery of a witness for offering to pay Russo for his expenses to come to California for an interview.
He brought perjury indictments against Dean Andrews; Kerry Thornley, Oswald’s Marine buddy who said he had not seen Oswald in New Orleans in 1963; Layton Martens, a young friend of Ferrie’s who said he could not connect Shaw to Ferrie; and David Chandler of Life magazine, originally a Garrison confidant who later became disillusioned.
The only one convicted was Dean Andrews, for having concocted the fictitious Clay Bertrand.
Filing the charges—aside from the intimidation it created—enhanced the image that he was fighting a secret network of conspirators pressed into service to disrupt his investigation.
He soon added the media, which he had so successfully used, to his hit list.
Much of the national press was part of a “CIA-inspired campaign” against him, he said.
The late 1960s, with the country in a rebellion against authority and many wary of government duplicity over the war in Vietnam, gave rise to a climate that was receptive to Garrison’s assertions that the greatest government deception of a generation had taken place in the Kennedy assassination.
As he fended off criticism, he also worked at creating a case against Clay Shaw.
During the months following Shaw’s arrest, hundreds of would-be witnesses were interviewed by the DA’s staff.
Celebrated cases tend to bring forward people who want to be in the limelight, and the Shaw matter was no exception.
Some were outright con artists, who wrote Garrison with exceptional tales about Oswald’s CIA connections and how Shaw fit into the plot, and when the DA then sent them air tickets to come to New Orleans, they merely cashed the tickets and were never heard from again.
Following up on those who did arrive in New Orleans and tell their stories, Garrison sent his investigators across the country to determine which, if any, he could use against Shaw.
A man calling himself Julius Caesar appeared, wearing a toga and sandals, and put Oswald, Ferrie, and Shaw together in an elaborate plot that fit Garrison’s scenario.
When the press discovered he was an ex-mental patient, Garrison abandoned him.
After Garrison decided Rolleston’s story did not fit into his theory, he refused to talk to him, and even made him pay his own hotel bill.
At the time Richard Nagell offered his help—through the mail—he was confined to the psychiatric section of the federal prison in Springfield, Missouri.
Nagell claimed his role in an extensive conspiracy was to execute Oswald, on Soviet orders, in order to prevent the assassination.
He changed his mind and instead robbed a bank in El Paso, Texas, in September 1963, so that he would be sent to jail and avoid his conspiratorial duties.
When he found Nagell unreliable, Nagell complained that Martin was part of the CIA plot against him.
Before Shaw’s trial, he made statements about numerous issues for which he had no supporting evidence.
Nevertheless, many of his pronouncements survived the prosecution of Shaw and became part of the folklore about the assassination.
On Johnny Carson’s Tonight Show, he produced, with a flourish, grainy photographs of five men talking to police in Dealey Plaza after the assassination.
It was a photo of bystanders, none of whom were arrested, and Garrison’s staff had not identified any of them when he appeared on Carson.
Another time he startled the press with the announcement that Oswald’s address book contained Ruby’s unlisted phone number.
According to Garrison, it was in code in Oswald’s book and he had deciphered it.
When asked how he came to subtract 1300, he said it was simply the block on Dauphine Street where Clay Shaw lived.
When he started his investigation he thought there were only two, one in the Depository and one on the grassy knoll.
After he spoke to Harold Weisberg, he put a shooter at the Dal-Tex building and cleared Oswald of firing any shots.
To Playboy, he proffered a second “Oswald” at Dealey Plaza, based on his talks with Richard Popkin.
Garrison added four more assassins in a CBS interview after speaking to Raymond Marcus, who told him that blown-up photos of the trees revealed the men.
Allan Chapman convinced him that another shooter was hidden inside a storm drain.
Jones Harris convinced him that a pickup truck shown in a photo hid two more assassins.
He once showed James Phelan a bullet from his pistol and said, “That’s a magnum load, and my gun can’t handle it.
After telling the press that Havana had sent a hired assassin who was stalking him,104 he hired bodyguards and used a code language when talking about the case over the phone.
Gurvich said Garrison wanted “to raid the local FBI office” to uncover “the secret recording room” that he believed monitored all his conversations.
Near the start of the Shaw trial, Garrison took a taxi home one night, and threw the money at the driver as he ran into the bushes near his house, crouching there for several minutes and surveying the area before running up to his front door.
During the long delay leading to Shaw’s trial, Garrison hoped he could find witnesses who would tie the defendant to either Oswald or Ferrie.
On January 21, 1969, the trial finally began, nearly two years after Shaw was arrested.
Despite his promises of spectacular disclosures, Garrison presented the same basic prosecution he had in the 1967 preliminary hearing.
Trying to prevent his case from falling apart, Garrison introduced the Clinton, Louisiana, witnesses, who said they had seen Shaw driving a car with Oswald and Ferrie sometime in the late summer or early fall of 1963.
He testified he had attended a party several months before the one Russo described, and Ferrie, Oswald, and Shaw had been there and had openly discussed their plans to kill Kennedy in front of him.
He claimed that strangers had hypnotized him some fifty or sixty times “against my will,” and because “new police techniques” allowed the conspirators to enter his house disguised as his relatives, he had fingerprinted his daughter when she returned from school to ensure it was she.
Garrison had been aware of Spiesel’s past but put him on the stand over his staffs objection.
Yet as the case against Shaw collapsed, Garrison increasingly concentrated on what appeared to be a second prosecution, one against the Warren Report and its conclusion of a lone assassin.
Although they were not relevant in determining Shaw’s guilt or innocence, he called Marina Oswald, Bethesda pathologist Pierre Finck, and witnesses from Dealey Plaza.
He successfully subpoenaed the Zapruder film and showed it ten times to the Shaw jury.
It returned forty-five minutes later with an acquittal on its first ballot.
Yet two days later, Garrison arrested Shaw for perjury, claiming that when Shaw testified he did not know Ferrie or Oswald, he had lied.
It took another two years of legal fighting before a federal court, on June 7, 1971, finally issued a permanent injunction against Garrison from prosecuting Shaw, on the grounds that the charges had been brought in bad faith.
At the federal court, Garrison once again offered Perry Russo as a witness, but Russo finally refused to repeat the fabrication about the Ferrie party.
Garrison told Playboy he thought the CIA might have paid Shaw’s legal bills, but Shaw actually spent over $200,000, his life savings, on the four years of legal battles.
For the suit to survive the death of the plaintiff, he had to have surviving children or parents.
Shaw had no children, and his mother died shortly before he did, so his case was dismissed.
Louisiana later changed its law so the estate of the deceased person could continue the suit.
The abuse of power from a megalomaniac prosecutor destroyed Shaw’s life.
Until his death in 1992, he continued beating the media drum that he was right all along and that only the efforts of the military-industrial complex prevented him from succeeding.
In 1988, he published On the Trail of the Assassins, in which he regurgitated all of his theories developed in 1966 and 1967, though they were clearly outdated.
He spoke about Shaw as though the jury’s acquittal was a mere oversight in an otherwise iron-clad case.
Despite his efforts, and his election as an appellate judge, he could not redeem his reputation.
The evidence of his abusive prosecution had hurt the conspiracy movement and ruined him as a credible voice.
However, he had lived to see director Oliver Stone use more than $50 million of Warner Bros.’ money to rehabilitate his theory and again tarnish the name of an innocent man, Clay Shaw, for yet another generation.
After his second term as district attorney, Garrison moved into a lavish home built by Frank Occhipinti, a Marcello business partner.
In 1971, Garrison was indicted on federal charges of accepting $50,000 in bribes to protect the mob’s gambling interests.
Six co-defendants testified against him, and government surveillance tapes exposed him accepting four bribes.
He represented himself in the trial, claiming it was a plot to punish him for his JFK investigation, and won an acquittal.
When the Commission asked Andrews for the names of any of Oswald’s associates, he said, “Today their name is Candy; tomorrow it is Butsie; next day it is Mary.
Today, the impropriety of private funding of a public prosecutor, with the inherent possibility for improper influence or conflicts of interest, is a violation of the American Bar Association’s ethical rules.
However, in the beginning, most were convinced Garrison was on the right track.
Novel filed an unsuccessful $10 million libel suit against Garrison and Playboy.
Despite the fact that he was married, Garrison himself was the subject of numerous stories in New Orleans about his sexual preference.
A prominent New Orleans attorney told the author how Garrison had tried to sexually molest his brother, then thirteen, in 1968 at the New Orleans Athletic Club.
Nationally syndicated columnist Jack Anderson wrote about Garrison’s assault of the youngster in a February 1970 column.
Bradley had lived and worked in North Hollywood, California, since 1962 and had never lived in New Orleans.
But when Garrison learned he had been in El Paso, Texas, on the day of the assassination, he issued an arrest warrant.
No evidence or witnesses were ever produced at a subsequent extradition hearing, and California governor Ronald Reagan refused to send Bradley to New Orleans.
Nagell also believes that Oswald was placed into a hypnotic trance by David Ferrie and turned into a “Manchurian Candidate” who then carried out the assassination.
As Garrison developed the story, Cheramie had warned the hospital staff that JFK would be killed in Dallas.
From the medical records, the House Select Committee discovered that she had been in heroin withdrawal and physical shock when she was checked into the hospital.
The only person who later claimed that Cheramie had mentioned the assassination before November 22 was the state trooper, Francis L Fruge, who brought her to the hospital on November 20.
When he spoke to Cheramie on November 25, Fruge said that she brought in Ruby and Oswald.
Fruge later worked with Garrison’s probe and his story of what Cheramie said before the assassination expanded dramatically.
According to Fruge, Cheramie said that she had been a stripper for Jack Ruby, that she knew that Oswald and Ruby were homosexual lovers, and that she had been thrown out of the car by Ruby, who she was working with on a narcotics deal.
She died on September 4, 1965, when she was again lying on the roadway and was struck by a car.
The subsequent investigation revealed it was an accident, although buffs list it as a mystery death.
Shaw was questioned about his foreign travels by the CIA’s Domestic Contact Division, the same as thousands of other Americans during that period, but he had no other relationship to the Agency.
At one point in the investigation, he had a warrant drafted for the arrest of Robert Perrin, who supposedly could testify about Ruby’s gun-smuggling activities to Cuba.
The night before he made the arrest notice public, Weisberg proved to him that Perrin had died in 1962.
The Clark Panel, as it was known, confirmed the medical conclusions of the Warren Commission, but its findings were largely lost in the coverage of the events in New Orleans.
However, during an interview with the author, Russo admitted, “I believe that Shaw was innocent.
As the extent of Garrison’s folly in New Orleans became known, the conspiracy press, which had gained tremendous public acceptance during 1966 and 1967, began to falter.
Garrison’s excesses reflected poorly on other theorists, especially since the leading critics were an integral part of his early efforts.
Anthony Summers later wrote, “What angers investigators about … Jim Garrison is that his cockeyed caper in 1967 was more than an abuse of the justice system.
The most popular works on the assassination were now those that exposed the New Orleans fiasco, most notably James Kirkwood’s American Grotesque5 and Counterplot, by Edward Jay Epstein, who had turned on Garrison.
Harold Weisberg had sued to obtain the transcript of the January 27, 1964, executive session of the Warren Commission, which discussed a newspaper article that asserted Oswald had been an FBI informer.
The Washington Post ran a big story, on page three, and that was picked up by Senator Pell.
They received considerable attention, were moderate in tone, and instead of jumping to conclusions, both demanded new government investigations.
In March 1975, Geraldo Rivera aired, for the first time, the Zapruder film on ABC’s Goodnight America.
Millions were shocked by its graphic detail, and especially the image of Kennedy’s head snapping back and to the left after the final shot.
Without an understanding of the medical evidence or the physics involved, it appeared as though the President reacted to a bullet fired from the front, rather than the rear as the Commission had concluded.
It had discovered that the CIA, with the assistance of the mafia, had repeatedly tried to assassinate Cuba’s Fidel Castro during the early 1960s.
The CIA had not kept President Kennedy fully informed about the assassination plots, and most of the Warren Commission members had never heard anything about them, though commissioner Allen Dulles had been director of the CIA when many of the attempts were made.
That the CIA hid its operations to murder the Cuban leader from the Warren Commission, as well as the details from its own President, raised questions about what it might have withheld on Lee Oswald and the Kennedy assassination.
In April 1975, Virginia congressman Thomas Downing, a committed believer in a conspiracy, introduced a resolution calling on Congress to reinvestigate the assassination of John Kennedy.
In the same Congress , Texas representative Henry Gonzales had introduced a resolution calling for a new investigation not only of JFK, but also of the shootings of Robert Kennedy and the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., and of the attempted assassination of Governor George Wallace.
By July, those congressional efforts were bolstered when a newsman broke the story that FBI agent James Hosty had received a note from Oswald shortly before the assassination and had destroyed it.
Yet despite the growing demand for a new investigation , it failed to get out of the committee, killed by a tie vote.
The next year, 1976, when it appeared the momentum for a new investigation was faltering, Coretta Scott King, the widow of Martin Luther King, Jr., met with the Congressional Black Caucus to inform them of new evidence that might affect the conclusion that James Earl Ray was the lone assassin of her husband.
The committee was established, with Congressman Downing as its first chairman.
The Black Caucus suggested Mark Lane as general counsel, but eventually Richard Sprague, a prominent Philadelphia prosecutor, was selected.
He had never read the Warren Report or any of the critics’ books, and appeared to approach the case without prejudgment.
He angered and offended Congress by submitting a 1977 budget of $6. million, considered excessive, and by announcing he would make extensive use of polygraphs and stress analyzers on potential witnesses.
Henry Gonzales, who had replaced Downing at the start of 1977 as the chairman, tried to dismiss Sprague, but Sprague insisted the entire committee vote him out.
By February 1977, it appeared there would be no new investigation of the JFK assassination.
In March, however, Speaker Tip O’Neill named a new chairman, Louis Stokes, Democrat of Ohio.
Stokes persuaded Sprague to resign, and was also able to get Congress to extend the committee’s life, at least through the end of the year, with a budget of $2. million.
Except for a few weeks of public hearings, with carefully chosen witnesses, most of the committee’s work was conducted in private, as are most congressional inquiries.
In December 1978, after spending nearly $5. million, the Select Committee reviewed a draft of a lengthy final report on both the JFK and King assassinations.
While it found that there was likely a conspiracy in the King case, it concluded the Warren Commission was basically correct and that Oswald alone had killed Kennedy and Tippit.
But late that month, acoustics experts Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy came forward with their interpretation of the Dallas dictabelt recording from the police motorcycle “proving,” with a supposed 95 percent certainty, that a fourth shot was fired from the grassy knoll.
McLain, who mistakenly thought his cycle had the open microphone, testified in a public hearing.
Instead of quietly resolving the conspiracy questions left over from the Warren Commission, the acoustics blunder opened the door to much greater speculation about a plot.
And since the committee had decided there was a conspiracy, it felt obliged, in its final report issued in July 1979, to assess the probable identity of the conspirators.
The committee’s conclusion infused new life into the arguments for a conspiracy, which now had the imprimatur of a government investigation that had not only concluded there was a conspiracy, but even highlighted the suspects.
To the buffs, Garrison’s investigation was now only a distant, bad memory.
For many, the CIA remained a leading suspect,† but now the mafia moved to the forefront as the most credible plot-master.
The same year that the Select Committee completed its work, Seth Kantor’s book, Who Was Jack Ruby?, concluded Ruby was a mafia hit man.
Moreover, in early 1967, when presented with a concrete plan to murder RFK, Hoffa rejected the opportunity.
Teamster official Frank Chavez told Hoffa about the details of a plot to eliminate Robert Kennedy, and Hoffa strongly rebuked him, saying that such an action was dangerous and should never be contemplated.
And in his public testimony before the Committee, Aleman recanted and said it was only “his impression” that Trafficante meant the President was going to be hit.
Becker says he tried to interest Marcello in distributing an oil additive he had invented.
During their discussions, Becker mentioned Bobby Kennedy, and the godfather lost his temper.
The House Select Committee concluded it was extremely unlikely that Marcello, who knew he was under a federal criminal investigation and had a reputation for being very close-mouthed, would discuss a plot to kill the President with anyone but his closest lieutenants.
He’s not even from Sicily, for God’s sake, he’s from North Africa, Tripoli.
If he was going to talk about Kennedy, there is no way on this earth he would talk to a geologist about that.
And for Carlos, who hardly ever talks, that would have been a goddamn oration.
Most of them were played in a 1981 trial in which Marcello was found guilty of racketeering and conspiracy.
Those tapes contain some conversations between Marcello and the undercover agents about the Kennedy family or the JFK assassination, and critics long contended they have been withheld because Marcello incriminates himself in those conversations and the government is covering it up.
Since the Select Committee had disbanded by the time the tapes were made, Professor Blakey did not hear them.
But at the very least, if true, his account shows Hoffa wanted JFK dead in early 1963, and Marcello and Trafficante were apparently not opposed to the idea.
On April 11, 1967, two FBI agents interviewed Ragano at their Tampa office, regarding the Bureau’s continuing criminal investigation of his client Trafficante.
He dismissed the allegations about Trafficante’s possible involvement in the assassination as “ridiculous” and, to prove his point, told the agents about a trip he had made to New Orleans earlier that year, during the Garrison probe.
He recounted that when he was in a car with Trafficante and Marcello, a radio broadcast commented on the Garrison investigation.
He made his disclosure less than three weeks after the movie JFK had created a national fervor on the subject, and at a time he was coincidentally trying to sell a book manuscript, his autobiography.
In addition, Ragano recalled a quite different reaction from Marcello and Trafficante when he relayed another murder request from Hoffa, this one to “hit” Teamster boss Frank Fitsim-mons.
The same mafia leaders who shied away from a contract on the teamster’s leader supposedly were interested in the most powerful target of all, the President.
Those who have investigated and studied the mafia do not believe there is any credible evidence that the mob was involved in the JFK assassination.
We also put a microphone into the special headquarters of Sam Giancana.
We listened to them—Giancana, all the top leaders of the Chicago mob—as they talked to other mobsters.
And then when the assassination of the President happened, they discussed it relentlessly, but there was never any sign they had anything to do with it—nothing to indicate that the Marcello clan or anyone they knew was connected in any way.
Giancana and the people around him were complete virgins when it came to electronic surveillance.
Hoover had brought us into the fight against organized crime in 1957, and he ordered us to try and get microphones in, and the first we ever got in was in July 1959 … I was the police agent on that.
That night we went up and took it out and then let it smolder for a couple of weeks, and then put it back in.
They never, in those days, thought we could put a microphone in their headquarters.
But we got them in there for six years, talking about every crime you could imagine.
It would be the end of the mafia if they went after the attorney general or the president and anything went wrong.
The mafia theorists no longer argue the evidence presented in the Warren Commission or the activities of Lee Harvey Oswald.
The attempt on General Edwin Walker’s life is given only passing mention, since there was no motivation for the mob to want Oswald to kill the general.
The mistaken belief that Oswald associated with Ferrie and Banister during the summer of 1963, both of whom did investigative work for the New Orleans godfather, has been used to link him to Marcello—as has been the fact that Oswald’s uncle, Dutz Murret, was a local gambler.
Oswald seldom saw Murret in New Orleans, but some writers, including Blakey, suggest that Marina may have confided to him that Oswald had tried to kill General Walker.
Then, presumably, Murret turned his nephew over to Marcello, who, according to Becker, was looking for “a nut” since 1962.
But Marina adamantly denies ever telling Murret or anyone—not even Ruth Paine—about the Walker assassination attempt before JFK was killed.
One of the most persuasive arguments against Oswald’s involvement with the mafia is the absence of any evidence of conspiratorial contact between them.
Oswald was living in Dallas in 1962 and early 1963 when Aleman, Becker, and Ragano claim the mafia leadership in New Orleans developed a plan to kill Kennedy.
Though Oswald went to New Orleans during the summer of 1963, he left there before Kennedy’s trip to Texas was even announced.
Moreover, if the Cuban embassy in Mexico City had granted Oswald a visa to travel to Cuba in September 1963, he would have been in Havana when JFK visited Dallas.
During the two months before the assassination, according to his landlady and roommates, Oswald stayed at home every night, never received any calls, and only made one a night to his wife.
After the motorcade was officially announced only days before the visit, there was no flurry of telephone calls.
Mobsters may have discussed killing JFK, but their plans did not involve Lee Oswald.
Although the mob thesis is the current favorite, critics have flooded the field with new and ever-changing theories.
Some are even based on elaborate personal stories told by people who have stepped forward and implicated themselves in a purported assassination plot.
That trend, which gained momentum after the Select Committee’s Report, had actually begun with Garrison’s weakening of the research standards.
The New Orleans district attorney believed almost anyone who had a story to tell about the assassination—the more elaborate the better.
Although Garrison’s results were condemned, his methods were perpetuated by others in the field.
Dallas researcher David Perry has compiled the names of twenty-eight men identified by buffs as having been a second assassin or as having “confessed” to being a second assassin.
There are also some forged documents being produced and this could do real damage to the historical record.
And unfortunately, a lot of the research that is getting printed in books is secondary work, just one author citing another.
That means that stories that are wrong are getting repeated over and over, and in many cases they are getting embellished in each retelling.
Eventually, people believe these stories just because they see them in print so often.
Richard Russell, in The Man Who Knew Too Much, does the same with Richard Nagell, who not only spent time in and out of a mental ward but was so unreliable that not even Garrison used him.
In his latest book on the assassination, Plausible Denial, Mark Lane relies in part on the word of Marita Lorenz, who claims to be a former mistress of Fidel Castro.
She spins an incredible tale of CIA complicity, and recounts cross-country car trips with conspirators as well as meetings with Ruby and the CIA’s E Howard Hunt.
The problem is, as Edwin Lopez, a former researcher for the House Select Committee, says, “Mark Lane was taken in by Marita Lorenz.
Between her and Frank Sturgis,* we must have spent over one hundred hours.
Adventurer Chauncey Holt, who says he knew Oswald, Ruby, and mobster Meyer Lansky, claimed to have delivered phony Secret Service identifications to Dealey Plaza while also disguised as a tramp.
Holt, represented by a Texas attorney, tried to sell a book about it all.
Ricky White said his father, Roscoe, a Dallas policeman, was the grassy-knoll shooter and claimed the evidence was in his father’s diary.
Other documents that “prove” White was an assassin have been unmasked as forgeries.
Meanwhile, a group of Texas investors formed a corporation, MATSU, and has repeatedly tried to market the Roscoe White story as a book or film.
Oliver Stone reportedly considered paying $750,000 for the White story but eventually decided to buy the rights to Garrison’s 1988 book On the Trail of the Assassins for $250,000.46 Jailed drug dealer Christian David spun an exciting tale of three Corsican hitmen who shot Kennedy.
A British producer believed David, and his story became the basis for a television documentary, The Men Who Killed Kennedy, although it was later discovered that the accused men were either in the French navy or in prison on the day David claimed they were in Dallas.
Oliver Stone’s film JFK, released late in 1991, was the culmination of more than a decade of work by the conspiracy press.
JFK is a blatant mix of fact and fiction and is a microcosm of what has happened throughout the assassination-research community.
Sifting out the truth is increasingly difficult for those not well versed in the facts.
These theorists take us away, fly us away to this unknown land of Oz, wherever they take us.
Now, as you know, there are a bunch of books that are just old-fashioned nut books, like the umbrella man.
Dealey Plaza witnesses important to the conspiracy, such as Jean Hill and Ed Hoffman, are treated as celebrities, complete with autograph sessions.
Besides the annual convention, a Dallas “JFK Assassination Information Center” has opened in a shopping mall, where everything from bumper stickers to T-shirts are sold.
Within the research community, some have profited from selling bootleg copies of the Zapruder film and the autopsy photographs.
In the wake of Oliver Stone’s JFK, the gun Jack Ruby used to kill Oswald sold at auction for $200,000 and the new owner is offering a “limited edition” of 5,000 bullets shot from Ruby’s pistol, for $500 each.
The coroner’s tag that had been placed on Oswald’s big toe after his death sold for $6,000.
People are making lucrative livings off of selling conspiracy theories to the public.
The ready acceptance of a conspiracy by most Americans, though few have bothered to read the Warren Report, does not surprise those who study the phenomenon.
Historian Henry Steele Commager said, “I do think there has come up in recent years … something that might be called a conspiracy psychology.
To employ what may seem an odd metaphor, there is an esthetic principle here.
It would invest the President’s death with meaning, endowing him with martyrdom.
After the remaining federal files are released, a slew of books will probably follow, each focusing upon “new” evidence, further removing the facts from the real story.
Oswald is likely to become a footnote to the ever-widening theories fueled by fresh documents.
The search for a darker truth than the lone assassin seems unquenchable.
They can be tested against credible testimony, documents, and the latest scientific advances.
Chasing shadows on the grassy knoll will never substitute for real history.
Lee Harvey Oswald, driven by his own twisted and impenetrable furies, was the only assassin at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963.
To say otherwise, in light of the overwhelming evidence, is to absolve a man with blood on his hands, and to mock the President he killed.
See page 348, about how the report was a hoax concocted by reporter Lonnie Hudkins et. al.
Robert Maheau, an ex-FBI agent who had become a private investigator with underworld connections, and Johnny Roselli, a captain in the Las Vegas syndicate, acted as conduits between the government and the mob.
Following the release of Oliver Stone’s 1991 film JFK, Congress passed historic legislation establishing a process that will lead to the release of most of those documents, as well as the small percentage of remaining Warren Commission papers, and whatever files other federal agencies still maintained about the case.
The purpose of the legislation was to dispel the notion fostered in Stone’s movie that the government was party to a cover-up.
By January 1994, more than 500,000 pages of documents had been released pursuant to the legislation, and no information that contradicted or undermined the conclusions that both Oswald and Ruby acted alone surfaced in the new files.
In November 1993, the author testified before the Legislation and National Security Subcommittee of the House of Representatives, providing not only a summary of the contents of some of the newly released documents, but also proposing methods for expediting the release of the remaining government files.
In First-Hand Knowledge , ex-CIA contract agent Robert Morrow weaves an intricate intelligence plot, of which he claims to have been a part.
Oliver Stone, in his film JFK, regurgitated almost all of Garrison’s original contentions against the intelligence community.
Yet not only have the underlying facts to such accusations been disproved, but the CIA theories necessarily involve the greatest number of conspirators, sometimes numbering in the hundreds.
Picked up by a ceiling bug in Marcello’s Town & Country office, an unidentified acquaintance asked Marcello how he intended to deal with the Select Committee’s suspicions about him in its final report.
Marcello told the man to be quiet, and according to the FBI description, the tape records the sounds of a chair being pushed away from a desk, and the two men walked out of the room.
Blakey found it suspicious that Marcello wanted to go outside to answer the question about the Select Committee conclusions.
Dragging Trafficante’s name into the assassination may be Ragano’s revenge for a time when Trafficante refused to help him.
When Ragano was convicted of tax evasion and was disbarred in 1976, he was soon destitute.
When he approached his old friend and client Trafficante for a loan, he was flatly turned down.
Then it finally dawned on me he was no different than the rest of them.
He was mistakenly identified by many buffs as one of the three tramps detained at Dealey Plaza.
In 1973, Mark Lane co-wrote Executive Action, a semidocumentary in which a wealthy right-winger is the chief conspirator.
The Parallax View shows how an innocent man could be framed as a lone gunman.
In Winter Kills , based around a Kennedyesque family, the slain President’s father was responsible for the assassination.
Mr X was loosely based on an adviser to the film, Fletcher Prouty, an ex-Army colonel who was the chief Pentagon liaison officer to the CIA at the time of the assassination.
The implication is that some intelligence agency, probably the CIA, released an early, prepackaged set of details about the assassin to the media.
But there is nothing mysterious about the “extra” edition of the Christchurch Star.
Because of the nineteen-hour time difference, it was 7:30 A.M. on November 23 in New Zealand when JFK was assassinated.
Oswald was arrested when it was shortly after 9:00 A.M. in Christchurch.
A Note About the Past Decade Since Case Closed was published in 1993, there have been several developments regarding the assassination.
Long-sealed government records have been made public and more books charging a conspiracy have been published.
The most significant addition to understanding what happened on November 22, 1963, is the release of new records.
It was charged with re-examining for release all assassination-related records that federal agencies had regarded as too sensitive for the public.
In 1993, when Case Closed was issued, some historians and journalists told me they thought it was a brave book since the conclusion that Oswald had acted alone in killing JFK was still to be tested by the imminent release of these documents.
I was a strong advocate for releasing all files that were remotely relevant, especially since the government’s longstanding, and usually indefensible, refusal to release such documents had exacerbated lingering doubts many people had about the assassination.
I was confident that the release of the files would bolster my conclusion of Oswald’s sole guilt.
The simple answer is they did not provide the information long hoped for by conspiracy theorists.
Without adding substantive evidence to any conspiracy theory, the files were conveniently ignored by many who had vocally demanded their release in the first place.
The files themselves often illustrate how a cult of secrecy had become an ingrained part of government bureaucracy, leading many to be suspicious about the government’s motives.
Agencies steadfastly held onto documents even when they had absolutely no relevance.
In August 1993, the CIA released a batch of long-classified documents, some of which were photocopies of published newspaper and magazine articles about the assassination.
It is hard to overcome the barriers of a bureaucracy that is so steeped in secrecy and nondisclosure that it deems its own photocopy of a public article to be classified.
The inherent tendency of government agencies to withhold documents has worked to the detriment of establishing an early and conclusive truth in the question of who killed the president.
Besides the release of the files, there have been several other important developments in the case during the past decade.
In late 1993, PBS’s Frontline aired a three-hour special investigation of Lee Harvey Oswald and the JFK murder.
As part of its work, Frontline gave an amateur film taken by a bystander at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963, to a scientific firm that specialized in digitizing and improving the grainy image.
The film of the presidential motorcade, shot from the corner of Main and Houston streets by the late Robert Hughes, covers the president’s motorcade entering Dealey Plaza, and also some of the assassination’s aftermath.
But because the Hughes film was of such poor quality, it was not possible to determine whether the “movement” was merely an artifact on the film or the shadow of a real person.
That is the same location where Lee Harvey Oswald had last been left alone by his co-workers just a half hour before the assassination.
It is also the same location in which three spent bullet cartridges were found, all of which came from Oswald’s rifle, which was ditched just across the sixth floor as he escaped.
The frames from the Hughes film showing a person in the sniper’s nest only seconds before the first shot, provide a visual confirmation of both the physical evidence left behind by the killer, as well as contemporaneous accounts given to police by several eyewitnesses.
During the last ten years, several comprehensive private investigations of the case have either begun, or in some cases, finished.
Max Holland, a fellow at the John Nicholas Brown Center for the Study of American Civilization, and a frequent contributor to The Nation, has been working on an extensive history of the Warren Commission and the inner dynamics and politics of how the seven-member panel reached its conclusions.
Chief Justice Earl Warren, who headed it, refused to answer any questions about it.
Warren did not appreciate that when a conclusion on something as momentous as the assassination of a young and popular president was handed down, it was not enough to expect the public to accept it on face value.
The failure of the Commission to establish any mechanism for responding to the rumors and false information that quickly became widespread was a fundamental error.
Holland’s groundbreaking study, due to be published as a book, explains how such elementary errors were reached, and how they helped fuel a conspiracy industry.
Another long-time JFK researcher, investigative journalist Gus Russo, published the results of his work in 1998.
Russo’s book, Live by the Sword, is the only one I know of that makes use of all the files released since 1993.
In his comprehensive study, Russo concludes that Lee Harvey Oswald was the lone assassin at Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963.
He also credibly solves the long-standing mystery of what happened to JFK’s brain, missing since the mid-1960s.
Russo shows how Robert Kennedy, intent on avoiding any gruesome public display about his brother’s death, buried the brain with JFK when the body was reinterred at Arlington Cemetery on March 14, 1967.
Russo, who believes that Oswald likely killed JFK on behalf of Castro and the Cuban government, raises some questions about Oswald’s activities during a preassassination trip to Mexico City that can no longer be answered.
Russo does an excellent job of skewering the CIA for giving a higher priority to protecting its assets in Mexico, as well as keeping secret its own plots with the mafia to kill Fidel Castro, than it did to assisting the Warren Commission.
The CIA was the only United States agency with jurisdiction to probe what Oswald had done abroad.
The documents released by the Assassinations Review Board further embarrass the CIA for its lackluster investigation.
Russo’s work has persuaded me that I was too mild in castigating the CIA in Case Closed for its virtually nonexistent investigation.
The CIA not only lied to the Warren Commission, but deliberately withheld evidence, not because it feared disclosing a conspiracy against JFK, but rather because it put is own interests first, and the public’s and government’s right to know, second.
By so doing, CIA officials performed a disservice both to the country and to history.
Several other books during the past decade have had added to smaller aspects of the case.
The Real Story of Jim Garrison’s Investigation and Oliver Stone’s Film JFK, is a meticulous deconstruction of District Attorney Jim Garrison’s conspiracy theories.
The book, based on new interviews and fresh information, exposes Garrison as a complete fraud and even includes the first-ever interviews with the children he had molested.
Thomas was published in the peer-reviewed Science and Justice, a quarterly publication of Britain’s Forensic Science Society.
Thomas argued that the House Select Committee had been correct after all when it concluded in 1979 that there was acoustical evidence of a fourth shot at Dealey Plaza.
But Thomas’s methodology—when subsequently examined by other acoustic and photographic experts—was found to be based on multiple errors when he tried matching photographs of the motorcade to available police audio tape.
Another woman in New Orleans, who claimed to have secret letters from Oswald as well as evidence of his undercover role in a massive plot, was exposed as a fake even by conspiracy theorists.
Purported first-time pictures of the assassination at Dealey Plaza were offered for sale by a respected southern auction house in 2000, but they were pulled when the auctioneers realized they were merely photos someone had taken while on the set of the Oliver Stone film.
Fake audio tapes, doctored pictures, bogus interpretations of existing records, and false confessions continue to plague the JFK case.
Yet, as a result of Case Closed, many long-time conspiracy theorists modified their arguments during the past decade, and especially during the past two years.
New conspiracy theories, complete with “witness” accounts, contradict most earlier conspiracy plots but also try to take into account what was accomplished in Case Closed.
For instance, when I used the Zapruder film—the so-called home movie of the assassination taken that day by Dallas dressmaker Abraham Zapruder—to establish that the only shots that hit Kennedy came from behind, most of the buffs just dismissed it.
As a result, a growing number of conspiracy theorists try to explain away that evidence by contending that the Zapruder film must have been somehow doctored.
It is the essentially the same argument used over JFK’s autopsy X rays and photographs.
Since those also prove that the only bullets that struck the president were fired from behind, conspiracy theorists often charge they must be fake.
The original proponent of such arguments, Robert Groden, also got involved in a new case during the past decade.
Simpson trial, saying that a photograph of Simpson, wearing a pair of Bruno Magli shoes at a football game, was doctored.
By the time the prosecution finished introducing a series of such pictures, at different times, Groden’s self-proclaimed photographic expertise was nationally exposed as woefully insufficient.
Other conspiracy theorists now acknowledge that Oswald was indeed in the sniper’s nest, with his rifle, but have gone so far as to conjecture that he shot only blanks.
Although there is no evidence to support the new theories, it is the only way some buffs, who refuse to acknowledge the simpler truth, have figured out how to answer the void left in their field by Case Closed.
There has simply been no information or developments during the past decade that have changed the conclusions reached in Case Closed.
Rather, the release of millions of pages of assassination related documents have bolstered the history originally set forth in the book.
When a reporter for the German newsweekly Der Spiegel recently asked if I was still comfortable with the bold title Case Closed, I answered that my only change for the fortieth anniversary of the assassination might be to call it Case Still Closed.
The following year, his mother, unable to cope with him, committed him to an orphanage, where he joined his two older brothers.
The Marines A week after his seventeenth birthday, Lee followed his brother Robert into the Marine Corps, where he was court-martialed twice.
Oswald’s passport, issued on September 10, 1959, one day before his release from the Marines.
Devoted to Marxism from the age of fifteen, he planned for nearly two years to defect to the Soviet Union.
Oswald in Russia Oswald’s failed suicide attempt in Moscow prompted the Soviets to allow him to stay in Russia.
In Minsk, he posed with Pavel Golovachev , a friend and later KGB informant on Oswald; Roza Kuznetsova , an Intourist guide and also a KGB informant; and Ella Germann, Oswald’s first love, who devastated him by rejecting his marriage proposal.
Oswald kept a “Historical Diary” of his activities while in Russia, which showed not only his fickle nature but his deepening hatred of both the Soviet and American political systems.
Oswald and some of his co-workers at the Minsk radio and television plant.
Marina and Lee In March 1961, Oswald met Marina , and they married a month later.
With them are Marin’s aunt and uncle, Valentina Guryevna Prusakova and Ilya Vasilyevich Prusakov.
Some mistakenly conclude that Ilya worked for the KGB, when he was actually the equivalent of a local U S. policeman.
Although he tried at first to renounce his United States citizenship, Lee spent more than a year trying to obtain permission to return home.
The Walker Shooting Back in America, the Oswalds’ home life turned violent.
Lee also created a second identity, complete with false identifications that he made.
Alek was derived from his Russian nickname “Alik” and Hidell was a variation on the name of a Marine he had known.
In early 1963, Oswald stalked the Dallas home of right-wing general Edwin Walker, taking surveillance photos such as the one above.
The window of the Walker home, showing why Oswald’s assassination attempt went awry.
His shot nicked the bottom of the wooden frame, deflecting the cullet’s path and saving Walker’s life.
The Backyard Photos This well-known photo of Oswald in the backyard of his Dallas apartment, with his pistol and rifle and holding two leftist newspapers, was one of several taken by his wife, Marina.
The Mannlicher-Carcano rifle in Oswald’s hand is the same one used to kill President Kennedy.
Despite Marina’s insistence that she took the photo, conspiracy critics have vigorously contested their authenticity.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations finally settled the issue when twenty-two of the nation’s leading photo experts submitted the photograph to a series of sophisticated tests and concluded there was no evidence of fakery.
Under a microscope, composite pictures are easily identified by variations in the grain pattern.
New Orleans This unpublished photo of a smug Oswald was taken moments after his court hearing in New Orleans for having disturbed the peace in an altercation with anti-Castro Cubans.
In August 1963, Oswald passed out pro-Castro leaflets for the New Orleans branch of the Communist Fair Play for Cuba Organization.
He was that chapter’s only member, though he hired two men from the unemployment line to help him distribute the pamphlets.
Mexico City Oswald’s application for a travel visa to Cuba, filled out at the Cuban embassy in Mexico City on September 27, 1963.
The photo stapled at the upper left-hand corner was given personally by Oswald to the Cuba embassy clerk, belying conspiracy stories that an imposter visited instead.
The Assassin’s View These 1964 reconstructions, done by the FBI for the Warren Commission, approximate the shooter’s view through his 4X telescopic sight.
These images, keyed by the Commission to frame numbers from the Zapruder film of the assassination, appear much smaller than what the assassin would have seen with the sight filling his entire line of vision.
The car is a different model from the presidential limousine, and therefore the two agents are not in the actual positions of President and Governor Connally at the time of the assassination.
JFK’s right arm has started moving up towards his chin, part of a neurological response to the throat wound.
Although it belonged to a heckler who was later identified, it gave rise to much early and incorrect conspiracy speculation.
It is the visual confirmation that the shot that killed JFK came from behind the motorcade, not from the Grassy Knoll.
The metal-jacketed 6.5mm slug struck JFK in the high, right rear of his skull, and in this picture, brain tissue exits directly above and to the right of the President’s head.
The men on the lower floor, Bonnie Ray Williams and Harold Norman , were startled when they heard the rifle fire directly above them.
Norman even heard Oswald operate the gun’s bolt action, and the three cartridge cases hitting the floor.
Howard Brennan, the construction worker who saw Oswald shooting during the assassination, here demonstrates where he was at that moment, only ninety-three feet from the sniper’s nest.
Tippit’s patrol car, in the exact location where he stopped Oswald just forty-five minutes after Kennedy was killed.
As Tippit walked around the front of the car, Oswald pulled our his revolver and fired, killing Tippit instantly.
Oswald, who was followed there by a local shoestore clerk, ducked inside the movie house without paying for a ticket.
After a scuffle inside the theater, in which he unsuccessfully tried to shoot another policeman, Oswald was dragged out of the movie house by a Dallas policeman and a detective.
Jack Ruby A television shot of the back of the room during Oswald’s press conference, held at the jail at midnight on the day of the assassination.
Jack Ruby , a local Dallas nightclub owner, had entered the room by pretending to be a journalist.
Ruby, publicity hungry and attracted to high-profile events, was obsessed with the weekend activities surrounding the assassination.
Oswald’s Murder Since he was a nightclub owner with a tough guy image, his murder of Oswald later sparked considerable—and ultimately incorrect—speculation about whether he was a Mafia hit man.
Although Ruby had not planned to shoot Oswald, once it happened he thought he would be treated as a hero for having meted out street justice to the President’s assassin.
JFK’s Casket Arrives in Washington One of the most controversial conspiracy theories charges that this bronze coffin containing JFK was empty when it arrived at Andrews Air Force Base.
Supposedly the President’s body had been stolen for surgical alterations while still in Dallas.
The casket was never unattended, however, and it was hermetically sealed by an air-lock mechanism in Dallas.
The Aftermath In 1978, six members of the House Select Committee on Assassinations traveled to Havana and met with Fidel Castro for four hours, the first time the Cuban president had answered questions about the assassination.
Oswald, a committed leftist who wanted desperately to move to Cuba, might well have been inspired by Castro.
The Single Bullet Tested A side and rear view of Warren Commission Exhibit 399, the single bullet that wounded Kennedy through his neck as well as inflicting all of Governor Connally’s injuries.
The bullet from a 1992 reconstruction done by Failure Analysis Associates.
Emerging in even better condition than 399, it provided the final physical evidence necessary to prove the single bullet theory.
APPENDIX A The Ballistics of Assassination Graphic Analysis One man, acting alone, killed the President.
Ever since, the technical plausibility of such marksmanship has been under attack.
Today, the ballistics can be subjected to advances in computer analysis.
By tracking the trajectories of the shots in reverse from the wounds, the source of the shots can be determined with precision.
The following graphics are based on forensic evidence analyzed by these new techniques, using timing from the frames of the now-famous 8mm film of the assassination taken by Abraham Zapruder.
Graphics by John Grimwade Edited by Clive Irving Research by Joyce Pendola This is the single bullet that wounded both JFK and Connally APPENDIX B The Non-Mysterious “Mystery Deaths” Penn Jones, former editor of the Texas weekly Midlothian Mirror, originated the popular theory that witnesses to the Kennedy assassination who knew too much were being silenced by an unidentified murder squad.
Jones, who believes there were nine assassins at Dealey Plaza, is the author of four self-published books on the case.
By 1967, he had compiled a list of eighteen people connected to the assassination who had suffered unnatural deaths.
Initially, The London Sunday Times used Jones’s list of eighteen to conclude that the odds against them being dead through foul play within three years of the assassination was one hundred thousand trillion to one.
No major writer or investigator on the case—even those trying to expose dangerous conspiracies—has died an unusual death.
All of the earliest critics, like Mark Lane, Edward Epstein, Harold Weisberg, David Lifton, Josiah Thompson, and Mary Ferrell, are alive and well.
Even Penn Jones, who first published information about the deaths, was never bothered and is now seventy-eight years old.
No one tried to eliminate Jim Garrison or any of his staff during their judicial probe, nor was Oliver Stone bothered when he “exposed” the government and sanctified Garrison.
The key witnesses who claimed to see a second gunman at Dealey Plaza—Jean Hill, Malcolm Summers, Gordon Arnold, and Ed Hoffman—are all alive.
Fundamental conspiracy witnesses like Beverly Oliver, who linked Ruby and Oswald, and others like Delphine Roberts, who tied Oswald to Guy Banister and David Ferrie, are still living.
Almost thirty men named as the “second shooter” by conspiracy buffs are alive.
Frank Ragano, sixty-nine years old, has reportedly sold his manuscript that says he passed the “hit” from Hoffa to Marcello and Trafficante.
Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans crime boss who some say carried out an assassination contract for the CIA, enjoyed his retirement until his natural death in 1993, at the age of eighty-three.
It would seem necessary that key “witnesses” to conspiracy be eliminated as soon as possible after the assassination, yet the list covers more than two decades.
The last death is that of Roy Kellerman, the Secret Service agent in charge of JFK’s limousine.
In many instances, the persons listed were strong believers in Oswald’s guilt, which should have assured their survival—at least from murder by conspirators.
Jackson —his only connection to the case was that he was the Life magazine executive who decided to purchase the Zapruder film.
He supplied a half-page affidavit, as did every other Dallas gun-store owner, that he did not sell a Smith and Wesson .38-caliber revolver, serial number 65248, the gun Oswald used to kill Tippit.
She was the cleaning woman at 1026 North Beckley and saw Oswald near 1:00 P.M. on the day of the assassination.
The only thing he knew about the Ruby investigation was what he read in the newspapers.
Ruby was deranged at the end of his life and believed not only that he was being killed by injections, but also that 25 million Jews were being slaughtered on the jail floor below him.
He is only listed because he was a friend of Roger Craig, the deputy sheriff who told the elaborate tale about a phantom getaway car at Dealey Plaza.
Nicholas Chetta was the New Orleans coroner who performed the autopsy on David Ferrie.
His finding of a berry aneurysm has been confirmed by subsequent forensic pathologists.
Her testimony helped prove he was in flight after the shooting, certainly not someone the conspirators would apparently kill at the age of seventy-two, six years after the assassination.
He sold the film to Life magazine and was uninvolved in the investigation.
They called him Red because he drank too much and his face looked like a baboon’s ass.
Marrs lists the death only as “possible cancer,” despite the unambiguous death certificate and statements from his treating physicians.
Charles Gregory was one of the surgeons who operated on Governor John Connally.
Gregory’s medical testimony was some of the most important supporting the Warren Commission and the single bullet.
After his Warren Commission testimony, he had no connection with the case.
The only reason he seems to be on the mysterydeaths list is that he was a business acquaintance of George de Mohrenschildt, Oswald’s Dallas friend.
Lewis was one of the dozens of Dallas deputy sheriffs who worked on the case.
John Holbrook , a psychiatrist, was a prosecution witness at the Ruby trial, testifying that Ruby was not insane at the moment he shot Oswald.
Immediately after her son’s arrest She hired Mark Lane to represent her, and over the years she gave and sold dozens of press interviews about many aspects of the case.
He testified before the Warren Commission but had no involvement with the investigation after his testimony.
James Weston was a pathologist who examined the JFK autopsy X rays and photos for the House Select Committee.
All of the other doctors are still alive at this writing—and perhaps the surprise survivor is Cyril Wecht, who for twenty years has led a vocal oneman campaign to prove medically that the assassination is a conspiracy.
Wecht is alive and well and is the medical examiner for Allegheny County, Pennsylvania.
He was retired and living in Florida when, Marrs says, he died of “unknown” causes.
The Unnatural Deaths While the fifty-three listed above died of natural causes, the following forty-eight died unnatural deaths.
According to Penn Jones, unidentified sources reported that she screamed into the telephone, before the assassination, that the President was going to be killed.
There is no corroboration for the report, yet Marrs still begins his list with her death.
Jones asserts that Zangetty told friends about three assassins scheduled to kill JFK, that Ruby would kill Oswald, and that the Sinatra family was involved.
There is no support for Jones’s claim, and the author could find no record of such a death.
He probably qualifies for the list since he was acquainted with Guy Banister.
He also reportedly knew a fellow roomer at Oswald’s Beckley Street boardinghouse.
Mary Sherman had no connection to the case, though she was acquainted with David Ferrie.
According to the medical records, she was killed in an accidental fire, and there was no gunshot wound on her body.
Both were reporters who had stopped by Ruby’s apartment on November 24, 1963, after the shooting of Oswald.
There, they spoke to one of Ruby’s attorneys, Tom Howard, Ruby’s roommate, George Senator, and a friend of his, Jim Martin.
Hunter was killed in California when someone dropped a pistol and it accidentally discharged.
The Dallas police believed Koethe’s murder was the result of a fight with a gay lover.
The evidence that Underhill was an agent is from an undisclosed source known only to Jones, and there is no corroboration that he ever said that there was CIA complicity in the assassination.
Except for her reported liaison with the President, she was not associated with any aspect of the case.
Marrs claims she “had private interview with Ruby” and was going to break open the case.
Her “private” interview with Ruby was when she spoke to him for a few minutes during a recess in the courtroom during his trial, surrounded by other reporters.
There was no scoop pending by the time Kilgallen drank herself to death.
Whaley had a head-on collision, in which his taxi passenger was critically injured, when the eighty-three-year-old driver of the other auto had a fatal heart attack and lost control of his car.
Bowers told his story not only to the Warren Commission but also to Mark Lane for his book and film documentary.
He was fired shortly after he told the story and had no other relationship to the case.
His testimony supports the Warren Commission conclusion about the location of the assassin.
The story was exploited by Robert Groden and Harrison livingstone in High Treason, and Marrs picked it up for his mysterydeaths list.
He was warned shortly before his death that a murder contract was put on his head by Castro agents.
Garrison wanted to question him as part of his anti-Castro investigation.
The coroner’s report and death certificate show it was an aneurysm, with no foul play involved.
He was a cameraman, not a reporter, and never claimed to have any special information.
Johnson, who claimed he could put Shaw and Oswald together, was so unreliable that not even Garrison used him.
The Shaw trial finished on March 1, and Johnson was not killed until July.
He was shot and killed when he and his partner, Al Maddox, tried to arrest a fugitive, James Walter Cherry.
Since he was supposedly a member of the “Warren Commission cover-up,” any team of assassins eliminating dangerous witnesses would be expected to let Boggs live.
Ruby had only sporadic contact with him over fifteen years, and none during 1963.
For a time, critics claimed Milteer was identified in one of the photographs taken at Dealey Plaza, but photo analysts for the Select Committee proved it was not him.
Beyond his boastful claim in November, there is no link between Milteer and the events in Dallas.
The thousands of hours of surveillance tapes on Giancana, starting in the late 1950s, show that he knew nothing about the assassination or about any alleged mob plot.
He strongly opposed Castro, and solicited American support for the anti-Castro Cubans.
Cadigan was a document expert whose involvement with the case ended with his 1964 Warren Commission testimony, and Sullivan was an official later in charge of counterespionage.
Oswald had been assigned to a U-2 base and was in Russia when Powers was downed.
Marrs lists Teresa Norton as a Ruby employee, and says she was “fatally shot” in August 1964.
He also lists Karen “Little Lynn” Carlin, another Ruby employee, as being a “gunshot victim” in 1966.
Teresa Norton was another name used by Karen Carlin—they are the same person.
Sylvia Meagher, Robert Sam Anson, and David Scheim all reported that Carlin died in August 1964 in a Houston hotel fire.
Moreover, Carlin testified a second time to the Warren Commission on August 24, 1964, after the date she was supposed to have died.
Marrs provides no citation for the 1966 date, and does not list a location, month, or day.
The author asked him to comment on the Ruby-related deaths, and he is quoted whenever they appear.
Researcher David Perry, in “The Lee Bowers Story,” , conclusively proved that Bowers’s death was accidental.
Acknowledgments The goal of this book was to reexamine all the evidence on the JFK assassination.
Any of a dozen issues could have been the subject of a separate book, including, among others, Oswald’s time in Russia, Jack Ruby’s story, or the actual assassination.
Although I had studied the subject and conducted preliminary research for several years, the last two, after Random House agreed to be the publisher, were particularly hectic.
In addition, considerable time was spent obtaining information about files still classified by the U.S., Russian, and Cuban governments.
In obtaining documents, I was aided by an excellent staff at the National Archives, particularly Michael McReynolds, director of Textual Reference, and Sue McDonough, archivist; Master Sgt.
A special thank you to both Cynthia Wegmann, Esq., New Orleans, who allowed me to review her father’s voluminous papers on the Garrison case, and to Peter Earnest, chief of the CIA’s Office of Public and Agency Information, who was always very generous in his assistance.
For help in obtaining information in other countries, I am indebted to Rene Mujica of the Cuban mission to the United States; Yuriy Kobaladze, press bureau chief of the KGB, Moscow; Kravchenko Pyotr Kuzimich, foreign minister, Belorussia; General Dmitri Volkogonov, Moscow; Anatoliy Petrovich Privalov, KGB Veterans of Foreign Espionage, Moscow; Nicholas Vykhodtsev, manager, Alice 24-Hour Information Service, Moscow; Gerald Nadler, The Washington Times, Moscow; and Ambassador Akira Sono, Tokyo.
While I am grateful to all of them for the time they took to speak with me, a few made an extra effort.
Carlos Bringuier clarified the anti-Castro issues as well as the problems in New Orleans in 1963; Dr.
Michael Baden resolved many persistent medical discrepancies; and Earl Ruby provided valuable insights into his brother Jack.
Yuriy Nosenko, the 1964 KGB defector, is familiar with the KGB’s handling of Oswald in Russia.
He is living under an assumed name in the United States since his life is still at peril because of a standing KGB death warrant.
Only twice before had he agreed to private interviews, and they had not been about Oswald.
A journalist from one of the earlier meetings had later disclosed the United States state in which Nosenko was living, forcing him to move.
Despite the risks in granting another interview, he agreed with the argument of my first letter to him, emphasizing his duty to the historical record.
The extended time he spent with me, combined with his recall for details, was more than I originally expected.
Bill Alexander, Esq., was the assistant district attorney in Dallas at the time of the assassination.
He was an integral part of the investigation after Oswald’s arrest and later prosecuted Jack Ruby for Oswald’s murder.
He is a significant source of untapped information about the case but has seldom given interviews.
I am grateful for the several days he gave me in Dallas, in addition to the many retired Dallas police sources he led me to.
His recollections of the assassination weekend helped me better understand many of those about whom I had to write.
Dallas sheriff Jim Bowles made himself and his staff, particularly Jim Ewell and Wilma Snelen, available for days at a time.
Sheriff Bowles’s crusade to uncover the truth in the assassination’s acoustics issues is some of the case’s best private research.
He shared his work selflessly with me, and I am indebted for his considerable assistance.
I am especially thankful to Mary Latham of Itek Optical Systems and Janet Steele of Bell & Howell.
Michael West have done some of the most sophisticated computer-enhancement work on the Zapruder film.
They not only gave me access to their enhancements and underlying tests, but also patiently guided me through the intricacies of the ballistics issues.
Steve Goldberg, Esq., Los Angeles, was always available with astute legal advice, and Rev.
David Whipple, president of the association of retired intelligence agents, Hamilton Brown, who holds the same position for retired Secret Service agents, and Les Stanford, for Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, were diligent in finding those long retired from their respective agencies.
I owe a special thanks to David Perry, an insurance investigator who has studied the assassination for nearly two decades.
While he may disagree with the conclusions I have reached in this book, he will recognize the benefit of purging many falsehoods that clutter the field.
He was unstinting in his assistance, often spending hours on the most arcane requests, ranging from the mystery deaths to the height of the fence on the grassy knoll to 1963 Dallas street maps and the like.
Using the Freedom of Information Act in many lawsuits, he has obtained thousands of government documents on the case.
His attitude toward the sharing of information is refreshing, and although I disagree with him about almost every aspect of the case, I thank him for his generosity in the use of his papers and his time.
The same applies to Mary Ferrell, a retired legal secretary in Dallas who has one of the largest private archives on the assassination.
She also gave advice and allowed me to review some of her extensive collection when I visited Dallas.
Paul Hoch, in Berkeley, California, is the unofficial archivist for the conspiracy press.
An academic, with a thorough understanding of the documents in the case, Hoch provided insights that helped me avoid pitfalls in the research.
Gus Russo, in Baltimore, Maryland, is a private researcher who was kind to provide many telephone numbers and addresses from his extensive database.
The Assassination Archives and Research Center in Washington, D.C., directed by attorney James Lesar, has all the documentation available at the National Archives, but instead of microfilm, everything at the AARC is in an easier format for research—paper copies.
With annual dues of $25 and a high-speed photocopy machine on the premises, there is no better place for anyone interested in researching the subject.
Charles Schwartz saved me after several computer crashes, as I made the mistake of trying to learn new software while I wrote the first draft of the manuscript.
His patience in taking panicked telephone calls at all hours of the night is greatly appreciated.
John and Catherine Martin were kind enough to allow my wife and me to be their houseguests on our often unplanned and lengthy research trips to Washington.
They always found room for us, and their home was an oasis of peace and quiet.
Pam Bernstein, my agent and friend, has left William Morris to establish her own agency.
She helped place this project and negotiate a contract that allowed me to undertake the extensive research.
Since her departure, I have been fortunate to be represented by one of the best agents in the business, Owen Laster.
At Random House, Beth Pearson oversaw the editorial production of the book.
Her great enthusiasm for the subject, combined with her keen eye for detail, greatly helped maintain the accuracy of the text.
He recognized this was a good story and gave me free rein to do the research and come up with the answers.
It is rare that a publisher will commit to a project without specific guarantees from the author about the book’s conclusions and the ability of the writer to gather the data.
Reexamine the evidence and find the truth—a task facilitated by the fact that they did not care if I came back with a book that concluded the Kennedy assassination was a conspiracy or the result of a lone assassin, so long as my work was supported by credible evidence.
My editor, Robert Loomis, has forever spoiled me for any future book because his effort on this one was beyond the ordinary assistance that can be expected from someone who must attend to a dozen manuscripts at a time.
He believed in this book from the beginning and championed it at Random House.
Our extensive discussions fundamentally affected its organization and tone several times, each for the better.
His imprint is evident throughout, and the book’s quality is due largely to his commitment and support.
She is my inspiration at every stage of my work, even enduring my frequent self-doubt when I constantly tormented her with my worries about organizing the masses of information into a solid manuscript by the deadline.
Depending on the subject, she endures the daily invasion of figures and trappings from another period.
I know she will be happy to no longer live with the shadow of Lee Oswald.
FBI report of addresses of Lee Harvey Oswald from time of his birth , CE 1963, WC Vol.
FBI report, April 3, 1964, of investigation concerning Lee Harvey Oswald’s possible attendance at a day nursery in Dallas, Texas, during the school year 1944–45 , CE 1874, WC Vol.
Letter from Louisiana Department of Public Safety to Commission, February 4, 1964, transmitting information concerning Lee Oswald’s education and background in Louisiana , CE 1413, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 26, 1963, reflecting affidavit of Palmer McBride , CE 1386, WC Vol.
Notes of interview of Lee Oswald conducted by Aline Mosby in Moscow, November 1959 , CE 1385, WC Vol.
Copies of Lee Oswald’s classification card, dated August 30, 1956, Fort Worth public schools, high school department, and Oswald’s permanent high school record, Fort Worth public schools, Arlington Heights High School , CE 1873 J, K, WC Vol.
FBI report, June 26, 1964, of interview with Allen R Felde , CE 1962, WC Vol.
Letter from Lee Oswald to Robert Oswald, November 26, 1959, CE 295, WC Vol.
Application form filled out by Lee Harvey Oswald on March 4, 1959, for entry to the Albert Schweitzer College, CE 228, WC Vol.
United States passport application of Lee Oswald, dated September 4, 1959 , CE 1114, WC Vol.
FBI reports, December 4, 1963, concerning passenger records of steam ship on which Oswald sailed from New Orleans to Le Havre, France , CE 2665, WC Vol.
Undated letter from Lee Oswald to Marguerite Oswald, with envelope postmarked September 19, 1959, CE 200, WC Vol.
Oswald’s Historic Diary, CE 24, entry for November 17-December 30, 1959.
Oswald’s Historic Diary, CE 24, entry for January 4, 1960; CE 985, WC Vol.
Oswald’s Historic Diary, CE 24, entries for January 11 and 13, 1960; interview with Priscilla Johnson McMillan, September 29, 1992.
Lee Oswald’s handwritten account of amorous affairs in the USSR, found among Oswald’s personal effects , CE 2759, WC Vol.
Notes written by Lee Oswald on Holland America Line stationery, CE 25, WC Vol.
Declaration of Lee Oswald requesting that his United States citizenship be revoked, CE 931, WC Vol.
Letter to Lee Oswald from the American embassy in Moscow, February 28, 1961, CE 933, WC Vol.
Foreign Service dispatch from the Department of State to the American embassy in Moscow, March 24, 1961, CE 940, WC Vol.
State Department memorandum from John T White to Edward J Hickey, March 31, 1961, CE 970, WC Vol.
XVIII, 367; Department of State In struction to the American embassy in Moscow, April 13, 1961, CE 971, WC Vol.
XI, 455; notes of interview of Lee Oswald conducted by Aline Mosby in Moscow, CE 1385, WC Vol.
Oswald’s Historic Diary, CE 24, entry for November 17 to December 30, 1959.
Letter from Lee Harvey Oswald to the American embassy in Moscow, dated May 1961, CE 252, WC Vol.
FBI reports, December 1–7, 1963, of interviews with and data concerning Marina Oswald , CE 1401, WC Vol.
Operations memorandum from State Department to the American embassy in Moscow, dated August 18, 1961, CE 979, WC Vol.
Letter from Lee Oswald to Robert Oswald, dated July 14, 1961, CE 301, WC Vol.
Copies of letters dated from July 15, 1961, to October 4, 1961, from Lee Oswald to the American embassy in Moscow, as preserved in State Department files , CE 1122, WC Vol.
Internal memorandum of the Commission, dated June 8, 1964, and attached documents, re “Senator John G Tower’s contacts with Lee Harvey Oswald” , CE 1058, WC Vol.
Operations memorandum from the American embassy in Moscow to the Department of State, August 28, 1961, CE 944, WC Vol.
Copy of letter, dated May 9, 1962, from Robert H Robinson, Immigration and Naturalization Service, to Michael Cieplinski, State Department, concerning Marina Oswald, CE 1777, WC Vol.
Foreign Service dispatch from the American embassy in Moscow to the State Department, dated July 11, 1961, CE 935, WC Vol.
Copy of an FBI report by Special Agent Fain, May 12, 1960, CE 823, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Gladys Yoakum , CE 2699, WC Vol.
XXVI, 73; FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Troy Bond, principal, evening school at Crozier Tech High School, Dallas, Texas , CE 1130, WC Vol.
Letter from Marina Oswald to Russian embassy, February 17, 1963, CE 986, WC Vol.
Interview with Art Pence, February 21, 1992; testimony of Ronald Simmons, WC Vol.
Notes by Oswald titled “A System opposed to the Communists,” CE 98, WC Vol.
IV, 444; copy of an FBI report by agent John Fain, September 10, 1963, CE 829, WC Vol.
FBI report, February 18, 1964, of interview with Marina Oswald, CE 1156, WC Vol.
Report of investigation into possible target practice by Lee Oswald in Dallas, Texas, area , CE 2694, WC Vol.
Oswald’s undated application for employment at Goldrings, New Orleans, CE 1945; application dated August 6, 1963, for employment at Cosmos shipping, CE 1946; application for employment at unknown place, CE 1947; Lykes Brothers Steamship Co.
Oswald’s application for employment with William B Reily, May 9, 1963, CE 1398, WC Vol.
Undated letter from Marina Oswald to the Russian embassy, with translation, CE 12, WC Vol.
Letter from Lee Oswald to Russian embassy, July 1, 1963, CE 13, WC Vol.
Letter from Ruth Paine to Marina Oswald, July 11, 1963, CE 411, WC Vol.
Watson, George Reppel, Philip Blappert, Fred Madden, and Fred Olsen; also, reports of investigations on Oswald’s employment in New Orleans, WC Vol.
Letter draft from Ruth Paine to Marina Oswald, July 21, 1963, CE 416, WC Vol.
Letters dated August 22 and July 6, 1963, from Eugene Murret to Lee Oswald, CE 2648, WC Vol.
Secret Service report, December 9, 1963, reflecting investigation of allegation that Oswald rented an office in New Orleans for conduct of Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities , CE 1414, WC Vol.
Letter from Major James T McCarley, CAP Deputy for Personnel, to Deputy Commander, CAP, Louisiana Wing, November 3, 1959.
Affidavit of John Manchester, as prepared by Andrew Sciambra, undated, 1967, 1.
Letter from Arnold Johnson to Lee Oswald, July 31, 1963, CE 1145, WC Vol.
Interview with Warren de Brueys, March 16, 1992; testimony of Warren de Brueys, WC Vol.
Copy of a FBI report by Special Agent Kaack, October 31, 1963, CE 826, WC Vol.
Lee Oswald’s application for tourist card to visit Mexico, CE 2481, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 11, 1963, of interview with Earl Spencer Anderson, CE 2126, WCVol.
Secret Service report, August 28, 1964, of schedule of buses traveling from Dallas and Houston to Laredo, Texas, CE 2534, WC Vol.
Letter of June 23, 1964, from State Department to Commission, transmitting note and enclosures received from Mexican government, with translation , CE 2123, WC Vol.
XXIV; FBI report of March 16, 1964, of investigation into Oswald’s trip to Mexico, with a translation of a report prepared by a Mexican immigration inspector and an interview of the inspector , CE 2193, WC Vol.
Lee Harvey Oswald, Internal Security—R—Cuba, Miami, Florida,” dated September 12, 1964, 9.
Burt Griffin memo to W David Slawson, May 16, 1964, House Select Committee on Assassinations ; deposition of Dr.
Burton C Einspruch, July 11, 1978, House Select Committee on Assassinations , 17.
XXV, 586; FBI report of investigation of December 16, 1963, of schedule of Continental Trailways buses from New Orleans to Houston; excerpts of Secret Service report dated August 28, 1964, of schedule of buses from Dallas and Houston to Laredo, Texas , CE 2464, WC Vol.
The Never-Before-Told Story of Lee Harvey Oswald by the KGB Colonel Who Knew Him 66.
Interview with Gerald Nadler, April 3, 1992; Jean Davison, Oswald’s Game , 209.
Gerald Nadler, “The KGB Spies Who Came in for the Gold,” The Washington Times, March 27, 1992, A9; interview with Gerald Nadler, April 3, 1992.
Gerald Nadler, “The KGB Spies Who Came in for the Gold,” The Washington Times, March 27, 1992, 1; interviews with Gerald Nadler, April 3 and 5, 1992.
Testimony of Marina Oswald, WC Vol., 27; FBI report, April 22, 1964, giving approximation of expenditures that Lee Oswald made during his travel and stay in Mexico , CE 1166, WC Vol.
XXII; photo of pamphlet titled “Fiesta Brava,” published by Pemex Travel Club, Mexico , CE 2489, WC Vol.
Summers donated them to the center after finishing the work on his book.
Comer Clark, “Fidel Castro Says He Knew of Oswald Threat to Kill JFK,” National Enquirer, October 15, 1967.
FBI report of interviews of manager and other personnel of Hotel del Comercio at Mexico City , CE 2540, WC Vol.
Letter, dated June 29, 1964, from the FBI to the Commission, with attached report of reinterviews of Mr and Mrs.
XXV, 6; FBI report, June 11, 1964, of interview of Eulalio Rodriguez-Chavez , CE 2456, WC Vol.
Interview with Michael Paine, April 18, 1992; testimony of Michael Paine, WC Vol.
Draft of letter from Lee Oswald to the Russian embassy, CE 103, WC Vol.
Letter from Lee Oswald to the Russian embassy, November 9, 1963, CE 15, WC Vol.
Wire-service story, “Back Pay Can’t Erase Censured Agent’s Years of Pain,” by Earl Golz, December 8, 1980.
Secret Service memo to Commission of July 10, 1964, concerning Trade Mart decision , CE 1360, WC Vol.
Statement of Special Agent Winston Lawson concerning his official duties from November 4 to November 22, 1963, in preparation for President Kennedy’s trip to Dallas, CE 769, WC Vol.
Letter from Secret Service to the Commission, March 26, 1964, CE 1022, WC Vol.
XVIII, 2; “Increased Seating Readied for Kennedy Luncheon,” Dallas Times Herald, November 16, 1963, CE 1361, WC Vol.
Interview with Marina Oswald, August 21, 1992; testimony of Marina Oswald, WC Vol.
Interview with Ruth Paine, April 18, 1992; testimony of Ruth Paine, WC Vol.
XXII, 615; “Yarborough Invited to Travel with JFK,” Dallas Morning News, November 20, 1963 , CE 1364, WC Vol.
Interview with Danny Arce, March 8, 1992; testimony of Bonnie Ray Williams, WC Vol.
Statement of Dallas police officer Joe Murphy, December 9, 1963, CD 205.
Earl Golz interview with John Powell for the Dallas Morning News, December 19, 1978.
FBI memo, ibid.; interview with Dallas sheriff Robert Knowles, March 3, 1992.
Author’s review of Warren Commission volumes and statements from Dealey Plaza witnesses by FBI, sheriffs office, and Dallas police.
Report of the Committee on Ballistics Acoustics, Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources; National Research Council; National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1982, 7.
Interview with Harold Norman; testimony of Bonnie Ray Williams, WC Vol.
The Kennedy Assassination: As Seen by Howard Brennan 7; testimony of Howard Brennan, WC Vol.
Decker Exhibit 5323, statement of Jean Hill to sheriff’s department, WC Vol.
Gordon Arnold, interviewed by Earl Golz, August 27, 1978, for the Dallas Morning News.
Duke Lane, “The Black Car Chase and the Cowtown Connection,” unpublished, 1993.
Entre Nous newsletter, Vol 14, #2, “Will the Real Umbrella Man Please Stand Up?,” 15.
Interviews with Tom Weaver, March 8, 1992, and John Crawson and Bernie Schram, March 6, 1992.
London Weekend Television, “Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald,” testimony of Jack Tatum.
Testimony of Helen Markham, William Scoggins, and Virginia Davis, WC Vol.
VI, 453; testimony of Virginia Davis, William Smith, and Sam Guinyard, WC Vol.
Radio log of Channel One of the Dallas Police Department for November 22, 1963, CE 705, WC Vol.
Authentication of John F Kennedy Autopsy Radiographs and Photographs, HSCA Vol.
Peters also drew a diagram that showed the doctors’ positions around the table and provided it to the author.
Author’s review of witness statements published in the twenty-six volumes of the Warren Commission and available in the National Archives.
Letter from the Secret Service to the Commission, dated June 11, 1964, with attached statements of Secret Service personnel concerning the events surrounding the assassination, CE 1024, WC Vol.
David Lui, “The Little Girl Must Have Heard,” The Dallas Times Herald, June 3, 1979, H-3.
Warren Commission memorandum, Arlen Specter to Lee Rankin, June 11, 1964; WC Vol.
V, 63; front view of coat worn by Governor Connally at time of assassination, CE 683; front view of shirt worn by Governor Connally, CE 686, WC Vol.
Robert Piziali, American Bar Association, mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald, August 10, 1992.
Piziali, American Bar Association, mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald, August 10, 1992.
Martin Fackler, American Bar Association, mock trial of Lee Harvey Oswald, August 10, 1992.
A Report to the House of Representatives, Select Committee on Assassinations, on the subject of “1977 Activation Analysis Measurements on Bullet-Lead Specimens Involved in the 1963 Assassination of President John F Kennedy,” by Dr.
I, 504; “1977 Activation Analysis Measurements on Bullet-Lead Specimens Involved in the 1963 Assassination of President John F Kennedy,” JFK-Exhibit F-331, 533.
Interview with William Alexander, March 12, 1992; testimony of Jack Ruby, WC Vol.
FBI report of investigation conducted on November 24, 1963, of Dallas area police record concerning Jack Ruby and others , CE 1234; FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Edward J Nerad, chief administrative officer, Family Court of Cook County, Chicago, III. , CE 1254; Selective Service records pertaining to Jack Ruby’s military career , CE 1274; FBI report, June 9, 1964, concerning records pertaining to Jack Ruby provided by Chicago Board of Education , CE 1290; records pertaining to Jacob Rubenstein provided by Illinois Institute for Juvenile Research , CE 1297 1, WC Vol.
Interview with Earl Ruby, November 17, 1992; statement of Marian Carroll and Ann Volpert, CE 1185, WC Vol.
Interview with Earl Ruby, November 17, 1992; testimony of Earl Ruby, WC Vol.
XIV, 439; FBI letter to Commission, dated February 18, 1964, transmitting records of Fannie Rubenstein in Elgin State Hospital, CE 1281, 11, WC Vol.
Interview with Earl Ruby, November 17, 1992; testimony of Hyman Rubenstein, WC Vol.
XV, 10; Sam Ruby Exhibit 1, 185; C Ray Hall Exhibit 1; FBI report, November 27, 1963, of interview with Sam Gordon , CE 1195; FBI report, November 27, 1963, of interview with Sollie Ziv , CE 1197; FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Harry M Epstein , CE 1200; FBI report, January 31, 1964, of interview with Martin Brauner , CE 1282, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 9, 1963, of information on Jack Ruby and his family supplied by Michael F Heneghan, chief probation officer, Family Court of Cook County, Chicago, Ill., CE 1255, 364; CE 1254, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview of Ben Epstein , CE 1193; FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview of Ralph Kaplan , CE 1194; CE 1195; CE 1197; FBI report, October 4, 1963, of interview of Phil Udell , CE 1246; FBI report, June 5, 1964, of interview with Ira Colitz , CE 1289, 3; WC Vol.
XV, 28; FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Erwin Horwitz , CE 1191; CE 1194; FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Harry Solavit , CE 1198; WC Vol.
XIV, 44; C Ray Hall Exhibits 1 and., 13; FBI report, December 4, 1963, of interview of Bennie Barrish , CE 1239, WC Vol.
CE 1200; FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Mike Nemzin , CE 1203; FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Ben Kay , CE 1207; FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview with Art Petacque , CE 1208; CE 1246; FBI report, December 2, 1963, of interview with Barney Ross ; CE 1261; FBI report, December 20, 1963, of interview with Arthur Douglas Cohen , CE 1299; WC Vol.
XIV, 445; FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Abe CoHn , CE 1190; FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview with Theodore Shulman , CE 1206, WC Vol.
XXII; FBI report, April 2, 1964, of interview with Saul Molodofsky , CE 1702, WC Vol.
CE 1193; FBI report, November 27, 1963, of interview with Joe Kellman , CE 1216; FBI report, December 3, 1963, of interview with Israel Horowitz , CE 1258; CE 1299, WC Vol.
FBI report, June 22, 1964, of interview with Stephen Andrew Belancik , CE 1294, WC Vol.
FBI report, June 24, 1964, of interview with Irving Zakarin , CE 1295, WC Vol.
FBI reports, August 10, 13, and 19, 1964, concerning the examination of phonograph records and papers pertaining to the Dallas crime investigation of 1946–48 , CE 2416, WC Vol.
FBI report of interview with Herman Ross on November 25, 1963 , CE 1516; FBI report, December 13, 1963, of interview with John N Crawford , CE 1619, WC Vol.
Interview with Earl Ruby, November 17, 1992; FBI report, November 27, 1963, of interview with Michael Shore , CE 1507, WC Vol.
XXII; FBI report, November 25, 1963, of interview with Leon Worth , CE 1531; FBI report of interview conducted on December 9, 1963, with Joseph Leipsic , CE 1552; FBI report, December 8, 1963, of interview with Norman Smith , CE 1742, WC Vol.
Newberry , CE 1638; FBI report, December 19, 1963, of interview with Mrs.
Ayo, , CE 1689; FBI report, April 1, 1964, of interview of Prentis I Vaughn , CE 1694, WC Vol.
XXII; FBI report, November 24, 1963, of interview with Benny H Bickers , CE 1517; FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Philip Lance , CE 1532; FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Mrs.
Philip Lance , CE 1533; FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Janet Adams Conforto , CE 1561; FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Winnie Fay Floyd , CE 1651; FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Vernon Roy Smith , CE 1653; FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Richard William Proeber , CE 1657; FBI report, January 20, 1964, of interview with Mrs.
FBI report, January 3, 1964, of interview with Charles Edward Morgan , CE 1548; FBI report, December 8, 1963, of interview with Jack Rowe , CE 1568; FBI report, December 19, 1963, of interview with Dan Alvin Gunn , CE 1633; FBI report, January 4, 1964, of interview with Willis D Dickerson , CE 1676, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview with Frank Ferraro , CE 1514; FBI report, December 4, 1963, of interview with Robert Gurley , CE 1554; FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Joe Peterson , CE 1564; FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Breck Wall , CE 1566; FBI report, January 16, 1964, of interview with John Wilson , CE 1672; FBI report, January 6, 1964, of interview with Willis Dickerson , CE 1676; FBI report, January 21, 1964, of interview with Gordon Sims , CE 1683, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 3, 1963, of interview with Robert McEwan , CE 1740, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Robert Lee Shorman , CE 1250; FBI report, undated, of interview with Rick Morrison , CE 1483; FBI report, December 8, 1963, of interview with Mrs.
Fannie Birch , CE 1496; FBI report, January 22, 1964, of interview with John Van Kampen , CE 1497; FBI report, December 24, 1963, of interview with Barry Herbert James Deavenport , CE 1498; FBI report, December 20, 1963, of interview with Mrs.
XXIII; FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview with Alexander Gruber , CE 2243; FBI report, November 30, 1963, of interview with Billy Joe Willis , CE 2414; WC Vol.
XXV; memo, September 16, 1964, from CIA to Commission reporting that CIA files have no information on Ruby or his associates ; letter, May 19, 1964, from Commission to CIA, requesting said information; memo, February 24, 1964, from Commission to CIA concerning Ruby, CE 2980, 4, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 12, 1963, of interview with William Earl O’Donnell , CE 1624, 2, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 3, 1963, of interview with John C Jackson, CE 1478, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 28, 1963, of interview with Elaine Rogers , CE 1459; FBI report, November 28, 1963, of interview with Marilyn Miranda Moone , CE 1460, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 4, 1963, of interview with Wynn Warner , CE 1484, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 6, 1963, of interview with Johnnie Hayden , CE 1449, 170, WC Vol.
Testimony of William Serur, State of Texas Jack Rubenstein, CE 2411, 626, WC Vol.
XXII; FBI report, December 17, 1963, of interview with Theodore Louis Fleming , CE 1632; FBI report, December 16, 1963, of interview with Mrs.
FBI report, November 24, 1963, of information provided by George Snyder, records bureau, Dallas Police Department, relating to arrest record of Ruby , CE 1528, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 25, 1963, of interview with John McKee, president, Dallas Crime Commission , CE 1233; FBI report, November 28, 1963, of interview with Lynn Burk , CE 1510, WC Vol.
Adelson, The Ruby-Oswald Affair, 59; interview with Tony Zoppi, No vember 19, 1992.
XXII; FBI report, November 25, 1963, of interview with Wally Weston , CE1530; FBI report, December 13, 1963, of interview with Walter Brown , CE 1560; FBI report, November 26, 1963, of interview with John Joseph McNaughton , CE 1563, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 29, 1963, of interview with Irvin Charles Mazzei , CE 1543, WC Vol.
FBI internal memorandum, Special Agent Ralph J Miles, August, 11, 1953.
FBI report of March 17, 1964, of examination of telephone records for the Carousel Club for September 26-November 22, 1963 , CE 2303, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 5, 1963, of interview with Max Rudberg , CE 2265, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 20, 1963, of interview with Connie Trammel , CE 2270, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 18, 1963, of investigation into records at Merchants State Bank , CE 1669, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 26, 1963, of telephone interview with assistant district attorney Bill Alexander , CE 2245, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 30, 1963, of interview with Graham Koch , CE 2251, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 20, 1963, of interview with C William Selah , CE 2269; FBI report, December 16, 1963, of interview with Ralph Gismont , CE 2288; FBI report, December 16, 1963, of interview with Kathleen C Root , CE 2319 WC Vol.
FBI report, December 21, 1963, of interview with Robert G Landers , CE 2434; FBI report, December 21, 1963, of interview with Charles Miller , CE 2435, WC Vol.
XX; FBI report, November 28, 1963, of interview with Gladys Craddock , CE 1479, WC Vol.
XII; FBI report, July 31, 1964, of interview with Gladys Craddock , CE 2321, WC Vol.
Interview with Tony Zoppi, November 23, 1992; Hall Exhibit 3, 4, WC Vol.
Tear sheet from Dallas Morning News of November 22, 1963, entitled “Welcome Mr Kennedy,” CE 1031, WC Vol.
FBI report dated March 17, 1964, of examination of telephone company records for Carousel Club from September 26-November 22, 1963 , CE 2303, 27, WC Vol.
FBI report, June 11, 1964, of interview with Alexander Philip Gruber , CE 2284, WC Vol.
Testimony of John Rutledge, State of Texas Jack Rubenstein, CE 2405, 105, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 25, 1963, of interview with Marguerite Vea Riegler , CE 2247; FBI report, April 3, 1964, of interview with Rita Leslie Siberman , CE 2278; FBI report, April 3, 1964, of interview with Robert Louis Sindelar , CE 2279; FBI report, April 17, 1964, of interview with Dennis Patrick Martin , CE 2280, WC Vol.
XXV; testimony of Arnold Clyde Gadash, State of Texas Jack Rubenstein, CE 2816, WC Vol.
FBI report of November 29, 1963, of interview with Thomas Raymond Brown , CE 2341, WC Vol.
Testimony of Wesley Wise, State of Texas Jack Rubenstein, CE 2413, 500, WC Vol.
FBI report, November 28, 1963, of interview with James M Chaney, CE 2324, WC Vol.
FBI report of information received February 17, 1964, concerning interview of Phillipe Labro in Paris , CE 2276, WC Vol.
FBI report, December 3, 1963, of interview with Frank Bernard Johnston , CE 2326, 428, WC Vol.
FBI report, July 23, 1964, of interview with Laura Bryum and report, July 29, 1964, of interview of Virginia Thompson Humphries , CE 2337, WC Vol.
XIV, 239; “In Their Own Words,” Dallas Morning News, November 20, 1988, 30.
XIII, 63; interview of Harry Holmes by postal inspector David McDermott, June 29, 1989, 2.
Hugh Aynesworth, “The Garrison Goosechase,” Dallas Times Herald, December 21, 1982.
David Chandler, “The ‘Little Big Man’ Is Bigger Than Ever,” Life, April 10, 1970, 33.
Richard N Billings, “Garrison and the JFK Plot,” Long Island Press, May 15, 1968.
Gurvich conference with Edward Wegmann, August 29, 1967, Tape 2, unpublished transcript, 10.
Statement of David Lewis, district attorney’s files, month undated, 1966.
Interview with Gordon Novel by Salvatore Panzeca and Robert Wilson, April 16 and April 17, 1967.
House Select Committee interview with Walter Sheridan, July 10, 1978 ; HSCA Rpt., 178.
Interviews with James Leavelle, March 11, 1992, and David Perry, March 2, 1992.
Interview with David Perry, March 2, 1992, referring to conversation with Hugh Aynesworth.
The Assassination of President John F Kennedy and the New Evidence of Conspiracy.
Government Reports “Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders,” Interim Report of the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations, with Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate.
Hearings Before the Sub-Committee on Civil and Constitutional Rights of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, on FBI Oversight, 1976.
Report of the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President John F Kennedy, and 26 accompanying volumes of Hearings and Exhibits, 1964; Report, without supporting volumes, also published by Doubleday, 1964.
Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations, United States House of Representatives, and 12 accompanying volumes of Hearings and Appendices on Kennedy investigation, 1979; Report, without supporting volumes, also published by Bantam, 1979.
Report to the House of Representatives, Select Committee on Assassinations, on the subject of 1977 Neutron Activation Analysis Measurements on Bullet-Lead Specimens Involved in the 1963 Assassination of President John F Kennedy, by Vincent Guinn, September 1978.
Report to the President by the Commission on CIA Activities Within the United States, June 1975.
Texas Supplemental Report on the Assassination of President John F Kennedy and the Serious Wounding of Governor John B Connally, November 22, 1963, by Texas Attorney General Waggoner Carr, Austin, Texas, 1964.
He confirmed the sequence of shots I originally set forth in Case Closed.
In 2007, former Charles Manson prosecutor Vince Bugliosi published Reclaiming History, a 1650-page book that ultimately concluded I got it right in 1993.
When Case Closed was first published, I went on Bill O’Reilly’s FOX program to discuss the book.
O’Reilly told me he had not yet read it, but that he was personally convinced the mob had killed Kennedy.
However, nineteen years later he wrapped the Case Closed conclusion of a lone assassin into a short populist book—and sold a million copies.
Three major Hollywood movies about the assassination will be released later this year.
According to an AP-GfK poll this past April, 60 percent of those surveyed believed that “multiple people were involved in a conspiracy to assassinate JFK,” while 25 percent thought Oswald alone had killed Kennedy.
Ten years earlier, on the fortieth anniversary, 75 percent thought it was a conspiracy.
Near the time of Stone’s JFK, a remarkable 90 percent or more embraced a conspiracy.
The millions of pages of government documents released about the assassination since Case Closed was published have not provided any solace to the conspiracy industry.
The theory most in vogue during the past decade is that JFK was killed as payback for his own attempts to kill Cuban president Fidel Castro.
Fifty years after the assassination, the biggest casualty has been the truth.
It has been mangled and often lost under an avalanche of false information, distorted memories, and unrestrained speculation.
Conspiracy theories might sometimes be entertaining, but nothing is more compelling than the real story of what happened on November 22, 1963.
All rights reserved, including without limitation the right to reproduce this ebook or any portion thereof in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.
EBOOKS BY GERALD POSNER FROM OPEN ROAD MEDIA Available wherever ebooks are sold Open Road Integrated Media is a digital publisher and multimedia content company.
Open Road creates connections between authors and their audiences by marketing its ebooks through a new proprietary online platform, which uses premium video content and social media.
