AND METHOD OF ANALYSIS 1, This analysis is a part of a larger examination of command and control aspects of the 1962 Cuban crisis.
The overall study also includes historiographic, procedural and organizational analyses.
The purpose of the present functional analysis of information flow is to define more clearly; the actual role played by Joint Staff offices; the technical or functional nature of crisis operations; the limitations and constraints on staff office operations; the size and nature of the staffing effort required; and the amount of time and effort expended in fulfilling required functions.
This study is not intended to evaluate the adequacy of Joint Staff operations j but is intended to provide information which may be used by the Joinb Staff in making their own decisions as to the adequacy of their procedures.
This functional analysis also seeks to develop detailed information concerning the nature and characteristics of the Joint Staff functions performed, one major purpose being to allow comparisons in several different types of crisis situations.
For thl3 purpose, this study provides lists of the staff functions performed, the information -processing requirements, the transmission and handling time for telegraphic message traffic, and the levels of decision and approval for the staff actions.
Similar lists already have been developed for the Dominican Republic crisis of 1961; 1 lists relating W3EG, 'A Functional Analysis of Joint Staff Involvement in the Jane 190I Dominican Republic Crisis, 25 September 1962 TOP SECRET. ropwMi Enclosure C Secret bflyrfEC. m _ Bsm TOP>lCRET to the Laos crisis of I960 to 1961 1 are in preparation.
The purpose of this research is to provide a broader perBpacfcive from which the Joint Staff can isolate desirable and undesirable features of its own organization and procedures established to ready the Joint Staff for various kinds of crlBis situations.
In addition, records and chronologies whiflh reflect the supporting actions taken by the Army, Navy, and Air Force have been made available by the Services, 4.
It must be expected, therefore, that if the details of actions taken by informal means of communication were kncim, some conclusions drawn from analysis of those formal records which were made available might have to be modified.
It is known that at least a few EXCLUSIVE JCS-In and -Out messages ViQre never released to the JSS or incorporated into the J-3 records.
Abstracts of this information have been integrated into summary tables in order that the findings could be presented in meaningful form.
Supplementary studies of delays In message triffic routing and of Master Check List operations have been made.
In addition, an attempt has been made to integrate all types of data developed on the handling of staff actions concerning the subject of Air Defenses.
This has been done In order to illustrate how the types of findings developed through functional analysis of information flow can be applied to planning for meeting future Joint Staff crisis requirements.
In view of the length of time required to review and classify each piece of paper in the JBS Cilea and the large number of pertinent messages available, detailed analysis of the telegraphic message files has been confined to a sample of approximately 1,600 messages originating between 16 and 28 October 1962.
This sample Includes all messages filed by the augmented Cuban Watch, beginning on 17 October, and all messages filed during the first week of Joint Battle Staff operations.
Where necessary, additional data have been researched through a subsequent time period corresponding to the life of Joint Staff Cuban arisis operations, which terminated on 6 December 196a.
These data include total telegraphic traffic counts , actions concerning JCS ""Greens"", and actions related to Miscellaneous Staff Memoranda.
The period analyzed in detail was in many ways the crucial period of Joint Staff Cuban crisis operations.
Major procedural and functional problems were faced and largely solved in this period.
The tenor of staff activity was distinct during this period., since it was on 28 October that the Soviets agreed to United States demands for the removal of their offensive weaponB from Cuba.
Thereafter, there was a rapid decrease in the probability that United States military action more drastic than the quarantine would be required.
Selection of the period 16 through 28 October for intensive analysis also permitted an examination of the effectB of security requirements on Joint Staff activities under two different types of conditions.
Prior to the President's 22 October public address , during the week in which most political decisions concerning the United States response to the crisis were made, special security restraints concerning military preparations were in effect.
After the President spoke, security aspects of Joint Staff operations reverted to their normal pattern. the phase-over to Joint Battle Staff operations, see Enclosure B, ""Procedural Analysis of J-3 Command and Control Operations.
The body of data developed in this functional analysiB is presented In two Appendices to this Enclosure j the results, in the form of Sunanary Observations, are presented immediately below.
Appendix A is the detailed analysis of information flow for the period 16 through 28 October.
It consists of a review of the Balient characteristics of overall message traffic flow, followed by specific analyses of the incoming traffic which furnished the basis for Joint Staff actions, the Joint Staff actions themselves, and endproduct JGS-Out messages which resulted from the various Joint Staff actions.
Appendix B examines tha selected aspects of information flow mentioned previously, including analyses of delays in message trafflo routing, staff preparation and use of the Cuban operations Master check List, and a staff actipnrequirement analysis of Air Defense problems.
It must be emphasized that these observations are based primarily on data contained in the Joint Battle Staff files.
Certain othe*> categories of relevant data — telephone traffic, reconnaissance and intelligence message flow, and aotion papers held in Action Officers' personal files ~have been utilized only indirectly.
References to such data contained in the Joint Battle Staff files have been taken into account, although the actual data were not released for inclusion in this analysis.
The following summary observations are grouped under headings corresponding to those sections of the Appendices from which the observations were derived.
Thus, the headings Indicate where the details on which the observation is based are presented.
At the beginning of tile crisis, extreme security restrictions precluded normal utilization by the JCS of the staffsupport capability of the Joint Staff in generating the required initial military planning and operations.
In the absence of normal staff support, preparation of early JCS actions had to rely mainly on check lists, outline plans, and other staff work already in existence before the crisis occurred.
The informational value of Jhe Master Check List for staffing purposes varied in kind and over timet the listing of ""Actions to be Considered"" was of utmost usefulness at first, but decreased rapidly once the initial JCS directives had been issued j the record of ""Actions Taken,"" although misleadlngly incomplete, was nevertheless ^the only source of some information required in staffing.
The most nearly current picture of the overall situation that the Joint Staff was capable of presenting to the JCS actually reflected conditions as they had been 18 to 12 hours previously/^ 15.
To compensate for prevailing information-flow delays, Joint Staff efforts to keep abreast of developments depended on field commanders 1 estimates and expectations as well as on their reports of what had in fact already occurred.
R)l TOT SEC many JCS-Out messages to be drafted at* the Director level or higher, in conjunction with the lack of debriefing arrangements regarding disposition df staff recommendations, frequently prevented coordination being effected by Joint Staff action personnel on queries from the CINCs concerning JCS directives.
Kie greatest demand for staff support occurred immediately following issuance of initial JCS directives to implement action ' 7 in the field and. primarily involved requests for amplification.
Special channels to limit distribution of messages, established In the first days of the crisis for security reasons, proved difficult to change after security was relaxed.
The basic character of both incoming messages and the attendant staff work that they occasioned changed after the first week of the crlBis, the emphasis shifting from planning and operational matters to force following.
SUMMARY i OBSBRVA TIONS PROM ANALYSIS OP OVERALL MESSAGE TRAFFIC FLOW 22.
On 17 October, the Joint Staff formally acknowledged the existence of the Cuban crista through the establishment of an augmented Cuban Watch.
The period from 16 through 22 October was the phase of the crisis during which the highest echelons of national decision making were considering alternative courses of action and developing the details of the United States response It was a period marked by extreme security precautions within the Joint Staff.
Much of the incoming message traffic was closely held hy a Joint Staff group especially cleared for staffing Cuban operations.
Some of these messages were later placed in JBS files; others never were.
The message distribution, filing and retrieval system supporting subordinate staff operations did not meet the requirements imposed by staff functions in the emergency.
As has been mentioned already, the initial files turned over to the Battle Staff on 22 October were incomplete.
Ultimately, after most of the message traffic began to be made available to the Battle Staff, two methods of filing were used.
There were very few cases where messages were filed by both DTG and subject, or by more than one subject.
The basic nature of both incoming message traffic and resultant staff actions changed on 2k October.
During the period 16 through 23 October, message traffic was largely concerned with requirements, operations orders and planning messages.
This period constituted the primary ""staffing"" action phase of the crisis.
Beginning 24 October , and peaking for the entire cri3is on 25 October, the vast majority of incoming traffic concerned enemy submarine and merchant ship looations, and tracking operations with status and movement reports for United States ground and air forces.
The major Joint Staff effort resulting from JCS-In messages during this period could be described as ""force following. n PROM ANALYSIS OF INCOMING MESSAGES 25.
More than two-thirds of the Cuban messages received by the Battle Staff were messages directly addressed to the JCS, as distinguished from Information Copies.
Eighty-one percent of the messages directly addressed to the JCS were reports concerning the status of forces.
Intelligence, operational readiness, and force movement and change-of-operational-control reports to the JCS were overwhelmingly direct addressings.
The JCS was informed on all other staff area subjects by at least as many Info Copy reports as direct addressings.
Sixty percent of all direct addressings other than status of forces reports were lequests for JCS assistance, and more than half of these were for approval of specific proposals of action by commanders in the field.
Certain relationships between the Joint Staff and other officea are apparent in the interchange of telegraphic messages.
The Office of the Secretary of Defense, Assistant Secretary of Defense , was the only OSD office ta address messages directly to the CIWCs, rather than using the regular^p-rocedure of requesting the JOS to pass on their information]] 27.
Six-hour SITREPb were required of all OINCs directly concerned or indirectly affected by the Cuban situation, in order that the Joint Staff could be kept informed of developments on a timely basis.
Normal precrisls reporting procedures established for the CEJCs did not satisfactorily inform the JCS of developments on certain subjects in the Unified and Specified Commands.
Special procedures were devised for reporting on airlift capabilities, special movements of forces, and extreme concentrations of aircraft on air bases.
The prime purpose of addressing Info Copies of messages to the JCS was to inform the JCS of actions taken or coordination effected by field commanders responsible for implementing JCSdirected actions.
Such messages required as careful a screening on receipt by the Joint Staff as did most messages addressed directly to the JCS, in order to get them quickly into established channels for use of incoming information.
I Readdrsssed Info Copies also provided a ,very important source of JCS information, although these were usually received in the Join' Staff anywhere from many hours to several days after time of origin.
The initial orders given by field commanders in response to JCS directives were given limited distribution in the field, in order to minimize potential ""leaks/ 1 and there was an unuauall; small number of coordinating messages passed between subordinate theater forces.
Much of this message traffic, necessary to Joint Staff knowledge of the reactions of theater forces to JC3 directives, was transmitted to the JCS in the form of low-precedence Info Copies, or was readdressed to the JCS when a field commander recognized JCS inter eat.
Even after relaxation of the special security measures invoked prior to22 October, the channels established prior to that time to minimize message distribution in the field proved hard to break.
The Joln~l Staff continued to receive key information by readdresaals after | the requirements for greater lateral coordination and more rapid i notification of the Joint Staff waa recognized.
The importance and relevance to Joint Staff operations of that portion of Cuban ' traffic received only after readdreesal suggests the need for""] ' establishing criteria and procedures designed to make the JcS a j direct or Info addressee of many types of messages which, at ' present, do not automatically include the JCS in the list of I initial recipients. — [30.
There Is evidence of the existence of large quantities of State Department and intelligence meBsage traffic to which the Enclosure C TOP^HStfllET ^j^w TOP JPTIIST Joint Battle Staff was not"" privy.
The JBS was -the recipient of only a very few reports generated by intelligence branches and agencies, Those intelligence reports which ware received consisted almost entirely of summaries of the situation as it had existed several days previously.
State Department traffic was the last category of information to be cleared for general JBS distribution, the slowest to be received, and the most Bpotty in quantity received relative to the quantity which must have originated . -3 FROM ANALYSIS OP JOINT STAFF CUBA ACTIONS 31.
The largest volume of incoming messages containing requirements for JCS action or guidance was received immediately followii transmission to the field of initial JOS directives concerning the nature of the United States response to the crisis.
These incoming messages resulted in the largest requirement for staff work in the Joint Staff of any period of Cuban crisis operations.
The number of requirements generated by incoming traffic on preparations for invasion {OPLAN 316) and air defense operations were only slightly smaller.
From the number of requirements messages received concerning these subjects, it appears that airlift, sealift and communications problems are the most difficult areas to plan for specifically in advance.
Rules of engagement appear to ba mors subject to misunderstanding than any other type of JCS directive, in view of the fact that such ""rules ' stimulated the most request for clarification.
Seven J-3 Staff memoranda concerning Cuba were completed on 25 October, along with the greatest number of miscellaneous staff memoranda produced on any one day.
Both JCS ""Greens"" and Joint Staff memoranda provided essential background for follow-up staff actions after JCS orders were given.
Early distribution of these data was as important to the r Battle Staff as early distribution of the JCS outgoing messages giving these orders.
Outside of intelligence operations, operations of the Special Assistant for Counterlnsurgency and Special Activities were the most highly secured and generated the largest number of ""JCS"" messages not released to Battle Staff personnel, FROM ANALYSIS OP JCS-QUT MESSAGES 35.
JCS-Out messages reached a peak for the entire crisis on 22 October with 28 messages sent concerning Cuban operations.
A total of 75 JcS~Outs originated during the period 21 through 23 October.
This total was 50 percent higher than the total for any other three-day period during the crisis, and it was about double the daily average for the week preceding the crisis.
On 23 October, the proportion of outgoing TOP SECRET messages dropped to one-third of the total and continued thereafter at about this fraction.
Several security problems were brought to the attention of the JGS for decisions.
Although the Joint Staff may expect these types of problems involving security to occur again in many types of possible future crisis situations, it is probably best to plan for clearing each one on an ad hoc basis as such problems arise.
However, even after formal staffing became the norm, because of the very high level of ""approval"" needed for most JCS-Out messages concerning Cuba, staff officers' loiowledge of the JCS actions taken was extremely limited.
This problem arose because there wae no procedure for timely feedback from the office where the JCS remained in nearly continuous session {the Geld Room) to the action officers who delivered draft messages to the door.
TOP SECRET TOP SRC Interviews Indicate that usually action officers had diffloulty determining whether ohanges were made in their message drafts or whether the messages were eent at all.
Often confirmation of JCS action was obtained by the Battle Staff when a hard copy of an Out message was distributed through normal channels.
The security precautions adopted at the upper echelons of the Joint Staff and applied during the initial phase of Cuban crisis operations made it extremely difficult to provide staff assistance.
After the President's public announcement of 23003, 22 October, special security conditions were supposedly relaxed.
However, the faots that high' echelons were drafting messages and staffing functions were being performed by offices outside the normal staff flow prevented the usual dissemination within Joint Staff Directorates and within the JBS of knowledge of probable forthcoming actions.
Consequently, when field commands called upon the Battle Staff to accomplish coordination of directives, quite often the JBS had no knowledge of the JCS directive about which it was being questioned.
Typical times for message flow between stations during the first two weeks of Cuban crisis operations are indicated for those stations where time -of -receipt records were maintained and the data made available for this analysis.
The transmission times indicated were largely independent of message precedence during this period.
The delay in receipt of messages at the Pentagon was due almost completely to heavily overloaded relay facilities in the field.
The increase in number of messages received in the Service communication centers in the Pentagon was still well within equipment capabilities.
FIo-.y of Incoming Telegraphic Message) for Jolnf Staff Acrior ll-18-o3-2 TOP iET TOP SECRET 5WRRT Pentagon vfere overloaded on many occasions.
The much more rapid advance copies were forwarded only for meB3ages of Operational j Immediate precedence or higher and for one action copy only.
Any description of the overall situation prepared by the Battle Staff for the JCS could be expected, at best, to be [eight hours behind Ifche actual situation.
Much of trie data in such summaries lagged J12 hourB Ipehind actual events.
Secondly, incoming massages reported the situation in the theaters and commands as of some time earlier than the time of message origin.
Finally, Battle Staff processing consumed some additional time after massage receipt.
Exercise HIGH HEELS II data, the Dominican Republic crisis analyses, and this analysis of Cuban crisis message traffic indicate that, with present equipment and procedures, planners must expect a median delay time in message transmission of twoand-a-half to three-and-a-half hours from origin in the field to Service communication facilities serving the JCS, This delay occurs despite high precedence assigned to messages.
Hard-copy reproduction and distribution to the Joint Staff can be expected to make messages generally available I six-and-a-half to seven-anda-half hours jafter origin, as a median.
Its usefulness decreased Very rapidly for further staff actions after implementing orders were sent.
After about three days of Cuban crisis operations the nature of these MCL listings changed from specific JCS agenda items to much more general agenda Items for staff consideration.
The MCL listing of ""Actions Taken"" served as a general reference paper for keeping members of the Joint Staff up-to-date on the overall picture.
FROM ANALYSIS OP AN APPLICATION OP INFORMATION FLOW RESEARCH 44, Empirical evidence obtained through the analysis of information flow can assist in the development of check lists for possible future crisis operations.
Such research can particularly point up those procedural and planning requirements which, if staffed in advance, may obviate many days of coordination with agencies external to the Joint Staff, should the same problem area arise in subsequent crisis situations.
Cuban crisis air defense actions have been analyzed in this study for development of such check lists.
External coordinations are shown to be the most time-consuming staff functions.
TABLE XXVI SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF JCS-OUT 78 CUBflt CRISIS MESSAGES TABLE XXVII ACTION OFFICERS FOR JCS-OOT CUBAN 79 CRISIS MESSAGES, BY MESSAGE SENDER TABLE XXVIII ACTION OFFICERS FOR JCS-OUT CUBAN / 80 CRISIS MESSAGES, BY OPERATIONAL SUBJECTS 1 TABLE XXIX 86 92 TOP SECRET TOP |«€1RET ' APP SNDIX A TO ENCLOSURE C DETAILED ANALYSIS OF THE CRUCIAL PERIOD tTT EH30UGH 'gb 1 OCTOBER ~""~ 1.
This Appendix presents the results of a functional analysis of information flow in the Joint Staff during the crucial period of 1962 Cuban crisis operations.
First, an overall picture of the magnitude of information flow is presented, based on an examination of telegraphic message traffic Incoming messages ""are then examined in detail, separating for analytical purposes .messages directly addressed to the JCS from messages passed to the JCS as Information Copies.
Finally, end-product JSS-Out messages are examined, first from the point of view of subject matter, and then as a source of data on the staff functions of message preparation, review and approval.
The scale of Joint Staff activity in crisis operations is dependent upon the nature and magnitude of information flow.
Albhough telephone fcraffio proved not bo be researchable, it is the opinion of JBS members that the following analysis fairly represents the shape of Cuban crisis activity in the Joint Staff.
There was no one complete JBS ""master file"""" of JCS incoming or outgoing messages, and aB a result it has been impossible to assure a complete message count.
Incoming messages were filed by the JBS in JCS-In folders, in folders grouped by CINCs, and in action folders held by individual staff officers.
However, a complete set of the files maintained by action officers was not available for incorporation into the cross-reference inde:c.
Nevertheless, the bulk of the messages received by the JBS appear to be filed in JCS-In, JCS-Out and CINCLANT, CINCSTRIKE and CINCARIB folders, from which the following message counts originate.
The general inclination of the JBS seemed to be to include, rather than exclude, questionable subject matter.
Prior to the President's announcement of United States plana for the quarantine on 22 October, much of the message traffic was very closely held by a Joint Staff group specially &1CRET •'I cleared for handling Cuban opera tions.
The extent to which these massages, held by various individuals and groups within the Joint Staff prior to clearance to the JBS for access to Cuban traffic were turned over to the JBS is unknown.
The extent to which access to other types of Cuban information was denied is also unknown.
The existence of a large volume of message traffic concerning the Cuban crisis not located in the Battle Staff files is indicated in many ways.
The mechanical and human resources were fully utilised and the weak links in the system became painfully apparent.
However, it does not represent the relative workload on any particular staff office or on the JBS, since the nature of the incoming traffic changed considerably between the 23rd and 25th of October.
By contrast, JCS-Out messages peaked on 22 October, with initial phase orders concerning Cuban crisis planning.
The nature of these messages also changed after 23 October, as unanticipated requirements became the rule rather than the exception.
The following discussion of the crucial period first examines the build-up phase.
The number of JCS addressed incoming messages received was approximately the same as the number of JCS Info Copies arriving.
However, the trend was from a relatively small percentage or Incoming traffic being directly addressed to ""JCS"" in the first few days to a definite majority on the 22nd and 23rd of October.
The relative load on the Cuban Vatch, with a more than tenfold increase in message traffic between the 18th and 23rd, is apparent.
It la very difficult to relate 'actual origin -of message traffic described above to receipt of messages by Joint Staff action offices.
Analysis of this relationship in this study must be based on time of receipt of messages which were subsequently entered into JBS files.
Some were reviewed briefly by the Chief of the CAC, some were copied and held for the JBS files, and others were first seen when hard-copy distribution was made.
Insofar as incoming messages were concerned, this problem was largely resolved by the 24th and 25th of October.
By that time it was recognized that the JBS should have access to advance copies on receipt in order to be able to perform those staffing functions it was being asked to fulfill.
However, the problem as it pertained to JCS-Out messages not staffed (drafted or coordinated) by the JBS continued for a considerably longer period.
The result is that JBS Cuba files are a mixture of advance copies, thermofax prints of advance copies, and hard copies of messages.
It therefore becomes a conservative extreme estimate —e., it is almost certain that messages were available for JBS reference and U3e at the times recorded.
Some unknown fraction of message traffic waB available, at least to some extent, at earlier times sinoe advance copies usually were available between two to four hours prior to hard -copy production and distribution.
It was noted above that the nature of incoming message traffic changed considerably between 23 and 25 October.
Through 24 October, the Joint Staff was almost completely dependent on Navy Flag Plot and Intelligence Plot for both United States quarantine information and for submarine and merchant ship location reports.
From 1134 to 24003 on 25 October, as many SAG aircraft reports of MERSHIP sightings and ship Situation Reports were received as all messages of all types received on 24 October.
The number of formatted JOPREP, 2 special movement, force status and intelligence reports increased up to 25 October.
These required attention by the JBS for preparation of SITREPs and force following.
ST [_requirsments for possible JCS action were represented by incoming requirements, operations and planning messages, and these decreased rapidly after 23 October.
Telegraphic messages addressed to the JOS prior to 29 October 1962 concerning the Cuban crisis and filed by the JBS have been categorized by time of origin, office of origin, time of receipt in the CAC , by message purpose, by subject operation, and by staff area concerned.
The details of classification are discussed below, along with message counts within each classification.
All others sending 10 or more messages to the JCS are combined into one listing on this table. £fta noted in the preceding section, starting on 25 October more than half of the message traffic concerned ship and submarine location reports sent in by SAC aircraft and CINCLANT ships.
It is apparent that CINCLANT, as commander of the operational theater, had the greatest number of communications with the JCS of any single office.
HO Hi U M « „ « fc P <U I 3 3 M « O ffl+) E OiiaHcSwwSfc&HSl O O O O K)4J « opooo<oi^o o a ja a s ,a«* <aaaagsaos «* M H H H S OTHHHHHHOHWO.-I TO# arokusT TOP SECRET With the exception or messages conceraingifflEHS'HXP and subjS'-f^ marine location reports which are addressed to the JCS by prearranged forrnatWonly 12 offices subordinate to CINCs addressed messages directly to the JCS, and these all appear to be in response to JCS orders or queries.
TOP J«€RET TOP SECRET $P™~ I commanders to JCS 1 requests for guidance as to their opinions, preferences and prejudices prior bo JCS planning decisions.
Actually, moat of the messages classified and counted as ""Requirements"" contain information informing the JCS of those aspects of situation background which, in the opinion of the sender, Justify his oase for stating the requirement.
For all types of messages addressed directly to the JCS other than status of forces reports, three-fifths were requirements for JQS assistance, and 6s percent of these requirements were for approval of specific proposals by commanders in the field.
Subjects of messages are tallied by the most specific operation referred to in each message.
The small number of messages concerning reconnaissance operations was due to special handling of reconnaissance traffic by the Joint Heconnaissance Group , with only a few messages finding their way to the Battle Staff files 71 30.
The Pir3t Phase,"" for a discussion on deployments undertaken to support the President's program of action.
Appendix A to Enclosure C TOP SECRET ill SJ&CRET TOP SECRET TO^flECRET t ' I\ preparation operations where 27 messages asked for JCS approvals, actions, or guidance.
Twenty-three messages asked for JCS assistance concerning tactical air operations and 22 concerning air defense operations.
Only 13 messages requesting assistance in quarantine operations ware directly addressed to the JCS, slnoe most of the traffic on this subject was with the CNO. ] -3 icts oOuoan Crisis Messages n-nectly 31.
J Most of these were the MERSHIP and submarine search reports requested by the Joint Staff for force following, and were sent to J-3 for action.
Aa a result, go percent of all messages directly addressed to the JCS concerned the J-3 area of staff operations/] Threefourths of normal operations messages concerned readiness, and movements and change of operational control of forces.
Logistic support, policy and communications messages followed in number received in that order.
These requirement messages made up 49 percent of all requirements laid on Joint Staff offices.
All of the five messages concerning exercises were requests to the JCS to approve cancellation of exercises.
More than threefourths of the 42 messages concerning logistics were requests for JC3 assistance, as were 18 out of 36 messages concerning policy.
One of the most important sources of information to the Joint Staff as to what is going on in the field and for general situational background Is Info Copies of messages passing between other military commands and other United States government offices.
Such messages are often used by the CINCs and Services to inform the Joint Staff that JCS orders are feeing implemented or how guidance is being translated into actions.
The initial OPORD included POL as ""war materials"" subject to quarantine.
This was brought to the attention of Deputy J-3 at 1330 on 23 October by a JBS officer, and OPNAV was contacted by phone to get POL removed from the CINCLANT message.
In thls~l Appendix A to Enclosure C w TOP JTCRET TOP SECRET TOPJWffClRET £ a particular case, the mattier had been caught and corrected earlier in LAOTCOM and a revised OPORD issued, although this was not known in the Joint staff at the time.
Naturally, the first Soviet Bloc ship passing through quarantine was carrying POL products. jc am Origin of Cuban 0risi3 MesBagea to JCS aa Info Copies 36.
Fortythree percent of these messages were sent by CINCLANT or hia subordinate commanders.
Traffic from USAF offices (including CSAF, MATS, SAC and TAG) was the second largest grouping, 20 percent of the total.
There was relatively even distribution of messages among the other GINCs and Services.
One of the facts of most interest in this table is the relatively small number of State messages sent to the JCS for their information.
In this instance, JCS Info Copy requests are requests from subordinate commanders to their immediate superiors for approvals, actions and guidance.
Reports of Coordination Effected are generally concerned with coordination of actions specifically directed by the JCS, Thus, they serve the purpose of eliminating the preparation of a separate report to the JCS that the coordinating action is being carried out.
Status reports passed on to the JCS as Info Copies are generally of similar format and content to specific reports which the JCS had asked for from the CINCs.
These status reports are submitted sometimes in lieu of a separate specific report by the CINC3, as are Info Copy reports of Actions Taken.
TOP SECRET TOP SECRET TOP^TCRET Operational Subjects of Cuban Crisis JCS Info Copy Messages 39.
Almost all of the messages in Intelligence were operational information, marked for J-3 cognizance.
Thus, Operations was concerned with more messages than all other staff areas combined.
The primary staff area subjects of JCS Info Copies were Intelligence, Mission Assignments, Force Movements and CHOPs.
MEHSHIP and submarine search location reports made up half of all intelligence messages received as Info Copies.
Onethird of all force movement and CHOP reports concerned preparations for invasion operations.
Mission assignments reported were chiefly for quarantine and tactical air operations.
Three-fifths of J-5 area Info CopieB concerned quarantine operations, 42.
The staff area of Logistics was of concern in 14 percent of the total number of Info Copy messages received.
Policy messages made up 12 percent of total copies, and communications, 6 percent.
Readdressing of Cuban Crisis JCS Info Copy Messages READDRESSING OFFICE Array War Room 28 Navy Flag Plot 27 CINCLANT 19 Air Force Command Post 15 CINCARIB 1 CINCFAC a CINCEUR 1 COMFIFTEEN ' Jl TOTAL 93 44.
These readdressed Info Copies were a very Important source of JBS information.
Pour of the five earliest messages concerning preparations for Cuban crisis operations were readdressed to the JCS after the augmented Cuban Watch went into effect on 18 October.
Two messages originating on 22 and 23 October were readdressed and received by the JCS on 25 and 28 October, at which times they were still of enough interest to be immediately readdressed by the JCS for transmission to the White House.
Twelve other readdressals were forwarded to the White House prior to 28 October.
It appears that, In oases where readdressals were required, procedures for getting certain key information from the field to the JCS caused considerable delay.
For the period through 28 October, all JCSIn messages in the JBS files placing requirements on the JCS, aa well as some additional incoming messages located through references to them in JCS-Out messages, have been abstracted and classified as part of the analysis of Joint Staff actions during the Cuban crisis.
These requirements messages have been sorted by date, by office of origin, by operational subject and by staff area affected in the tables which follow.
Requirements were placed on the JCS by 18 offices, with CINCLANT responsible for originating half of the total.
The peak of activity was reached 22 October, but more than 10 requirements for JCS action originated each day from 19 through 24 October, The 9 and 11 October requirements were staff actions underway when the crisis situation broke and, like several later requirements, were significantly affected by crisis operations planning. fope 47.
H-rtfcGMO j,J» TOP SECRET • TOPJWCRET (which 'ware spread out over the entire period ""examined.
Twothirds of all the requirements concerned OPLANs 312, 314, 316, air defense and quarantine operations.
Actions requested of the JCS on the subjects of quarantine , CINCARIB support, counterinsurgency, La_tln American assistance in quarantine operations, and overall aommand and control, originated after initial decisions were made and United States preparatory actions were well underway.
Similarly, the effect of Cuban operations on United States nuclear testing and Pacific operations caused later stage requirement messages.
Thirty-nine percent of the action requirements concerned the J-3 staff area of operations, 30 percent concerned logistic support, 10 percent policy, and 12 percent communications.
Requests for actions concerning force movements, CHOPS, and planning made up the majority of J-3 area requirements.
Requests for airlift were responsible for the largest single subject within the general category of logistics.
The largest number of problems with regard to public'affairs were brought up in connection with Invasion preparations and quarantine operations.
Tactical air and invasion preparations caused the largest number of requests for logistic support actions.
Almost three-quarters of the air defense requirements were staffed within J-3.
One-third of the quarantine problems concerned interpreting rules of engagement in order to define mission assignments.
More than half the SIOP requirements concerned nuclear support for strategic readiness.
All of the CARIB area requests were for logistic and communications support.
X £i .22 ,2 c* d 1 t) iiriuaa 3 Sao I ** I'^^i^CRET VOFJ0CRET T OP SECRET TOTAL INCOMING MESSAGES ' "" • 49, In summing up information flow to the Joint Staff oy telegraphic messages, a comparison of messages directly addressed to the JCS and those received a3 Info Copies will serve bo point up the sources of Joint Staff data.
Since receipt of the Info Copies involves significant dexay over receipt of messages on which the JCS is a direct addressee, the timeliness of data souroes also is indicated In these comparisons.
Aircraft reports of MERSHIP sightings and submarine search reports were directly addressed to the JCS along with 10 to 20 other priority addressees in a Joint staff approved Address Indicator Group.
Those CINCs participating directly in Cuban operations and Chlef-of-Staff Army kept the Joint Staff informed with an average of one Info copy for every two directly addressed messages.
Those CINCs only Indirectly affected by Cuban operations , dealt with the JCS only by direct addressings.
CINCAL, CINCNELM and worldwide operations were coordinated almost exclusively by direct addressings to the JC£>; Jb.
Operations subordinate to major United States Cuban actions were coordinated chiefly through Info Copies to the JcS; and _c.
Primary Cuban actions resulted in SO to 45 percent of all messages on these subjects being reported to JCS by Info Copy.
Out-of-pattern large percentages of Info Copies concerning Tactical Air and European operations appear to be due to CINCAFLA^ ' a basic chains of command to CINCLAOT and of support to CSAP, and of a relatively large number of subordinate CINCSUR offices directly contacted by Washington offices concerning Cuban crisis operations.
All other staff area subjects consist of at least as many Info Copy reports as messages directly addressed to the jcs.
If the assumption that direct addressings keep the Joint Staff better informed than Info Copies is valid, J-l, j-k, J-5 and j-6 were less ""current"" on developments connected with their areas of responsibility than was J3.
The Operations Directorate Itself was less informed on planning and mission assignments in the field than they were on the status of forces.
H CU 0) I 1 I g Appendix A to Enclosure c ro3*men.Er TOP SECRET TOI^reClRET Status of Forces Reports 53.
The types of messages in terms of functions performed by the massages (e.g.* authorizations, approvals, requirements , etc.) are not directly comparable between Direct Addressiiuro ana.
Howevor, in total, 63 percent of all incoming messages were notifications concerning the status and aotiona of friendly and potential enemy forces.
Most were formatted reports, and initially, largely in the JOPREP series.
Early in crisis planning, JOPREPs were requested every six hours to help keep the Joint Staff informed.
Additional six hour reports were ordered beginning 22 October to cover all movements concerned with Cuban crisis operations.
Other specialized reports were subsequently requested to cover MERSHIP and Soviet submarine activity.
A breakdown of these categories of notifications received by Direct Addressings and Info Copies is recorded below.
It appears that the special crisis-related reports neurly tripled the volume of reports available to the Joint staff.
The first half of thiB Appendix haB been concerned with the flow of information bo the Joint staff.
The remainder is concerned with Joint Staff actions taken and the end-product results of these actions.
No action records per se have been made avilable, so actions taken have been deduced from various products of these actions.
Data analyzed include, JOS ""Cuba Greens % JBS records of miscellaneous Director's memoranda and JCS-Out messages.
Of J the 53 JOS ""Greens"" summarized, 21resulted in formal submission to the Secretary of Defense for information or action.
Seventeen resulted in action assignments on Joint staff offices, and seven in action assignments on Service Chiefs.
The data available are too spotty to say much about the requirement origins, staffing offices, or decision levels, or to say anything meaningful about time required in the Joint Staff.
High levels of aotivity are apparent for 22 through 29 October, on 6 November, and 14 through 20 November, The fact that at least five JCS ""Greens"" concerning Cuba were in some phase of staffing from 20 Ootober through 27 November is also of some interest, MISCELLANEOUS STAFF ACTION RBCOHDS 59.
As part of the JBS files, records of miscellaneous staff aotions were maintained.
As for the Cuba ""Greens"", these records provide a source of data as to staff aotions required during the Cuban crisis.
A review and tabulation have been made and a summary for each paper is listed at the end of this Appendix as Annex B Of the 53 records maintained in this file, 36 are records of J-3 actions and eight are J-5 actions.
Ten of the J-3 actions resulted in ""J-3M papers"" and 12 resulted In ""J-3 Ops"" papers.
An attempt was made to Illustrate an expected increase In J-3 memoranda during the period of greatest Cuba staff activity by plotting J-3M numbers againat time.
The results, however, were nearly a straight line over the months of Ootober and November 1962, _ Since the J~3Ms pertaining to Cuba made up only about 5 percent of those issued, the graph appears to indicate that there is a nearly continuous equal production of J«3Ms this number IS largely independent of the ""crash"" actions of the moment, This implies that within J-3i crisis situations change the subject matter but not the volume of production, JCS-OUT MESSAGES 61, JOS-out messages represent a formal end-product of Joint Staff actions.
Information has been received giving the background on a situation, a requirement for staff action has been submitted or implied, and the requirement has been recognized within the Joint staff.
Staff action 1b taken and a draft message is prepared, coordinated, approved, and transmitted as a JCS-Out message.
Other sources Include formal support from the Services, telephone calls, and briefings and personal conversations.
These sources have not been studied for Cuban crisis operations, and this paper is confined to analysis of the extent to which formal incoming messages determined and affected JCS-Out messages.
CEET staffing problems land actions resulting in JCS-Out messages, as indicated by the messages themselves.
Plow of JCS-Oufc messages by date for initial phase Cuban crisis operations is examined in the next two tables.
This table indicates that Cuban crisis operations became the prime subject of all JCS-Out traffic on Saturday, 20 October.
Handling of preparations for Cuban operations made up 93 percent of the Out messages the following day, TOP SECRET 3 ^ifS TOP 33CSET TOB-gflTCRET as Joint Staff general offices began a Beven-day weak senior staff Cuban Watch.
The increases in JCS-Out messages on Friday, 19 October, Monday, 22 October, and Friday, 26 October, do not appear to be even indirectly related to Cuban operations.
These traffic increases are probably normal end-of-work-week and accumulated weekend Joint Staff business.
There was a slight emphasis on air defense of the southeastern United States and key Caribbean installations (including the Panama Canal) through 19 Ootober.
The ""lateness"" of formal JCS communications oonoerning quarantine operations is apparent.
JCS participation in reinforcing Quantanamo and evacuating dependents was a middle time-phase follow-on to early emphasis < defenses. -D Addressing of JOS-Out Messages 67.
Aa would be expected, CINCLAST was by far the largest recipient of JCS-Out messages, being directly addressed on 56 percent of these messages, and kept informed of JCS aotions by Info Copies on an additional 25 percent of the JCS-Out traffic.
CINCONAD was the next largest recipient of direot addressings, being single or co-addreSBee on 25 percent of the JCS messages and informed on 10 percent additional.
CINCs CONAD, STRIKE, PAC, CARIB and SAC, and the Servioe Chiefs of Staff were all informed on roughly one-third of the Cuban Out traffic.
The Services received a slightly larger number of JCS-Out messages as Info CopieB than as direct addressings.
Twenty offices in all were directly addressed on the JCS-Out messages concerning the initial phase of the Cuban orisis, and 43 other offices were sent Info Copies.
Two of these messages were among the nine ""Excluaives"" originated during the period.
TOP 3BCH35T _72 s2£ _ § ^ TOJ^CCRET J^^O.ptie relative Importance of CINCPAC as art addressee concerning Cuban crisis operations may not have been expected.
CINCPAC and CINCSTRIKE were called upon forjmajor augmentation of CXKCLANT forces for invasion preparations, build-up of tactical air and air transport capabilities, and reinforcement of Guanfcanamo defenses^ CINCARIB had special assignments primarily to [prepare far aounterlnsurgenay operations in Latin America and in connection with quarantine operations^ Massages specifically addressed to SAC dealt primarily with I Messages directly addressed to Service Chiefs were almost exclusively for coordination of operations being performed by their subordinate commands.
It la apparent that almost two out of every three JCS-Out messages required action by recipients, being either Orders Given or Approvals of recommended actions.
Notifications consisted of messages informing subordinate commanders of actions taken by the JCS or Joint Staff to coordinate field activities.
These actions were usually in response to a request from the field for airlift or for augmentation of forces or equipment by transfer from another command.
These coordinating actions were required most often In connection with preparations for invasion. -^72.
Merchant ship and submarine search reports have already been discussed.
Other special reports requested concerned tactical air and air defense operations, and were due to the extreme overloading of southeast United States air bases and resulting redeployments to obtain quicker reaction capabilities.
Guidance requested was primarily in connection with this extreme concentration or forces and their resulting vulnerability.
Although only eight messages were clsarcut disapprovals of actions requested, several of the Approval messages modified suggestions from the field, or approved requests only in part.
With the exception of guidance given worldwide, the other ten Guidance Given messages were in response to specific requests for concepts of planned operations.
Apparently, most of the requests from subordinate commanders for clarifications of JCS-Out messages were handled by telephone rather than by formal JCS-Out messages.
Fifty-four percent of the JCS-Outs were in the J-3 area of operations, and 20 percent of the JCS-Out messages concerned movements and CHOPs of forces.
Two interesting messages from the point of view of procedures are in the Intelligence and Communications Stafr areas.
Secondly, on 21 October, J-3 had to authorize MATS to use normal flight plan and movement messages in connection with airlift of the [5th VEb\ m 3 Security Aspects of JCS-Out Messages 76.
The last two messages referred to reflected seourity problems arising in the initial phase of Joint Staff Cuban crisis operations.
This percentage increased until 23 October, when it dropped to one-third TOP SECRET after the President's address.
J -4, J-5, J-6 and Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities staff personnel drafted similar numbers of messages, each handling about one-fifth of the number of J-3 staff aotions.
Approximately one-third of the JCS-Out messages were drafted by senior staff personnel at the Director level or above.
The Director, Joint Staff wrote the largest number of these, with the Vice Director, Joint Staff and JCS Secretary also personally drafting significant numbers of JCS-Out messages.
The JCS specifically ordered almost two-thirds of the messages to be sent.
Of the nine other offices sending out messages, J-3 was the only one ordering more than 5 percent of the total traffic, sending 20 percent.
Ho specific categorization of responsibilities is apparent, except for the CNO and OPNAV personnel writing only quarantine messages.
Other offices seem to be pretty well-rounded in their subject Appendix A to Enclosure C TOP SEGBET 82 ^A TOP SECRET 5CIR1ET responsibilities.
Similarly, all subjects required efforts of several different offices, '<±th only tha J-3 staff responsibility for SXOP messages appearing significant.
The characteristics of the ""staffing"" actions for JCSOut message a during the initial phase of operations were due to a very large extent to extreme security measures being taken.
Through the 22nd of October, the Director J-3» for example, was not at liberty to discuss certain actions being taken with his staff, and there are indications that the DJS did not feel free to discuss certain JCS actions with his Directors.
Through 21 October, exactly half of the JCSOut messages concerning Cuban operations had been drafted by personnel other than those subordinate to Joint Staff Directors and 'Special Assistants.
On the big day, 22 October, more than two-thirds of the Cuban crisis Out mesaageB were drafted by upper and special echelons.
All types of messages were ordered by JCS and all types, except for Giving Guidance, by J-3.
Only most senior personnel ordered passing of guidance to the field, and three of the four ""CJCS Sends"" messages were in the Guidance Given category.
Two-thirds of the JCS-Out messages were ordered sent by echelons higher than the Directors.
All«JCS-Out riesaages require approval for. transmission, and approval is evidenced on message copies by signature.
Messages addressed as ""DJS Sends"" or ""J-3 Sends"", or by any of the Directors, were almost always approved by the parson named as sender, his ""Exeo"" or his Military Secretary.
In messages addressed ""JOS Sends"", the DJS or VDJS generally approved the contents of the message.
However, when a ""JGS Sends"" message was drafted by a Direotor, the JCS Secretary, or SACSA, the writer usually approved his own message.
Of 55 ""JCS Sends"" messages written by the Secretary, the Directors, SACSA, the DJS or VDJS, 48 were approved by the writer.
Five of these were approved by the DJS, two by the VDJS and one by J-3.
The stringent security precautions adopted at the upper echelons of the Joint Staff for handling of the initial phase of Cuban crisis operations made for difficult working conditions for the Battle Staff, especially with regard to JCS-Out messages.
This often resulted in the JBS being called upon by field commands for coordination of implementing actions ordered by the JCS, but of which the JBS had no knowl89.
This problem persisted in slightly different form after the 22nd or October, even though formal staffing became the norm.
Action for a JCS-Out message would ba assigned to a subordinate staff officer, but knowledge of changes in his draft action recommendation and final approval and transmittal action were often unknown to the JBS until after a query was received from a field command as to some facet of the transmitted message.
There was no procedure for short-term feedbaok from the CJCS office where senior staff members were working to the JBS action officer who hand-carried his draft message to the door and Baw it disappear inside.
This undoubtedly affected efficiency of personnel on the Cuban Battle Staff.
The second section of this Appendix examines the Cuban crisis Master Checle list operations In more detail.
Finally, a 3et of Joint Staff action requirements pertaining to contingency air defense action is developed and analyzed.
As In the ease of Appendix A, critical observations are included in the text as occasion warrants j summary observations are found In the main Enclosure and are not repeated here.
Similarly, delay on recaipt of JCS-Info Copies by the JBS averaged eight hours and 29 minutes.
A more detailed study of the routing delays has been attempted fop naval message traffic, since hard copies of messages passed over naval communication nets record the time a message is reoelved in Washington.
Unfortunately, these da&a concerrllng Cuba message t ' ■ transmission times are very difficult to interpret in detail, because they are Isolated from non-Cuba traffic data and beoause they are a function of unrecorded parameters, such as backlog loads at,, relay stations.
However, they are informative empirical evidence of times actually taken for these functions, and apparently are largely unaffected by assigning high precedence, to messages.
In the period examined in detail approximately 75 percent of all messages addressed to the JCS had precedences of Operational Immediate, Jlash or Emergency.
Shis compares with a oold war norm of approximately 25 percent of incoming messages having precedences of Operational Immediate or higher.
There is no clear relationship between below and above average message transmission times and message precedence, source location, or time of day of message origin.
D5. jierhaps the 2 S 27 median time for transmission of messages directly addressed to the JCS on 19 to 21 October is not representative of normal daily noncrisis operations, but it is comparable to the Initial phase of the Dominican Republic crisis and the preliminary phas© of HIGH HEELS II Exercise traffic.
The slowest 25 percent varied by day from more than 5-3/4 hours bo more thanj6& hours I required for transmission.
Also, the relatively long message reproduction time for 19 to 21 October is not explainable from theBe data.
JThe Navy Communication Station estimates two hours normally required for reproductlonTlThe decrease In message reproduction time on 25 October reflects increased effort assigned.
Onehundred and seventeen /Air Force] messages to JOS averaged about 1 30 minutes \f aster than the JNavy) communications that *' day in total time elapsed, Twenty-four\_Armylmessages for which tha JCS was a direct addressee were[20 minutesjf aster yet.
The Master Check List was prepared by General Operations Division of 3-3 during the Cubaa crisis but was an integral part of Battle Staff operations.
The MCL consisted of a list of 'Actions to be Considered for each day plus tv/o days in the future, and a list of ' Actions Taken"" for each previous day back to 20 October 1£iS2.
It was first published for the Cuoan crisis on 21 October; up-dated several times dally for the first few days, and then up-dated once daily for the duration of Cuban crisis operations.
The MCL copy kept up by the JBS is of particular interest because of log notes recorded by JBS members as to the status of Actions Underway.
Prom 21 to 25 October, the JBS copy of the MCL was used as an Action-Following log.
After 26 October only sporadic notes were made in the MCL by the JBS and no other reoord of action following has been found.
For this analysis, the MCL covering the period 21 to 31 October was studied carefully.
Its usefulness changed considerably as the ability to anticipate action requirements decreased.
By 23 October, in the seventh issue of the MCL, a list of eight items ""to be considered every day"" had evolved.
RET TOP SBCRBB u^g^-T-^AET These items made up a continuously increasing percentage of all items to be considered from then on, constituting 88 percent of the items listed for consideration by 31 October.
Since each day's MCL listed items to be considered for ""today,"" ""tomorrow,"" and the next day, the ""relative listing date"" columns have been used in this table to show the change in items over time.
Thus, on 21 October nine aotionB were listed to be considered on 23 October, and these appear in the ""-2"" relative date column for 23 October.
By the morning of 23 October 17 additional actions had been added to be considered that day , and these appear in the ""0"" relative date column for 23 October.
Tills percentage drops <5ff significantly for the rest of the month, however, as more and more actions resulted from requirements placed on the JCS as unanticipated contingencies arose.
Although for the first three days of the MCL publication all actions taken were listed for consideration, the numbers listed for consideration were increasing and the percent of those listed that were taken was dropping rapidly.
A large number of actions represented by JCS-Out messages are not reported.
Sometimes JCS messages containing minor details are listed; sometimes fairly general aotlons are not.
The development of lists of requirements laid on the Joint Staff, and the tracing of the Staff response to each (initial action assignment, approval of recommended staff action, coordination effected internally and externally, final action and final approval) provide empirical evidence of the staff functions and of the time which might be required for such functions in future crisis situations.
Such information lends itself to the development of check lists for possible future operations and to oritioal review of staff problems to determine which require improved procedures or preplanning to minimize time in providing Joint Staff decisions to the field.
Unfortunately, the research process mentioned above is extremely time-consuming in the data collection and collation phases.
It must be performed wall in advance of the time a crisis situation might require use of check lists or revised procedures for Joint Staff decision making.
Furthermore, determination of these problems requiring preplanning will, by definition, be of little value if brought forward only in the heat of an actual crisis situation.
In short, the value of this type of research lies only in having it done prior to a crisis requiring its use.
The following study has bean performed bo show what might be obtained if the Joint Staff directs such an effort to supplement chack list prooedure development.
Studies of the following type would be more applicable if carried out under the eyes of a, Joint Staff action officer or monitor responsible for the check list.
All data found in JBS files concerning air defense actions through 28 October 1962 have been summarized by individual actions in tiis Annex.
The next two columns list the time the final staff adtion product left the Joint Staff (usually the DTG of a JCS-Out message) and the approximate number of hours it had remained in the Joint Staff.
The next two columns of the Annex indicate the office assigned action in the Joint Staff and the type of initial action product developed.
If coordination external to the Joint Staff was effected, this is noted with data available pertinent to the time required for action by offices outside the Joint Staff.
The remaining columns describe the final action taken and the highest echelon which reviewed and approved each Joint Staff action.
The natUre of air defense requirements for Joint Staff action ia our first concern.
Joint Staff actions concerning allocations and missions might he expected for each subsystem.
Allocation of HAWK and HERCULES SAM units covered the largest number of air defense actions.
Determining specific locations for deployment of air defense subsystems was the type of action most often required.
Requests for estimates of adequacy were the primary actions concerning geographic areas of our overall air defense system.
Two types of planning information are developed by this type of analysis.
The preceding paragraphs have examined the specific actions required to prepare our air defenses for contingency operations which might have resulted from the Cuban crisis.
A second type of information worth knowing is the length of time required for various types of staff actions, and what factors made for brief or lengthy Joint Staff response to air defense requirements.
It is apparent from examination of the Annex that the length of time required for Joint Staff actions is dependent primarily on the degree of external coordination required.
For example, the longest time for OSD action was due to political indecision concerning the desirability of implementing air quarantine operations, OSD review of the outline plan for the air defense role in an air quarantine would have und6ubtedly proceeded faster if the United States had implemented an air quarantine.
The other OSD actions appear to be reasonably illustrative of time required for important decisions.
Authorizing GONAD OFCDN of the Mooreetom radar appears to be a good example of a ""sticky"" minor item passed up the chain of command for decision.
During the Cuban crisis, Air Force and Army coordinations were related to the factthat the Secretary of Defense had designated the Service roles in air defense.
It is difficult to estimate the extent to which the Joint Staff would have requested Servioe coordination on these subjects if the Secretary of Defense had not designated responsibilities so firmly.
It is likely that these subjects would be coordinated in the same manner, but Joint Staff participation is normally more active in items such as planning bhan was the case during the Cuban crisis.
There were at least twelve actions where coordination with the CIHCs and JTF-8 was effected by the Joint Staff.
K II I I II I I II I II I 1 1 s s 4) 4) 4 I 32 ■a gfl S3 tin » 4J-P P> 33 A £ 3 £P2 c I^N O 9 Ml Si 5f 3S 5 s| ■3 S-h §13 ""S da §3 & 2 8* U TOP MET top secret Tq^SECRET resulted in one day 's' delay in { final Joint Staff action, i Coordination with PAA waa time consuming, and appears to be an area where advance planning might speed air defense preparations significantly.
Matenals were identified, obtained, assembled and indexed by the National Security Archive, a non-profit Washington D.C. based research institute and library.
