Email Print Share Facebook Twitter Tumblr LinkedIn StumbleUpon Reddit Digg Mixx Del.i.cious Google+ Reprints Follow @TIME The United States and Cuba sure know how to hold a grudge.
When Fidel Castro came to power in 1959, relations between the two countries quickly devolved into bitter arguments, political grandstanding and the occasional international crisis.
On April 13 President Barack Obama announced that he would lift some longstanding restrictions, allowing Cuban Americans to visit and send remittances to their families and easing — but not removing — the 47-year-old economic embargo on the island nation.
For the next half-century the two countries more or less cooperated, with the United States helping to squash rebellions and heavily investing in the economy of its tiny neighbor.
Ernest Hemingway lived there for 22 years; he wrote The Old Man and the Sea at his villa just outside the capital.
It took multiple years and a few attempts but on Jan., 1959 Fidel Castro and his band of guerillas successfully overthrew the government of President General Fulgencio Batista.
Castro visited the United States just three months after coming to power, touring Washington monuments and meeting with Vice President Richard Nixon, all while wearing his trademark olive green fatigues.
It was a rare moment of alliance between the two countries, and one that would not be repeated.
By 1960, Castro's government had seized private land, nationalized hundreds of private companies — including several local subsidiaries of United States corporations — and taxed American products so heavily that United States exports were halved in just two years.
The Eisenhower Administration responded by imposing trade restrictions on everything except food and medical supplies.
Decrying ""Yankee imperialism,"" Castro expanded trade with the Soviet Union instead.
The United States responded by cutting all diplomatic ties, and the two countries have been talking through Switzerland ever since.
President Kennedy issued the permanent embargo on Feb., 1962 — right after ordering a shipment of 1,200 Cuban cigars for himself — and within a few years the country, whose economy relied on the use of American-made products, became a shell of its former self.
With no way to import American cars, Cubans watched their pre-embargo sedans rust into jalopies.
The early 1960s were marked by a number of subversive, top-secret United States attempts to topple the Cuban government.
Between 1961 and 1963 there were at least five plots to kill, maim or humiliate the Cuban leader using everything from exploding seashells to shoes dusted with chemicals to make his beard fall out.
The Get Smart-like plans never worked, and Castro's Cuba soldiered on, angry as ever at the United States.
The darkest moment in the countries' relationship came on the morning of October 15, 1962 when United States spy planes discovered evidence that the Soviet Union was building missile bases in Cuba.
The Soviet missiles were gone within six months, but it would take a long time for America to forgive the nation that allowed them to be placed so close to the American mainland.
In April 1980, a downtown in the economy caused thousands of dissatisfied Cubans to seek political asylum in foreign countries.
Anyone who wanted to leave, Castro announced, could do so through its northwestern port, Mariel Harbor.
Over the next six months 125,000 Cubans clambered onto boats and made their way to the United States in a mass flotilla.
Castro also released criminals and mental-hospital patients, of whom as many as 22,000 landed on the shores of Florida; Cuba refused to take them back.
The United States strengthened its embargo rules in 1992 and again in 1996 with the Helms-Burton Act, which applied the embargo to foreign countries that traded with Cuba and was issued in retaliation after Cuba shot down two United States civilian airplanes.
The last decade has seen the United States tighten and then relax restrictions depending on the political climate.
A 2001 agreement to sell food to Cuba in the aftermath of Hurricane Michelle has so far remained in place; the United States is now Cuba's main supplier of food, with sales reaching $710 million in 2008.
President Obama's announcement this week that he would lift remittance and travel restrictions for those with family still in Cuba marked a small but significant change in the U.S.'s position toward the island.
Obama also agreed to let telecommunications companies — long barred under the embargo — to pursue business in the country, which still has roughly the same number of phone lines as it did in the 1950s.
But the fate of the embargo rests in the sensitive hands of politicians, and no one is sure what Cuba's reaction will be.
The United States has extended a small olive twig to an ailing nation run by the brother of an ailing man, and what happens next is anyone's guess.
This is, after all, a man the United States once tried to kill with a seashell.
