Name it properly {follow the format} Nómbrelo correctamente {sigue el formato} Last Name, First Initial.
Put No School in Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday Things you should know… You have 10 calendar days before your first final exam.
Attendance Recovery will be offered Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday.
Signed Personal Education Plans and Attendance Letters need to be returned.
El paquete de aumento de grado se publica y enviado por correo electrónico. 2nd Quarter Grade Boost Formal Assignment due tomorrow.
Asignación formal del segundo trimestre de aumento de grado, vencimiento 1/4/19.
Things you should know and data You have only 6 more in class days to make changes.
Use your test taking strategies to answer the questions in the attachment.
Use sus estrategias para tomar exámenes para responder las preguntas del adjunto.
Test Taking Strategy Analyze it Box/Underline key words or phrases Observe all answer choices Never answer without reading the question again 9.
Trade caravans allowed the Songhai Empire to exchange their valuable metals for commodities and luxury items.
Trade caravans prevented the Songhai traders from selling their goods to overseas customers.
Songhai traders welcomed travelers to their cities in hopes of selling them fabrics and food items.
Songhai traders traveled to Egypt to seek ores and other valuable minerals for building materials.
Si te quedas estancado durante dos minutos, responde dos preguntas fáciles.
Communism / Comunismo Cold War using at least four of the vocabulary words.
Truman Doctrine / Doctrina Truman Guerra Fría usando al menos cuatro de 5.
Cuba • In 1959, Cuba became a Communist 90 country, led by Fidel Castro.
Bay of Pigs Invasion • The Bay of Pigs invasion was a failed mission by the United States to remove communists from power in Cuba in 1961.
Vamos a leer un pasaje para ayudarnos a responder las siguientes preguntas.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union gave Cuba more weapons.
In October 1962, President After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union gave Cuba more Kennedy learned that Inthe weapons.
Soviets October were secretly 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviets were secretly building missile bases building on missile the bases on the island.
If island. the If the bases bases were completed, atomic were missiles could reach American cities within minutes. completed, atomic missiles could reach American cities within minutes.
Kennedy announced that American warships would stop any Soviet ship carrying missiles.
The world After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union gave Cuba more waited tensely as Soviet weapons. ships1962, In October steamed President toward Cuba.
Kennedy learned that the Soviets were secretly building At the last minute, missile bases the Soviet ships on turned the island.
Ifback. the bases were completed, atomic missiles could reach American cities within minutes.
After In the Baythe turn, of Pigs invasion,States United the Sovietpromised Union gave Cuba more weapons.
In October 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviets were not to invade the island. secretly buildingStill the missile basesCuban missile on the island. crisiswere If the bases hadcompleted, atomic missiles could reach American cities within minutes. shaken both American and Soviet officials.
In all the years of the Cold War, the world never came closer to a full-scale nuclear war.
In October 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviets were secretly building missile bases on the island.
If the bases were completed, atomic missiles could reach American cities within minutes.
Exit Ticket First and Last Name 12.18.18 World History Block # Answer the essential question in Exit Ticket paragraph form.
Finish DBQ Essay • If work is emailed, it must arrive the night before the due date.
Grade Boost Packet • If the email comes in at 12:00, it will be assessed a late penalty.
Watch videos • If the assignments is handed in after five minutes, it will be assessed a late penalty.
