The crisis lasted two paradise that once welcomed American tourists and their money. weeks from October 15, 1962 to October 28, 1962 and ended After the Cuban Revolution the small nation quickly reversed all its when American President John F Kennedy reached an agreement policies towards the United States and allied itself with America’s greatest with the Soviets to dismantle nuclear missiles stationed in Cuba. enemy, the Soviet Union.
Though it only lasted a week, the crisis brought the work to the brink of full scale nuclear war.
From Paradise to Enemy Territory In the years before the Cuban Revolution the island nation was a popular Bay of Pigs vacation spot for wealthy In 1961, a group of Cuban exiles who had been forcefully removed Americans.
It was so popular from Cuba were trained by the American C.I.A. and sent back to Cuban leader Fidel Castro and Soviet leader that many Americans had Nikita Khrushchev invade the island with the goal of overthrowing Fidel Castro.
The US bought vacation homes on the did not officially support the invasion, but it was obvious to Castro island and large American-owned resorts were created.
First, the invaders were largely private property was seized by outnumbered, outgunned and failed in their mission to unseat Castro. the new communist Second, the obvious American support for the invasion pushed Cuba government.
Having a America American ‘Jupiter’ nuclear missiles installed in communist nation allied Turkey and Italy within range of the USSR. routinely used with the Soviet Union just high tech spy a few miles off the United States coast was seen as a direct threat by planes that could Aerial photos from U2 spy plane of missile firing sites Americans.
For his part, Fidel Castro was looking for some protection fly miles above the under construction in Cuba. against what he saw as an aggressive American enemy.
With such a ground avoiding most powerful enemy so close them, Fidel Castro agreed to have the enemy rocket fire while taking detailed photographs of enemy Soviets build nuclear missile bases on the island as a deterrent territory.
The missiles were shipped to increased shipping traffic Cuba on massive boats that traveled from the Soviet Union to the between the Soviet Union Caribbean island.
Americans prepared themselves for a nuclear war as the Soviet Naval Union showed no signs of backing down.
To make things worse, an Blockade American spy plane was shot down while flying over Cuba after the The blockade was set up.
It looked like war was unavoidable as neither Americans side appeared to be backing down. knew that a direct air Crisis Ends attack on From the beginning of the crisis, the United States and the Soviets had been Cuba or a in secret communication and even negotiations.
In this case, both nations Soviet submarine forced to surface by nearby American battleships. a full-scale war secretly conceded but publicly it looked as if the United States had stood its Note the United States helicopter. with the ground while the USSR had to abandon its military plans for Cuba.
This option however, was President(Kennedy’s(response(and(reaction(to(the(Soviet(plan(to(put( not without its dangers.
After Kennedy ordered the blockade around Cuba the situation only got more tense as the Soviet ships carrying the components for nuclear missiles did not change course or even slow down.
