The USA and USSR met four timesMay 1959in Geneva.These two summits went fairly well, though nothing was agreed.September 1959Eisenhower meets Khrushchev in USA September 1959Eisenhower meets Khrushchev in USA May 1960Eisenhower and Khrushchev meet again in ParisThis summit was a disaster; United States spy plane had been shot down over the USSR and Eisenhower refused to apologise and the summit collapsed.
June 1961Khrushchev meets Kennedy in ViennaThis summit was only agreed as there was a new president but neither side was willing to back down.
Kennedy began to prepare the USA for nuclear war After the disastrous summits, Khrushchev backed down as he knew he couldn't win a nuclear war and so western powers stayed in Berlin.
As a result, in August 1961 the Berlin wall was built.This stopped people from escaping and those who tried were shotmany people were killed.This way Khrushchev avoided the war with the United States but still looked strong.
Although the USA attempted to bring Cuba back into its sphere of influence, Cuba asked the USSR for help with defence.
After the revolution, the United States refused to deal with the new government.
The CIA convinced Kennedy that a US-backed invasion would solve the problem.
Castro's control of Cuba was very weakCastro knew of the invasion in advance and 1400 United States backed troops met 20,000 of Castro's troops.
It ended all chance of a friendly United States relationship with Cuba.
Cuba and USSR started building closer tiesincluding military defence for Cuba.
Warn Castro that his actions put Cuba in danger and hope that Castro would decide to stop the missile site construction.
United States troops would invade and get rid of the Castro government.
USSR placed the missiles here as the USA had missiles close to the USSR but the USSR had no missiles close to the USA Cuba saw Soviet missiles as a great way to prevent the USA from invading Cuba again In September 1962, Soviet ships carried nuclear weaponry to Cuba.
Then, in October 1962, United States spy planes photographed the Cuban missile sites and the secret was out.
USSR gave a speech, in 1963, about working with the USSR to focus on their 'common interests' Khrushchev forced from power in 1964 USSR was determined to catch up with the United States in the arms race and by 1965 it had achieved this.
CzechoslovakiaLike Hungary, Czechoslovakia challenged Soviet authority.This was because their economy and living standards declined, any opposition to communism was crushed and hence communism rule became very unpopular.
Tried to persuade Dubcek to stop these reforms but failed.August 1968USSR sent tanks to Prague and Dubcek was arrested.
The USSR demanded withdrawal as they could not continue to allow Germans to leave East Germany through Berlin.
So in November 1958 they announced Berlin was East German and demanded western powers leave the city within six months.The USA objected; if they left it would be humiliating.
Berlin WallSummitsThe USA and USSR met four timesMay 1959in Geneva.These two summits went fairly well, though nothing was agreed.
May 1960Eisenhower and Khrushchev meet again in ParisThis summit was a disaster; United States spy plane had been shot down over the USSR and Eisenhower refused to apologise and the summit collapsed.
