This volume may not be reproduced in whole or in part in any form without prior written permission from the publisher.
ISBN 0-7166-0103-6 Library of Congress Control Number 2002068987 Printed in the United States of America 03 54321 J is the tenth letter of our alphabet, and was the last to be added.
It developed from the letter |, which was the tenth letter in the alphabet used by the Semites, who once lived in Syria and Palestine.
They probably adapted an Egyptian hieroglyphic meaning hand to represent the letter, but the resemblance is slight.
In the late Middle Ages, when two or more i's were written together, scribes often added a long tail to the last one.
During the 1600's, an / at the beginning of a word was written with a tail.
The / developed from these forms, and became a symbol for the consonant /, as in joy.
Common forms of the letter J Roman letters have small finishing strokes called serifs that extend from the main strokes.
Manuscript \printed) letters, /eft have simple curves and straight lines.
Uses. / or / ranks as the 24th most frequently used letter in books, newspapers, and other printed material in English.
In English, a person pronounces / by placing the tongue below the edges of the lower front teeth.
Occasionally, j has a y sound, as in ha/lelujah, and in Latin, German, and Scandinavian languages.
In Spanish, jhas the sound of A In French, it is roughly like s/o in the English word adhesion.
Computers can “read these letters either optically or by means of the magnetic ink with which the letters may be printed.
The bill and legs, as well as the head and neck, are all black, except for a reddish ring of skin around the lower neck.
Jacana, zHAH suh NAH, is a type of small wading bird found in tropical areas worldwide.
The long toes permit a jacana to run easily over the floating leaves of large water plants, when it searches for food.
An Asian jacana, called the surgeon bird, has a long tail like a pheasant's.
The northern jacana, also called American jacana, lives in South America and as far north as Texas.
In the bend of each wing is a strong spur, which the jacana uses as a weapon.
Its long toes enable the jacana to run over floating water plants as it searches for food.
Jacaranda, jak uh RAN dut, is the Brazilian name for a group of trees and shrubs native to tropical America.
The tall, beautiful fern-tree jacaranda grows in many subtropical regions of the world, including the southern United States.
In late spring, it produces large clusters of beautiful bluishviolet flowers.
Jacarandas belong to the bignonia Flowers 25 to 50 ft WORLD BOOK illustration by John D Dawson The jacaranda is a beautiful flowering tree that grows in tropical and subtropical climates.
It has small, purplish, bell-shaped flowers and delicate, fernlike leaves. family, Bignoniaceae.
Jack Frost is the imaginary sprite who is supposed to trace the patterns that frost makes on trees, windows, and other objects.
The sprite appears in nursery rhymes and stories as an elflike character representing nipping cold.
In Norse mythology, Kari, god of the winds, had a son named Jokul or Frosti. /oku/ means icicle, and Frosti means frost.
In Russia, frost is represented as Father Frost, a mighty smith who binds the earth and waters with his chains.
When Old Mother Frost shakes her bed, white feathers fly and snow begins to fall.
Stekert Jack-in-the-pulpit is any of several American wildflowers that grow in moist woodlands, flood plains, thickets, and swampy or boggy areas.
Jack-in-the-pulpits are found chiefly in the eastern half of the United States.
A jack-in-the-pulpit has a spadix, which is a cluster of small flowers crowded on a slender stalk.
The plant's tissues contain bundles of needlelike crystals that can injure the mouth and throat.
Indians used the plant for food, but only after a long series of preparations to make it edible.
Jack-o’-lantern is a name often given to a hollowedout pumpkin which has eyes, nose, and a mouth carved in one side.
Jack-o-lanterns are usually made on Halloween, and a candle or other light is placed inside the pumpkin.
The term also refers to the light that frequently shines from rotting stumps or logs in swampy land.
Jack rabbit is a name for four kinds of large hares found in deserts and prairies in western North America.
The four kinds are the black-tailed, white-tailed, whitesided, and antelope jack rabbits.
All of these hares have long hind legs, large eyes, and long, thin ears.
The black-tailed jack rabbit lives in dry areas of Mexico and the western United States.
It is sometimes called the jackass hare because its long ears resemble those of a donkey. brownish-gray fur and a pure white belly.
White-tailed jack rabbits range northward into Canada and eastward into Wisconsin.
Jack rabbits like to eat succu/ents, plants with thick, juicy leaves or stems.
The chief enemies of jack rabbits are coyotes, but eagles, bobcats, badgers, and other animals also prey on them.
It is also known as the Parson Russell terrier or Parson Jack Russell terrier.
Its strong, muscular body has a top coat of coarse, weatherproof hair and a soft undercoat.
Preferably, the markings should cover parts of the head and the base of the tail.
The Jack Russell terrier was developed in southern England during the 1800's to help hunters catch red foxes.
It was named after John Russell, an English clergyman and well-known fox hunter.
But first-time dog owners probably should avoid choosing the breed as a pet because the dogs need careful training and much exercise.
Critically reviewed by the Jack Russell Terrier Association of America Jack the Ripper was an unknown murderer who terrorized London in 1888.
From August 31 to November 9, five prostitutes were killed and mutilated.
The murderer was Called Jack the Ripper because a knife was used to cut the victims throats and slash their bodies.
The murderer was never caught in spite of the efforts of police, citizen patrols, bloodhounds, and even fortunetellers.
Scotland Yard, the headquarters of the London Metropolitan Police, identified three principal suspects.
However, the police failed to prove that any of them had committed the murders.
Widespread charges of police incompetence caused the commissioner of Scotland Yard, Sir Charles Warren, to resign on November 8, the day before the fifth murder.
The London police received hundreds of letters from people who claimed to be the murderer.
The sender's address was ‘From Hell,” and part of a kidney of one of the victims was enclosed.
Jackal is a wild dog that lives in Asia, Africa, and southeastern Europe.
Arabs call it “the howler” because of its mournful cry and yapping, usually heard at night.
Jackals feed on almost any small animal, but they are chiefly scavengers that eat animals they find dead.
For this reason, they are important as “street cleaners’ in some Asian and African cities.
It has a grayish-yellow or brown coat, and a bushy tail about 8 inches long.
People prize the blackbacked jackal of Africa for its fur, which is more attractive than that of the common jackal.
The common jackal is classified as Canis aureus; the black-backed jackal is C mesomelas.
James L Patton John Wightman, Colorific The jackal, a member of the dog family, is mainly a scavenger, an animal that feeds on creatures it finds dead.
It is dusky black, with gray on the back of the head and on the cheeks and neck.
Each member knows its status, and highranking birds are allowed to eat and drink before lowranking birds.
Jacks, also called jackstones, is the name of a children’s game played with small metal objects called jacks.
Players must pick up the jacks from the ground while tossing and catching a ball or another jack.
Some of these stunts are called Downs and Ups, Upcast, Downcast, Scrubs, Bounce, and No Bounce.
Some of the stunts are Over and Back, Scatters, Pigs in the Pen, and Sweeps.
The game probably came from Pebble Jackstones, which is still played in © Linda Kelly-Hassett from Caryle Calvin Jacks is a children’s game played with a rubber ball and metal objects called jacks.
Each player bounces the ball and tries to pick up a certain number of jacks while the ball is in the air.
Rachel Gallagher Jackson, Mississippi (pop.4,256; met. area pop. 440,801), is the capital and largest city of the state.
It serves as acenter of commerce, industry, and transportation and is called the Crossroads of the South.
Jackson lies on the west bank of the Pearl River in central Mississippi.
In 1821, the Mississippi Legislature established the capital in the center of the state at a site called LeFleur's Bluff.
The Legislature renamed the site Jackson to honor Major General Andrew Jackson, a hero of the War of 1812.
It lives in Europe and North Africa and often nests in towns and villages.
Mississippi College lies just west of Jackson, and Tougaloo College is north of the city.
Tourist attractions in Jackson include the Old Capitol, which houses the State Historical Museum; the Mississippi Agricultural and Forestry Museum; the Mississippi Museum of Art; and the Mississippi Museum of Natural Science.
The city’s Dizzy Dean Museum has memorabilia about the legendary baseball pitcher.
The Jackson Symphony, Mississippi Opera, and Ballet Mississippi perform in the Municipal Auditorium.
Jackson's central location in the South helps make it one of the most important commercial centers of that region.
Some of Mississippis largest banks and law firms are located in the city.
Bus companies and railroad passenger and freight lines serve the city, as does Jackson International Airport.
The city’s chief products include automotive and aircraft parts, electrical houseware equipment, and motors.
Other major industries include food processing and the manufacture of clothing, furniture, and products made of clay, glass, or stone.
Choctaw Indians lived in what is now the Jackson area before French settlers arrived during the early 1700's.
In 1792, Louis LeFleur, a French-Canadian fur trader, set up a trading post there.
In 1821, the Mississippi Legislature chose this post as the site of the state capital.
Jackson, Alexander Young 5 During the American Civil War , Union forces invaded Jackson four times.
General William T Sherman and his troops burned much of the city in 1863.
The rapid development of railroads during the late 1800's helped make Jackson a center of trade.
This discovery attracted industry because the gas provided cheap fuel for factories.
About 70 companies built factories in the area in the late 1960's and early 1970's.
A Civic Arts Center-Planetarium, including an art gallery, a planetarium, and two rehearsal halls, was completed in 1978.
Jackson, Alexander Young , a Canadian landscape painter, was a founding member of a group of Canadian artists called the Group of Seven.
The group developed a national school of painting in the early 1900's based on the Canadian wilderness.
Jackson traveled across Canada, painting in Ontario, Quebec, and the West.
Jackson was a strong supporter for the continuation of the group's ideas.
He helped to develop 7he Canadian Group of Painters, a national association that was formed in 1933 to succeed the Group of Seven.
Oil painting on canvas ; National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa te ot etre Algoma, November is one of many wilderness landscapes Alexander Jackson painted to portray the beauty and grandeur of the Algoma district of southern Ontario.
Jackson, the son of poor Scotch-Irish immigrants, became an orphan at 14.
Then he moved to Tennessee, where he became a successful lawyer and landowner.
Jackson won fame as an Indian fighter and as a general in the War of 1812.
He won election as President in 1828 partly because his party was so well organized throughout the nation.
Jackson made the presidency a more powerful office, though still subject to the will of the people.
As President, he disapproved of many actions by Congress and vetoed 12 bills, more than all previous Presidents combined.
Many of these bills sought to increase federal spending on domestic improvements.
The Democrats believed that the states, not the national government, should pay for such projects.
Jackson's strong actions, particularly during disputes involving the Bank of the United States and the rights of states, won him much praise.
The 20-year period after Jackson became President is often called the Age of jackson.
Under Jackson's leadership, his followers tried to win reforms in the states.
They fought for the right of workers to organize labor unions, and called for a 10-hour workday.
When Jackson was reelected President in 1832, he became the first President who had been nominated by a national political convention.
Historians often use the term Jacksonian Democracy to describe the reforms and reform movements of the period from 1828 to 1850.
During Jackson's presidency, the opening of land in the West sped up the westward movement.
Wild speculation on land, roads, canals, and cotton led to a business depression in the late 1830's.
William Lloyd Garrison organized one of the first societies favoring an end to slavery.
Peter Cooper built the first American steam locomotive used for passenger service, and Jackson became the first President to ride a train.
Andrew Jackson was born on March 15, 1767, in either North Carolina or South Carolina—no one really knows which.
Jackson believed he was born on the farm of his uncle, James Crawford, in Waxhaw settlement, South Carolina.
The Crawford house stood on the west side of the road that formed the boundary between North Carolina and South Carolina at that time.
Jackson's parents, Andrew and Elizabeth Hutchinson Jackson, were a poor farm couple from Northern Ireland.
They had sailed to America in 1765 with their first two sons, Hugh and Robert.
He died in 1767, a few days before Andrew, their third child, was born.
He grew up among people who were ready to fight at any time to defend their honor.
Congress established the Wisconsin Territory in 1836. fa New territory The United States flag had 25 stars, /eft, by the end of Jackson’s second term in the presidency.
A 26-star flag was adopted after he left office in 1837. found himself challenged to a battle.
A schoolmate later recalled that Andrew would “never give up,” even when another boy had him on the ground.
In those days, most farm communities had “public readers’ who read aloud items from the Philadelphia newspapers.
Andrew later recalled that he was “selected as often as any grown man’ to be the reader.
In 1776, at the age of 9, he read the newly adopted Declaration of Independence to his neighbors.
But sports and cockfighting occupied more of his time than did studying.
The 13-year-old Andrew and his brother Robert joined South Carolinas mounted militia.
Jackson, Andrew 7 The world of President Jackson Electromagnetic induction, a way of turning mechanical energy into electricity, was discovered independently by two physicists—Michael Faraday of England and Joseph Henry of the United States—in the early 1830's.
Both men found that a moving magnet produced electric current ina coil of wire.
Black Hawk, a Sauk Indian chief, led a group of Sauk and Fox Indians to try to regain their land near Rock Island, Ill., from white settlers.
The resulting conflict, the Black Hawk War of 1832, ended in defeat for the Indians.
Presidential candidates began to be chosen by national conventions in the election of 1832.
The first coeducational college in the United States, Oberlin Collegiate Institution , began to admit students of both sexes in 1833.
The romantic composers Felix Mendelssohn and Robert Schumann of Germany and Frédéric Chopin of Poland wrote many of their finest works during the 1830's.
The first successful reaping machine, which enabled farmers to harvest grain much more quickly, was patented by the American inventor Cyrus McCormick in 1834.
The Battle of the Alamo, the most famous battle in the war for Texan independence, took place in 1836.
Mexican troops under General Antonio Lépez de Santa Anna defeated the Alamo defenders, including Davy Crockett and Jim Bowie.
The British commander wanted his boots cleaned, and ordered Andrew to scrub them.
The angry officer lashed out at Andrew with his sword, and the youth threw up his left hand to protect himself.
The blade slashed Andrew's hand to the bone and cut him badly on the head.
In an exchange of prisoners, Elizabeth Jackson obtained the freedom of her sons.
Jackson died a short time later, and Andrew on 4 , deg rg eee f-4 9 Puscraas ig ae a Oe ae Library of Congress Jackson's boyhood home was a log cabin in the Waxhaw settlement in South Carolina, near the boundary with North Carolina.
A British officer slashed Jackson with his sword, above, because the boy refused to clean the soldier's boots. became an orphan at the age of 14.
After the Revolutionary War, Andrew found little to interest him in school.
Jackson met Spruce Macay, a wealthy lawyer, in Salisbury, N.C., in 1784.
But he soon established a reputation as ‘the most roaring, rollicking, gamecocking, horse-racing, card-playing, mischievous fellow that ever lived in Salisbury,” according to an old-time resident of the town.
Professional standards for lawyers were not high in those days, and Jackson was admitted to the bar in 1787.
In 1788, John McNairy, judge of the Cumberland superior court, appointed Jackson solicitor, or attorney general, for the region that now forms Tennessee.
On his way to Nashville, Jackson stopped briefly at Jonesborough to take part in a civil suit.
He accused the opposing lawyer, Waightstill Avery, of taking illegal fees, and challenged him to a duel.
Thousands of settlers had moved into Nashville after the Revolutionary War.
His success as a public official brought him a large private law practice.
Robards was separated from her husband, Captain Lewis Robards, an army officer.
Robards believed that Robards had obtained a divorce and were married in Natchez in August 1791.
In December 1793, they learned that Robards had not been granted a divorce until September of that year.
The confusion surrounding their marriage and remarriage made the couple targets of gossip that troubled their lives for decades.
The Jacksons also reared his two sons, John Donelson and Andrew Jackson Donelson.
In addition to practicing law, Jackson made money by selling land to new settlers.
He bought land for as little as 10 cents an acre and later sold it for as much as $3 an acre.
In 1796, he bought Hunter's Hill, a plantation 13 miles from Nashville.
Jackson served as a delegate to the state constitutional convention that prepared for Tennessee's admission into the Union.
There is a story that Jackson proposed the name “Tennessee” for the new state.
Jackson’s rough western frontier manners made him stand out among the representatives of eastern states in Congress.
Jackson was 1 of 12 representatives who voted against a resolution praising President George Washington's Administration.
He also felt that the pace of life in the capital, Philadelphia, was too slow.
Six months later, the Tennessee legislature elected Jackson as a justice of the state supreme court.
In 1804, Jackson resigned the judgeship to devote full time to his private affairs.
In 1805, he and John Hutchings established a general store at Clover Bottom, near the Hermitage.
His pistol duel in 1806 with Charles Dickinson, a lawyer, ended in Dickinson's death.
When war with Great Britain began, he quickly offered his services to President James Madison.
For several months, Jackson and his 2,500 Tennessee militiamen awaited orders from the War Department.
Finally, in January 1813, Governor Willie Blount of Tennessee directed him to reinforce American troops in New Orleans.
After Jackson arrived in Natchez, Miss., on the way to New Orleans, he received orders from Secretary of War John Armstrong to demobilize his forces on the spot.
Jackson was furious because the federal government had not provided pay, food, transportation, or medicine for his men.
Jackson next took command of a volunteer force of 2,000 men in a campaign against the Creek Indians.
A serious shortage of supplies and food made military operations difficult for Jackson.
He also had to put down two mutinies when some of his men threatened to desert.
It took place near the Creek village on Horseshoe Bend of the Tallapoosa River, near presentday Alexander City.
Jackson allowed the Indian women and children to cross the river to safety before he attacked.
He dictated peace terms to the Creek, who gave up 23 million acres of land in present-day Georgia and Alabama.
The federal government commissioned Jackson a major general in the regular army.
Jackson was assigned to command United States forces along the southern coast.
Before moving on to New Orleans, Jackson asked permission to seize Pensacola in Spanish Florida.
Jackson arrived in the city on Dec., 1814, and found the people almost defenseless.
Though ill with dysentery, he set a furious pace in preparing to defend the city.
Timely reinforcements from Kentucky and Tennessee increased his forces to about 5,000 men.
After several minor attacks, the British army of more than 8,000 men began its attack at dawn on Jan., 1815.
The British marched up in close columns against earthworks defended by Jackson’s artillery and riflemen.
The American losses totaled only 14 men killed, 39 wounded, and 18 captured.
But it had no effect on the War of 1812 because a peace treaty had been signed two weeks earlier.
Communications were so slow that Jackson had not learned about the treaty.
Earl; The Hermitage, Nashville, Tenn, Rachel Jackson, Jackson's wife, died of a heart attack in December 1828.
Her death came shortly before her husband left for Washington to be inaugurated President.
Jackson returned to his plantation in Tennessee but remained in command of the army's Southern Division. ln December 1817, he received orders to lead an expedition to Florida.
Fierce Seminole Indians, some discontented Creek, and groups of escaped slaves and vagabonds had been raiding American settlements north of the Florida-Georgia border.
At the time of the campaign, the United States was negotiating for the acquisition of Florida from Spain.
In 1821, two years after the United States acquired Florida, Jackson became provisional governor of the new territory.
At the age of 54, he was looking forward to the life of a country squire.
Jackson's friends and newspapers in Nashville called for his nomination as President. {n 1822, the Tennessee legislature nominated him to run for President in 1824.
Jackson, now a dignified country gentleman, impressed Washington society.
Yet Jackson faced stiff 10 Jackson, Andrew The Hermitage, Nashville, Tenn.
In the Battle of New Orleans, Jackson led American forces to victory over the British.
The British commander, General Edward Pakenham, died in the fighting, above. opposition in the election of 1824.
Secretary of State John Quincy Adams regarded himself as the logical man to succeed President James Monroe.
Representative Henry Clay of Kentucky hoped to be elected by winning the vote of the West.
A congressional caucus nominated Secretary of the Treasury William H Crawford for President.
He won 99 electoral votes, Adams received 84, and other candidates received 78 votes.
But no candidate had a majority, so the election went to the House of Representatives, which voted by states.
Clay threw his support to Adams, who won the presidency with the votes of 13 states.
In the following years, Jackson and his supporters did their best to embarrass Adams.
He felt that his chances for winning the presidency in 1828 would be strengthened if he returned to private life.
The presidential campaign of 1828 was one of the bitterest in American history.
It was also the first in which all nominations were made by state legislatures and mass meetings instead of by congressional caucuses.
Adams sought reelection, with Secretary of the Treasury Richard Rush as his vice presidential candidate.
As his running mate, they named John C Calhoun, who had served as Vice President under Adams.
Jackson’s supporters continued to call themselves Republicans or Democratic-Republicans.
These leaders followed Van Buren partly because they felt his support for the idea of states’ rights would allow for compromise on the question of whether slavery should be expanded.
Van Buren also knew the importance of campaign tactics that took advantage of Jackson’s military fame.
Crowds gathered at the Hermitage to congratulate Jackson. “l am filled with gratitude,” he said.
She preferred the comfort of her own room, with her Bible and a few close friends.
Jackson remained convinced that the various slanders of the campaign led to his wife's death.
Jackson’s first Administration When Jackson arrived in Washington, D.C, for his inauguration, he was still bitter at the politicians who had attacked his wife.
The sun shone brightly on Jackson as he walked to the Capitol, followed by a huge crowd.
Slowly he made his way down to unpaved Pennsylvania Avenue, mounted his horse, and headed for the White House.
Carriages, wagons, and thousands of people on foot followed close behind.
The throng swarmed into the White House and eagerly grabbed the cakes, ice cream, and orange punch that had been prepared for Jackson's reception.
They stood on chairs, broke china, tore drapes, and even pushed the President aside.
He wanted to destroy what seemed to him a monopoly of federal offices by wealthy individuals.
This practice, which had long been used in state politics, was known as the spoils system.
Jackson has often been described as a “spoilsman,” but his replacement of Adams’ supporters has been exaggerated.
Jackson believed that no federal employee should have a lifetime “right” to his or her job.
He felt that his system of replacing workers made the government more democratic by allowing more people a chance to work for it.
Political turmoil forced Jackson to limit regular Cabinet meetings during his first years in office.
He relied on advice from loyal Cabinet members he consulted individually and from influential friends.
Critics objected to Jackson's reliance on this unofficial “Kitchen Cabinet” Life in the White House.
Jackson died, she had expressed the wish that her niece, Emily Donelson, should be given the opportunity to manage the White House for the President.
Donelson’s husband, Andrew Jackson Donelson, became the President's private secretary.
Sarah Yorke Jackson, the wife of Jackson's adopted son, served as White House hostess.
The north portico of the White House was constructed during Jackson's Administration.
The government committed more than $50,000 to redecorating of the mansion.
While expensive, fancy foods were served, he usually preferred a simple diet of rice, bread, vegetables, milk, and wine.
An argument over Peggy O'Neale Eaton caused a split in Jackson’s family and in his Cabinet.
Eaton, the wife of Secretary of War John H Eaton, was the daughter of an innkeeper and the widow of a naval officer, who, according to rumor, had committed suicide because of his wife's unfaithfulness.
The Donelsons returned to Tennessee for six months rather than accept Mrs.
He also came to regard the affair as an attempt by Calhoun to gain power for himself.
In 1831, both Eaton and Van Buren resigned in order to provide Jackson more freedom in reorganizing his new Cabinet.
Jackson then appointed anti-Calhoun men as successors to Ingham, Berrien, and Branch.
Early in 1828, Congress had passed a law that increased tariff rates on foreign manufactured goods.
Calhoun complained that the law hurt his native state of South Carolina.
In this document, Calhoun claimed that a state could nullify any law passed by Congress which the state believed had violated the Constitution.
Earl; © White House Historical Association (photography by the National Geographic Society) Emily Donelson, Rachel Jackson's niece, managed the White House and served as Jackson's hostess at most social events.
Her husband was the President's private secretary. get Jackson on their side.
They invited him to a dinner celebrating Thomas Jefferson's birthday, on April 13, 1830.
Jackson's fight against the Bank of the United States became the major issue of his first Administration.
The Bank of the United States could also prevent state banks from making loans without enough security.
State banks in the South and West were usually freer in extending credit and loans than the more conservative Eastern banks.
Western and Southern farmers who could not get new loans or renew old ones denounced the Bank of the United States for restricting the power of local banks.
That is, he believed currency would be more reliable if paper money was based strictly on specie, or gold and silver.
Jackson called the bank a monopoly and said its vast powers threatened the government The bank had meddled in politics and its political supporters, including Senators Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, opposed Jackson.
Jackson interpreted it as a direct attack on his reelection campaign and charged that the bank's president, Nicholas Biddle, was misusing bank funds to support Clay.
Biddle’s congressional supporters tried to override the President's veto, but failed.
For the first time, national political conventions chose the candidates for President.
Before this time, the candidates had been nominated by state legislatures, mass meetings, or congressional caucuses.
In December 1831, Jackson's opponents nominated Henry Clay for President.
They chose John Sergeant, head of the legal staff of the Bank of the United States, for Vice President.
The delegates nominated Jackson for President and Martin Van Buren for Vice President The fight to recharter the Bank of the United States became the chief issue of the 1832 presidential campaign.
In 1832, Congress passed another high-tariff act On November 24, South Carolina declared the tariff laws of 1828 and 1832 null and void.
It threatened to secede, or leave the Union, if the government tried to collect duties at Charleston.
Jackson and Senator Robert Y Hayne of South Carolina reacted to the crisis in opposite ways.
Hayne resigned from the United States Senate and won election as governor of South Carolina.
On Dec., 1832, Jackson ordered troops and warships to be concentrated near Charleston.
On December 28, Calhoun resigned the vice presidency and took over Hayne’s Senate seat.
At the same time, Senator Henry Clay pushed through a compromise tariff bill that reduced all tariffs for 10 years.
South Carolina withdrew its nullification of the tariff laws, but declared Highlights of Jackson’s Administrations 1830 Senators Daniel Webster and Robert Y Hayne debated states’ rights.
Jackson vetoed a bill to renew the charter of the Bank of the United States.
United States troops forced the Seminole Indians to retreat to the Florida Everglades.
Jackson's Specie Circular required payment in gold or silver for public lands. 1832 1832 1832 1832 1833 1835 the force law null and void.
Jackson's stand against nullification angered states’ rights supporters in his party and strengthened the opposition in the South.
Jackson properly interpreted his reelection as public approval of his bank policy.
He ordered Secretary of the Treasury Louis McLane to remove the governments deposits from the Bank of the United States and place them in state banks.
Both McLane and his successor, William J Duane, refused to carry out Jackson’s order.
Duane had been appointed even though Jackson knew that he opposed the President's bank policy.
See Taney, Roger B The withdrawal of the governments funds reduced the powers of the national bank.
In 1834, the United States Senate voted to criticize Jackson's bank policy.
In 1837, Jackson's allies won control of the Senate, and revoked the 1834 resolution.
The dispute over the Bank of the United States occurred during a period of heavy speculation in land, the opening of the West, and increased foreign trade.
The government was receiving more money from tariffs and the sale of public land than it was spending.
Congress provided that any surplus above $5 million should be divided among the states in 1837 as a loan.
But a depression struck in 1837 before the money from the government could be distributed to all the states.
By 1836, most banks had only 1 gold dollar in reserve for every 10 or 12 paper dollars in circulation.
Inflation became so serious that Jackson hastened to act before the boom crumbled.
On July 11, 1836, he issued his Specie Circular. \t directed government agents to accept only gold and silver in payment for public lands.
This order shocked the West because speculators there had been buying land with “cheap” paper money.
The inflation of money, overexpansion of business, and overinvestment in public improvements brought on a depression that struck shortly before Jackson left office.
After the War of 1812, he helped negotiate important Indian treaties and greatly influenced the governments Indian policy.
Most modern historians believe Jackson did not hate the Indians, but he believed that the government should treat them as wards of the nation and not as members of independent foreign powers.
He doubted that Indians and white people could live together, and therefore favored moving the Indians in the East to the West.
In 1828, Georgia passed laws that gave the Cherokee Quotations from Jackson Jackson, Andrew. indians no legal protection if the state seized their lands.
The Cherokee protested that the federal government had guaranteed them this land by treaty.
In this controversy, Jackson did not support the rights of the federal government as he had done in the nullification crisis.
Eventually the case, Cherokee Nation Georgia, reached the Supreme Court of the United States, which dismissed the Cherokee suit in 1831.
But in a later case, Worcester Georgia , the court ruled that the federal government had exclusive jurisdiction over Indian territory.
Jackson's supporters in Congress helped win approval of the Indian Removal Act of 1830.
The act called for the removal of the Indian tribes east of the Mississippi River and their relocation on land west of that river.
By the end of Jackson's Administration, almost all Indians east of the river—including the Creek, Cherokee, Choctaw, and Chickasaw—had signed treaties to move west of the Mississippi.
Thousands of Indians, cheated out of their land, died during the forced migration.
By the time the fighting ended, most of the Seminole had surrendered or been captured and had been sent to the West.
After the Revolutionary War, Britain had prohibited American ships from trading in the West Indies.
In 1830, Jackson offered to open American ports to the British if Americans received equal trading rights in the West Indies.
Jackson achieved another success when he persuaded France to pay its long-standing “spoliation,” or The following quotations come from some of Andrew Jackson's speeches and writings.
Message to Congress, Dec., 1830 There are no necessary evils in government.
If it would confine itself to equal protection, and, as Heaven does its rains, shower its favors alike on the high and the low, the rich and the poor, it would be an unqualified blessing.
Message to Congress vetoing the renewal of the charter of the Second Bank of the United States, July 10, 1832 | repeat to the union men again, fear not, the union will be preserved and treason and rebellion promptly put down, when and where it may show its monster head.
They are the preservation of the rights of the several States and the integrity of the Union.
Secand Inaugural Address, March 4, 1833 Without union our independence and liberty would never have been achieved; without union they never can be maintained.
Second Inaugural Address, March 4, 1833 One word to you as to matrimony—seek a wife, one who will aid you in your exertions. . . for you will find it easier to spend two thousand dollars, than to make five hundred.
Look at the economy of the mother and if you find it in her you will find it in the daughter.
French ships had attacked American shipping during the Napoleonic Wars of the early 1800's.
In 1831, France agreed to pay for the damages in six annual installments.
In 1836, Jackson announced that France had paid four installments with interest.
During this period, the admission of any state into the Union was linked with the slavery controversy.
Americans believed that an independent Texas would soon be annexed to the United States, with its area divided into several states.
Antislavery forces opposed the admission of Texas, or even the recognition of an independent Texas.
But he hesitated, fearing that recognition of Texas would damage Martin Van Buren’s chances for the presidency in 1836.
Jackson used his last day as President to establish diplomatic relations with the Republic of Texas.
Later years After seeing his friend Martin Van Buren sworn in as President, Jackson returned to the Hermitage.
Whitehaired and sick with tuberculosis and dropsy, Jackson still stood erect.
He continued his interest in national politics and supported Van Buren’s unsuccessful bid for reelection in 1840.
Jackson the soldier A The Battle of Horseshoe Bend B Glory at New Orleans C Florida expedition ill.
Road to the presidency A Election of 1824 B Election of 1828 Ladies Hermitage Association The Hermitage, Jackson's home, is near Nashville, Tennessee.
It was completed in 1819, damaged by fire in 1834, and rebuilt in 1835.
Jackson's first administration A The spoils system D The Bank of the United B Life in the White House States C Split with Calhoun E Election of 1832 F The nullification crisis V Jackson’s second administration A The bank issue D Foreign affairs B The money surplus E Slavery and Texas C The Indian issue Vi.
Jackson, Helen Hunt , became best known for her efforts to secure justice for the American Indians.
In A Century of Dishonor , she documented the history of the United States government's mismanagement of Indian affairs.
She then became special commissioner to investigate conditions of the Indians living in the California missions.
In her novel Ramona , Jackson dramatized the mistreatment of the mission Indians.
Jackson, Jesse Louis , is an African American civil rights activist, political leader, and Baptist minister.
He was a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1984 and 1988.
In both campaigns, Jackson focused attention on the problems of African Americans and other minority groups.
Jackson also led efforts to register more black voters and to increase representation of minority groups at the 1984 and 1988 Democratic national conventions.
But he gained fame as one of the most effective orators in United States politics.
From 1966 to 1971, Jackson was director of Operation Breadbasket, the economic arm of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
In this role, he persuaded many white-owned companies to hire blacks and to sell products made by black-owned firms.
In Chicago in 1971, Jackson founded People United to Save Humanity , an organization devoted to gaining economic power for blacks.
In the mid-1970's, the organization's name was changed to People United to Serve Humanity.
Jackson directed Operation PUSH until 1984, when he founded and became head of the Rainbow Coalition.
The coalition was a group dedicated to gaining political power for blacks and others.
In 1995, Jackson resumed his leadership of Operation PUSH while continuing to head the Rainbow Coalition.
In 1996, the two organizations merged as the Rainbow PUSH Coalition, and Jackson became the new group’s president.
Jackson made several trips abroad that resulted in the freeing of hostages or other prisoners.
In 1984, for example, he obtained the release of a captured United States airman whose plane had been shot down by Syrian forces in Lebanon.
In 1999, Jackson helped arrange the release of three United States soldiers taken prisoner by Yugoslavia.
In 1989, Jackson was awarded the Spingarn Medal for his civil rights and political achievements.
In 1999, Jackson led protests against a school district in Decatur, Illinois.
The district had expelled six African American students for two years for allegedly starting a fight during a football game.
Jackson claimed that many schools’ “zero tolerance” policies against violence were unfair.
AP/Wide World Jesse L Jackson jackson, Robert Houghwout 15 In 2001, Jackson revealed that he was the father of a child born outside of his marriage in 1999.
Some people claimed that this revelation weakened his authority as a moral and religious leader.
Since 1995, Jackson’s son Jesse, Jr., has represented an Illinois district in the United States House of Representatives.
Her singing combined powerful vitality with dignity and strong religious beliefs.
She disliked being identified with nonreligious music, but her singing style revealed the influence of jazz.
In 1927, she moved to Chicago, where she became a soloist in the choir of a Baptist church.
Jackson's 1947 recording “Move On Up a Little Higher” sold over 1 million copies.
By the late 1940's, she was attracting large audiences among the general public.
Frank Tirro Jackson, Michael , an American singer, dancer, and songwriter, has been one of the most popular and exciting performers of rock music.
Jackson's music has a strong rhythm and steady dance beat that combines elements of soul, rhythm and blues, and rock.
The music video of the song “Thriller” is a 13-minute horror film that combines singing and dancing with spectacular visual and sound effects.
Michael Joseph Jackson was born on Aug., 1958, in Gary, Indiana, and began performing locally with his brothers when he was 5 years old.
Michael established himself as a solo singer with the album Off the Waill.
Jackson, Robert Houghwout , an American lawyer and judge, served as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1941 until his death.
He served as solicitor general in 1938 and 1939, and defended New Deal laws in Supreme Court hearings.
As a Supreme Court justice, Jackson showed independence, and argued that judges should try to keep their judgments free from personal opinion.
In 1945 and 1946, Jackson was chief United States prosecutor at the war crimes trials in Nuremberg, Germany.
Merlo J Pusey Jackson, Shirley , was an American novelist and short-story writer known for her tales of psychological horror.
Jackson's best-known short story, “The Lottery” , tells of gruesome human sacrifice in a seemingly ordinary smal] American town.
Some of her other short stories deal with such social issues as prejudice and the loneliness of modern American women.
Victor A Kramer Jackson, Shoeless Joe , was the most famous of eight Chicago White Sox players banned from baseball in 1920.
They were banned for supposedly accepting bribes to make Chicago lose the 1919 World Series to Cincinnati.
An Illinois court found all eight innocent of conspiracy, though some had confessed to involvement in the scheme.
Despite the verdict, Baseball Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis decided the eight players could never again play professional baseball.
Troubled by blisters from a new pair of shoes, Jackson played in his stocking feet.
Jackson played his first full major league season in 1911 and became an outfielder for the White Sox in 1915.
Jackson’s .356 career batting average ranks him behind only Ty Cobb and Rogers Hornsby in major league history.
In the 1919 World Series, Jackson batted .375 and made no fielding errors.
In 1989, the South Carolina state senate asked to have Jackson freed from blame.
Donald Honig jackson, Stonewall , was one of the most famous Confederate generals and one of the best officers who fought under General Robert E Lee.
At the First Battle of Bull Run, or Manassas, Jackson’s brigade faced overwhelming odds, but formed a strong line and held its ground.
General Barnard E Bee, trying to rally his Southern troops, saw Jackson’s line and shouted, “There is Jackson standing like a stone wall.
After that, Jackson was known as “Stonewall,” and his brigade as the Stonewall Brigade.
Jackson's chief characteristics were his religious nature, his careful attention to military detail, his firm discipline, and his capacity to get the maximum efforts from his men.
His soldiers loved him and trusted his ability, and so they tolerated his strict discipline.
The two worked so well together that General Lee could not find a man capable of replacing Jackson after his death.
Orphaned at an early age, he was raised by an uncle, Cummins Jackson, a miller who lived near what is now Weston, W Va.
But he worked hard and secured an appointment to the United States Military Academy in 1842.
Because of his inadequate schooling, he had to work several times harder than most cadets to absorb lessons.
But his grades slowly climbed until he graduated in the upper third of his class.
The story went around the school that if Jackson had had one more year, he would have ranked first.
As soon as he received his commission as a lieutenant of artillery, Jackson was assigned to the war zone in Mexico.
Jackson served at Veracruz, Contreras, Chapultepec, and Mexico City, and rose to the temporary rank of major within a year.
Jackson left the army in 1851 and joined the faculty of the Virginia Military Institute at Lexington, where he taught until 1861.
He was not popular as a teacher, and the students mocked his apparently stern, religious nature and his eccentric traits.
Although he favored preservation of the Union, Jackson went with his state, Virginia, when it seceded.
An unknown when the war started, he soon made a reputation in the First Battle of Bull Run.
With not more than 17,000 men, he defeated 60,000 Union troops ina series of lightning marches and brilliant battles.
After the campaign ended in June, Jackson raced to the aid of Lee at Richmond.
He fought in the Seven Days’ Battles, and at Cedar Mountain, the Second Battle of Bull Run, Antietam , and Fredericksburg.
He took his Second Corps around Union forces near Chancellorsville, Va.
Jackson's men struck from behind and drove the enemy back in wild disorder.
In the darkness, some of his own men mistook him for the enemy and shot him.
The 5 peace MES it ae Ree ar aoe Kp FE Le St he ene Chicago Historical Society Stonewall Jackson Confederate Army won the battle in which Jackson fell.
Jackson, William Henry , was an American photographer famous for his pictures of the Old West.
His photographs of the hot springs and geysers of the Yellowstone region of Wyoming helped persuade Congress to establish the first national park there in 1872.
These pictures, Jackson's spectacular landscapes, and his photos of pioneers and settlers provided a realistic view of the West.
Jackson traveled throughout the West, often with government geological survey teams.
Negatives produced by one of his cameras measured 20 by 24 inches , which even at that time was unusually large.
Charles Hagen Jacksonville is the largest city in Florida and the state's financial and insurance capital.
It is also an important seaport and a major distribution and transportation center of the southeastern United States.
In area, Jacksonville ranks as one of the largest cities in the United States.
Jacksonville lies in northeastern Florida, midway between Atlanta, Georgia, and Miami, Florida.
Indians and early colonists drove their cattle across this ford, which became known as Cow Ford. |saiah D Hart, a Georgia plantation owner, moved to the Cow Ford area in 1821.
He named it Jacksonville for Andrew Jackson, the provisional governor of the Territory of Florida.
Jacksonville began to grow and prosper during the 1870's with the development of its first industries, lumbering and shipping.
The metropolitan area of Jacksonville covers 2,836 square miles and extends over four counties.
The Jacksonville Landing shopping mall along the north bank is a center of activity in the downtown business district.
The Times-Union Center for the Performing Arts stands west of the Jacksonville Landing.
Concerts, conventions, exhibitions, and plays are held at the performing arts center.
The Prime F Osborn III Convention Center, to the west of downtown, is linked with the business district by an elevated people mover system.
Johns River Park and Marina features the lighted Friendship Fountain, one of the tallest lighted fountains in the United States.
The Riverwalk, a boardwalk about 1 5 miles long, stretches along the river's south bank.
Restaurants and hotels line the Riverwalk, which also features entertainment areas where performers such as musicians and mimes appear.
African Americans -make up about 30 percent of the population of Jacksonville.
Other groups in the | © James H Johnson Jacksonville lies on the northeastern coast of Florida.
It was named for Andrew Jackson, who was the provisional governor of the Territory of Florida and who later became United States president.
In the 1970's, the city received over $25 million in federal funds to build low-cost housing.
Religious groups have built eight high-rise apartment buildings and a health center, all for the elderly.
Jacksonville serves as the main financial and insurance center of Florida.
It is a major banking center, and about 35 insurance companies have their home or regional offices there.
Jacksonville is also a leading distribution and transportation center of the southeastern United States.
The United States Navy operates the Mayport Naval Base and a naval air station in the city.
Jacksonville International Airport, railroad passenger trains, and a nationwide bus company serve Jacksonville.
Other important industries include printing and publishing and the manufacture of chemicals, fabricated metal products, heavy machinery parts, paints, paper and pulp products, and plastics.
About 20,000 students attend the city’s 75 private and church-supported schools.
The people elect the board members to four-year terms, and the board names a superintendent.
Jacksonville is also the home of Florida Community College at Jacksonville, a two-year college.
The Haydon Burns Library, Jacksonville's public library, consists of the main library in the downtown area and about 15 branches.
The Jacksonville Symphony Orchestra performs at the Times-Union Center for the Performing Arts and the Florida Theatre.
Local arts groups restored the building, and the city government purchased it in the mid-1980's.
Other concerts and plays are presented at the performing arts center and the Florida Theatre.
The Florida Ballet at Jacksonville is the city's professional dance company.
The Jacksonville Museum of Contemporary Art and the Cummer Gallery of Art exhibit works of locally and nationally known artists.
Fort Caroline National Memorial, a reconstructed fort, stands northeast of the downtown area.
The fort is near the site of the original Fort Caroline, which Huguenots built in 1564.
Timucua Indians and European settlers are believed to have made a peace pact under the tree in the 1500's.
This center includes a baseball park, the 8,000-seat Jacksonville Coliseum, and the 73,000-seat Alltel Stadium.
This stadium serves as the home of the Jacksonville Jaguars of the National Football League.
FLORIDA THEATRE 6 COE SEUN ~~ AMLTEL STAD A av NTEVIPORARY oo ( a's UNIVERSITY Gi e C * Ponte Vedra : Beach ir] ac sonville Beach VILLE ors"" N Ponce de Leon Bivd.
A major tennis tournament, the Bausch & Lomb Championships, is held yearly at nearby Amelia Island.
The people elect the mayor, the 19 City Council members, and other city officials to four-year terms.
The city gets most of its income from property taxes, sewer service charges, and utility taxes.
They took this action to achieve greater efficiency by ending the duplication of many activities and services.
Under the consolidated government, the police and fire departments have been improved, more than 1,000 miles of streets have been paved or repaired, and thousands of street lights have been installed.
Timucua Indians lived in the Jacksonville area long before Europeans first arrived.
In 1564, a group of Huguenots led by René de Laudonnieére built Fort Caroline in the area.
But Spain claimed the entire Florida region and was determined to keep the French out.
In 1565, Spanish forces defeated the French colony at Fort Caroline in what was probably the first war between white people in America.
During the American Civil War , both sides fought for the city, and Union forces occupied it four times.
During the 1870's, lumbering and shipping became Jacksonville's first major industries.
The city's mild climate also began to attract many winter vacationers from the North.
The increase in tourism led to the opening of the first direct railroad line between Jacksonville and the North in 1888.
The city grew rapidly during the late 1800's, and by 1900, it had a population of 28,429.
The fire killed 7 people, left about 10,000 homeless, and destroyed about $15 million worth of property.
During World War Il , the United States government established the Mayport Naval Base and two naval air stations in Jacksonville.
Between 1950 and 1960, Jacksonville's population declined from 204,517 to 201,030.
As a result of this action, Jacksonville rose in rank from the nation's 61st to 23rd largest city in population.
An industrial park for factories and warehouses was built during the 1970's, and the city has carried out a port development program.
In the mid-1980's, Jacksonville began redevelopment of the downtown areas on both banks of the St.
The city’s major projects included the Jacksonville Landing shopping mall and the Prime F Osborn III Convention Center, which was built in a converted railway station dating to 1919.
During the late 1980's, service industries, such as the health care and telecommunications industries, boomed.
Jacksonville's population continued to grow rapidly, reaching 735,617 by 2000.
By then, Jacksonville had become the nation’s 14th largest city in population.
In 2000, a business and housing boom took place in southern Duval and northern St.
To cope with this growth, a coalition of government agencies began major projects to clean the St.
Johns River, upgrade roads, improve the sewerage system, and preserve open space.
Michael P Clark Jacob, in the book of Genesis, was the son of Isaac and the father of 12 sons and at Jeast 1 daughter by his wives Leah, Rachel, Zilpah, and Bilhah.
According to the Bible, Jacob's sons were the founders of the 12 tribes of Israel.
Some scholars believe these idealized family relationships really reflect complex patterns of tribal settlement and migration.
Whatever the actual historical background, Jacob's character, with its conflicting dimensions, has come to stand for and embody the characteristics of the entire people called Israel.
Later, at the urging of his mother, Rebecca, Jacob enforced his claim by pretending to his blind and aged father that he himself was Esau.
On the way to his uncle Laban, Jacob slept at a place called Bethel, where he dreamed of a wonderful ladder between heaven and earth.
But Laban forced Jacob to marry his older daughter, Leah, before he could have Rachel for his wife.
After working 20 years for Laban, Jacob left for home in Palestine with all his wives and their children.
At the end of the encounter, Jacob received God's blessing and a new and more religious name—Israel.
Jacob spent his last years in Egypt, where his son Joseph brought him to live.
Jacob, JAY kuhb, John Edward , a civil rights leader, served as president of the National Urban League from 1982 to 1994.
He replaced Vernon Jordan, 20 Jacobins who had held the position since 1972.
He started working for the organization in 1965 as director of education and youth incentives at the Washington, D.C., chapter.
Jacob later served as acting executive director and president of that chapter and as executive director of the San Diego Urban League.
In 1979, he became exeCutive vice president of the national office of the Urban League under Jordan.
Before joining the Urban League, Jacob was a social worker for the Department of Public Welfare in Baltimore.
The society got its name from its Paris headquarters, which was near the church of St.
The Jacobins favored changing France from a monarchy to a democratic republic.
Most Jacobins were middle-class professionals such as doctors, lawyers, and teachers.
The Jacobins opposed war with other countries at first, fearing that it would lead to a military dictatorship.
But when war broke out with Prussia and Austria in 1792, the Jacobins supported it to gain control.
But his fellow Jacobins, fearing his political beliefs, turned on him in 1794 and executed him.
See also French Revolution; Girondists; Mirabeau, Comte de; Robespierre; Sieyés, Emmanuel J Jacobs, Joseph , was a British scholar best known for his collections of folk tales for children.
Jacobs collected tales from England, Scotland, and Wales and modified them for younger audiences.
English Fairy Tales and More English Fairy Tales rank among his most popular works.
They include such stories as ‘Jack and the Beanstalk” and “The Three Little Pigs.
Jacobs was born in Sydney, Australia, and moved to England in the early 1870's.
Jacobs was active in Jewish affairs throughout his career and wrote many works on Jewish history.
Jacquard, juh KAHRD or zha KAR, Joseph Marie , perfected the automatic pattern loom.
National Urban League John Edward Jacob Jacquard looms could weave cloth with intricate patterns as easily as older looms made plain cloth.
In 1800, he saw an English journal that offered a prize for a simple pattern loom.
By 1804, he had perfected a loom action that has remained essentially the same.
O Frank Hunter Jade is a hard, tough, and highly colored stone widely used for fine carvings and jewelry.
The Chinese carved it into jewelry, and also buried it with their dead.
Many beautiful jade carvings, dating from 1400 B.C., have been dug from the ruins of Anyang, the capital of the first Chinese dynasty.
Through the years, the Chinese developed new sources of the mineral and improved their carving technique.
Nephrite, the chief source of jade, was the mineral which the early Chinese used for carving.
The principal jade-cutting centers are at Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangzhou.
The mineral is translucent to opaque, and comes in a wide range of colors, including dark green, white, yellow, gray, red, and black.
The most valuable type of nephrite is a dark green jade called spinach jade.
Jadeite, or Chinese jade, is a rare jade mineral, found mainly in Myanmar, Japan, California, and in carved objects in Mexico.
It is more valuable than nephrite because of its beautiful colors, such as light-green or lilac.
Once ina while, small amounts of a transparent emerald-green colored jadeite are found in boulders.
Jade minerals have a peculiar structure of interlocking meshes of fine needles that make them very strong and suitable for carving into delicate patterns and thin implements.
Nephrite tools were found in the Lake Dweller remains of the New Stone Age in Europe and Central America.
Jaeger, YAY guhr or JAY guhr, also called hunting gull, is the name of three species of sea birds that live in northern regions worldwide.
They feed on small mammals and small birds; eggs; and fish, which they often steal from other sea birds.
It has been an important seaport since Biblical times, when it was Called Joppa.
Jaguar, JAC wahr, is the largest, most powerful wildcat of the Western Hemisphere.
Jaguars occur in Mexico, Central and South America, and southern Arizona and New Mexico.
However, until the early 1900's, they also roamed in southern California, Louisiana, and Texas.
Jaguars live in forests, shrubby areas, and grasslands—wherever they can safely hide.
They eat almost any kind of animal, including deer, fish, wild pigs, tapirs, turtles, and capybaras and other rodents.
Jaguars measure from 5 to 8 5 feet long, including their 1 } to 2 5 foot tail.
The spots along its back and sides are lightcolored with dark borders and have a dark spot in the center.
The jaguar symbolized strength and courage to the ancient Maya Indians, who considered the animal a god.
It has a long neck, a weaselshaped head, short ears, stubby legs, and a long tail.
The cat stands about 1 foot high at the shoulder and is from 3 to 4 feet long.
Jahn’s early works reflect the International Style of modern architecture.
This style emphasizes steel, glass, and concrete, avoids ornamentation, and stresses straight lines and overlapping planes.
Jahn adapted these principles in his Kemper Arena and Bartle Convention Center , both in Kansas City, Missouri.
About 1980, Jahn made a transition to a style known as Postmodern architecture.
The multicolored facade of Jahn’s One South Wacker Drive office building in Chicago includes black window panels designed in the form of gigantic pillars that refer to ancient Greek columns.
Dennis Domer Jai alai, HY /y, is a fast and dangerous game that resembles handball.
Players use a narrow wicker basket to throw a hard ball against the front wall of a court.
Spectators sit along the open side of the court, watching the game through a clear, protective screen.
To begin a singles game, the server hurls the ball from his cesta against the front wall.
The opponent must catch the ball either before it hits the floor or on the first bounce.
The opponent then hurls the ball against the wall, and the server must catch it and throw it back.
In international doubles games, called partido games, a team must score 30 or 40 points to win.
This ancient Basque sport is played with a basket called a cesta and a ball called a pelota. region of Spain and France during the 1600's.
Today, jai alai is a favorite sport not only in Spain and France, but also in Mexico and the Philippines.
In the United States, jai alai first became popular in Florida and is now played in several states.
It is based on the belief that every living thing consists of an eternal soul called the jiva and a temporary physical body.
The eternal jiva is imprisoned in the body as a result of involvement in worldly activities.
After being freed, it exists eternally in a state of perfect knowledge and bliss.
These men and women try to separate themselves from the everyday world.
They may not own any property except a broom, simple robes, bowls for food, and walking sticks.
They may not live in buildings except for brief periods, and they must beg for all their food.
It may motivate them to cease all bodily activity and die of starvation, but this rarely happens.
The laity support the sadhus and sadhvis and obey less strict rules of conduct.
Most Critically reviewed by the United States Amateur Jai A broom and a bowl are important symbols of Jainism, and Jain holy men and women always carry them.
Holy men and women use it to sweep aside insects so they will not step on them.
They carry bowls to collect food for themselves. of the laity engage in business activities because such occupations do not directly involve killing any living thing.
They look forward to becoming sadhus or sadhvis themselves in a future life.
The Jains believe that Mahavira was the 24th in a line of teachers of Jain principles.
The Jains honor these teachers and other holy persons, but they do not consider them to be gods.
Jakarta, juh KAHR tuh , is the capital, largest city, and chief economic center of Indonesia.
Jakarta, sometimes spelled Djarkata, lies on the Ciliwung River, on the northwest coast of the island of Java.
Many modern hotels and office and government buildings surround Medan Merdeka (Freedom Square) near the center of Jakarta.
The monument honors Indonesia's struggle for independence from the Netherlands, which ruled the country during most of the period from the 1600's to 1949.
Jakarta’s main business district and some industries are in the northern part of the city.
Major industries also operate on the southern and eastern edges of Jakarta.
Wealthy Jakartans once lived in a Dutch-built residential section called Menteng.
Today, these people make their homes in Pondok Indah and other fashionable residential areas in the south of Jakarta.
However, many people in Jakarta live in small wood or bamboo structures in districts called Kampongs.
Its best-known museum, the Museum Pusat, houses Indonesian archaeological treasures.
The Taman Ismail Marzuki Center features art exhibits, theatrical and musical performances, puppet plays, and a planetarium.
The city's harbor, Tanjung Priok, handles much of the nation's foreign trade.
Factories in Jakarta assemble motor vehicles; process food; and manufacture chemicals, electronic equipment, paper and printed materials, textiles, and other products.
The government employs many people, although private businesses are growing.
Automobiles, buses, taxis, trucks, and motorcycles crowd the streets of Jakarta.
The Sukarno-Hatta International Airport at Cengkareng lies to the west of the city.
The area of what is now Jakarta was settled as early as the A.D. 400’s, probably by Sundanese people from other parts of Java.
In the early 1500's, the Portuguese established a trading post in the area but were soon driven out by local Muslims.
Dutch and English trading companies built outposts in Jayakarta during the early 1600's.
Jayakarta was destroyed in 1619, when the Dutch defeated the English in a battle for control of the area.
The Japanese occupied Batavia from 1942 until their defeat in World War Il in 1945.
Indonesia won its independence from the Netherlands in 1949, and Batavia was renamed Jakarta.
The great increase in population resulted in overcrowding and a shortage of jobs.
In 1970, for example, the city’s governor banned new immigrants from settling in Jakarta unless they already had jobs in the city.
Arawak Indians, who were the first people to live in Jamaica, named the island Xaymaca, which means /and of wood and water.
Jamaica's pleasant climate and its beautiful beaches and mountains attract large numbers of tourists each year.
Jamaica is among the world’s leading producers of bauxite, the ore from which aluminum is made.
The island also produces bananas, sugar, and various manufactured goods.
The prime minister, who leads the majority party in Parliament, is the chief executive.
The governor general represents the monarch but has few governing powers.
The Jamaican Parliament consists of a Senate and a House of Representatives.
The governor general appoints the 21 senators, 13 of them on the advice of the prime minister and 8 of them on the advice of the leader of the opposition in Parliament.
The voters elect 60 people to five-year terms in the House of Representatives.
Jamaica is divided into 12 units of local government called parishes, plus the Kingston and St.
Andrew Corporation, a governmental unit made up of Kingston and its surrounding area.
Each parish has a governing council whose members are elected by the people.
More than 90 percent of Jamaica's people have black African or mixed black African and European ancestry.
Agricu/ture—bananas, cacao, citrus fruits, coconuts, coffee, sugar cane.
Manufacturing and processing— alumina, cement, chemicals, clothing, machinery, petroleum products, rum, sugar.
A gold diagonal cross with black triangular side panels, and green triangular panels at top and bottom.
The gold stands for sunlight and mineral wealth, the black for hardships of the past and future, and the green for hope and agricultural wealth.
Other important crops include sugar cane, coffee, citrus fruits, and coconuts. include Asians, most of whom are Chinese and Indians; Europeans; and Syrians.
Most Jamaican business and professional people are Europeans and Afro-Europeans.
Large numbers of people of African and South Asian ancestry work as farm laborers.
But most Jamaicans speak a dia/ect of English that differs from the English that is spoken by Americans and English people.
Religious groups include Anglicans, Baptists, members of the Church of God, and Roman Catholics.
About 100,000 black Jamaicans belong to a religious and political movement called Rastafarianism.
The name Rastafarian comes from Ras Tafari, a title held by Haile Selassie |, the emperor of Ethiopia from 1916 to 1974.
In addition, they adopted many of the beliefs of Marcus Garvey, a Jamaican who died in 1940.
After Haile Selassie’s death in 1975, Rastafarians changed some of their beliefs about Africa.
Today, some look forward to a spiritual return to Africa rather than to actually living there.
The government provides free elementary schools for children from 6 to 15 years old.
Jamaica is part of the Greater Antilles, a group of islands in the West Indies.
Limestone formations located in northwestern Jamaica include a large number of deep depressions called cockpits, and the area is called the Cockpit Country.
The rainy seasons extend from May through June and September through November.
Other farm products include allspice, bananas, cacao, citrus fruits, coconuts, coffee, milk, poultry, and yams.
But the nation’s farms do not produce enough food for all the people, and so Jamaica must import much of its food.
Plants near some of the bauxite mines remove a mineral compound called a/umina from the bauxite ore.
Jamaicans also mine gypsum, which is used in making plasterboard and other construction materials.
Jamaica has plants that produce cement, chemicals, cigars, clothing, fertilizer, footwear, machinery, molasses, petroleum products, and rum.
The leading tourist centers in Jamaica include Kingston, Montego Bay, Negril, and Ocho Rios.
Jamaica’s chief trading partners are the United Kingdom, the United States, and Venezuela.
Jamaica belongs to the Caribbean Community and Common Market , an economic organization of Caribbean nations.
It is also a member of other international trade and development organizations.
But the country has an average of only about 1 automobile for every 15 people.
Arawak Indians lived in Jamaica when the explorer Christopher Columbus arrived there in 1494 and claimed the island for Spain.
The Spaniards enslaved the Arawak and later brought Africans to the island as slaves.
Because Jamaica had no gold, they did not try to settle or develop the island.
The British invaded Jamaica in 1655, and they gained formal possession in 1670.
But they continued to fight African slaves called Maroons, who had escaped into the hills when the British arrived.
During the 1670's, British pirates in the Caribbean used Jamaica as a base to attack Spanish ports and ships.
Sugar became the major crop, and the island ranked as the most important slave market in the Western Hemisphere.
The end of slavery hurt the Jamaican sugar industry because the plantation owners lost thousands of laborers.
In 1865, disputes between planters and workers led to a peasant revolt called the Morant Bay Rebellion.
After the revolt, Jamaica became a crown colony, governed directly by the United Kingdom.
In the 1930's, Jamaican labor leaders urged the British Parliament to give the Jamaican people more political power.
In 1944, the United Kingdom gave Jamaica a new constitution that provided for some self-government.
Jamaica was a member of the West Indies Federation from 1958, when the federation was established, until it was dissolved in 1962.
Later in 1962, Jamaica became a fully independent nation and a member of the Commonwealth of Nations.
Jamaica joined the United Nations in 1962 and the Organization of American States in 1969.
He sought to solve the economic problems by adopting socialistic policies.
He adopted economic policies that emphasized the role of private business and encouraged foreign investment and good relations with Western nations.
In 1983, Jamaica and several other Caribbean nations joined the United States in invading Grenada to overthrow its Marxist government.
He followed a moderate course in economic and foreign relations policies.
The PNP won the most seats in parliamentary elections held in 1993 and 1997, and Patterson remained prime minister.
Aluminum (graph: Leading Maroons bauxite-mining countries) Morgan, Sir Henry Arawak Indians Organization of American Commonwealth of Nations States Garvey, Marcus Rastafarians Kingston Reggae Marley, Bob West Indies James was the name of five kings of Scotland and two kings of both Scotland and England.
James I became King James VI of Scotland in 1567 when his mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, was forced to give up that throne.
When his cousin Elizabeth | died in 1603, he became James | of England, the first Stuart king of England.
A scholar, he pubJames, Daniel, Jr. lished works on theology, witchcraft, and the divine right of kings, the belief that kings get the right to rule from God, rather than from the people.
He had great success ruling Scotland, but the English Parliament opposed his attempt to rule as absolute monarch in England.
This struggle for power continued under Charles |, and contributed to the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642.
James also faced opposition from the Puritans, a religious group that wanted “to purify” the Church of England.
James sponsored a new translation of the Bible, published in 1611, that became known as the King James Version.
Jamestown, the first permanent English settlement in America, was named in his honor.
But James showed an interest in colonies only in Northern Ireland, where he seized land from Irish Catholics and gave it to English and Scottish Protestants.
When James's wife had a son in June 1688, the prospect of another Catholic ruler united James's opponents.
In the Glorious Revolution of 1688, James was forced to give up the throne.
His Protestant daughter Mary and her husband, William of Orange, ruler of the Netherlands, became joint rulers in 1689.
They were James | , who ruled from 1424 to 1437; James II , who ruled from 1437 to 1460; James III , who ruled from 1460 to 1488; James IV , who ruled from 1488 to 1513; and James V , who ruled from 1513 to 1542.
Held at Tuskegee Army Air Field, this program trained the men who would become the United States military's first black pilots.
James won promotion to brigadier general in 1970 and lieutenant general in 1973.
He served as commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD, now the North American Aerospace Defense Command) from 1975 until his retirement in 1978.
He praised excellence in performance as a way to attack institutionalized racism.
It is one of eight letters called “General Epistles” because they were addressed to Christians in general.
This James should not be confused with James, the son of Alphaeus, and James, the son of Zebedee, who were among the 12 apostles.
Some believe the author may have lived in Antioch because the epistle is written in Greek and seems to contain Greek ideas.
It warned Christians that profession of faith cannot take the place of good deeds.
In his short stories and novels, he created characters of great psychological complexity.
At first, James's style was straightforward and realistic, and he often sharply satirized manners and morals.
Later, his style became complicated, and his basic realism became deepened by a rich, almost poetic symbolism.
His reviews, essays, and prefaces have established him as one of the most important theorists of fiction.
His father was a religious philosopher and a friend of leading thinkers of the 1800's.
His older brother, William, became a great philosopher and psychologist.
James's father gave his five children an unusual education, which included long visits in Europe.
In the tale “The Lesson of the Master’ , he suggested that to be an artist, a person should be free of the obligations of family life.
James devoted himself to his art, writing every day, but he still enjoyed a wide circle of social and literary friendships.
He felt that the older and more socially complicated societies of Europe would offer him richer material for his fiction.
In Paris, he befriended the most advanced European writers, including Gustave Flaubert, lvan Turgenev, and Emile Zola.
He became a British subject in 1915 to show his support for Britain during World War I His works.
The first, from 1864 to 1874, was an apprenticeship in which he concentrated on writing short stories and criticism.
His second phase began with Roderick Hudson , his first important novel.
In those works, an innocent, sensitive, intelligent person sets out on a quest for experience.
The person usually travels to Europe, discovering the contrast in manners and morals between the older world of Europe and the new world of America.
During James's third stage, from 1882 to 1889, he wrote many short stories and short novels.
James's fourth stage, from 1889 to 1895, is marked by his unsuccessful attempts to become a popular playwright.
He entered an experimental period that lasted until 1900, writing a group of novels in which he tried different methods of controlling point of view.
For example, in What Maisie Knew , an “adult” story about divorce is told from the point of view of a little girl.
James's sixth phase—often called his “major phase’— covers the rest of his life.
He wrote his three greatest novels, The Wings of the Dove , The Ambassadors , and The Golden Bow! , in this period.
Smith, Virginia L Henry James and the Real Thing: A Modern Reader's Guide.
James, Jesse , became one of the most famous bank and train robbers in the history of the United States.
Jesse Woodson James be was born in Clay County, P.M Missouri, and was the son of a minister.
After the war, Jesse and Frank James formed a new band with their cousins, the Youngers, and began to hold up trains, stagecoaches, and banks.
In 1871, bank officials hired the Pinkerton National Detective Agency to capture Jesse. [n 1875, a bomb thrown into his mother's house killed his stepbrother Archie Samuel and injured his mother.
Some people believed detectives hurled the bomb, and that James was being unjustly persecuted.
In 1881, Governor Thomas Crittenden of Missouri offered a $5,000 reward for the arrest of Frank or Jesse.
Gang member Robert Ford believed he could collect the reward if he killed either brother, and shot Jesse in the head.
A poet as well as a policeman, Dalgliesh brings intelligence and sensitivity to the cases he investigates.
James's books are noted for their psychological realism, wellconstructed plots, strong characterization, and descriptive prose.
She joined the British civil service in 1949, working first in hospital administration, and then in the criminal policy department.
David Geherin James, Saint, was one of the leaders of the Christian church in Jerusalem during the first years after it was founded.
Some documents record the tradition that the Jews called him “the Just,” probably because of his strict observance of the law.
According to tradition, James wrote the Epistle of James in the New Testament.
Charlesworth James, William , became the most widely read American philosopher of the 1900's.
James's interests turned to psychology and the relationship among experience, thinking, and conduct.
Neither physiology nor psychology could satisfy James's interest in the human condition.
He was basically a philosopher who believed in the supreme importance of ideas.
Depression over his inability to reach a decision led him to the verge of despair.
He believed that every difference in thinking must make a difference to someone, somewhere.
If two theories differ, the difference becomes clear when we know how they differ over what the facts are, and the difference in our behavior if we believe that one or the other is true.
Another may claim that people are not free because all human decisions and actions are determined by factors beyond their control.
Therefore, according to James, we must find a way to decide between them because our conduct depends on which we adopt.
James proposed that we approach such questions by tracing the consequences of each viewpoint.
We can regret some of our actions and can say that the world would be better if such actions had not been carried out.
We are not responsible for our actions, and it makes no sense to speak about something happening differently from the way it did happen.
James did not claim to have solved difficult philosophical problems for all time.
He tried to put them into a form that would make it easier for people to solve the problems for themselves.
All people, James believed, must make up their own minds on issues of human life and destiny that cannot be settled on scientific grounds.
It states that if we believe in the possibility of some future event taking place, this belief increases our power to help make the event happen when the time comes for action.
James explored the bay in 28 James River 1631 and again in 1633 while trying to discover the Northwest Passage.
Several large rivers flow into the bay, among them the Attawapiskat, Albany, and Moose in Ontario; and the Harricana, Nottaway, and Eastmain in Quebec.
George B Priddle James River is the largest waterway lying wholly within the state of Virginia.
Jamestown, the first permanent English colony in America, was settled on the banks of this stream in 1607.
The river rises in the Allegheny Mountains at the meeting point of the Jackson and Cowpasture rivers.
The Appomattox, one of the chief branches of the James, enters the river 66 miles (106 kilometers) from the sea.
From this point down to the sea, the James is a tidal stream and can accommodate large ocean steamers.
Michael P O'Neill James the Greater, Saint, was one of the 12 apostles of Jesus Christ.
James is often called James the Greater to distinguish him from another apostle, James the Less.
James and John were fishermen who lived along the northern shore of the Sea of Galilee.
Of all the apostles, his martyrdom is the only one reported in the New Testament.
According to later tradition, the bones of James were taken to Santiago de Compostela in Spain.
As a result, the town became an important pilgrimage center during the Middle Ages.
James's feast day is celebrated on July Zo Richard A Edwards See also Apostles.
He is often called James the Less to distinguish him from another apostle, James the Greater.
However, many Biblical scholars believe that they are three different people.
James the Less is mentioned in all four lists of the apostles in the New Testament.
Richard A Edwards Jamestown, Va., was the first permanent English settlement in North America.
On May 6, 1607, three ships stopped at Cape Henry, at the southern entrance to Chesapeake Bay, after more than four months at sea.
Captain Christopher Newport commanded the ships, the Susan Constant, Godspeed, and Discovery.
They had been sent out by a group of London merchants and other interested people known as the Virginia Company of London (later shortened to Virginia Company.
They came to America mostly to search for treasure and also to spread Christianity among the Indians.
Few of the men were able or willing to do manual labor or to raise farm products that could not be grown in England.
The adventurers landed on a little peninsula on the river on May 24 and established their settlement there.
They named both the river and their settlement in honor of King James | of England.
A meager and unwholesome diet weakened the men, and about two-thirds of them soon died of malnutrition, malaria, pneumonia, and dysentery.
Captain John Smith held the group together when he took control from mid-1608 to mid1609.
He forced the adventurers to stop searching for gold and silver and to start working for their survival, and he bought corn from the Indians.
But an accident in 1609 forced Smith to return to England for treatment.
Fire, drought, Indian attacks, disease, starvation, and lack of another strong leader brought the settlement to its lowest ebb in the winter of 1609-1610.
The arrival of Governor Thomas West, Lord De La Warr, in 1610 with settlers and supplies saved Jamestown from abandonment.
His daughter, the Indian princess Pocahontas, was reported to have saved the life of John Smith.
It brought about a few years of uneasy peace between the settlers and the Indians.
The early settlers failed in attempts to produce silk, grapes, and other items unsuited for the Virginia climate.
Early industries included glass blowing, iron smelting, the making of potash, and shipbuilding.
The first farm products to be raised successfully were hogs and Indian corn.
In 1612, John Rolfe introduced a new type of tobacco to the colony by bringing seed from Trinidad.
This new kind of tobacco was sweeter than the native Virginia plant, and the settlers found a ready market for it in Europe.
Tobacco, corn, and hogs provided a solid basis for Jamestown’s economy.
In 1619, the first representative legislative assembly in the Western Hemisphere met in Jamestown.
In 1619, when the population was about a thousand, the Virginia Company tried to encourage young men to make permanent homes in the colony by sending a number of “young, handsome and honestly educated maids” to become the bachelors’ wives.
Before 1619, only a few married women and female servants lived in Jamestown.
Another important event of 1619 was the arrival of a Dutch ship at Jamestown with 20 blacks for sale.
These Africans, and the thousands who followed them, would in time become slaves.
The town itself was warned of the uprising and was able to resist the attack.
Both times, the colonists struck back, killing many Indians and destroying their food supplies and villages.
Two of the main reasons for the survival of the Jamestown settlement were that the colonists learned to produce their own food, and tobacco proved to be a highly marketable cash crop.
These disasters caused the people in Virginia to transfer their capital to Williamsburg in 1699.
It now lies on an island, having been cut off from the mainland by water.
Much of the original land has been washed away by tidal currents of the James River.
For many years, only a few foundation stones and the ruined tower of a brick church stood as reminders of the settlement.
The Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities controls the land around the ruined church.
In 1957, Virginia celebrated the 350th anniversary of the founding of Jamestown.
The state built Jamestown Festival Park about 5 mile from the original site of Jamestown.
The park has a reproduction of the area's first fort, Powhatan’s lodge, and replicas of the ships that brought the first adventurers.
Bacon's Rebellion London Company Smith, John Glass American glass) _—_ Rolfe, John Williamsburg Additional resources Hume, lvor N The Virginia Adventure.94.
Janaéek, YAH nah cHenx, Leo$, LFH awsh , was a Czech composer best known for his operas and works for male chorus.
Many of Janacek’s compositions reflect his interest in the folk music of Moravia, his native region.
Janacek’s operas show his fascination with the moods and rhythms of speech.
Jansky, Karl Guthe 29 Janacek’s most popular opera is probably /entifa , a tragedy based on peasant life.
He also wrote works for solo piano and songs for solo voice as well as chamber music.
Janissaries, /AN uh SEHR eez, were a group of highly trained professional soldiers of the Ottoman Empire.
Sultan Murad I, the third Ottoman ruler, probably organized the Janissaries in the 1300's.
The group at first consisted of slaves and prisoners of war, and later of children trained as soldiers.
They were known for their discipline and their early use of handheld firearms.
Janissaries made up the select core of the Ottoman army from the 1300's to the 1500's.
In 1826, Sultan Mahmud II outlawed the Janissaries as a first step in reforming the empire.
Justin McCarthy Jansen, Cornelius , was a Roman Catholic bishop best known for his book Augustinus, published in 1640, after his death.
The church condemned as heresies Jansenism’s views on grace, free will, and predestination.
The movement created controversy among Catholics in France and the Netherlands.
Jansen based Augustinus on his study of the writings of Saint Augustine, a leading early Christian theologian.
In Augustinus, Jansen wrote that human nature ts totally corrupt and that people need God's grace to act according to His will.
Jansen also taught that God gives grace only to those he has predestined for salvation and that Jesus Christ died only for the people predestined for heaven.
Cornelius Otto Jansen was born in Acquoy, near Gorinchem, the Netherlands.
Jansky, JAN skee, Karl Guthe , an American engineer, was the first person to detect radio waves whose source was outside the solar system.
His discovery led to the development of radio astronomy, a branch of astronomy that studies radio waves given off by objects in space.
While investigating static interference in transatlantic radio messages, he heard static he could not identify.
After extensive study, Jansky determined that the static came from outside the solar system, in the constellation Sagittarius.
Today, scientists use radio waves to observe objects in space that cannot be seen with optical telescopes.
Vincent McDermott Roger H Stuewer 30 January January is the first month of the year according to the Gregorian calendar, which is used in almost all the world today.
In 46 B.C, the Roman statesman Julius Caesar added a day to January, making it 31 days long.
The Anglo-Saxons called the first month Wolfmonth because wolves came into the villages in winter in search of food.
The third Monday of January is a federal holiday in the United States in honor of slain civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr., whose birthday falls on January 15. important January events Most Christian churches celebrate Epiphany on January 6, the 12th day after Christmas.
The holiday commemorates the arrival of the wise men from the East bearing gifts for the infant Jesus.
In Norway, a similar holiday is called Tywendedagen (Twentieth Day), because it falls on the 20th day after Christmas.
Many Hindus celebrate a harvest festival called Makara Sankranti or Pongal in mid-January.
During this holiday, many people bathe in the Ganges River, India’s most sacred river.
They give a/ms , eat newly harvested rice, and eat sweets to symbolize the wish for sweet words throughout the year.
Salmon P Chase, antislavery leader and chief justice of the United States, born 1808.
Carole S Angell Quotations Ring out the old, ring in the new, Ring, happy bells, across the snow; The year is going, let him go; Ring out the false, ring in the true.
Alfred, Lord Tennyson Blasts of January would blow you through and through.
Calendar Garnet New Year's Epiphany Janus Day Janus, /AY nuhs, in Roman mythology, was a god who had two faces that looked in opposite directions.
One Snowdrop Important January events Janus 31 face looked into the past, and the other looked into the future.
The Romans prayed to Janus at the beginning and end of any important action, especially a war.
The Romans called on Janus at the beginning of every prayer, even ahead of Jupiter, the king of the gods.
For example, the early Hindus in India prayed to a two-faced god named Vayu before starting any major undertaking.
Benjamin Franklin, American statesman and inventor, born 1706. — Anton Chekhov, Russian playwright and short-story writer, born 1860. — David Lloyd George, British statesman and prime minister, born 1863.
Milne, British author for children, born 1882. — Versailles Peace Conference opened in 1919, following World War I 19 James Watt, Scottish inventor, born 1736. — Robert E Lee, commander of the Confederate Army in the American Civil War, born 1807. — Edgar Allan Poe, American author, born 1809. — Sir Henry Bessemer, British steelmaker, born 1813. — Paul Cézanne, French painter, born 1839.
Jan 15—Martin Luther King, Jr., born Jan 20—Inauguration Day in United States 24 Gold discovered in California, 1848. — Edith Wharton, American author, born 1862.
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Mike Hagel Jan 24—Gold discovered in California Jan 27—Canadian Great Western R.R. opened 32 Japan Tony Stone Images Japan is rich in both advanced technology and natural beauty.
Japan's shinkansen, also called the “bullet train,” speeds to its destination through fertile fields, shown here.
Lovely Mount Fuji, a volcanic peak considered sacred by many Japanese people, seems to float in the background.
It lies off the east coast of mainland Asia across from Russia, Korea, and China.
The Japanese call their country Nippon or Nihon, which means source of the sun.
The name Japan may have come from Zipangu, the Italian name given to the country by Marco Polo, a Venetian traveler of the late 1200's.
Mountains and hills cover most of Japan, making it a country of great beauty.
But the mountains and hills take up so much area that the great majority of the people live on a small portion of the land—narrow plains along the coasts.
These coastal plains have much of Japan’s best farmland and most of the country’s major cities.
Japan’s big cities are busy, modern centers of culture, commerce, and industry.
Its total economic output is exceeded only by that of the United States.
The Japanese manufacture a wide variety of products, including automobiles, computers, steel, television sets, textiles, and tires.
The country’s factories have some of the most advanced equipment in the world.
Japan has become a major economic power even though it has few natural resources.
Japan imports many of the raw materials needed for industry and exports finished manufactured goods.
For example, the favorite sporting events in the country are baseball games and exhibitions of sumo, an ancient Japanese style of wrestling.
Although most Japanese wear Western-style clothing, many women dress in the traditional kimono for festivals and other special occasions.
The Japanese no and kabuki dramas, both hundreds of years old, remain popular.
But the Japanese people also flock to see motion pictures and rock music groups.
Many Japanese artworks combine traditional and Western styles and themes.
Early Japan was greatly influenced by the neighboring Chinese civilization.
From the late 400’s to the early 800’s, the Japanese borrowed heavily from Chinese art, government, language, religion, and technology.
Trade began with several European countries, and Christian missionaries from Europe converted some Japanese.
During the early 1600's, however, the rulers of Japan decided to cut the country’s ties with the rest of the world.
Japan’s isolation lasted until 1853, when Commodore se SSS Any +5 Lee i Paul Chesley, Tony Stone Images A Tokyo railway station, the Shinjuku station, shown here, is crowded with commuters.
Matthew C Perry of the United States sailed his warships into Tokyo Bay.
As a result of this show of force, Japan agreed in 1854 to open two ports to United States trade.
During the 1870's, the Japanese government began a major drive to modernize the country.
New ideas and manufacturing methods were imported from Western countries.
By the early 1900's, Japan had become an industrial and military power.
During the 1930's, Japan’s military leaders gained control of the government.
The Japanese won many early victories, but then the tide turned in favor of the United States and the other Allied nations.
In August 1945, United States planes dropped the first atomic bombs used in warfare on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Many Japanese cities lay in ruins, industries were shattered, and Allied forces occupied the country.
But the Japanese people worked hard to overcome the effects of the war.
The success of the Japanese economy attracted attention throughout the world.
Government Japan is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary government.
The Constitution, which took effect in 1947, guarantees many rights to the people, including Japan 33 Gavin Hellier, Tony Stone Images A farm in central Hokkaido grows rice.
Farmland is limited in Japan because mountains and hills cover most of the country. freedom of religion, speech, and the press.
The Constitution establishes three branches of government—the executive, the legislative, and the judicial.
The emperor performs some ceremonial duties specified in the Constitution, but he does not possess any real power to govern.
The Diet is the national legislature, the highest lawmaking body of Japan.
The Diet consists of two houses, the House of Representatives and the House of Councillors.
The representatives have slightly more power under the Constitution than the councillors do.
The prime minister is the head of the executive branch of the government.
Members of the Diet elect the prime minister, who must be a civilian and an elected member of the Diet.
The prime minister selects members of the Cabinet to help govern the country.
The Japanese call the country Nippon or Nihon, meaning source of the sun.
Japan lies in the North Pacific Ocean off the east coast of mainland Asia.
Japan has four main islands—Hokkaido, Honshu, Kyushu, and Shikoku—and thousands of smaller ones.
Okhotsk é “\Sakhalin ars Island ® “S \ dae A9 North Latity mec OF Japan {East Sea) ‘Bonin \s.
The four main islands— Hokkaido, Honshu, Kyushu, Shikoku—stretch about 1,200 mi from northeast to southwest.
Central and southern Japan have hot summers, mild winters, and moderate precipitation in all seasons.
Daytime high temperatures average about 86 °F in the hottest month, August, and about 46 °F in January, the coldest month.
Hokkaido, northern Honshu, and high mountain areas are much colder than the rest of the country in winter and cooler in summer.
Not many Japanese strictly practice either religion, but almost everyone engages in some practices or rituals based on these two religious traditions.
Agricu/ture—cabbage, Chinese cabbage, hogs, mandarin oranges, milk, potatoes, poultry and eggs, rice, strawberries, tea, white radishes.
Fishing—clams, eels, mackerel, oysters, pollock, salmon, sardines, scallops, squid, tuna.
Manufacturing—automobiles, cement, chemicals, computers, iron and steel, optical equipment, paper and newsprint, processed foods, television sets, textiles, tires, watches.
Major exported goods—chemicals, electronic equipment, iron and steel, motor vehicles, office machinery, scientific and optical equipment.
Major imported goods—chemicals, electrical equipment, fish and shellfish, machinery, metal ores, petroleum.
Main trading partners— China, Germany, South Korea, Taiwan, United States.
The residents of each prefecture elect a governor and representatives to a prefectural legislative assembly.
The residents of each city, town, and village also elect a mayor and a local council.
Every 10 years, the people have an opportunity to remove a justice from the court by voting in a referendum.
The Supreme Court oversees the training of Japan’s judges and attorneys.
The court system includes 8 regional high courts; 50 district courts; many summary courts, which handle minor offenses and small claims without the formal procedures of other courts; and numerous family courts, which handle domestic cases.
The Constitution prohibits Japan from maintaining military forces to wage war.
But Japan does have a Self-Defense Agency created to preserve Japan’s peace, independence, and national security.
The agency oversees an army, a navy, and an air force consisting of about 240,000 members.
About 90 percent of the people live on the coastal Dave Bartruff The Ainu may have been Japan’s original inhabitants.
Japan 35 plains, which make up only about 20 percent of Japan’s territory.
These plains rank among the most thickly populated places in the world.
Millions of people crowd the big cities along the coasts, including Tokyo, Japan’s capital and largest city.
The Tokyo metropolitan region, which includes the cities of Yokohama and Kawasaki, is the most populous urban area in the world.
The Japanese are descended from peoples who migrated to the islands from other parts of Asia.
Many of these peoples came in waves from the northeastern part of the Asian mainland, passing through the Korean Peninsula.
Some ancestors of the Japanese may have come from islands south of Japan.
But by about 10,000 B.C, the Japanese islands were inhabited by people who hunted, fished, and gathered fruits and plants for food.
This early culture is known as the /omon, which means cord-marked, because the people made pottery that was covered with the impressions of ropes or cords.
This culture is called the Yayoi, after the section of modern Tokyo where remains of the culture were found.
The Yayoi people grew rice in irrigated fields and established villages.
Chinese, Koreans, and a group of people called the Ainu make up Japan's largest minority groups.
The country has about 70,000 Chinese, ROYAL 1 Mike Yamashita An Osaka street scene reflects the common ancestry of most Japanese.
G 7 Okindetnretenee Makurazaki® Kanoya 2 wd 3 ; 4 Sh, ""Does not appear on map; key shows general location.
Most of the Ainu live on Hokkaido, the northernmost of Japan’s main islands.
Many Ainu have intermarried with the Japanese and adopted the Japanese culture.
The rest of the Ainu are ethnically and culturally different from the Japanese.
Some scholars believe the Ainu were Japan's original inhabitants, who were pushed northward by the ancestors of the present-day Japanese people.
But the people who have suffered the most injustices are a group of Japanese known as the burakumin.
They came from buraku (villages) traditionally associated with such tasks as the execution of criminals, the slaughter of cattle, and the tanning of leather.
According to Japanese religious traditions, these tasks and the people who performed them were considered unclean.
As a result, the burakumin— though not ethnically different from other Japanese— have long been discriminated against.
Many of the burakumin live in segregated urban slums or special villages.
The burakumin have started an active social movement to achieve fair treatment, but they have had only limited success so far.
Almost all the people understand the Tokyo dialect, which is used in schools and on radio and television.
A number of Japanese words, such as a/su kuriimu (ice cream) and guruupu , are based on English.
Where the people of Japan live Most of Japan's people live near the coasts.
The Pacific coast from Tokyo to Kobe is the most densely populated area.
It uses Japanese phonetic symbols that represent sounds as well as Chinese characters.
Each character is a symbol that stands for a complete word or syllable.
Schools in Japan also teach students to write the Japanese language with the letters of the Roman alphabet.
The downtown streets are filled with expensive, late-model automobiles and are lined with glittering high-rise buildings.
The buildings house expensive apartments, prosperous firms, fashionable department stores, and elegant shops.
Most Japanese people who live in cities and suburbs enjoy a high standard of living.
Housing in metropolitan areas includes modern highrise apartments and traditional Japanese houses.
In traditional homes, the rooms are separated by sliding paper screens, which can be rearranged as needed.
People sit on cushions and sleep on a type of padded quilt called a futon.
Today, many Japanese apartments and houses have one or more rooms fitted with carpets instead of tatami and containing Western-style chairs and tables.
Dave Bartruff Apartment buildings in Osaka provide homes for many of the city’s residents.
Japan's big cities, like those in many other countries, face such problems as overcrowding and air and water pollution.
However, crime and poverty are not as common in Japan as they are in most Western nations.
In rural areas along the coasts, some Japanese make their living by fishing and harvesting edible seaweed.
Most families in rural areas live in traditional Japanese-style wooden houses like those in the cities.
Housing is cheaper in the countryside than in cities, but it is still expensive by international standards.
Only about 15 percent of farm households live on their farming incomes alone.
By taking second and third jobs, farmworkers maintain an average household income slightly higher than that of urban workers.
But rural populations have declined as the children of farmers leave to work in Japan's cities.
Some well-to-do Japanese buy designermade garments, but the majority of the people purchase more moderately priced clothing.
The styles they buy are similar to those worn in the United States and Western Europe.
For business and professional men, typical workday wear consists of a dark suit, white shirt, conservative tie, black shoes, and a dark woolen overcoat for winter.
When not at work, Japanese men typically wear slacks and a casual shirt or sweater.
Most women who do not work outside the home dress in moderately priced dresses or blouses with skirts or slacks when at home or in their own neighborhood.
While in a major city shopping area or business district, many of these women wear expensive imJapan 39 ported dresses or skirts, blouses, and jackets.
On special occasions, such as weddings, funerals, or New Year's celebrations, Japanese women may dress in the traditional long garment called a kimono.
A kimono is tied around the waist with a sash called an obj and worn with sandals known as zori.
The uniforms often consist of a black or navy jacket worn with matching shorts, skirt, or slacks.
On weekends, Japanese children dress in the latest casual styles from Europe and the United States or in T-shirts printed with Japanese cartoon characters.
Many Japanese families eat at restaurants on weeknights and weekends as well as on special occasions.
Roads and superhighways are lined with such American establishments as Denny's and McDonald's and similar Japanese-owned chains called Skylark and Lotteria.
They supplement the rice with fish, tofu , pickled vegetables, soups made with miso , and on occasion, eggs or meat.
Like their elders, they eat fish, but they also like to eat beef, chicken, and pork.
They eat more fruit, including imported kiwi and grapefruit as well as the apples, oranges, pears, and strawberries grown in Japan.
They also consume larger amounts of eggs, cheese, and milk than their parents.
In fact, by 1990, total rice consumption in Japan had dropped to about half its level in 1960.
Overall, younger people now take in significantly more protein and fat then their grandparents did.
The John Launois, Black Star A traditional Japanese house blends with the natural beauty surrounding it.
Schools encourage children to enjoy sports, and adults spend large sums on athletic equipment and membership fees.
Baseball, bowling, golf, gymnastics, and tennis attract large numbers of participants, and many Japanese are good swimmers and runners.
Another popular sport is kendo, a Japanese form of fencing in which bamboo or wooden sticks are used for swords.
Many Japanese also practice a/kido, judo, and karate, traditional martial arts that involve fighting without weapons.
Spectator events, such as baseball, horse racing, soccer, and the Japanese form of wrestling called sumo, are also popular.
Hobbies are another important leisure time activity for Japanese men and women.
Many Japanese study with masters of these arts to improve their skills.
Within Japan, popular travel destinations include temples or shrines, hot springs, and famous historical sites.
Other leisure pursuits common in Japan include watching television, playing video games, and listening to recorded music.
Many workers read during the hours spent commuting by train between homes in the suburbs and jobs in the city.
Men in Japan often spend their free time after work socializing in small groups.
They stop off at little shops, Paul Chesley, Tony Stone images Japanese meals reflect the culture of both the East and the West.
Many people enjoy dining at home in traditional Japanese style, above, and many enjoy eating out.
Casual family restaurants are favorite dining places, and fast-food establishments, /eft are also popular throughout Japan. restaurants, and bars to have a snack together and a drink of sake or beer.
One of the most popular celebrations in Japan is the New Year's Festival, which begins on January 1 and ends on January 3.
During the festival, the Japanese dress up, visit their friends and relatives, enjoy feasts, and exchange gifts.
Many Japanese people say they are not devout worshipers and do not have strong religious beliefs.
However, nearly everyone in Japanese society engages in some religious practices or rituals.
Those practices are based on the two major religious traditions in Japan, Shinto and Buddhism.
Shintoists worship many gods, called kami, that are found in mountains, rivers, rocks, trees, and other parts of nature.
In 1868, the Japanese government established an official religion called State Shinto.
State Shinto stressed patriotism and the worship of the emperor as a divine being.
The government abolished State Shinto after World War II, and the emperor declared he was not divine.
Today, fewer than 3 percent of Japanese practice strict traditional Shinto.
Many people visit Shinto shrines to make offerings of fruit, rice, prayers, and other gifts to the gods.
In return, they may ask the gods for favors, such as the safe birth of a child, success on examinations, or good health.
Japanese people typically invite Shinto priests to preside at weddings and to offer blessings for the New Year or for the construction of new buildings.
Buddhism has a more elaborate set of beliefs than Shinto, and it offers a more complicated view of humanity, the gods, and life and death.
Generally, Buddhists believe that a person can obtain perfect peace and happiness by leading a life of virtue and wisdom.
Many Japanese turn to Buddhist priests to preside at funerals and other occasions when they commemorate the dead.
A variety of religious groups called New Religions developed in Japan during the 1800's and 1900's.
Many of these religions combine elements of Buddhism, Shinto, and in some cases, Christianity.
In addition, a small percentage of the Japanese population is Christian.
The society expects women to marry in their mid-20's, become mothers soon afterward, and stay at home to attend to the needs of their husband and children.
Women often have a dominant role in raising children and handling the family finances.
Men are expected to support their famiJapan 41 lies as sole breadwinners.
To make this possible, Japanese employers provide male workers with family allowances.
Most Japanese men accept this idea of their place in society, and many women do, too.
But in practice, the majority of Japanese women do hold jobs at one time or another.
Most women work before they marry, and many of them return to the labor force after their children are in school or grown.
Altogether, about 50 percent of all Japanese women over age 15 are in the labor force at any one time.
But because of the society's expectations about gender roles, female employees earn lower incomes and receive fewer benefits than male employees do, and have almost no job security.
The traditional ideas about gender roles have begun to change in Japan, most quickly among younger women.
Many women in their early 20's are reluctant to give up their jobs and income.
As a sign of that change, an increasing number of Japanese women are postponing marriage until they are in their late 20's or early 30's.
Fred Ward, Black Star A driving range with three levels enables large crowds of Japanese golfers to practice their swing.
Golf is a popular sport in Japan, and the country has many golf courses.
Sumo wrestlers parade around the ring before an exhibition of this Japanese style of wrestling.
Many Japanese Buddhists visit the Daibutsu , a huge bronze statue of Buddhism’s founder in Kamakura, above right.
Japanese society places an extremely high value on educational achievement, particularly for males.
The Japanese measure educational achievement chiefly by the reputation of the university a student attends.
The student's grades or field of study are less important as signs of success.
Under most circumstances, any student who graduates from a top-ranked university has a big advantage over other college graduates in seeking employment.
Families work hard to get their children into a good university, starting as soon as the youngsters begin school.
After six years at an elementary school, almost all Japanese children continue for another three years at a junior high school.
Education at public schools is free during these nine years for children 6 to 14 years of age.
Japanese elementary and junior high school students study such subjects as art, homemaking, the Japanese language, mathematics, moral education, music, physical education, science, and social studies.
In addition, many junior high school students study English or another foreign language.
Students spend much time learning to read and write Japanese because the language is quite difficult.
Public schoo] students attend classes Monday through Friday and half a day on Saturday, except for two weeks each month when they have Saturdays off.
The Japanese school year runs from April through March of the next year.
During the last two years of junior high school, many students focus on attaining admission to a high school with a good record of getting its graduates into top universities.
Many of the most successful high schools are expensive private institutions that require incoming students to pass a difficult entrance examination.
To prepare for the test, many eighthand ninth-grade students spend several hours each day after school taking exampreparation classes at private academies called juku.
Classes include many of the same subjects studied in junior high school, along with courses to prepare students for college or train them for jobs.
While in high school, a student may continue to study at a juku as preparation for the entrance exam to a university.
Charles Gupton, Tony Stone Images Students work on a Jesson with their teacher.
As soon as they enter school, students begin to focus on getting into a well-regarded university.
After students are admitted to one of these four universities, they tend to pay more attention to extracurricular activities than to their classwork.
Simply being at a top university will ensure job interviews at the country’s best firms.
Because Japanese society does not expect a woman to be the family’s main wage earner, the educational experience for girls is more limited.
About half of the women who get college educations attend technical or junior colleges rather than universities.
In contrast, nearly all men who get a college degree attend universities.
Japanese students consistently score well on international tests of science and mathematics skills.
But many Japanese are concerned about the disadvantages of their educational system.
Parents feel that it places too much emphasis on memorization and taking exams.
Most would prefer to have their children educated in a more creative environment that requires less time in classrooms.
Many Japanese politicians and business people agree that their educational system has flaws.
The arts For hundreds of years, Chinese arts had a great influence on Japanese arts.
However, there has always been a distinctive Japanese quality about the country’s art.
Most forms of Japanese music feature one instrument or voice or a group of instruments that follow the same melodic line instead of blending in harmony.
Japanese instruments include the lutelike biwa; the zitherlike koto; and the three-stringed banjolike samisen, or shamisen.
Many Japanese cities have their own professional symphony orchestras that specialize in Western music.
The oldest form of traditional Japanese drama is the no play, which developed during the 1300's.
Masked actors perform the story with carefully controlled gestures and movements.
Two other forms of traditional Japanese drama— bunraku and the kabuki play—developed during the late 1600's.
In puppet theater, a narrator recites the story, which is acted out by large, lifelike puppets.
The puppet handlers work silently on the stage in view of the audience.
Kabuki plays are melodramatic representations of historical or domestic events.
Kabuki features colorful costumes and makeup, spectacular scenery, and a lively and exaggerated acting style.
But the people also enjoy new dramas by Japanese playwrights, as well as Western plays.
Much of the country’s literature deals with the fleeting quality of human life and the never-ending flow of time.
Murasaki Shikibu, a lady-in-waiting to the empress, wrote The Tale of Genji during the early 1000's.
This long novel is generally considered the greatest work of Japanese fiction and possibly the world’s first novel.
Some of the earliest Japanese sculptures were haniwa, small clay figures made from the A.D. 200's to 500’s.
The figures represented animals, servants, warriors, weapons, and objects of everyday use.
Japanese sculptors created some of their finest works for Buddhist temples.
The sculptors worked chiefly with wood, but they also used clay and bronze.
The most famous bronze statue in Japan, the Great Buddha at Kamakura, was cast during the 1200's.
Paolo Koch, Photo Researchers Kabuki, a traditional form of Japanese drama, features chanting, music, colorful costumes and makeup, and a lively and exaggerated acting style.
Kabuki plays are melodramatic portrayals of historical or domestic events.
Early Japanese painting dealt with Buddhist subjects, using compositions and techniques from China.
From the late 1100's to the early 1300's, many Japanese artists painted long picture scrolls.
These scrolls realistically portrayed historical tales, legends, and other stories in a series of pictures.
Ink painting flourished in Japan from the early 1300's to the mid1500's.
Many of these paintings featured black brushstrokes on a white background.
During the mid-1500's and early 1600's, a decorative style of painting developed in Japan.
Artists used bright colors and elaborate designs and added gold leaf to their paintings.
From the 1600’s to the late 1800's, artists created colorful wood-block prints.
These temples have large tile roofs with extending edges that curve gracefully upward.
Traditional Shinto shrines are wooden frame structures noted for their graceful lines and sense of proportion.
The simple style of Shinto architecture has influenced the design of many modern buildings in Japan.
Japanese architecture emphasizes harmony between buildings and the natural beauty around them.
The Japanese have long been famous for their ceramics, ivory carving, lacquerA . _ ware, and silk weaving and embroidery.
Other traditionTes Se COC~— CC alarrts include flower arranging, cloisonné (a type of decWood-block print by an unknown Japanese artist ; ArtResource.
OFative enameling), and origami (the art of folding paper Landscape prints, such as the wood-block print above, flourinto decorative objects). ished in Japan in the 1800's.
Robert Glaze, Artstreet The National Stadium of Tokyo shows the influence of traditional Japanese architecture in the gracefully curving lines of the structure's roof.
Fuji is Japan's highest and most famous peak, and many Japanese people climb it each year.
Fuji is part of a chain of volcanoes on the island of Honshu, the largest of Japan’s four main islands.
In fact, the Japanese islands consist of the rugged upper part of a great mountain range that rises from the floor of the North Pacific Ocean.
Jagged peaks, rocky gorges, and thundering mountain waterfalls provide some of the country’s most spectacular scenery.
Thick forests thrive on the mountainsides, adding to the scenic beauty of the Japanese islands.
This shifting causes two of Japan’s most striking natural features— earthquakes and volcanoes.
Most are minor tremors that cause little damage, but severe earthquakes occur every few years.
Undersea quakes sometimes cause huge, destructive waves, called tsunamis, along Japan’s Pacific coast.
But their waters are used to irrigate farmland, and their rapids and falls supply power for hydroelectric plants.
A large number of hot springs gush from the ground throughout the country.
The four main islands, in order of size, are Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu, and Shikoku.
Japan’s four chief islands have 4,628 miles (7,448 kilometers) of coastline.
It is sometimes called the East Sea because it lies east of Russia and the Korean peninsula.
The towering peaks of the Japanese Alps, the country's highest mountains, rise in central Honshu.
Japan's tallest and most famous peak, Mount Fuji, or Fujiyama, is one of these volcanoes.
The Kanto Plain, the country’s largest lowland, spreads Hokkaido extends the farthest north of any of Japan’s main islands.
Hokkaido’s chief agricultural region, dotted with small rural communities like the one at the left, lies in the southwestern part of the island.
Two other major agricultural and industrial lowlands—the Nobi Plain and Osaka Plain—lie south and west of the Kanto region.
Farming and fishing villages and some industrial cities lie on small lowlands scattered throughout this region.
It is the country’s second largest island but has only about 5 percent of Japan’s total population.
Northeast of this peninsula is the Ishikari Plain, Hokkaido’s largest lowland and chief agricultural region.
The economy of Hokkaido depends mainly on dairy farming, fishing, and forestry.
After Honshu, Kyushu is Japan’s most heavily populated island, with about 11 percent of the population.
A chain of steep-walled, heavily forested mountains runs down the center of the island.
Kyushu’s largest plain and Ss RS Se. chief farming district is located along the west coast. ——— ia ty 4 Burt Glinn, rae The northeastern and southern sections of Kyushu Kyushu is the southernmost of Japan’s main islands.
Rugged have many volcanoes, high lava plateaus, and large deterrain covers much of the island.
In both regions, only small patches _level strips of land cut out from the sides of lava plateaus. ——————— — aa. ——_ 1.
Bay Kagoshima Bay OSumi Peninsula E 2] ata Cape » Sumisu ast eo ; Ching Vsumi ts.
Farmers grow some crops on level strips of land cut out from the steep sides of the lava plateaus.
Most of the people live in northern Shikoku, where the land slopes downward to the Inland Sea.
Farmers grow rice and a variety of fruits on the fertile land along the Inland Sea.
The United States returned the northern Ryukyus to Japan in 1953 and the Bonins in 1968.
In 1972, it returned the rest of the Ryukyu Islands, including Okinawa, the largest and most important island of the group.
Two Pacific Ocean currents—the Kuroshio and the Oyashio—influence Japan’s climate.
The warm, darkblue Kuroshio flows northward along the south coast and along the east coast as far north as Tokyo.
The cold Oyashio flows southward along the east coasts of Hokkaido and northern Honshu, cooling these areas.
In winter, monsoons from the northwest bring cold air to northern Japan.
These winds, which gather moisture as they cross the Sea of Japan, deposit heavy snows on the country’s northwest coast.
During the summer, monsoons blow from the southeast, carrying warm, moist air from the Pacific Ocean.
Summer monsoons cause hot, humid weather in the central and southern parts of Japan.
All areas of the country—except eastern Hokkaido—receive at least 40 inches of rain yearly.
Japan has two major rainy seasons—from mid-June to early July and in September and October.
May | 61 June 75 63 | 24 17 16 June | 68 July 82 70 | 28 21 4 | July | 75 Aug.
Average January temperatures Average August temperatures Average yearly precipitation In winter, winds from the mainland of In summer, most of Japan has hot, humid Japan has abundant rainfall.
Winters are mild in the south. the islands bring warm, moist air. ter, snow falls over much of Japan.
The heavy rains and violent winds of these storms often do great damage to houses and crops.
Economy The size of Japan’s economy ranks second only to that of the United States in terms of its gross domestic product.
The GDP is the total value of all goods and services produced within a country yearly.
Japan is one of the world’s leading countries in the value of its exports and imports.
On average, Japanese families enjoy one of the highest income levels in the world, and their assets and savings are among the world’s largest.
The country has few natural resources, so it must buy such necessities as aluminum, coal, lead, and petroleum.
To pay for those imports, the government has adopted a strategy of exporting manufactured goods of high value.
Japan’s manufactured products range from tiny computer components to giant oceangoing ships.
The most important manufactured products are cars and trucks, electronic products, and communications and data processing equipment.
Other products include cement, ceramics, clothing, fabricated metal products, food products, plastics, textiles, steel, tires, and watches and other precision instruments.
Japan's manufacturing sector plays a major role in the Japanese economy.
Manufacturing industries have consistently employed more than 20 percent of the Japanese labor force and generated approximately 25 percent of the country’s gross domestic product.
An especially important part of Japan’s manufacturing sector is known as the /arge-firm sector.
It includes such well-known companies as NEC Corporation, Nissan Motor Company, Sony Corporation, Toshiba Corporation, and Toyota Motor Corporation.
Most of the large manufacturing firms assemble parts and components into a finished product such as a car, computer, or television set.
The large firms then sell the product at a significantly higher price than the cost of the components.
Another part of the manufacturing sector consists of tens of thousands of small factories.
Most of these companies make the parts or components that large firms assemble into finished products.
A core group of Japanese managers and skilled workers in the large-firm sector have secure jobs, earn high wages, and enjoy generous benefits.
But some workers in the large-firm sector and many in the small factories have less job security, lower wages, and fewer benefits.
For the location of each region and a listing of its main products, see the map titled Economy of Japan in this section of the article.
The construction sector consists of several giant national firms, hundreds of medium-sized regional firms, and thousands of small local firms.
The industry grew dramatically after World War II, when construction firms were needed to rebuild Japan's ruined cities and demolished factories.
Later, the nation’s growing economy brought a constant demand for new shops, offices, factories, roads, harbors, airports, japan 49 Japan’s gross domestic product -——Agriculture 2% _Industry 35% Services 63% Japan's gross domestic product was $3,966,096,000,000 in 1998.
The GDP is the total value of goods and services produced within a country in a year.
Services include community, social, and personal services; finance, insurance, and real estate; government; transportation and communication; and trade. /ndustry includes construction, manufacturing, mining, and utilities.
In the 1990's, most of the largest firms began to expand internationally.
Today, Japanese construction firms build such large projects as hotels and office buildings throughout the world.
They handle many projects in other parts of Asia, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Japan has a wide variety of minerals, but supplies of most are too small to satisfy the nation’s needs.
The chief mining products are coal, copper, lead, limestone, manganese, silver, tin, and zinc.
Throughout much of Japan's history, agriculture was the mainstay of the Japanese economy.
As late as 1950, the agricultural sector employed 45 percent of the labor force.
But as Japan's industries grew, the economic importance of agriculture declined.
Because Japan is mountainous, only about 15 percent of the land can be cultivated.
To make their farmland as productive as possible, Japanese farmers use irrigation, improved seed varieties, fertilizers, and modern machin50 Japan ery.
Farmers grow some crops on terraced fields—that is, on level strips of land cut out of hillsides.
Japan’s farmers are able to produce almost all the eggs, potatoes, rice, and fresh vegetables eaten in Japan.
They also produce 50 to 80 percent of the dairy products, fruit, and meat.
However, they raise only a tiny share of the animal feed, beans, and wheat that Japan needs.
The nation must import the agricultural products that its farmers cannot supply.
For decades, government policies have kept crop prices high, especially for rice.
Those policies help ensure that Japan has an adequate supply of food, and they protect rural communities from the sudden loss of income.
But most Japanese consumers want to reduce the government subsidies so that food becomes less expensive.
Other nations want Japan to stop protecting its agricultural sector, so that foreigners can sell rice and other farm products to the Japanese.
Japanese fishing crews catch large amounts of bonito, carp, eel, mackerel, pollock, sardines, trout, and tuna.
Other products of Japan's fishing industry include crabs and other shellfish and squid.
Workers also harvest oysters and edible seaweed from “farms” in coastal waters.
Pollution and international restrictions on ocean catches have reduced the quantity and value of the Japanese catch.
Taken altogether, service industries generate over 60 percent of Japan’s GDP and employ more than 60 percent of the labor force.
Japan’s leading service industries include community, social, and personal services; finance, insurance, and real estate; and wholesale and retail trade.
Other service industries that contribute to Japan’s economy include government, and transportation and communication.
Many of the workers in the service industries are highly educated and well-paid.
They hold such positions as bankers, financial analysts, civil servants, engineers, teachers, accountants, doctors, and lawyers.
In general, salarymen receive generous incomes and benefits, and they enjoy good job security until they retire in their late 50's or early 60's.
However, a number of other workers in the service industries earn lower salaries and have fewer benefits and little job security.
Such shops sell food, clothing, household necessities, and a variety of other goods.
The little shops are far more numerous in Japan than in the United States or Western Europe.
But they are disappearing as giant discount stores force them out of business.
Japan requires large amounts of energy to power its factories, households, offices, and motor vehicles.
But the nation must import most of the fuel required to produce that energy.
Hokkaido and Kyushu contain fairly large deposits of coal, but its quality is poor, and the deposits are difficult to mine.
Nevertheless, Japan ranks among the world’s leading consumers of electric power.
Power plants that burn coal, natural gas, or petroleum produce about 65 percent of Japan's electric power.
Nuclear power plants supply about 25 percent of the country’s electric power, and hydroelectric plants about 10 percent.
Japan had hoped to build many more nuclear power plants to decrease its reliance on imported fuels.
But a 1995 accident at an experimental nuclear reactor raised questions about the future of the expansion program.
In many ways, the driving force of Japan’s economy is international trade.
By trading with other nations, Japan obtains the raw materials it does not have and finds buyers for the expensive, highquality manufactured goods its workers produce.
Other major imports include chemicals, fish and shellfish, and metal ores.
Japan buys many of its imports from Asian nations with small populations and few consumers.
As a consequence, Japan is seldom able to sell to its trade partners enough manufactured goods to maintain an equal balance of imports and exports.
Orion Press Thousands of Japanese cars on a huge wharf near Nagoya await shipment to other countries.
Automobiles are among Japan’s most important manufactured products. tion looks to wealthy countries in North America and Western Europe.
Since the end of World War II, the United States has bought the largest share of Japan's exports.
In the 1950's, the United States purchased inexpensive Japanese textile products.
Later, it began to buy more costly goods, such as automobiles and communications and computer equipment.
The United States sells Japan many American goods in return, including expensive items, such as computers and medicines.
By the 1980's, the United States was buying far more from Japan that it was selling to it.
In the early 1990's, a similar imbalance arose between Japan and nations in North and East Asia and Western Europe.
Japan’s trade surpluses enabled it to accumulate huge reserves of foreign currency, in an amount that was second only to the foreign reserves of the United States.
Japan used some of its reserves to invest in factories, banks, businesses, and real estate in the United States and many other countries.
Just as Japan was reaping these successes, Canada, Economy of Japan Manufacturing is the single most important economic activity in Japan.
This map shows the nation’s five major industrial regions and lists the chief products of each region.
Japan's croplands, forest lands, mineral deposits, and fishing products are also indicated on the map.
Petroleum and coal Sea } products Octopus © “Shrimp WORLD BOOK map INLAND SEA REGION Japan 51 the United States, and Western Europe were suffering economic slowdowns.
People in other nations began to envy and resent Japan for its trade surpluses, large reserves of foreign currencies, and heavy investment in other countries.
Japan has a modern transportation system, including airports, highways, railroads, and coastal shipping.
All the major cities have extensive local transit networks that include buses, trains, and subways.
Japan also has the world’s longest suspension bridge, the Akashi Kaikyo Bridge.
It connects Kobe and Awaji Island and thus provides a link between the island of Honshu and the island of Shikoku.
An eight-company business unit known as Japan Railways Group operates about 75 percent of Japanese railroads.
Trains traveling between Honshu and Hokkaido go through an undersea tunnel called the Seikan Tunnel.
Hundreds of smaller ports and harbors enable coastal shippers to serve every major city in Japan.
Its busiest airports include Tokyo International, also called Haneda; New Tokyo International, also called Narita; and Kansai International at Osaka.
Osaka’s Kansai International was built on an artificial island in Osaka Bay.
Each year, Japanese publishers produce tens of thousands of new books and periodicals, including popular comic books, called manga, for both adults and children.
Virtually every Japanese household has at least one color television set and one or more radios.
The earliest inhabitants lived by hunting and gathering food and made tools out of stone.
To obtain food, they hunted for deer and boar, fished, and gathered nuts and berries.
The main artifacts these people left behind were pots with markings made by cords or ropes. /omon means cord-marked.
Near the end of the Jomon era, people in Japan learned new ideas and new technologies from contact with Korea and China.
The Japanese learned how to grow rice in irrigated fields, and they began to settle in communities near the rice paddies.
They also learned how to make tools and weapons out of bronze and iron.
By the end of the Yayoi era, different groups of extended families began to struggle for power in the Yamato Plain.
When the leaders of these groups died, their relatives buried them in large tombs called ko/fun that were often shaped like keyholes.
Many haniwa are figurines of warriors or sculptures of bows and arrows, a sign that warfare had become an important part of Japanese society.
In the 600’s and 700’s, one of the extended family groups began to dominate the others, and it declared itself Japan's imperial household.
The head of the imperial house, whose given name was Kotoku, became emperor in 645.
The next year, the imperial family began a program called the Taika Reform.
The program involved constructing capital cities and organizing Japanese society following the example of China.
The imperial family created a central government and official bureaus and adopted a system of land management similar to China’s.
Under this system, most people worked as farmers on land the government owned.
In return, the farmers paid taxes to the government and provided labor, including service in the government's small armies.
To justify its claim to authority, the imperial family relied not on China but on ancient Japanese beliefs.
Japanese histories written in the 700’s maintain that the family had descended from the gods who created the Japanese islands in Japanese mythology.
The family’s presumed descent was through Amaterasu, the Japanese sun goddess.
In 794, the imperial household moved to a new capital city called Heian-kyo, located at the site of today’s Kyoto.
He established a military government headquartered in Kamakura. 1500's Japan endured a long period of wars among regional lords.
This visit and a second one in 1854 led to the opening of Japanese ports to international trade.
Tokyo became the capital, and Japan began working to develop modern industries and to strengthen its military.
Japan 53 During the Heian era, a male in the imperial household ruled as emperor.
The male heads of noble families assisted the emperor by administering the government, collecting tax revenues, maintaining small armies, and judging legal disputes.
These officials earned generous incomes and lived in large mansions in the capital city.
The ruling nobles used their leisure time primarily to observe nature and write poetry.
Female members of the nobility, who were barred from holding office, had the most time for these pursuits.
Women produced the era's most famous writings, including The Tale of Genji.
During the Heian era, the leading noble families undermined the power of the emperor and his government.
One such family was the Fujiwara, who gained power by intermarrying with the imperial family.
Private estates were plots of land whose owners were free from government interference and taxation.
The government began to establish these estates in the 700’s to provide Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines with income to fund their religious activities.
During the 700’s, the government also began to allow tax exemptions to those who developed new lands for growing rice.
The aristocratic families and religious institutions that had enough wealth to develop new lands acquired large holdings.
Later, the Fujiwara and other high-ranking families in Heian-kyo used their influence to obtain ownership of other public lands.
By the 1200's, about half of the rice-growing land in Japan had been converted into private estates.
As the influence of the private estate owners increased, the power of the central government declined.
With less public land, the government had less tax revenue to support its activities.
The government and the aristocrats in Heian-kyo had to rely on bands of professional soldiers called samura/to protect the land and keep order in the countryside.
The earthquake and the fires and tsunami (huge, destructive sea wave) that followed caused about 143,000 deaths and destroyed large areas of the two cities.
The fighting became part of World War I 1941 Japan attacked United States bases at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii.
Japan surrendered to the Allies, and the Allied occupation of Japan began.
Japan began a period of political instability and frequent changes of government.
By the 1100's, two large military clans—the Taira and the Minamoto—had armies of samurai under their command.
In the late 1100's, the Taira and Minamoto clashed in a series of battles for power.
The Minamoto established a new military government headquartered in Kamakura, a town in eastern Japan far from Heian-kyo.
In 1192, the head of this military government, Yoritomo, was given the title of shogun, a special, high-ranking military post granted by the emperor.
Although Yoritomo was the emperor's special commander, he established his own separate bases of power.
He began to place nobles who had sworn loyalty to him on private estates and appointed others to oversee the remaining public lands.
In this way, the shogun began to influence both areas of power in Japan—the imperial government and the private estates.
By the early 1200's, Japan's political situation had become highly unstable.
Private estate owners were struggling to retain control over their lands as the shogun’s ambitious supporters expanded their influence.
First, the Minamoto family lost its influence to members of the Hojo family, who ruled as agents in the name of the Minamoto shoguns.
The Ashikaga established a new military government in Kyoto in the 1330's.
Peasants in the countryside were forced to take up swords to protect their communities.
Temples with large jlandholdings trained their own armies of warrior-monks to protect their assets.
Some estate owners gathered private armies of samurai to guard their lands.
They exercised control over many armed warriors and governed large areas of farmland.
They fought each other for military supremacy during the 1500's, as Japan sank into a long period of civil war.
In 1549, Saint Francis Xavier, a missionary from Portugal, arrived in Japan and introduced a new element into this unstable scene.
Xavier and a few other priests had come to convert the Japanese populace to Christian beliefs.
The missionaries also intended to help Portuguese traders sell European luxury goods and up-to-date weapons to the Japanese.
The priests had little success in converting the Japanese to Christianity.
But the traders found eager customers among the daimyo in southern Japan.
Pa) te a eee ~~ Detail of The Burning of the Sanjo Palace , an ink paintiog with colors on paper by an unknown Japanese artist; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Feoollosa-Weld Collection a Rival families fought for control of the Japanese government during the 1100’s.
Two large military clans—the Taira and the Minamoto—met in battle in 1160, above.
The Taira won and ruled Japan until the Minamoto defeated them in 1185.
In the 1560's, he gathered a large coalition of forces under his command and led them to Kyoto.
He was beginning to impose control on other areas of Japan when he was killed in 1582.
Oda’'s successor, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, took up the task of uniting the nation.
Toyotomi was succeeded by a noble named Tokugawa leyasu, who had also served Oda Nobunaga.
The Tokugawa shogun presided over a delicately balanced system of authority.
The shogun directly controlled about 25 percent of the farmland in the country.
He also licensed foreign trade, operated gold mines, and ruled the major cities, including Kyoto, Osaka, and the shogun’s capital—Edo, which is now Tokyo.
The Tokugawa shogun had to share authority with the daimyo, who controlled the remaining 75 percent of Japan’s farmland.
In each han, the daimyo, not the shogun, issued laws and collected taxes.
During the Tokugawa era, Japan thus had only a partially centralized government.
Their presence disturbed the shogun, in part because the Tokugawa did not support Christianity, the religion of most of the outsiders.
In addition, the shogun wanted to control Japan's international trade to prevent any daimyo from gaining too much wealth and power through trade with the outsiders.
For these reasons, the Tokugawa had most foreigners expelled from Japan during the 1630's under orders known as seclusion edicts.
Only a few Dutch and Chinese traders were allowed to remain in Japan to conduct their business.
That town served as Japan’s sole window on the European world until the mid-1800's.
Japan had now put an end to centuries of internal wars and had closed itself off from the rest of the world.
During this period of peace and isolation, the nation began to pursue its own course of development.
At this time, Japan laid the foundation for its future economic growth.
People in all walks of life developed a strong work ethic and devotion to their craft and duty.
Hard-working farmers in the countryside and merchants in the cities saved money and learned to invest it wisely.
Trading firms in the large cities developed skills in finance, organization, and personnel management.
It developed thriving industries to entertain the many samurai and merchants living there.
Entertainers perfected the form of stage drama called kabuki and the puppet theater called bunraku.
The entertainDetail of The Opening of dae , a water color by Ogata Gassan; Kurihama Administration Center {International Society or Educational Information, Tokyo, from the Consulate General of Japan, Chicago) An American mission led by Commodore Matthew C Perry arrived in Japan in 1853.
The United States government sent Perry to open diplomatic and trade relations with the Japanese.
In 1858, partly as a result of Perry's efforts, Japan signed trade treaties with the United States and other Western countries.
The colorful wood-block prints depicted the men and women of the entertainment districts.
Their declining incomes added to the samurai’s growing dissatisfaction with Japan’s rigid social structure, which prevented them from rising to better stations in life.
Finally, poor harvests and harsh lords drove many peasants to join together in protest.
In 1853, renewed contact with the West led directly to sweeping changes.
That year, a small fleet of American naval vessels sailed into the bay south of Edo.
The fleet's commander, Matthew C Perry, asked Japan to open its ports to international trade.
After many discussions, Japan allowed the United States to station a negotiator, Townsend Harris, in the small port of Shimoda, far from Edo.
In 1858, Harris succeeded in his negotiations on behalf of the United States, and Japan signed a treaty of commerce.
The treaty permitted trade between the two countries, called for opening five Japanese ports to international commerce, and gave the United States the right of extraterritoriality.
This right enabled American citizens to be governed only by United States laws while they were on Japanese soil.
Many Japanese disapproved of the treaty and similar agreements signed later.
To them, the treaties were unequal, because Japan had granted extraterritoriality and other privileges that were not given to the Japanese in turn.
The treaties enraged many samurai, who attacked and killed some foreign officials.
In 1867, a small group of samurai and aristocrats pressured the shogun into resigning and restored the emperor to his previous position as head of the government.
The revolutionaries disapproved of the trade treaties and wanted to increase Japan's security and well-being in what they considered a dangerous and competitive world.
On Jan., 1868, the emperor officially announced the return of imperial rule.
The emperor, a teen-ager named Mutsuhito, adopted Meiji, meaning enlightened rule, as the name for the era of his reign.
The revolution that placed him in power is known as the Meiji Restoration.
In practice, however, the leaders of the Meiji Restoration and their successors ruled the country, not the emperor.
The leaders adopted the slogan “Enriching the Nation and Strengthening the Military’ as their guiding policy.
By enriching Japan, the new leaders believed they would enable the nation to compete with the Western powers.
By 1919, Japan was a world power. coal mines, textile mills, shipyards, cement factories, and many other modern enterprises.
In the 1880's, the government began selling its industries to private companies.
Some of these companies, such as the Mitsui and Sumitomo groups, were old merchant houses that had been in business since the 1600's.
Others, such as the Mitsubishi group, sprang up after the Meiji restoration.
From the 1880's to the 1940's, these business enterprises grew large and rich.
Most zaibatsu were owned and operated by a single family or a family group.
They created many related ventures, especially in banking, insurance, international trade, manufacturing, and real estate.
The zaibatsu cooperated with the government to promote its aim of enriching the nation.
But they remained private enterprises that enriched themselves at the same time.
The second strategy of the Meiji leadership was to strengthen Japan's military force.
Former samurai took charge of a modern military recruited from the sons of farmers.
With the advice of European military experts, the government built naval shipyards and assembled military arsenals.
Within 20 years after the Meiji restoration, Japan had developed the best military force in East Asia.
From 1868 to 1889, government leaders also experimented with different methods of organizing the nation’s political institutions.
This document made the emperor the head of the government and established a cabinet of ministers and a legislature with two houses.
The Constitution spelled out the rights and duties of the citizens, and it created a system of courts.
Under this Constitution, the powers of the Japanese people were extremely limited.
The leaders of the restoration and their appointees continued to hold real UI power.
These men now served in official roles as prime ministers and Cabinet members.
The nation removed the restrictions that had prevented people from pursuing any occupation they desired.
New laws made the family the basic unit of society and males the heads of households.
Some of these laws limited women’s rights more drastically than they had been during the Tokugawa era of the 1600's to mid-1800's.
Finally, the government established an ambitious system of public education.
By the early 1900's, Japan offered free elementary education to most young people.
More advanced, specialized schooling was available to students who had the money and talent to proceed further.
This school system made it possible for many people to improve their status in society.
The schools also cultivated in students a strong sense of national pride and superiority.
In due course, the Meiji government's emphasis on military might and the educational system’s emphasis on Japanese superiority led to war.
In 1895, Japan began to build an empire like those of Britain and other European powers.
The Japanese then exploited Taiwan as an agricultural colony producing rice and sugar.
Korea fell under Japanese control in 1910, following a bitterly fought war between Japan and Russia in 1905.
Japan exploited Korea for its rice and its potential to develop industries.
More important, the war gave Japan an economic advantage in India and the rest of Asia.
As Western nations became preoccupied with the war in Europe, they stopped their investment and trade in the East.
Japanese exporters and manufacturers took that opportunity to move into Indian and other Asian markets.
After the war, Western nations reestablished trade with India and the rest of Asia, and the Japanese economy suffered.
In 1923, a terrible earthquake struck the Tokyo-Yokohama area and led to the deaths of about 143,000 people.
A worldwide depression during the late 1920's further hurt the Japanese economy.
About this time, China began to strengthen its administration in Manchuria.
Japan feared it might lose the rights it gained in the Russo-Japanese War.
Japan's prime minister and other government leaders could not deal with the problems troubling Japan.
Officers in the Japanese army decided to take matters into their own hands.
At home, nationalist groups began to threaten members of the government who opposed the army.
On May 15, 1932, nationalists assassinated Prime Minister Tsuyoshi Inukai.
By 1936, Japan's military leaders were in firm control of the government.
As Japanese armies marched across China and into Southeast Asia, the United States grew AP/Wide World Emperor Hirohito, on the white horse, reviewed Japanese troops in 1938.
Meanwhile, Japan moved toward closer relations with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy by signing anti-Communist pacts with the two nations.
In September 1940, Japanese troops occupied the northern part of French Indochina.
When they moved into the southern part of Indochina the next year, the United States cut off its exports to Japan.
In the fall of 1941, General Hideki Tojo became prime minister of Japan.
Japan's military leaders began preparing to wage war against the United States.
Japanese bombers attacked the United States military bases at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii on Dec., 1941.
They also bombed United States bases on Guam and Wake Island and in the Philippines.
The bombing brought the United States into war against Japan and Japan’s European allies, Germany and Italy.
Japan quickly won dramatic victories in Southeast Asia and in the South Pacific.
By 1942, the Japanese empire spanned much of the area from the eastern edge of India through Indonesia, and from the Aleutian Islands near Alaska to the Solomon Islands in the South Pacific Ocean.
The Japanese fleet suffered its first major setback in May 1942, when the United States fought the Battle of the Coral Sea to a draw.
The United States victory in the Battle of Midway the following month helped turn the tide in favor of the United States.
American bombers hit industrial targets, and warships pounded Japanese coastal cities.
On August 6, the United States dropped the first atomic bomb ever used in warfare on the city of Hiroshima.
Two days later, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan and invaded Manchuria and Korea.
The next day, United States fliers dropped a second and larger atomic bomb on Nagasaki.
The next day, Emperor Hirohito announced to the Japanese people that Japan had agreed to end the war.
The nation kept only its four main islands and the small islands nearby.
In the 1950's, 1960’s, and 1970's the United States returned to Japan the Bonin Islands, lwo Jima, and the Ryukyu Islands.
Japan's defeat brought foreign occupiers to its shores for the first time in its long history.
Under the direction of United States General Douglas MacArthur, the occupation force carried out a sweeping set of reforms inspired by American ideals.
Under the occupation, more than 5 million Japanese troops were disarmed.
Seven of the leaders, including former Prime Minister Tojo, were executed.
In 1931, Japan conquered Manchuria and then advanced into other parts of China and Southeast Asia.
The map above shows the stages of Japanese expansion from 1931 to 1942.
The Allied occupation force began reforms in 1946, when MacArthur and his advisers drew up a new Japanese Constitution.
Under this document, the emperor lost all real power and became merely a symbol of the state.
A civilian prime minister, chosen by majority vote in the Jegislature, became head of the government.
The rights of the people increased dramatically compared with those granted by the Meiji Constitution.
They redistributed farmland, legalized labor unions, and encouraged new laws giving women and children greater rights.
The Americans also reorganized Japan's educational system to make it more democratic.
In 1951, Japan signed a peace treaty with 48 nations that went into effect on Aug., 1952.
Allied bombing destroyed many of the nation’s factories and nearly leveled most large cities.
Much of the population lived in dire conditions in small rural villages, and they depended on friends and neighbors to survive.
Japan was almost closed off from the outside world because many of its trading ships had been destroyed.
The value of its currency, the yen, dropped so low that Japan could not afford to purchase many foreign goods.
The United States provided financial assistance, but the Japanese national government played the central role in promoting reconstruction.
After the war, the government began to guide and direct the nation’s industries.
The government formed the Ministry of International Trade and Industry to identify the industries in Japan that needed to be developed.
Then the Ministry of Finance directed investment funds toward these enterprises.
The Japanese tradition of working hard, saving money, and investing wisely helped the nation become economically stable.
By the mid-1950’s, the output of most Japanese industries matched their prewar levels.
The LDP strongly advocated Japan’s economic growth, and it put into effect many successful policies.
Fewer and fewer people stayed in rural areas to earn a living by farming.
Instead, they moved to cities and became workers in manufacturing or service industries.
But the pressures to conform to society's expectations were less apparent in large cities than in the small villages.
Young people felt freer to be individuals than their parents and grandparents had.
In 1959, Crown Prince Akihito broke tradition by marrying a commoner, Michiko Shoda, the daughter of a wealthy industrialist.
This visit marked the first time that a reigning Japanese emperor had ever left the country.
It soon began to appear that Akihito’s era would be a time of unsettling political and economic change.
Troubles for Japan’s long-term ruling political party, the LDP, began in the 1980's.
A number of leading government figures were accused of raising campaign funds illegally.
The coalition passed a number of major laws reforming the election system.
By the mid-1990’s, Japan’s political parties had gathered into two large factions, one composed of the LDP and its allies, the other a coalition of opposition parties.
Economic troubles also arose in the late 1980’s, as Japanese manufacturers began finding it difficult to sell their products abroad.
Japan’s strong currency, high real estate values, and high labor costs all made Japanese goods expensive to overseas customers.
Japanese manufacturers also had to compete with low-cost businesses from newly developing nations.
At the same time, the Japanese banking system began to suffer because the banks had made many loans during the late 1980's that failed as real estate prices japan 59 dropped in the 1990's.
The result of Japan's problems in trade and finance was a recession, a period when the economy virtually stopped growing.
In the 1990's, Japan’s unemployment rate rose, average household incomes nearly stopped growing, and consumer spending declined.
However, other nations also suffered economic problems, so Japan's relative economic position in the world did not change dramatically.
But economic anxiety spread throughout Japan as businesses and workers tried to maintain their competitive edge.
Historical flags National park Navy of the world) Okinawa Hara-kiri Ryukyu Islands Japan, Sea of Shinto Japanese language Jinrikisha Kuril Islands Sony Corporation Space exploration Toyota Motor Corporation 60 Japan Outline Il.
Government A National government B Local government C Politics D Courts E Armed forces ll.
The arts A Music B Theater C Literature D Sculpture V The land A Honshu B Hokkaido C Kyushu D Shikoku E The Ryukyu and Bonin islands Vi.
Additional resources Level I Hamanaka, Sheila, and Ohmi, Ayano. /n Search of the Spirit The Living National Treasures of Japan.
The southern end of the sea is connected to the East China Sea by the Korea Strait.
The northern end of the sea is connected to the Pacific Ocean by Tsugaru Strait, and to the Sea of Okhotsk by La Perouse Strait and Sakhalin Strait.
Japanese beetle is an insect that injures grasses, trees, crops, and garden plants.
It probably was accidentally imported in the roots of nursery plants from Japan.
It is now found in all states east of the Mississippi River and in the Canadian provinces of Quebec and Ontario.
Its copperybrown front wings are hard and meet ina line down the center of the back.
They have white comma-shaped bodies with brown heads and swollen tails.
In late May or early June, the grubs enter the pupa stage and emerge as adults near the end of June.
The United States Department of Agriculture has released several types of parasites that attack Japanese beetle grubs.
A bacterial disease, called milky spore, also can be used to kill the grubs.
Adult beetles may be killed with insecticides or lured into baited traps.
The Japanese beetle belongs to the scarab family, Scarabaeidae, in the order Coleoptera.
WORLD BOOK illustration by Oxford Illustrators Limited Japanese beetle Japanese chin is a dainty, graceful toy dog.
Its coat is long and silky, with longer hair around its neck and on its tail and legs.
The Japanese chin was brought to the Western world from Japan in the 1850's.
The breed, which probably originated in China, was formerly called Japanese spaniel Critically reviewed by the Japanese Chin Club of America Japanese language is the native tongue of the people of Japan and the neighboring Ryukyu and Bonin islands.
Since 1868, the speech of the city of Tokyo has become the standard Janguage of the Japanese people.
The rhythm of Japanese allows an even, metronomelike beat for each syllable.
Differences in pitch are the distinctive features of words and phrases, much as differences in stress and emphasis are typical of English.
Japanese dialects can be divided into three types, based on pitch-accent patterns.
The Kansai, or Western, type is characteristic of western Honshu, most of Shikoku, and southern Kyushu.
The sing/e-pattern type is found in northeastern Honshu and central Kyushu.
Both resemble languages of the Ural-Altaic type, which also includes Finnish and Turkish.
The intimate is correct in everyday conversation with family, friends, and coworkers.
The fonorific style confers honor and respect when spoken and is used for older people and superiors.
There are also the impersonal style used in speeches and writing, and the modern literary style.
Each inflected word consists of a stem and one or more of a set of endings.
The uninflected words include nouns and most conjunctions and postpositionals.
A postpositional indicates a noun’s grammatical function within the sentence.
The Japanese language has 16 consonant sounds and 5 vowel sounds—ah, ee, oo, eh, and of.
A syllable may consist of only a vowel, only the nasal n, a consonant plus a vowel, or a consonant plus the semivowel y plus a vowel.
The Japanese predicate always ends the sentence, preceded by subject, object, indirect object, and other phrases in variable order.
The Japanese borrowed the Chinese system of writing, as well as many Chinese words.
In order to express the complex Japanese grammatical endings, some Chi; nese characters were used as phonetic symbols without John V Grohol from Michael and Carole Benson (Japanese Chin Club of Americal The Japanese chin Japanese literature 61 any meaning attached.
These were later simplified into two systems of phonetic symbols called kana, which represent the sounds of the Japanese syllables.
Today, the two kana systems, called syllabaries, and about 2,000 Chinese characters are used in writing Japanese.
It is a set of rounded characters derived from cursive Chinese characters.
The more angular katakana syllabary is derived from parts of Chinese characters.
Katakana is used to write words and other language elements in the equivalent elements of another alphabet.
Katakana is also used to make a word stand out in a text, much like italics are used in English.
The Roman alphabet is also taught in Japanese schools, along with Romanized Japanese.
This system writes consonants with their nearest English equivalent and vowels as in Italian.
Laurel Rasplica Rodd Japanese literature ranks as one of the world’s great literatures.
It reflects many characteristics of the Japanese people, such as their appreciation of tradition and their sensitivity to nature.
The Japanese probably produced their first written literature during the A.D. 500's.
But Japan long remained isolated from the rest of the world, and its written language was difficult to master.
Therefore, Japanese literature remained almost unknown outside Japan until the 1900's.
These works chiefly glorify the deeds of the imperial family but also include folk tales, legends, myths, and songs.
The earliest collection of Japanese poetry, the Manyoshu, also appeared during the 700.
Japanese poems, partly because of the nature of the language itself, have subtle rhythms and no rhyme.
The Man yoshu consists mainly of 31-syllable poems called tanka, which deal with friendship, love, and nature.
It also has some longer poems, many of which praise the imperial family.
Most people who wrote and enjoyed literature at the time were members of the nobility.
The first work of Japanese fiction, The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter, written by an unknown author, dates from the early 900s.
It far surpassed previous stories with its sophisticated style and accurate description of human emotions.
Diaries and essays were also important literary forms during the Heian period.
By the 900's, the vocabulary and themes of Japanese verse had narrowed, reflecting the elegant tastes of the aristocracy.
Buddhist ideas about human mortality brought a new seriousness to Japanese poetry during the 1100's.
In 62 Japanese literature addition, poets tried to reach beyond the limits of short individual poems by writing groups of poems with related themes and images.
The educated warrior classes joined the nobility in producing and reading literature during the medieval period.
In the early 1300's, a trend toward historical fiction and an increasing mood of pessimism about human fate inspired the creation of The Tale of the Heike.
This war story, whose author is unknown, describes the rise and violent fall of the Taira family.
Minstrels recited The Tale of the Heike throughout the Middle Ages, and it was the source of stories for plays and fiction in later centuries.
The most famous medieval Japanese essays include An Account of My Hut by Kamo no Chomei and Essays in Idleness by Yoshida Kenko.
These works provide insight into traditional Japanese attitudes toward life and art.
In poetry, the tanka remained the chief verse form throughout the medieval period.
However, poets also composed renga, which were chains of interlocking poems written by several poets.
The oldest form of Japanese drama, the no drama, was first performed in the 1300's.
It developed from performances of song and dance that had long been part of religious and folk rituals.
In the late 1300's, an actor and playwright named Zeami Motokiyo shaped the no drama into the form in which it is still performed today.
He combined dancing and chanting with literary themes and poetic language from the past.
The most successful literary works of the Tokugawa period were those aimed at people of the new middle classes, who lived in the cities.
Many prose works of the time dealt with scenes of urban Japan and with humorous or sexual subjects.
In the late 1600's, Ihara Saikaku abandoned a successful career as a poet and became the most famous fiction writer of the period.
During the Tokugawa period, a new verse form called haiku challenged the popularity of the tanka.
Haiku has 17 syllables and began as a comic style of verse that was simple to write.
But in the late 1600's, Matsuo Basho changed haiku into a serious art form.
His haiku, written according to strict rules, present aspects of nature and contain a reference to a season of the year.
These poems merely suggest ideas and feelings, and so the reader must use imagination to interpret them.
Two new types of drama, kabuki plays and puppet theater, flourished during the 1600's.
Kabuki plays are melodramatic and feature colorful costumes and lively music and acting.
The puppet theater of the early 1700's featured several dramatic masterpieces by Japan’s greatest playwright, Chikamatsu Monzaemon.
The poetic power of Monzaemon’ss scripts turned simple characters, such as shop clerks and prostitutes, into tragic figures.
The influence of Western ideas has greatly changed Japanese literature since the end of the Tokugawa period.
The major result of this influence has been the development of the modern novel.
During the 1880's, a small group of writers educated in Western languages called for a break with older forms of literature.
Such authors as Futabatei Shimei and Tsubouchi Shoyo thought the Japanese should write Europeanstyle novels as an intellectual counterpart to Japan’s technological modernization.
As a novelist and literary critic of the early 1900's, he established the modern novel as a respected form of literature.
Two Japanese novelists have won the Nobel Prize for literature, Yasunari Kawabata in 1968 and Kenzaburo Oe in 1994.
Other outstanding modern Japanese novelists include Tanizaki Junichiro, Abe Kobo, and Yukio Mishima.
Western literature has also influenced Japanese poetry and drama of the 1900's.
Some poets still write the traditional tanka and haiku, but longer poems and free verse now account for much Japanese poetry.
In spite of Western influences, however, tradition remains strong in Japan.
In 1970, Yukio Mishima killed himself in the manner of a medieval warrior.
He did so while proclaiming the same reverence for the imperial family that appears prominently in the earliest Japanese literature.
Japanese print is a type of Japanese illustration printed on paper from carved blocks of wood.
The most famous Japanese prints were produced from the 1600's to the late 1800's.
They are noted for their brilliant designs, bold colors, and technical quality.
Most Japanese prints portray scenes from everyday life or from the theater and other popular forms of entertainment.
They called the prints ukivo-e, which means pictures of the floating world.
Printing techniques Japanese prints were designed by highly trained artists and produced by skilled artisans.
The early prints were made in black and white, though the artists sometimes added other colors by hand.
A carver cut away the portions of the wood between the lines of the drawing, which left the design itself raised.
A printer then applied a water-based ink to the raised surfaces of the wood block.
The printer rubbed the back of the paper with a smooth-surfaced pad, and the ink soaked into the paper.
The printer then pulled the paper from the block, and the design appeared in print.
The production of color prints required additional blocks of wood, one for each color used.
The carver cut each block so that the only areas left raised were those to be used for a certain color.
The printer then applied various colored pastes to the blocks and placed the paper on each block in succession.
History Japanese prints originated in the early 1600s as illustrations in popular books.
Many people became interested in the pictures themselves, and so publishers began to produce the illustrations separately from books.
The publishers commissioned the artists and hired the carvers and printers.
Printmaking flourished in Japan during the Tokugawa period of the nation’s history, which lasted from 1603 to 1867.
During this period, a middle class arose and prospered in Japan's cities.
The people of the middle class were the chief buyers of Japanese prints, which served as inexpensive substitutes for paintings.
Japan had little contact with other countries during the Tokugawa period.
Thus, Japanese print artists were not influenced by Western art styles.
These artists followed Japanese art styles that had developed over centuries.
One of the earliest known Japanese print artists was Moronobu, who lived during the 1600's.
A technique that enabled artists to create color prints was introduced in the mid-1700's.
This technique involved carving wood blocks with guide marks so that printers could place paper in the same position on successive blocks.
Utamaro and Sharaku were among the greatest print artists of the late 1700's.
The one shown above emphasizes the colors and patterns of the costumes.
These artists created many series of prints of a particular scene in nature under a variety of weather conditions.
During the mid-1800's, the Tokugawa government became weakened by economic problems and social upheavals.
The shogun (military ruler) resigned in 1867, and Emperor Mutsuhito officially became ruler in 1868.
The new government began to modernize Japan and introduced many Western inventions and traditions into the country.
The drive for modernization led to the decline of traditional Japanese printmaking.
Many Japanese artists adopted Western-style painting, and they produced few high-quality prints.
Since then, Japanese woodcut artists have followed Western styles and techniques.
These artists sought alternatives to Western art styles and were fascinated by the unusual designs, bold colors, and pictorial conventions of Japanese prints.
In his portrait of the graceful woman shown above, Utamaro used the kimono, fan, and parasol to create bold contrasts of color and pattern.
In Jarrell’s later poems, he dramatized the losing battle he saw all people fighting against time and an indifferent universe.
Jarrell believed that we can only hope to cultivate an intense, compassionate awareness of our position and cherish the moments of happiness from our past.
Jarrell also wrote a satirical novel called Pictures from an Institution and children’s books.
Jaruzelski, v4 roo ZFEHL skee, Wojciech, VOY chehk , was the top leader of Poland from 1981 to 1989.
In December 1981, Jaruzelski established martial law in an effort to restore order.
His administration established strict controls over the lives of the Polish people.
It outlawed independent social organizations such as Solidarity, a free labor union led by Lech Walesa.
In 1989, the government ended its ban on Solidarity and other organizations.
It also allowed the freest elections to Parliament since the country became a Communist state in 1945.
In the elections, non-Communist candidates backed by Solidarity had the greatest success.
In 1985, Jaruzelski had become president of the government—then a largely ceremonial post.
Under the restructuring, the presidency became a much more powerful post.
The Soviets deported Jaruzelski and many other Poles to the Soviet Union.
After German troops invaded the Soviet Union in 1941, the AP/Wide World Wojciech Jaruzelski Soviets recruited Jaruzelski to be trained as an officer for a Polish Communist army.
In the government, he was minister of defense from 1968 until 1983, and prime minister from 1981 until he became president.
The common white jasmine, or jessamine, is a vine with dark green leaves and white flowers.
In France, botanists graft the Spanish type on the common white species.
This practice results in a bushy plant Janusz Bugajski Perry D Slocum, Animals Animals/Earth Scenes Jasmines grow in tropical and subtropical regions. with large, fragrant blossoms.
Jason was a hero in Greek mythology who led a band of men called the Argonauts.
Their capture of the Golden Fleece—the wool of a golden ram—ranks among the most exciting adventures in mythology.
Pelias, Aeson’s brother, seized the throne and forced the infant Jason and his mother to flee the city.
After Jason grew up, he returned to lolkos to claim his father’s throne.
To get rid of Jason, Pelias persuaded him to organize an expedition to capture the Golden Fleece from the distant land of Colchis.
For the expedition, Jason recruited about 50 heroes who became known as the Argonauts after their ship, the Argo.
With the help of Medea's magic powers, Jason captured the Golden Fleece and returned to lolkos.
The red coloration of jasper usually indicates the presence of iron oxide.
It takes a high polish and is used for mantels, pillars, and other fancy interior finishings.
The most beautiful varieties come from Siberia, Greece, India, Turkey, and Poland.
Prehistoric people made arrowheads and tools from jasper and other related minerals.
Ancient Greeks and Romans believed it could heal many illnesses and draw the poison from snakebites.
It features magnificent mountain scenery, large glaciers, beautiful lakes and rivers, and abundant wildlife.
A scenic highway called the Icefields Parkway winds through the mountains of Jasper National Park.
From this highway, motorists can view such majestic peaks as Mount Athabasca and Mount Fryatt, both of which rise more than 11,000 feet above sea level.
The Icefields Parkway connects the park to Banff National Park, which lies to the south.
The Columbia Icefield, a vast sheet of glacial ice, is partly in Jasper and Banff national parks in Alberta, and partly in British Columbia.
Tourists also visit such sites in the park as Athabasca Falls, Medicine Lake, Miette Hot Springs, and an alpine area called the Whistlers.
Jasper National Park has large forests of such evergreen trees as firs, pines, and spruces.
Animals in the park include bighorn sheep, black and grizzly bears, elk, golden eagles, mountain caribou, mountain goats, ptarmigans, and wolves.
The park offers a variety of activities, including fishing, hiking, and camping in summer and cross-country and downhill skiing in winter.
The resort town of Jasper in the central section of the park has hotels, motels, and other tourist facilities.
Jaundice 65 Jaspers, Karl , was a leading German existentialist philosopher.
He held that philosophy is not a set of doctrines, but an activity through which individuals can become aware of the nature of their own existence.
However, he was not primarily interested in the philosophers’ conclusions, because he held that in philosophy all content and all conclusions are unimportant.
Jaspers urged the study of other philosophers as a way to disturb and stimulate us so profoundly that we would be compelled to engage in the activity of philosophizing.
Jaspers believed that people learn most about themselves in “limit situations” such as death, guilt, and failure.
Ivan Soll Jaundice, /AWN dihs, is a yellowish discoloration of the skin, the tissues, and the whites of the eyes.
It results from an increased amount of bi//irubin, a reddish-yellow pigment, in the blood.
Bilirubin is formed by the breakdown of hemoglobin, a pigment in red blood cells.
The liver removes bilirubin from the blood stream and discharges it in the bile.
Thus, jaundice results from either excessive production of bilirubin or reduced discharge Dick Dietrich, FPG Jasper National Park, in western Alberta, includes many scenic peaks, including Mount Edith Cavell, above. 66 java of bile.
Jaundice in dogs, sheep, and other animals is sometimes called yellows.
Hemolytic jaundice results from an increased breakdown of red blood cells, which causes a greater concentration of bilirubin in the blood.
Hepatocellular jaundice occurs when the liver is damaged so that it cannot secrete enough bile.
Many babies are born with physiologic jaundice, which occurs if the body cannot process all the bilirubin it produces.
Java fossils, /AH vwuh, are the remains of a type of prehistoric human being that lived from about 1 million to 500,000 years ago, and perhaps as early as 1,600,000 years ago.
All evidence of the Java people's existence comes from fossils found in ancient stream and volcanic deposits on the island of Java.
The first Java fossils were discovered in 1891 by Eugéne Dubois, a Dutch physician.
The fossils show that the Java people had a large face with a low, sloping forehead and heavy ridges above the eyes.
Their brain was smaller than that of more modern types of human beings.
Karl W Butzer Javelin, JAV /ihn or f/AV uh lihn, is a light, slender spear that is thrown for distance in track and field meets.
The javelin used in track and field meets is made of metal with a metal tip.
Women use a javelin that is 2. to 2. meters (7 feet 3 inches to 7 feet 6 + inches) long.
A javelin thrower grasps the shaft on a cord grip, and runs with it down a runway to gather momentum.
The Throwing a javelin thrower runs about 33. meters and then hurls the javelin overhand from behind a restraining line.
It must fall within a marked sector with its point striking the ground first.
Michael Takaha For javelin championship figures, see the tables with Track and field and Olympic Games.
Jay refers to several species of a large family of birds that includes ravens, crows, and magpies.
Jays are smaller than crows, and their feathers are usually more colorful.
This bright blue, black, and white bird lives east of the Rocky Mountains.
The Stellerss jay, the pinyon jay, and the scrub jay live in the Rocky Mountains and farther west.
The crestless scrub jay has blue and gray feathers and dwells in oak woods and brushy areas.
The gray jay of Canada, the Northern United States, WORLD BOOK illustrations by John F Eggert Jays are related to ravens and crows but usually have more colorful feathers.
Two species found in North America are the scrub jay, top, and the green jay, bottom.
The javelin must be thrown over the shoulder or upper part of the throwing arm before the person reaches a restraining line.
The javelin must land in a marked sector with its point striking the ground first. i o | WORLD BOOK illustration by Sarah Woodward i 4 yy and the Rocky Mountains is gray and black.
The green jay, which lives in southern Texas and parts of Mexico and Central and South America, is mostly green and gold and has a blue head.
Other jays are found in other parts of North and South America, Europe, and Asia.
The pinyon jay is Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus; the scrub jay, Aphelocoma coerulescens; the gray jay, Perisoreus canadensis; and the green jay, Cvanocorax yncas.
Jay, John , was a distinguished statesman during the early days of the United States.
He became the first chief justice of the United States under the United States Constitution.
Jay's judgment and fairness and his courage in making unpopular decisions made him a valued diplomat and respected political figure.
Jay was president of the Continental Congress from December 1778 until September 1779, when he became United States minister to Spain.
This treaty, which ended the Revolutionary War in America, was signed in 1783.
When Jay returned to the United States, he found that Congress had chosen him as secretary of foreign affairs.
Jay's experiences as a diplomat in Europe convinced him that the United States needed a stronger central government.
In 1789, President George Washington appointed Jay chief justice of the United States.
While still chief justice, Jay went to the United Kingdom in 1794 to negotiate a settlement of issues between the two nations.
Elliott Robert Barkan Jay Treaty, signed in 1794, resolved disputes that arose between the United States and the United Kingdom after the Revolutionary War in America ended.
John Jay, chief justice of the United States, arranged the treaty in London.
Neither the United Kingdom nor the United States fully lived up to the Treaty of Paris, which ended the war in 1783.
They also refused to pay for wartime property losses of Americans who sympathized with Chicago Historical Society John Jay Jayhawkers_ 67 Britain.
The British refused to give up military posts on the United States side of the Great Lakes and to open their important West Indies markets to United States ships.
Relations between the United States and the United Kingdom almost reached the breaking point after France declared war on Britain in 1793.
President George Washington sent Jay to London to negotiate a settlement.
The treaty gave the United States control of all military posts on its side of the Great Lakes and opened the British West Indies to United States ships under severe restrictions.
It also provided that neutral commissions would decide possession of disputed areas on the Canada-US. border, the amount United States debtors owed the British, and the amounts the United Kingdom owed for losses in the blockade.
But the treaty failed to stop British interference with United States ships, and it prohibited retaliation against such interference.
The United States Senate narrowly passed the treaty, but only after Britain removed the section dealing with the British West Indies trade.
Jaycees are organizations that stress individual development through leadership training and civic involvement.
The organization in the United States is called the United States Jaycees.
Jaycees learn to be leaders by working in community improvement programs.
They sponsor programs on such matters as personal improvement, youth development, government affairs, health, safety, and foreign relations.
The United States Jaycees has about 5,000 local chapters and approximately 240,000 members.
Until 1984, women could join the organization but could not vote or hold office.
But in that year, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in a Minnesota case that the Jaycees could not deny women voting privileges and other rights of full membership.
The United States Jaycees was organized as the Young Men's Progressive Civic Association in 1915 in St.
A national organization was formed in 1920, and the name became the Junior Chamber of Commerce.
Junior Chamber International, the worldwide Jaycees organization, has more than 400,000 members.
The Modern Jazz Quartet © David Redfern, Retna © Gary Gershoff, Retna Pianist Marcus Roberts Jazz is a popular kind of music that originated in America.
It may be performed by a large group called a big band, top; a small group called a combo, above /eft; or a soloist, above right.
Jazz Jazz is a kind of music that has often been called the only art form to originate in the United States.
The music grew fram a combination of influences, including black American music, African rhythms, American band traditions and instruments, and European harmonies and forms.
Much of the best jazz is still written and performed in the United States.
But musicians from many other countries are making major contributions to jazz.
Jazz was actually widely appreciated as an important art form in Europe before it gained such recognition in the United States.
One of the key elements of jazz is improvisation—the ability to create new music spontaneously.
This skill is the distinguishing characteristic of the genuine jazz musician.
Improvisation raises the role of the soloist from just a performer and reproducer of others’ ideas to a composer as well.
To syncopate their music, jazz musicians take patterns that are even and regular and break them up, make them uneven, and put accents in unexpected places.
The earliest jazz was performed by black Americans who had little or no training in Western music.
As jazz grew in popularity, its sound was influenced by musicians with formal training and classical backgrounds.
During its history, jazz has absorbed influences from the folk and classical music of Africa, Asia, and other parts of the world.
The development of instruments with new and different characteristics has also influenced the sound of jazz.
The sound of jazz Jazz may be performed by a single musician, by a small group of musicians called a combo, or by a big band of 10 or more pieces.
The typical front line consists of one to five brass and reed instruments.
The rhythm section usually consists of piano, bass, drums, and sometimes an acoustic or electric guitar.
The rhythm section in a combo or big band maintains the steady beat and decorates the rhythm with syncopated patterns.
The drums keep the beat steady and add interesting rhythm patterns and syncopations.
The piano—or sometimes a guitar—plays the chords or harmonies of the composition in a rhythmic manner.
The bass outlines the harmonies by sounding the roots, or bottom pitches, of the chords, on the strong beats of each measure.
Any of the rhythm instruments, especially the piano, may also solo during a performance.
The principal brass instruments of jazz are the trumpet, the cornet, and the slide trombone.
But the French horn, the valve trombone, the baritone horn, the fliigelhorn, and even electronic trumpets have been used in jazz performances.
But the cornet is usually considered more mellow and the trumpet more brassy.
The typical brass section of a big band consists of four or five trumpets and three trombones.
Jazz trumpeters and trombonists frequently use objects called mutes to alter or vary the sound of their instrument.
The player plugs the mute into the be// (flared end) of the instrument or holds it close to the opening of the bell.
The flute, though technically a woodwind, is often classified as a reed in jazz.
In early jazz, it was an equal member of the front line with the trumpet or cornet and the Duncan P Schiedt A traditional jazz band consists of a front /ine of a trumpet, trombone, and clarinet or saxophone, and a rhythm section of drums, a bass, a piano, and often a guitar or banjo.
The clarinet eventually gave way to the saxophone, which is capable of much greater volume.
Four members of the saxophone family—the soprano, alto, tenor, and baritone saxophones—are regularly employed in jazz.
A typical reed section in a big band is made up of one or two alto saxophones, two tenors, and a baritone.
Musicians often “double” by playing two or more reed instruments, such as an alto saxophone and a tenor saxophone, during a performance.
Drums of various types were familiar to black Americans dating back to the days of slavery.
These early percussion instruments played a vital role in the development of jazz.
As jazz grew, the drum set evolved until one drummer could play more than one percussion instrument at the same time.
The invention of a foot-operated bassdrum pedal and pedal-operated cymbals freed the drummer's hands to play other percussion instruments, such as snare drums, tom-toms, cowbells, and wood blocks.
Another important invention was a wire brush that the drummer used in place of a drumstick or mallet to produce a more delicate sound on drums and cymbals.
Today, a jazz drummer may use electronic percussion instruments that can create an almost infinite variety of sounds and reproduce them accurately at virtually any volume.
Since the earliest days of jazz, the piano has served both as a solo instrument and as an ensemble instrument that performs as part of the rhythm section.
Today, other keyboard instruments, including electronic organs, electric pianos, and synthesizers controlled by a keyboard, may substitute for pianos.
The guitar, like the piano, is capable of playing both chords and melodies.
In the early days of jazz, these two instruments, along with the banjo, were often substituted for one another.
Later, however, the guitar and banjo were most often used in the rhythm section in addition to the piano.
Jazz musicians have used the acoustic guitar in ensembles and as a solo instrument since jazz's earliest days.
The electric guitar emerged in jazz in the late 1930's to add sustained tones, greater volume, and a new assortment of sounds and effects to jazz.
The rhythm section may substitute a brass bass, such as a tuba or Sousaphone.
When an electronic organ is used, the organist can play the bass part with foot pedals on the instrument.
Electric bass guitars have been incorporated into some jazz ensembles, primarily those that play a “fusion” of jazz and rock music.
Nearly every Western musical instrument and many non-Western instruments have been used in jazz at one time or another.
The vibraphone, an instrument similar to the xylophone, and the violin deserve special mention.
The violin has had only a few notable soloists in jazz, possibly because its volume could not match the power of the trumpet or trombone in ensemble.
But throughout jazz history there have been some violinists who have skillfully adapted this basically classical music instrument to jazz.
Modern amplification and sound manipulation devices 70 jazz have given the violin new and exciting possibilities as a jazz instrument.
The folk songs and plantation dance music of black Americans contributed much to early jazz.
These forms of music occurred throughout the Southern United States during the late 1800's.
Ragtime, a musical style that influenced early jazz, emerged from the St.
Ragtime was an energetic and syncopated variety of music, primarily for the piano, that emphasized formal composition.
The blues is a form of music that has always been an important part of jazz.
Its mournful scale and simple repeated harmonies helped shape the character of jazz.
Jazz instrumentalists have long exploited the blues as a vehicle for improvisation.
Fully developed jazz music probably originated in New Orleans at the beginning of the 1900s.
New Orleans style jazz emerged from the city’s own musical traditions of band music for black funeral processions and street parades.
Today, this type of jazz is sometimes called classic jazz, traditional jazz, or Dixieland jazz.
New Orleans was the musical home of the first notable players and composers of jazz, including cornetists Buddy Bolden and King Oliver, cornetist and trumpeter Louis Armstrong, saxophonist and clarinetist Sidney Bechet, and pianist Jelly Roll Morton.
Fate Marable led a New Orleans band that played on riverboats traveling up and down the Mississippi River.
King Oliver migrated to Chicago, and Jelly Roll Morton performed throughout the United States.
Commercial radio stations, which first appeared in the 1920s, featured live performances by the growing number of jazz musicians.
A group of Midwest youths, many from Chicago's Austin High School, developed a type of improvisation and arrangement that became known as “Chicago style” jazz.
They played harmonically inventive music, and the technical ability of some of the players, especially Goodman, was at a higher level than that of many earlier performers.
Edmond Souchon Bix Beiderbecke, second from right, was one of the first famous jazz musicians.
Johnson strongly influenced other jazz pianists, notably Count Basie, Duke Ellington, Art Tatum, Fats Waller, and Teddy Wilson.
In 1923, he became the first leader to organize a jazz band into sections of brass, reed, and rhythm instruments.
His arranger, Don Redman, was the first to master the technique of scoring music for big bands.
Various Henderson bands of the 1920's and 1930s included such great jazz instrumentalists as Louis Armstrong and saxophonists Benny Carter and Coleman Hawkins.
Armstrong also became the first well-known male jazz singer, and UPI/Bettmann Duke Ellington, at the piano, has been called the single most significant person in the history of jazz.
Sie ae j | i BG seven \ popularized scat singing—that is, wordless syllables sung in an instrumental manner.
During the late 1920's and early 1930's, jazz advanced from relatively simple music played by performers who often could not read music to a more complex and sophisticated form.
Among the musicians who brought about this change were saxophonists Benny Carter, Coleman Hawkins, and Johnny Hodges; the team of violinist Joe Venuti and guitarist Eddie Lang; and pianist Art Tatum.
Many people consider Tatum the most inspired and technically gifted improviser in jazz history.
In 1932, Duke Ellington recorded his compo‘ » Se *% Down Beat Magazine Woody Herman was a popular bandleader for more than 40 years.
Many musicians who joined his band later became noted soloists with their own groups.
One of the most famous was tenor saxophonist Stan Getz, seated next to the guitar player.
Jazz 71 Benny Goodman, third from left, was a leading bandleader and clarinet player of the swing era.
This sextet included two musicians who were pioneers on their instruments—vibraphonist Lionel Hampton and electric guitarist Charlie Christian.
Big bands dominated the swing era, especially those of Count Basie, Benny Goodman, and Duke Ellington.
Goodman was the first white bandleader to feature black and white musicians playing together in public performances.
In 1936, he introduced two great black soloists—pianist Teddy Wilson and vibraphonist Lionel Hampton.
Until then, racial segregation had held back the progress of jazz and of black musicians in particular.
Their performance was one of the first by jazz musicians in a concert hall setting.
Other major bands of the swing era included those led by Benny Carter, Bob Crosby, Jimmy Dorsey, Tommy Dorsey, Woody Herman, Earl Hines, Andy Kirk, Jimmie Lunceford, Glenn Miller, Artie Shaw, Chick Webb, and, toward the end of the period, Stan Kenton.
The bands in Kansas City, Mo., especially the Count Basie band, had a distinctive swing style.
These bands relied on the 12-bar blues form and riff backgrounds, which consisted of repeated simple melodies.
They depended less heavily on written arrangements, allowing more leeway for rhythmic drive and for extended solo improvisations.
Boogie-woogie was another jazz form that became popular during the 1930's.
The music had an intense quality that created excitement through the repetition of a single phrase.
Albert Ammons, Pete Johnson, Meade Lux Lewis, and Pinetop Smith were among its most important artists.
Jazz vocalists came into prominence during the swing era, many singing with big bands.
These singers included Mildred Bailey, Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, Nat “King” Cole, Carmen McRae, and Sarah Vaughan.
In addition to singing, Nat “King” Cole was a superb jazz pianist and Jack Teagarden was a great jazz trombonist. 72 jazz rit Duncan P Schiedt Bebop revolutionized jazz in the 1940's.
He teamed with trumpeter Miles Davis, right, in an important bebop combo.
In the early 1940's, a group of young musicians began experimenting with more complicated chord patterns and melodic ideas in a combo setting.
The group included trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie, alto saxophonist Charlie Parker, pianists Bud Powell and Thelonious Monk, and drummers Kenny Clarke and Max Roach.
They played long, dazzling phrases with many notes, difficult intervals, unexpected breaks, and unusual turns in melodic direction.
On slower tunes, they displayed a keen ear for subtle changes of harmony.
Only extremely skilled musicians were able to play bebop well, and only sophisticated listeners at first appreciated it.
In bebop performances, musicians usually played an intricate melody, followed with long periods of solo improvisation, and restated the theme at the end.
The bassist presented the basic beat for the group by plucking a steady, moving bass line.
The drummer elaborated the beat with sticks or brushes on cymbals, snare drum, and tom-tom.
The pianist inserted complex chords at irregular intervals to suggest, rather than state, the complete harmonies of the piece.
This form emphasized some of the traditional values of jazz derived from gospel and blues music, including rhythmic drive, uninhibited tone and volume, and freedom from restricting arrangements.
The hard bop leaders were drummer Art Blakey and pianist Horace Silver.
Blakey led a combo called the Jazz Messengers from the mid-1950's until his death in 1990.
The Jazz Messengers served as a training ground for many of the greatest soloists in jazz history.
Trumpeter Clifford Brown and drummer Max Roach were coleaders of another outstanding hard bop combo.
Cool jazz originated in the works of such musicians as tenor saxophonist Lester Young, who starred with Count Basie, and guitarist Charlie Christian, who played with Benny Goodman.
In the late 1930's and early 1940's, these musicians made changes in the sound and style of jazz improvisation.
For example, they softened the tones of their instruments, used syncopation more subtly, and played with a more even beat.
In 1948, tenor saxophonist Stan Getz recorded a slow, romantic solo of Ralph Burns's composition “Early Autumn’ with the Woody Herman band.
In 1949 and 1950, a group of young musicians that included trumpeter Miles Davis, alto saxophonist Lee Konitz, baritone saxophonist Gerry Mulligan, and arranger Gil Evans recorded several new compositions.
During the 1950's, many combos became identified with the cool movement.
Some of the most successful combos were the Gerry Mulligan Quartet, the Modern Jazz Quartet, and the Dave Brubeck Quartet.
In the 1940's and 1950's, the sophisticated forms of bebop and cool jazz began to gain wide acceptance among intellectuals and college students.
Groups of jazz stars made a series of international tours called Jazz at the Philharmonic.
The international growth of jazz resulted in many successful overseas tours by United States bands and combos.
The trumpeter and singer appeared in several motion pictures, including the 1950 film High Society, above.
Culver Dave Brubeck, a classically trained pianist, led one of the most popular jazz quartets of the 1950's.
The combo featured the lyrical solos of alto saxophonist Paul Desmond. restricted performances to about 3 minutes in length.
The LP also permitted a number of shorter performances to be issued on a single record.
Sweden, France, Germany, Japan, and other countries developed players and composers whose work compared favorably with that of the leading Americans.
The first foreign jazz musicians to influence Americans were Belgian-born guitarist Django Reinhardt in the late 1930's, and George Shearing, a blind, English-born pianist who immigrated to the United States in 1947.
In 1954, the first large American jazz festival was held at Newport, Rhode Island.
These festivals have featured almost all of the most popular jazz musicians and have introduced many extended concert works.
Jazz music began to feature nontraditional instruments, such as French horn and bass flute.
Jazz musicians began to take an interest in non-Western music, especially the modes (different arrangements of scales), melodic forms, and instruments of Africa, India, and the Far East.
In the late 1950's, John Lewis, musical director of the Modern Jazz Quartet, worked with classical musician Jazz 73 and composer Gunther Schuller to write and play orchestral works that combined elements of modern jazz and classical concert music.
Stan Kenton also played this so-called third stream music when he toured the United States with a 40-piece orchestra.
Also during this period, pianist George Russell developed a jazz theory of modes.
In 1959, the Miles Davis combo, with pianist Bill Evans and saxophonists John Coltrane and Cannonball Adderley, recorded compositions and improvised solos based on modes rather than on patterns of chords.
In 1960, saxophonist Ornette Coleman reshaped the thinking of younger jazz musicians when he recorded the album Free Jazz with a double quartet.
In this recording, Coleman discarded harmony, melody, and regular rhythms.
Pianist Cecil Taylor and bassist Charles Mingus conducted similar atonal experiments.
In the 1960's, the influence of the music of India entered jazz through the adaptations of John Coltrane.
Jazz musicians also began to use more unusual meters, such as 2,7, angi.
In the 1970's, many musicians blended jazz and rock music into fusion jazz.
Fusion combined the melodic and improvisational aspects of jazz with the rhythms and instruments of rock.
Jazz pianists began exploring the increased sound potential of synthesizers.
Horn and string players began to use electronics to intensify, distort, or multiply their sounds.
Some of the best-known fusion musicians were guitarist George Benson, trumpeters Donald Byrd and Miles Davis, pianist Herbie Hancock, and two combos, Weather Report and the Mahavishnu Orchestra.
At the same time, many veteran jazz musicians retained their popularity by leading groups that played in the swing, bebop, and cool styles.
These leaders included Stan Getz, Dizzy Gillespie, Woody Herman, Gerry Mulligan, and Oscar Peterson.
Miles Davis, third from right, who earlier pioneered in bebop and cool jazz, led several successful fusion combos. 74 jazz Recent developments.
During the 1980's, a number of young jazz musicians returned to mainstream jazz.
Mainstream jazz includes elements of the swing, cool, and bebop styles.
The most widely acclaimed young musician of the 1980's was trumpeter Wynton Marsalis, a performer of both jazz and classical music.
He and his brother, saxophonist Branford Marsalis, have led excellent hard bop combos.
Two of the most respected fusion artists are the brothers trumpeter Randy Brecker and saxophonist Michael Brecker.
Jane Ira Bloom also displays a mastery of the soprano saxophone and the synthesizer.
In the 1990's, jazz was dominated by a blend of older values and more modern styles.
Many musicians favored acoustical over electronic instruments, formal structure over total freedom, and a sense of history over harsh modernity.
For example, bands devoted to the music of Count Basie and Charles Mingus became popular.
Johnson and saxophonists Joe Henderson and Sonny Rollins, found new audiences among younger listeners.
The young musicians who energized jazz in the 1980's had become establishment figures by the end of the 1990's.
They included trumpeters Roy Hargrove and Wynton Marsalis, guitarist Pat Metheny, trombonists Steve Turré and Ray Anderson, and pianist Chick Corea.
A younger group of musicians also gained popularity, focusing on “straight-ahead jazz’ that reflected earlier mainstream styles.
They included saxophonists Joshua Redman and Donald Harrison, bassist Christian McBride, trumpeter Terence Blanchard, and pianist Marcus Roberts.
At the same time, the free jazz style of the 1960's continued strong throughout the 1990's in the playing of saxophonists Steve Lacy and Roscoe Mitchell, pianist John Zorn, and their young followers.
Many musicians play in historic styles, such as swing © David Redfern, Retna Ltd.
Exciting young musicians increased the popularity of jazz in the 1990's.
These musicians included trumpeter Terence Blanchard and saxophonist Donald Harrison. and bebop.
For example, the Art Ensemble of Chicago blends free jazz, African costumes and makeup, exotic instruments, and surprise techniques into theatrical musical events.
Ornette Coleman's group, called Prime Time, mixes free and fusion jazz in new and interesting ways.
Such young jazz composers as Michael Daugherty are demonstrating that live musicians can interact creatively with computer-generated sound.
Some artists have attempted new fusion sounds that blended jazz with such forms as rap music.
The piano G Other B Thereeds _ E The guitar instruments C Drums F The bass Il.
Jean Baptiste de la Salle, zhahn 4 TEEST, Saint , a French priest, founded the Institute of Brothers of the Christian School, a Roman Catholic religious order devoted to teaching boys.
His schools stressed practical skills and religious instruction rather than classical education.
He tried to train teachers in Reims but became convinced that only a religious order of brothers could have the dedication to effectively educate the poor.
At the time of his death, communities had been set up throughout France and in Rome.
Jeans are trousers that are usually made of denim, a heavy, coarse cotton cloth with a diagonal weave.
The word jeans comes from Génes, the French word for Genoa, a port in Italy.
In the Middle Ages, working men there wore sturdy cotton pants that were the forerunners of jeans.
Strauss arrived in California during the Gold Rush and started a business manufacturing sturdy work pants for gold miners.
He used brown canvas cloth at first but later made the pants of a tough cotton fabric from Nimes, France.
The word denim comes from the French phrase de Nimes, meaning from Nimes.
Strauss dyed the denim a deep blue called indigo, which became the traditional color for jeans.
In 1873, Strauss and a tailor named Jacob W Davis took out a patent for trousers strengthened with copper rivets at the pockets and other points of strain.
For decades, jeans were worn chiefly by outdoor laborers, such as farmers and cowboys.
In the 1940's, young people began to wear blue jeans for casual occasions.
In the 1960's, jeans became important to a youth movement called the counterculture.
Members of the counterculture rejected the lifestyles of the middle class.
These jeans had a label on the outside bearing the designer's name, such as Calvin Klein or Gloria Vanderbilt.
Jeep is a small all-purpose vehicle used by the armed forces of many countries.
The term jeep may come from the letters GP, the initials for general purpose vehicle.
When capitalized, the word Jeep is a trademark for a civilian automotive vehicle that was patterned after the armed forces jeep.
This name may come from the initials Jefferson, State of 75 H.M.M.W.V., which stand for Aigh-mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicle.
Armed forces jeeps also serve as platforms for various weapons, such as machine guns and small missiles.
He was born John Robinson Jeffers in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where his father was a professor at Western Theological Seminary.
In 1905, he graduated—at the age of 18—from Occidental College in Los Angeles, having mastered many classical and modern languages.
There, he found dramatic inspiration for his feelings about humanity, and an endless source of symbols to express his feelings.
Jeffers regarded human beings as creatures of no significance, largely responsible for their own misery and engaged in a vain struggle against death and darkness.
However, a contrasting strain in Jeffers’s philosophy qualified his pessimism.
Although the human race is doomed, Jeffers thought, a person may find some peace in the stoic wisdom of the past.
And although nature is indifferent to human fate, one person can appreciate nature’s grandeur.
Jeffers’s severe view of life may keep him from becoming widely popular.
But Jeffers’s mastery of long narrative forms and the extended blank verse line gave him a firm place in modern poetry.
Bonnie Costello Jefferson, Joseph , became one of the most popular and respected American comic actors of the 1800's.
He gained immense popularity for his performance in the title role of Rip Van Winkle.
He began performing it in the United States in 1866 and spent the next 38 years touring the country as Rip.
The actor collaborated with the Irish-American playwright Dion Boucicault on the play, which was a dramatization of a short story by Washington Irving.
His Autobiography provides a vivid account of the United States theater in the 1800's.
Don B Wilmeth Jefferson, State of, was the name of a proposed state in the United States.
In 1915, the Texas legislature suggested that the Panhandle, or northwestern part of Texas, become the State of Jefferson.
The discussion disclosed that the law which admitted Texas to the Union gave the state the right to divide itself, with the consent of Congress.
Dan L Flores 76 jefferson, Thomas 3rd President of the United States 1801-1809 Adams Jefferson Madison 2nd President 3rd President 4th President 1797-1801 1801-1809 1809-1817 Federalist DemocraticDemocraticRepublican Republican Aaron Burr Vice President 1801-1805 George Clinton Vice President 1805-1809 Detail of an oil portrait on canvas by Rembrandt Peale; © White House Historical Association Jefferson, Thomas , is best remembered as a great President and as the author of the Declaration of Independence.
He greatly appreciated art and music and tried to encourage their advancement in the United States.
He arranged for the famous French sculptor Jean Houdon to come to America to make a statue of George Washington.
Jefferson also posed for Houdon and for the famous American portrait painter Gilbert Stuart.
In addition, Jefferson served as president of the American Philosophical Society, an organization that encouraged a wide range of scientific and intellectual research.
Jefferson invented a decoding device, a lap desk, and an improved type of moldboard plow.
His collection of more than 6,400 books became a major part of the Library of Congress.
He developed the decimal system of coinage that allows Americans to keep accounts in dollars and cents.
He compiled a Manual of Parliamentary Practice and prepared written vocabularies of Indian languages.
Instead, he regarded himself as a public-spirited citizen and a broad-minded, practical thinker.
But he spent most of his career in public office and made his greatest contribution to his country in the field of politics.
His ideal society was a nation of jandowning farmers living under as little government as possible.
The term /effersonian democracy refers to such an ideal and was based on Jefferson's faith in self-government.
He trusted the majority of people to govern themselves and wanted to keep the government simple and free of waste.
Jefferson loved liberty in every form, and he worked for freedom of speech, press, religion, and other civil liberties.
Jefferson strongly supported the addition of the Bill of Rights to the Constitution of the United States.
During Jefferson's two terms as President, the United States almost doubled in area with the purchase of the vast Louisiana Territory.
America preserved its hard-won neutrality while France, led by Napoleon's armies, battled most of Europe.
But the first successful voyage of Robert Fulton's steamboat, which became famous as the Clermont, signaled a promising new era in the history of transportation.
Thomas Jefferson was born on April 13, 1743, at Shadwell, the family farm in Goochland (now Albemarle) County, Virginia.
He was the third child in the family and grew up with six sisters and one brother.
Thomas mother, Jane Randolph Jefferson, came from one of the oldest families in Virginia.
Thomas developed the normal interests of a country boy—hunting, fishing, horseback riding, and canoeing.
At age 9, he went to live with a Scottish clergyman, who taught him Latin, Greek, and French.
After his father died, Thomas entered the school of James Maury, an Anglican clergyman, near Charlottesville.
Important dates in Jefferson's life 1743 Born in Goochland County, Virginia.
The Louisiana Purchase, territorial agreement with France, doubled the size of the United States in 1803.
Dalton’s Theory of the Atom, one of the foundations of chemistry, was developed in 1803.
English chemist John Dalton proposed that all matter was made up of atoms.
Marbury Madison, a \andmark Supreme Court ruling, established the court's right to declare laws unconstitutional.
The Lewis and Clark Expedition crossed the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Ocean and mapped much of the vast northwestern wilderness.
Richard Trevithick, an English engineer, invented the steam-powered locomotive in 1804.
American inventor Robert Fulton began the first commercially successful steamboat service in 1807.
Sir Walter Scott's The Lay of the Last Minstre/ and William Wordsworth’s Poems in Two Volumes , stressed imagination, passionate feeling, and unusual experiences.
The Embargo Act of 1807 prohibited ships from entering or leaving United States harbors.
It sought to end interference with United States shipping by Britain and France, who were at war.
WORLD BOOK map In 1760, when he was 16, Jefferson entered the College of William and Mary at Williamsburg.
There, young Jefferson met two men, William Small and Judge George Wythe, who would have a great influence on him.
Through Small and Wythe, Jefferson became friendly NS Mile Tt Jefferson Birthplace enone Park Commission Jefferson’s birthplace was this house at Shadwell, a family estate of more than 2,500 acres in central Virginia.
Jefferson inherited the property when he was 14 years old. 78 jefferson, Thomas with Governor Francis Fauquier.
The four spent many evenings at the governor's mansion, talking and playing chamber music.
His studies and the companionship of cultured men stimulated his eager mind.
Jefferson had been reared in the Anglican Church, but he developed a distrust of organized religion.
After finishing college in 1762, Jefferson studied law with George Wythe.
Thomas F Kelsey, CC Ae. jefferson collected clever devices throughout his lifetime.
The swivel chair shown here and other items Jefferson gathered are on display at Monticello.
Robert Lightfoot, Atoz Images Monticello, the home Jefferson designed and built between 1768 and 1809, is a 35-room brick mansion on a hilltop near Charlottesville, Virginia.
In 1765, Jefferson heard Patrick Henry give his famous speech against the Stamp Act.
He practiced law with great success until public service began taking all his time.
Jefferson's estate, like that of his father, lay in the rolling hills of Virginia’s Piedmont region.
The ScotchIrish and German immigrants of this section had hacked their small farms out of the wilderness.
Their ideas conflicted with the aristocratic beliefs of the wealthy landowners of the Tidewater region.
Jefferson was related to many Tidewater aristocrats and was accepted in their society.
But his political sympathies tended to be closer to those of his Piedmont neighbors.
She was the daughter of John Wayles, a prominent lawyer who lived near Williamsburg.
According to legend, Jefferson's love of music helped him win his bride.
Two rival suitors came to call one day but left without a word when they saw the couple playing a duet on the harpsichord and violin.
Jefferson died in 1782, after only 10 years of marriage. jefferson reared his two daughters.
For many years, some historians thought that Jefferson might have had children with one of his slaves, Sally Hemings.
In 1998, scientists conducted a DNA study to help learn if this was so.
The study compared the DNA of male descendants of Sally Hemings with DNA from male descendants of Jefferson's uncle.
The study could not include male descendants of Jefferson and his wife because they had no sons who lived to adulthood.
Certain characteristics of Jefferson’s DNA and that of his uncle, brother, and their descendants would be the same.
The study suggested that Jefferson or one of his relatives fathered at least one of Hemings’s children, Eston Hemings.
The Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation, which oversees Monticello, appointed a committee to review the study.
Committee members examined historical and scientific documents and interviewed descendants of Monticello slaves and others.
The likelihood is very strong, the foundation said, that Jefferson and Sally Hemings had a long-term relationship and that Jefferson was the father of one, if not all six, of Hemings’s children.
Jefferson was elected to the House of Burgesses in 1769 and served there until 1775.
He was not a brilliant speaker but proved himself an able writer of laws and resolutions.
Jefferson often showed a talent for clear and simple English that the more experienced legislators quickly recognized.
Jefferson became a member of a group that included Patrick Henry, Richard Henry Lee, and Francis Lightfoot Se eo.
These men challenged the control that Tidewater aristocrats held over Virginia politics.
They also took an active part in disputes between the colonies and the United Kingdom.
Together with other patriots, they met in the Apollo Room of Williamsburg’s Raleigh Tavern in 1769 and joined against the United Kingdom in a nonimportation association.
Jefferson took the lead in organizing another nonimportation agreement.
He was chosen to represent Albemarle County at the First Virginia Convention, which in turn was to elect Virginia delegates to the First Continental Congress.
He became il] and could not go to the meeting, but he sent a paper giving his views.
Jefferson argued that the British Parliament had no control over the American Colonies.
He declared that when the original settlers came to America, they had used their “natural rights” to emigrate.
Jefferson claimed the colonies still owed allegiance only to the king, to whom the original settlers had freely chosen to remain loyal.
Jefferson said the first English settlers in America were like the first Saxons who had settled in England hundreds of years before.
Jefferson claimed the British Parliament had no more right to govern America than the German rulers had to govern England.
Jefferson attended the Second Virginia Convention in the spring of 1775.
The members of this convention chose Jefferson as one of the delegates to the Second Continental Congress.
Before he left for Philadelphia, the Virginia Assembly asked him to answer a message of peace from Lord North, the British prime minister.
North had proposed that Parliament would not try to tax the settlers if they would tax themselves.
Jefferson insistJefferson, Thomas 79 ed that a government had been set up in America for the colonists, not for the British.
The more moderate John Dickinson drafted a substitute, which included much of Jefferson’s original version.
During the spring of 1776, sentiment rapidly grew stronger in favor of independence.
Congress appointed a committee to draw up a declaration of independence.
On the committee were Jefferson, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Roger Sherman, and Robert Livingston.
The committee unanimously asked Jefferson to prepare the draft and approved it with few changes.
Congress began debating the declaration on July 2 and adopted it on July 4.
It set forth with moving eloquence, supported by strong legal argument, the position of the American revolutionaries.
In September 1776, Jefferson resigned from Congress and returned to the Virginia House of Delegates.
He had no interest in military life and did not fight in the Revolutionary War.
The people in this largest colony suffered from uneven distribution of land.
The colonial government closely restricted voting privileges and limited educational opportunities.
Jefferson sponsored a bill abolishing entail, which requires property owners to leave their land to specified descendants, rather than disposing of it as they wish.
The legislature passed another bill introduced by Jefferson providing that immigrants could become naturalized after living in Virginia for two years.
Jefferson aroused hostility not only among Anglicans, but also among other denominations, which feared that a separation of church and state would loosen all religious ties.
Virginia ended the Anglican Church’s position as a state church in 1779.
It took the church's clergymen off the public payroll and exempted Virginians from paying taxes to support the church.
In 1786, when Jefferson was in France, the assembly passed his Statute of Religious Freedom, which guaranteed religious liberty in Virginia.
He pushed through many reforms, especially in land law and criminal law.
The legislature defeated his plan fora system of free public education with a state-supported university, but parts of this plan later became law.
Jefferson was born into a slave society in which he continued to own slaves while opposing slavery.
He never justified owning slaves, but he felt that freeing his slaves would not have ended slavery as an institution.
He hoped the younger generation would end society's dependence on this system.
The Virginia Assembly elected Jefferson governor for one-year terms in 1779 and 1780.
During his administration, the state suffered severely from the effects of the Revolutionary War.
At the request of General George Washington, Jefferson had stripped Virginia of its defenses to aid the American army.
James Monroe was among those who recruited Virginians for military service.
British troops under Benedict Arnold and Lord Cornwallis invaded Virginia in 1781.
Jefferson himself barely escaped capture on June 4 when troops led by Lieutenant Colonel Banastre Tarleton swept down on Monticello.
The Virginia legislature chose Thomas Nelson, Jr., the top officer of the state militia, to succeed Jefferson.
Jefferson was criticized for the state's lack of resistance against the British invasion.
But many years passed before Jefferson regained prestige in his own state.
The criticism wounded him deeply, and he left public office with genuine relief.
Jefferson returned to Monticello embittered and determined to give up public life forever.
This book included much information on Virginia and on his own beliefs and ideals.
The death of Jefferson's wife in September 1782 left him stunned and distraught.
He accepted the office because he felt it would take his mind off his personal tragedy.
During his year in Congress, he devised a decimal system of currency that Congress approved.
He also piloted through Congress the Treaty of Paris, which ended the Revolutionary War.
Most important was Jefferson's work on the Ordinance of 1784 and the Land Ordinance of 1785.
The problem of western lands had troubled the colonies from the beginning of the war.
Problems of how to govern the area and how to dispose of its land then arose.
Congress appointed two committees to consider the issues and made Jefferson chairman of both.
In 1784, Jefferson submitted a draft of an ordinance for the political organization of the lands.
Each would eventually be admitted to the Union on a basis of complete equality with the original 13 states.
Jefferson's provision forbidding slavery west of the Appalachians lost by one vote.
In May 1784, Congress sent Jefferson to France to join John Adams and Benjamin Franklin in negotiating European treaties of commerce.
The next year, Franklin resigned as minister to France, and Jefferson succeeded him in Paris.
Yet Jefferson came as close as anyone could to replacing the honored Franklin.
The United States was suffering from a weak central authority under the Articles of Confederation.
French reformers regarded Jefferson as a champion of liberty because of his political writings and his legal reforms in Virginia.
The Marquis de Lafayette, who had fought for American independence, and other moderates often sought his advice.
But he did draft a proposed Charter of Rights to be presented to the king.
This document and his other suggestions urged moderation because Jefferson felt that the French were not yet ready for a representative government of the American type.
He sympathized with the revolution, feeling it was similar in purpose to the Revolutionary War in America.
Jefferson had taken his daughter Martha to France with him, and Mary joined them in 1787.
He broadened his knowledge of many subjects, especially architecture and farming.
He wanted to settle his affairs in America and to take his daughters back home.
National statesman During Jefferson's stay in France, Americans at home were busy reorganizing the government.
Jefferson was secretary of state under President George Washington, right.
The Cabinet was, /eft to right, Henry Knox, Jefferson, Edmund Randolph, and Alexander Hamilton. sembled in a convention in 1787 and drew up what became the Constitution of the United States.
But he objected strongly to the lack of a bill of rights and wrote letters urging one.
Soon after the Constitution went into effect, Madison introduced the 10 amendments that became the Bill of Rights.
A letter from President George Washington awaited him, asking Jefferson to be secretary of state in the new government.
Jefferson received this invitation “with real regret,” but he finally yielded to Washington's urging.
Sharp differences of opinion soon arose between Jefferson and the secretary of the treasury, Alexander Hamilton.
Hamilton, though younger than Jefferson, had gained prominence as a spokesman for the Constitution.
Hamilton believed that the United States would be best governed by an aristocracy of the rich and well-born.
Jefferson supported Hamilton's plan for funding all the debts of the previous national governments.
He reluctantly agreed that Congress should also accept responsibility for the debts taken on by the states during the Revolutionary War.
This proposal aroused considerable opposition, especially in Virginia and other Southern Jefferson, Thomas 81 States that had paid off much of their debt.
Some Southern members of Congress agreed to vote for paying the state debts in return for having the national capital located in the South.
Jefferson helped carry out this compromise, and the capital was located in the District of Columbia.
But Jefferson opposed Hamilton's plans to encourage shipping and manufacturing.
He feared that such a bank would encourage financial speculation and hurt farming interests.
Washington asked his Cabinet to submit opinions on the constitutionality of a national bank.
Jefferson developed his “strict construction” theory, which held that the government should assume only the powers expressly given it by the Constitution.
Hamilton replied with his “loose” interpretation of the Constitution, declaring that the government could assume all powers not expressly denied it.
Washington generally favored Hamilton in domestic affairs and approved the bank.
The differences between Jefferson and Hamilton grew into a bitter personal feud.
Their conflicting points of view led to the development of the first political parties.
Washington supported most of Jefferson's policies in foreign relations.
Jefferson urged recognition of the new revolutionary government of France.
Jefferson tried to persuade the British to abandon their forts in the Northwest Territory.
Jefferson joined his fellow Cabinet members in urging Washington to accept a second term as President.
In 1796, his Democratic-Republican supporters nominated him as a candidate for President to run against John Adams, the Federalist candidate.
Adams received 71 electoral votes in this first party contest for the presidency and was elected President.
Jefferson took no active part in the new Administration because it was largely Federalist.
He found strong support among small farmers, frontier settlers, and Northern laborers.
His relations with Adams grew more and more strained, until the men broke completely in 1800.
To aid deliberations, he wrote his famous Manual of Parliamentary Practice, which is still in use.
These laws in effect deprived the Democratic-Republicans of freedom of speech and of the press.
They aroused much opposition, and Jefferson led the attack against them.
He prepared a series of resolutions that were passed by the Kentucky legislature, and his friend Madison prepared similar resolutions for Virginia.
These Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions set forth the “compact” theory of the Union and asserted the right of the states to judge when this compact had been broken.
MbDcccl. a _— \ r Virquita State dibtary Jefferson’s Manual of Parliamentary Practice, a handbook of rules for the Senate, was published in 1801.
The Federalists warned Americans that Jefferson was a revolutionary, an anarchist, and an unbeliever.
This party quarrel helped the Democratic-Republicans, as did the unpopular Alien and Sedition Acts.
Jefferson won the presidency by receiving 73 electoral votes to 65 for Adams.
But their spirits fell when they learned that each Democratic-Republican elector had cast one vote for Jefferson and the other for Burr.
Although they had clearly intended to elect Jefferson to the presidency and Burr to the vice presidency, the result was a tie.
Burr was technically also a candidate for President according to the voting procedures of the time.
He failed to withdraw his name as a candidate, and the House of Representatives had to settle the election.
The Federalists still controlled the House because the newly elected Democratic-Republican Congress had not yet taken office.
Many Federalist members of Congress preferred Burr to Jefferson because they thought Burr would be more manageable.
He threw his influence to the support of Jefferson, who won election on the 36th ballot.
He felt that the Democratic-Republican victory after 12 years of Federalism would save the nation from tyranny.
Jefferson spoke more moderately in his inaugural address than he did during the political campaign.
Jefferson declared in his speech that “every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.
Within a short time, the Democratic-Republicans had adopted, or at least accepted, many ideas of the Federalists.
Jefferson, a poor public speaker, was the first President to send his annual message to Congress, rather than deliver it in person.
Later Presidents followed this procedure until 1913, when Woodrow Wilson resumed the practice of appearing before Congress.
The so-called “President's House” was only partly built when Jefferson moved in.
He felt somewhat lonely in what he described as “a great stone house, big enough for two emperors, one pope Thornes fetterson Memottal Foundation Martha Randolph, Jefferson's older daughter, sometimes served as hostess at the White House.
His daughter Martha Randolph served as hostess of the White House from time to time.
Jefferson's most popular hostess was Dolley Madison, the wife of his secretary of state.
Jefferson's grandson, James Randolph, was the first child born in the White House.
Jefferson kept a French steward and chef, but he tried to eliminate some of the formality in White House protocol.
He began the practice of having guests shake hands with the President instead of bowing.
He also placed dinner guests at a round table so that everyone would feel equally important.
Always interested in architecture, Jefferson developed some ideas for the addition of east and west terraces and a north portico to the White House.
Jefferson believed that government should play the smallest possible role in national life.
With the help of Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, he began a policy of strict economy.
The government sharply reduced department expenditures, especially those for the Army and Navy.
The Louisiana Territory was purchased from France, by a treaty predated April 30.
The Non-Intercourse Act was passed, banning trade with France and Britain. 1808 1809 payments on the national debt.
It repealed excise taxes, which had aroused opposition under the Federalists.
Jefferson believed that appointments to federal jobs should be based on merit.
But Federalists held all the offices, and he quickly discovered that vacancies “by death l raat arrtccFMlefin ical Society A ceremony honoring the Louisiana Purchase took place in New Orleans in 1803.
The United States had bought French territory between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains.
He removed some Federalists, and generally appointed Democratic-Republicans to vacancies.
By the end of Jefferson's second term, his party held most federal offices.
Jefferson told them to consider their appointments as never having been made.
William Marbury was one of 42 justices of the peace whom Adams had appointed to five-year terms in the District of Columbia.
Marbury did this in accordance with the Judiciary Act of 1789, which gave the Supreme Court power to issue such writs.
Marbury’s action led to one of the most important Supreme Court decisions in American history, that of Marbury Madison in 1803.
In its decision, the court declared unconstitutional the section of the Judiciary Act of 1789 that gave the court power to issue writs of mandamus.
Therefore, the court refused to force Madison to deliver Marbury’s commission.
On the surface, Chief Justice John Marshall's decision should have pleased Jefferson and his fellow Democratic-Republicans.
The decision meant that the Jefferson Administration did not have to deliver commissions to the “midnight judges” appointed by the Federalists.
But the Democratic-Republicans were disturbed by the idea that the Supreme Court could declare unconstitutional a law passed by Congress.
This principle placed a powerful weapon in the hands of the courts, which the Federalists still controlled.
Many Democratic-Republicans feared that the Supreme Court would use its power to help the Federalists.
The Democratic-Republicans tried impeachment as a way of checking the federal courts.
First they impeached John Pickering, a New Hampshire judge who was a victim of insanity.
After the Senate had removed Pickering from office, the House brought impeachment charges against Justice Samuel Chase of the Supreme Court.
The House charged that he had criticized the Jefferson administration unfairly.
This helped establish the precedent that political changes do not affect the tenure of judges.
Ever since Jefferson had been minister to France, he had urged that the United States should act against the Barbary corsairs of North Africa.
These corsairs attacked trading ships, demanding tribute and ransom from all countries.
The United States had paid Tripoli, the most unruly of the Barbary States, $2 million in 10 years.
In 1801, Tripoli opened war on American shipping because it wanted more tribute money.
The little United States Navy blockaded Tripoli’s ports, bombarded fortresses, and eventually forced Tripoli to respect the American flag.
Notes on the State of Virginia .. .were it left to me to decide whether we should have a government without newspapers, or newspapers without a government, | should not hesitate a moment to pre_ fer the latter.
Letter to the American statesman James Madison, Jan., 1787 Determine never to be idle.
No person will have occasion to complain of the want of time who never loses any.
Letter to his daughter Martha, May 5, 1787 The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants.
Letter to Colonel William Stephens Smith, an American diplomat, Nov., 1787 . .. delay is preferable to error.
Letter to President George Washington, May 16, 1792 ...unmerited abuse wounds, while unmerited praise has not the power to heal.
Letter to Edward Rutledge, an American political leader, Dec., 1796 The second office of the government is honorable and easy, the first is but a splendid misery.
Letter to the American statesman Elbridge Gerry comparing the vice presidency with the presidency, May 13, 1797 . .. | have sworn upon the altar of God, eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man.
Letter lo Benjamin Rush, American physician and political leader, Sept., 1800 All, too, will bear in mind this sacred principle, that though the will of the majority is in ali cases to prevail, that will, to be rightful, must be reasonabie; that the minority possess their equal rights, which equal laws must protect, and to violate which would be oppression.
First Inaugural Address, March 4, 1801 ... error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.
First Inaugural Address, March 4, 1801 Sometimes it is said that man cannot be trusted with the government of himself.
Never buy what you do not want, because it is cheap; it will be dear to you.
Letter to his namesake Thomas Jefferson Smith, Feb., 1825 Resistance to tyrants is obedience to God.
Saying found among Jefferson's papers, date unknown Jefferson, Thomas 85 but it brought prestige to the United States Navy.
Jefferson had shown great interest in the West since his days in Congress.
He obtained a grant from Congress early in 1803 for exploration of the region all the way to the Pacific Ocean.
He sent Meriwether Lewis and William Clark to the headwaters of the Missouri River, then across the Rockies to the Pacific.
Anyone with $80 in cash could make the first payment on a frontier farm.
The Louisiana Purchase ranks as one of Jefferson's greatest achievements.
The Louisiana Territory, a vast region between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains, had been transferred from France to Spain in 1762.
Jefferson learned in 1801 that Spain planned to cede the area back to France.
When Louisiana belonged to Spain, it offered no threat to the United States.
Under Napoleon, it might block American expansion and threaten American democracy.
He sent James Monroe to Paris to help the American minister, Robert Livingston, negotiate with France.
He at least wanted to get a perpetual guarantee of free navigation of the Mississippi and various commercial privileges at New Orleans.
Before Monroe reached Paris, Livingston proposed a modest purchase of New Orleans.
For the province of Louisiana, the United States paid $11,250,000 and gave up claims on France estimated at $3,750,000.
So, for about $15 million, the government gained control of the Mississippi River and almost doubled the nation’s size.
He doubted whether the government had a right under the Constitution to add this vast new territory to the Union.
But his doubts did not keep him from submitting the treaty to the Senate, which ratified it by a vote of 24 to 7.
There seemed little doubt that a prospering nation would reelect Jefferson in 1804.
But a group of northeastern Federalists feared that the purchase of Louisiana would weaken New England's position and influence.
They felt that the time had come to break up the Union and sought an ally in Vice President Burr.
Aaron Burr, already discredited in politics, had further damaged his reputation by killing Alexander Hamilton in a duel in July 1804.
He then became involved in a mysterious scheme, the purpose of which is still not clear.
He may have wanted to take the West away from the United States, or perhaps to conquer the Spanish Southwest.
In any case, Burr tried unsuccessfully to get support from the British, French, or Spanish against his own government.
In 1806, Burr set off down the Ohio River for New Orleans, hoping to gather recruits along the way.
General James Wilkinson, the governor of the Louisiana Territory, had encouraged Burr to expect his support.
To the disgust of Jefferson and others, Chief Justice Marshall interpreted the charge of treason so narrowly that the jury had to acquit Burr.
Jefferson found that his chief tasks were to keep the United States out of the war, and at the same time uphold the country's rights as a neutral.
One result was that a large part of the West Indies-Europe trade fell into American hands.
American shipbuilding and commerce grew rapidly, and thousands of sailors were needed.
Most of these men came from New England, but many had deserted from British ships.
Britain, desperately needing seamen, began stopping American ships on the high seas and removing sailors suspected of being British.
The struggle in Europe soon became so intense that neither side cared much about the rights of neutral nations.
In the Berlin and Milan decrees of 1806 and 1807, Napoleon announced his intention to seize all neutral ships bound to or from a British port.
In practice, this meant that the British would try to seize any ship bound for the European continent, while the French would do their best to seize ships sailing almost anywhere else.
The crowning outrage occurred in June 1807, when the British frigate Leopard launched an unprovoked attack on the American ship Chesapeake.
The Leopard fired on the Chesapeake after the captain of the American vessel refused to let the British search his ship for deserters.
In any case, it would have been hard to decide whether to fight France or Britain.
Jefferson believed that he could bring the warring nations to reason by closing American markets to them, and not selling them any American supplies.
This law prohibited exports from the United States and barred American ships from sailing into foreign ports.
The embargo injured the United States far more than it did either Britain or France.
Ships lay idle, sailors and shipbuilders lost their jobs, and exports piled up in warehouses.
The government had to pass additional laws to increase the nation’s coastal defenses and to enforce the embargo.
After 14 months, it became clear that the embargo would force no concessions from either Britain or France.
Public clamor against the measure grew overwhelming, and Congress repealed it in March 1809 by passing the milder Non-Intercourse Act.
But he chose to follow George Washington’s example and retire from office after two terms.
Jefferson made it clear that he expected James Madison to be the next President.
Later years Jefferson was 65 when he retired from the presidency in 1809.
He felt free at last to cultivate those “tranquil pursuits of science’ for which, he said, nature had intended him.
Leisure gave Jefferson a chance to enjoy his countless and varied interests.
He turned to music, architecture, chemical experiments, and the study of religion, philosophy, law, and education.
During his long absence, Monticello had run down, and Jefferson worked energetically to repair the damages of long neglect.
He also experimented with new crops and new farming techniques, and improved his flower and herb gardens.
Jefferson carried on an immense correspondence with people in all parts of the world.
He entertained an endless stream of guests who came to pay their respects.
In 1811, Jefferson was reconciled with John Adams, and the two men renewed their old friendship.
Their letters ranged widely over the fields of history, politics, philosophy, religion, and science.
The remarkable correspondence continued until they died—both on the same day, July 4, 1826.
Jefferson had withdrawn from politics, but he was consulted constantly on public affairs.
Madison and Monroe, his successors in the White House, frequently sought his advice.
He had made additions to Monticello, entertained lavishly, and supported members of his family.
Public contributions aided him in later years, but Monticello passed out of the hands of his family after his death.
Jefferson's most important contributions in his later years were probably in the field of education.
As a young legislator, he had worked for reform of Virginia's system of public education.
In time, he became convinced that the state needed an entirely new university.
Jefferson reorganized the curriculum, hired the faculty, and selected the library books.
Jefferson also drew the plans for the buildings and supervised their construction.
As a result of his efforts, scholars from other countries were persuaded to teach at the university.
On July 4, 1826, just 50 years after the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson died.
These were accomplishments that he ranked higher than being president of the United States.
Colonial statesman A Revolutionary leader B The Declaration of Independence C Virginia lawmaker lll.
Jefferson's first Administration A Life in the White House E Western expansion B New policies F The Louisiana Purchase C The courts G Election of 1804 D War with Tripoli V Jefferson's second Administration A The Burr conspiracy B The struggle for neutrality C Commercial retaliation Vi.
It lies near the center of the state, along the Missouri River . lt was named for the third president of the United States, Thomas Jefferson.
It is built of white limestone and resembles the United States Capitol.
On the building's third floor, famous murals by American painter Thomas Hart Benton portray Missouris history.
Near the Capitol are the Governor's Mansion, which is a fine example of French-Italian architecture, and the huge, modern Harry S Truman State Office Building.
The city’s products include automobile parts, cotton swabs and other health-care items, textbooks, transformers, truck radiators, and washing machines.
Jefferson City became the capital of Missouri in 1826, when it was a tiny settlement.
It grew after it became a stopping point for stagecoaches and steamboats in the 1830's.
Jefferson City is the county seat of Cole County and has a mayor-council government.
Jefferson Memorial, in Washington, D.C, is a shrine to the third president of the United States and author of the Declaration of Independence.
The memorial is a white marble building on the south side of the Tidal Basin near the Potomac River.
The shrine was designed by architects John Russell Pope, Otto R Eggers, and Daniel P Higgins.
President Franklin D Roosevelt spoke at a ceremony that marked the start of construction in 1938, The memorial was built at a cost of $3 million.
It was dedicated on April 13, 1943, the 200th anniversary of Jefferson’s birth.
This design is based on the classical style of architecture, which Jefferson introduced into the United States.
Three broad flights of steps, with level platforms at intervals, lead from the edge of the Tidal Basin to the portico.
A 19-foot statue of Jefferson by the American sculptor Rudulph Evans stands inside the memorial.
Four quotations from Jefferson's writings are engraved on panels inside the shrine.
Jefferson Territory was the name proposed in 1859 for the area that covered the present state of Colorado and large parts of what are now Nebraska, Utah, and Wyoming.
Thousands of Americans rushed into the Rocky Mountain region of Colorado in 1858 and 1859 because of rumors and reports of gold discoveries.
In 1859, residents established a provisional government and elected Robert W Steele as governor.
But Congress failed to grant the request, partly because its members were involved in a bitter dispute over the spread of slavery to new territories.
It was the first time in Senate history that control of the Senate shifted when a senator changed parties.
He said he left the party to best serve Vermont and his own principles.
As a result of the 2000 election, the Senate had been made up of 50 Democrats and 50 Republicans.
Jeffords became chair of the Committee on Environment and Public Works in 2001.
He is also a member of the Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee and the Finance Committee.
He supported a family leave bill that was passed by Congress and signed into law by President Bill Clinton.
He also supported an increase in the legal minimum wage that Clinton called for and Congress approved in 1996.
Jeffords received a law degree from Harvard Law School in 1962 and began to practice law.
From 1964 to 1966, he chaired the Rutland County, Vermont, Board of Tax Appeals.
Jeffords was a member of the United States House of Representatives from 1975 to 1989.
He won the championship on June 9, 1899, by knocking out Bob Fitzsimmons in 11 rounds.
Bert Randolph Sugar Jehovah, jih HOH vuh, is a form of Yahweh, the sacred Hebrew name for God.
By the 200’s B.C., they were using the word Adonajas a respectful substitute when reading from the scriptures.
When writing the word, Jewish scribes mixed the vowels of Adonai and Elohim with the consonants of YHWH, the traditional spelling of Yahweh.
This mixing resulted in the Latin spelling, Jehovah, which carried over into English.
Jehovah's Witnesses, ji HOH vuhz, are members of a religious group that uses the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society as its corporate body.
Joseph M Hallman The Witnesses believe there is one God, called Jehovah.
They consider the resurrected Jesus to be divine in nature but, as God's Son, not equal to God as Father.
They consider Abel, the son of Adam and Eve, as the first of Jehovah's Witnesses, and cite Hebrews 11 and 12:1 as their source.
They believe God's war of Armageddon will rid the earth of all wickedness in this generation.
The modern group now called Jehovah's Witnesses was started in Pennsylvania in the 1870's by Charles Taze Russell and his associates.
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society was incorporated in 1884 with Russell as president.
He commanded the British Grand Fleet at the Battle of Jutland in May 1916, the only time the main British and German fleets met in combat.
Jellicoe then directed the campaign against German submarine warfare until December 1917.
He served in Egypt in 1882 and in the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900.
Jellicoe was knighted in 1907 and was made a member of the British nobility in 1918.
Jelly and jam are made from many kinds of fruit, including apples, apricots, blackberries, boysenberries, cherries, grapes, oranges, peaches, raspberries, and strawberries.
The proper firmness of jelly and jam is achieved by mixing sugar and a thickener with fruit juice that has a high acid content, and then boiling the mixture.
Jelly and jam serve as a means of preserving fruit because their high sugar content allows them to be stored at room temperature for months without spoiling.
Margaret McWilliams Jellyfish is the common name of a type of sea animal that biologists call a medusa.
Jellyfish range in size from species that are no larger than a pea to an arctic jellyfish that may be about 7 feet in diameter.
Jellyfish get their names from the jellylike material beJellyfish 89 tween the two layers of cells that make up the animal's body.
This substance serves as a skeleton to support the fragile body wall and to help the jellyfish maintain buoyancy in the water.
A short tube, which contains the mouth, hangs from the center of the body like a bell clapper.
Another group of projections, called tentacles, hang down from the edges of the body.
Jellyfish are classified as cnidarians, a phylum that includes corals, sea anemones, and hydras.
Large jellyfish make up the class Scyphozoa (pronounced sy fuh ZOH uh) and are called scyphozoan jellyfish.
Scyphozoan jellyfish are often seen at the coast and are sometimes called sea nettles.
About the size of a soup bowl, they may be pale orange, pink, blue, or other colors.
Instead, its body, shaped like an open umbrella, is supported by a thick layer of a jellylike substance called mesogloea.
The jellyfish’s tentacles contain stinging cells that inject a paralyzing poison into its prey.
Jellyfish swim by expanding the body like an opening umbrella, then pulling it together again rapidly.
This squeezes water out from beneath the body and the jellyfish moves upward.
On its way down, it catches small animals that touch its tentacles or oral arms.
These parts contain stinging cells that explode when touched, driving tiny toxic threads into the victim and paralyzing it.
Some jellyfish can inflict painful and even dangerous stings to people.
Jellyfish called sea wasps inject their victims with a poison that is deadlier than any snake 90 Jemison, Mae Carol Bob and Valerie Taylor, Bruce Coleman Inc.
The sea wasp is a jellyfish found mainly in the waters of the Great Barrier Reef off the coast of Australia.
A severe sting froma sea wasp can kill a person within three minutes. venom.
Some people have died less than three minutes after being stung by a sea wasp.
Sea wasps are found near the coasts of northern Australia and the Philippines.
Each egg develops into a tiny polyp, a stage in which the animal looks like a hollow cylinder.
The jellyfish, when they reach a certain size, detach from the polyp and develop into adult jellyfish.
L Muscatine See also Animal ; Hydra; Portuguese man-of-war; Sea anemone.
Jemison, Mae Carol , an American astronaut and physician, became the first black woman to travel in space.
In September 1992, she made an eightday flight on the spacecraft Endeavour.
Aboard the spacecraft, Jemison conducted the first experiment that fertilized frog eggs in space.
She also studied the loss of bone tissue experienced by people and other animals in orbiting spacecraft.
Her research was aimed at determining how gravity affects the development of complex organisms.
Jemison was born in Decatur, Alabama, and moved to Chicago as a young child.
From 1983 until 1985, she was the Area Peace Corps Medical Officer for Sierra Leone and Liberia.
She became the director of the Jemison Institute for Advancing Technology in Developing Countries at Dartmouth College.
She was born at sea while her parents were coming from Ireland to America.
Like most children who were taken captive, Mary was adopted into an Indian family.
When white settlers moved nearby, they became interested in her life story.
Thomas , was a Maryland signer of the Constitution of the United States.
He attended nearly every session of the Constitutional Convention in 1787.
Jenifer did not play a leading role in the debates, but he consistently supported efforts to develop a strong national government.
From 1775 to 1777, Jenifer was president of the Maryland Council of Safety.
From 1778 to 1782, he was a member of the Second Continental Congress and the Congress of the Confederation.
Joan R Gundersen Jenkins, Roy Harris , is a British political leader and author.
He was also chancellor of the exchequer from 1967 to 1970 and home secretary from 1965 to 1967 and from 1974 to 1976.
From 1977 to 1981, he served as president of the Commission of the European Community, an economic organization that was later incorporated into the European Union.
NASA Mae Carol Jemison Jenkins was born in Abersychan, Wales, near Merthyr Tydfil.
Richard Rose Jenne, jeh NAY, also called Djenné, is a small city in Mali.
From the 1200's to the 1700's, it was one of the centers of Muslim civilization in West Africa.
Jenne was protected from military attack by high river waters during the rainy season and by a wall.
Salt from desert mines and cloth, copper, and silver from north of the Sahara were traded in Jenne for gold, kola nuts, leather, and other products of regions south of the desert.
Jenne had a school that was famous in the study of law, medicine, and Islam.
Jenner, Edward , a British physician, discovered vaccination as a means of preventing smallpox.
Before his time, no parents counted their children safe until all had passed through smallpox.
This disease was Lansiné Kaba Edward Jenner, right, gave the first vaccination for smallpox to James Phipps in England in 1796, be/ow.
Jenner used cowpox matter that had been taken from the infected hand of Sarah Nelmes, be/ow right.
It was common knowledge in Jenner's time that a person could catch smallpox only once.
Many people tried to inoculate themselves with matter from smallpox sores.
They hoped to catch a light case of the disease, and then be immune to it for the rest of their lives.
Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, an English author, had introduced this method into England in 1718.
Jenner began experimenting in his home town, Berkeley, Gloucestershire.
Many people there believed that dairymaids who had caught cowpox could not catch smallpox.
Cowpox is a minor disease that causes a few sores on the hands but carries little danger of disfigurement or death.
In 1796, Jenner took matter from the hand of Sarah Nelmes, a local dairymaid.
Jenner then made two cuts on the arm of James Phipps, a healthy eight-year-old boy, and inserted the matter from one of Sarah's cowpox sores.
Forty-eight days later, Jenner introduced smallpox matter into the boy's arm.
Ordinarily fatal, the smallpox matter had no effect, because the boy had been vaccinated with cowpox matter.
He then went to London to make his discovery known to the medical world.
In 1799, he published Further Observations on the Variolae Vaccinae or Cowpox, which he wrote chiefly as a reply to people who opposed vaccination.
After 1800, vaccinations became accepted as a means to prevent smallpox.
Parliament granted him 10,000 pounds in 1802, and another 20,000 pounds in 1806, because he devoted so much of his time to his discovery that he lost income from his regular medical practice.
In 1770 he went to London to study medicine under John Hunter, a British surgeon, and at Saint George's Hospital in London.
He returned to Berkeley, where he began practicing medicine, and he remained there most of his life.
Jenner, Sir William , a British physician, studied certain acute communicable diseases and did much to advance their treatment.
Jenner's efforts have made possible a more practical treatment of these diseases.
His works include the papers “On the Identity and Non-Identity of Typhoid Fever’ and “Diphtheria, Its Symptoms and Treatment,’ as well as clinical lectures.
He served as president of the Royal College of Physicians from 1881 to 1888.
He became an extremely 92 Jennet successful and prominent practitioner in the field of medicine.
He designed the Home Insurance Building in Chicago, often considered the world’s first metal-frame skyscraper.
To support the buildings upper floors, Jenney's design used metal columns and beams, rather than traditional stone and brick.
This method greatly reduced the building's weight, making it possible to build taller structures.
In 1868, he established an office in Chicago, specializing in commercial buildings.
During the 1870's, he trained several men who later became leaders of a style of architecture called the Chicago School They included Daniel Hudson Burnham, William Holabird, Martin Roche, and Louis Henri Sullivan.
Jensen, YEHN zuhn, J Hans , a German physicist, shared the 1963 Nobel Prize in physics with Maria Goeppert Mayer and Eugene Paul Wigner.
Working independently, Jensen and Mayer prepared almost identical papers on the shell structure of atomic nuclei.
They showed that atomic nuclei possess shells similar to the electron shells of atoms.
This allows a systematic arrangement of nuclei according to their properties.
Jenson, /EHN suhn or zhahn SAWN, Nicolas (1415?1480), was a French printer who perfected roman-style type.
In 1470, he designed a style of type that influenced nearly all later roman types.
In 1458, he went to Mainz, Germany, to study the process of printing books with movable type.
Peter M VanWingen Jerboa, juhr BOH uh, is a mammal that looks like a tiny kangaroo.
Jerboas are fawn-colored (light, yellowishbrown) and have pointed ears, buttonlike eyes, and long whiskers.
They live in deserts Bettmann Archive William Le Baron Jenney WORLD BOOK illustration by John D Dawson The jerboa looks like a tiny kangaroo, but it is really a rodent.
Like the kangaroo, the jerboa leaps away on its strong hind legs when startled, and it uses its long tail for balance. and dry areas in Africa, Asia, and eastern Europe.
The feather-footed jerboa, one of the most widespread species, is found from the central part of Russia through Mongolia to northern China.
Jerboas and kangaroo rats, which live in the United States, are so similar that it is hard to tell the two animals apart.
Study of the skulls and teeth of the two animals show that they had quite different ancestors.
But, in the dry regions in which they live, similar features developed in both animals.
Jeremiah perceived, to his great sorrow and pain, that the sin of the people of Judah, like that of all nations, would bring about punishment.
When he proclaimed this message and called for repentance, he was arrested and nearly lynched as a traitor.
He survived the destruction of Jerusalem, and his prophecies became ones of comfort, restoration, and hope for a new moral order.
Much of what is known about Biblical prophets and prophecy comes from the book.
Jeremiah consists of four main sections, collected during the prophets life and in the century following.
The first 25 chapters mostly record Jeremiah’s haunting visions, oracles of judgment, and laments.
Chapters 26 to 45 consist mostly of speeches by Jeremiah and stories about him.
The last chapter is a historical appendix describing the fall of Jerusalem.
In 1967, Israel defeated Jordan, Egypt, and Syria in a war and occupied the West Bank and other Arab territory.
In 1993, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed an agreement that named Jericho as the first West Bank area to be given a form of Palestinian self-rule.
In May 1994, Israeli occupation of Jericho ended and Palestinian control began.
Peter Gubser Jeroboam, jer uh BOH uhm, is the name of two kings who ruled the northern kingdom of Israel.
He had been an official under Solomon, but he opposed Solomon's policies and took refuge in Egypt.
Jeroboam revived two ancient shrines—one at Bethel and one at Dan—to free his people from dependence on the religious center in Jerusalem, which was in Judah.
The nation made economic advances but also experienced political corruption and oppression of the poor.
J Maxwell Miller Jerome, Saint , was a great Biblical scholar of the Christian church.
Jerome’s version, known as the Vu/gate, served as the authorized translation of the Bible in the Roman Catholic Church for hundreds of years.
Jerome produced many important religious works besides his Bible translation.
Jerome also wrote against the ideas of the British monk Pelagius and the early Christian philosopher Origen.
JeJersey 93 a OH"" S anat ~ Oil painting on wood panel by Jan van Eyck; Detroit Institute of Arts, City Appropriation Saint Jerome was a great Biblical scholar of the early church.
In the 370s, he lived for several years as a monk in the Syrian Desert.
There, he and Saint Paula founded monasteries for men and women and established a resthouse for travelers.
It is the southernmost island of the group and lies off the west coast of Normandy—a region of France—in the English Channel.
It has an area of about 45 square miles and a population of about 80,000.
Farmers on the island grow early potatoes, tomatoes, and other vegetables.
The chief executive is a lieutenant governor appointed by the British ruler.
Jersey was originally made from wool, but now it is made from a variety of fibers.
It was first used to make clothing for fishing crews on the island of Jersey in the English Channel.
It is often used to make such garments as dresses, suits, lingerie, and sportswear.
During the 1630's, Dutch settlers arrived in what is now the Jersey City area.
They named the city for Jersey, the largest of the Channel Islands in the English Channel off the coast of France.
Its leading industries produce chemicals, clothing, electrical equipment, food products, paper products, and textile products.
Tunnels under the Hudson River serve cars, buses, trucks, and trains traveling between the two cities.
The voters elect the mayor and the nine council members to four-year terms.
Delaware Indians lived in what is now the Jersey City area before the Dutch set up a trading post there in the 1620's.
Two railroad terminals were established there in 1834 and helped bring industry to the area.
Rapid industrial growth caused the city’s population to rise from 6,856 in 1850 to 29,226 in 1860.
Frank Hague, one of the nation’s last city political “bosses,” served as mayor of Jersey City from 1917 until 1947.
The population declined from the 1950's through the 1980's because many people and businesses moved to the suburbs.
The Journal Square Transportation Center, which consists of a rapid transit railroad station, bus terminal, and shopping area, opened in 1974.
This program, continuing into the 2000's, has increased the city’s affordable commercial and residential space and has attracted many corporations to the city.
This view shows Jerusalem from the east as seen from the Mount of Olives.
The golden Dome of the Rock, a Muslim shrine, rises above the walls of the Old City, Jerusalem’s oldest district.
Jerusalem Jerusalem is the capital and largest city of Israel and one of the world’s holiest cities.
It is also one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world.
For centuries, Jerusalem has been a spiritual center to Jews, Christians, and Muslims.
Jews consider Jerusalem a holy city because it was their religious and political center during Biblical times.
Christians consider Jerusalem holy because many events in the life of Jesus Christ took place there.
Muslims also revere the city and believe that the Prophet Muhammad rose to heaven from there.
The remainder is mostly Muslims, plus a small number of Christians, including Roman Catholics, Eastern Catholics, Protestants, and members of Eastern Orthodox Churches.
After it begins on Friday night, much of Jerusalem closes down and most public transportation stops.
The city is surrounded on the north, east, and south by the West Bank, a disputed territory inhabited by both Palestinians and Israelis.
In 1949, at the end of the first Arab-Israeli War, Jerusalem was divided between Israel and Jordan.
Chief executive—mayor; elected by the people to a four-year term, Legis/ature—Municipal Council of 31 members; elected by the people to a five-year term. 94b Jerusalem © George Chan, Photo Researchers The Western Wall in the Old City is the holiest site in Judaism.
Jews from throughout the world come to pray at the wall and insert messages and prayers in its crevices.
GEORGE'S CATHEORAL Mount a TOMBS OF TH PROPHETS isto MUSEUM”, oO Qe 5 Miles B Kilometers western part of the city.
Jordan controlled the eastern section, including the Old City, a walled section of Jerusalem dating from Biblical times.
Jerusalem today is claimed by both the Palestinians and the Israelis as their capital.
The Old City, which occupies much of the area of Biblical Jerusalem, is the historical heart of the city. it covers a rectangular area of about 5 square mile (1 square kilometer) in the eastern part of Jerusalem.
The Old City is enclosed by stone walls about 40 feet high and 2; miles {4 kilometers) long.
Although Jerusalem has always been a walled city, its present walls were built during the 1500's.
Until the late 1800's, these gates were closed at night to protect inhabitants.
The skyline of the Old City is dominated by a Muslim shrine known as the Dome of the Rock.
The shrine stands on a raised area called the Temple Mount, the site of the first and second Jewish Temples in ancient times.
The Old City is divided into four neighborhoods—the Armenian, Christian, Jewish, and Muslim quarters.
The Armenian quarter is occupied primarily by members of the Armenian Church, an Eastern Orthodox Church.
The largest religions in the Christian quarter are the Roman Catholic Church and Greek Orthodox Church.
Most inhabitants of the Jewish and Muslim quarters are followers of Judaism and Islam, respectively.
The narrow cobblestone lanes that wind through the Old City have remained largely unchanged for hundreds of years.
The busiest streets are the suqs(markets), which have small, windowless shops that sell food, pottery, jewelry, and souvenirs.
The area had a poor sanitation system and inadequate supplies of electric power and water.
After |srael took control in 1967, it expanded public services into the Old City, including modern electric and water systems, garbage collection, and social welfare programs.
The main downtown area of Jerusalem centers on a triangle formed by King George Street, Jaffa Road, and Ben-Yehuda Street in West Jerusalem.
Fashionable shops, hotels, restaurants, and tall office buildings line these streets.
Several modern public buildings in West Jerusalem are located in a neighborhood called Givat Ram.
Jerusalem 95 1/2 Mile 1 Kilometer WORLD BOOK map The Old City, in eastern Jerusalem, contains many sites sacred to Christianity, Islam, and Judaism.
The city is divided into the Armenian, Christian, Jewish, and Muslim quarters.
A neighborhood known as Mea Shearim, north of downtown, is the home of many Orthodox Jews.
The huge Hadassah Medical Center stands nearby, with its famous stained glass windows designed by the Russian-born artist Marc Chagall.
Also in the area is Yad Vashem, a memorial museum dedicated to the victims of the Holocaust, the Nazi campaign to exterminate the Jews.
East Jerusalem, north of the Old City, is where most of Jerusalem's Arabs live.
Some neighborhoods in East Jerusalem are run-down, with old, neglected housing.
Israel built several modern Jewish neighborhoods, including Ramat Eshkol and Gilo, after taking control of East Jerusalem in 1967.
Holy places Jerusalem has a central place in the worship, doctrine, and daily practice of Judaism, Christianity, and islam.
The city’s large number of synagogues, churches, mosques, and other religious institutions reflects the significance of the city for all three faiths.
According to tradition, Jerusalem is where God ordered the patriarch Abraham to sacrifice his son, Isaac, to Him.
The Jews built their Temple, the center of Jewish worship in ancient times, at the site of Abraham's sacrifice on the Temple Mount in the Old City.
Two successive buildings, the First Temple and the Second Temple, stood at the site.
The First Temple housed the Ark of the Covenant, a sacred chest holding the tablets inscribed with the Ten Commandments.
The Western Wall is the only surviving part of the Second Temple and Judaism’s most sacred shrine.
It is a stone retaining wall that reinforced the western side of the Temple Mount in ancient times.
The wall is sometimes called the Wailing Wall because of the sorrowful prayers said there to mourn the destroyed Temple.
Other sites in the city sacred to the Jews include King David's tomb on Mount Zion in West Jerusalem, and the Jewish Cemetery and the Tombs of the Prophets on the Mount of Olives, a hill just east of the Old City.
Many sites associated with Biblical figures are sacred to Christians, too.
Many monasteries, convents, shrines, and religious seminaries in Jerusalem mark events in the life of Jesus Christ and in the formation of the Christian Church.
The Last Supper supposedly took place in a room known as the Cenacle (also called Coenaculum/ on Mount Zion.
The Church of the Holy Sepulcher in the Old City occupies the site said to be the place of Jesus's Crucifixion , as well as His burial and Resurrection.
The building stands at The Church of the Holy Sepulcher is in the Christian Quarter of the Old City.
The church stands on Calvary, the site where, according to Christian tradition, Jesus Christ was crucified.
Jesus was last seen by His followers on the Mount of Olives before He ascended to heaven.
Jerusalem is Islam’s third holiest city, after Mecca and Medina in Saudi Arabia.
According to tradition, the Prophet Muhammad originally selected Jerusalem as the qib/a, the direction the faithful should face during prayer.
However, the prophet redirected his followers to face Mecca instead of Jerusalem when praying, to symbolize the independence of Islam.
This change helped ease the tension that had existed between Muslims and Jews.
Muhammad is said to have as} cended to heaven from a stone now enclosed by a golden-domed shrine called the Dome of the Rock.
The people of Jerusalem Nearly three-fourths of Jerusalem's people are Jews.
Palestinian Arabs make up nearly all the remaining onefourth of the population.
Growing numbers of Jews also live in new neighborhoods in East Jerusalem.
The central business district, in West Jerusalem, is almost entirely Jewish, and the markets of the Old City are mostly Arab.
The population of Jerusalem has grown substantially rival > > —— ""han errreseeseUres Lr Ben-Yehuda Street is a popular commercial area in downtown Jerusalem.
The portion of the street shown above is a mall closed to automobile traffic.
Residents of Jerusalem and tourists visit the street for its shopping and to relax at the area's many cafes and restaurants.
Jerusalem 97 The Cardo in the Jewish Quarter of the Old City is a street dating back to Roman and Byzantine times.
It is now the main entry to the Jewish Quarter from the Christian and Muslim sections of the Old City. israel Ministry of Tourism 98 Jerusalem Israel Ministry of Tourism An Arab market in the Old City attracts shoppers seeking traditional arts and crafts.
According to Christian tradition, Jesus Christ carried His cross down this street on the way to His Crucifixion. since Israel became independent in 1948.
The city continues to add to its population through both natural growth and immigration.
Many others are Jews who have immigrated to Israel from countries around the world.
Large numbers have come from Poland, Russia, and other Eastern European countries; from other Middle Eastern countries; and from northern Africa, including Ethiopia.
As a result, Jerusalem’s Jewish citizens represent a mixture of cultures and nationalities.
Jerusalem's Jewish citizens also differ in the extent to which they follow the laws and practices of Judaism.
Some people, called secular Jews, have a strong sense of Jewish identity but observe few religious traditions.
A group of extremely traditional Orthodox Jews called haredim make up about a third of Jerusalem’s Jews and are the fastest-growing group in the city.
Many haredim follow ways of life that developed among Jewish communities in Eastern Europe, Spain, and North Africa hundreds of years ago.
Many of these haredim speak a Germanic language called Yiddish along with Hebrew and dress in traditional styles of the 1800's.
Many of the men wear long black coats, black or fur-trimmed hats, and beards or dangling side curls.
The women typically wear long coats and dresses, black stockings, and headscarves or wigs to follow religious laws that call for modesty.
Confrontations have occasionally developed between Jews of different religious convictions over observances of Jewish law.
Many extremely religious Jews believe that only a life of prayer and religious study is proper for the holy city.
They also have demanded that their neighborhood streets be closed to traffic during the Jewish Sabbath, from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday.
They believe that only the Messiah, whom God will send, can establish the Jewish state.
The Old City contains architectural examples from each major period in the city’s history.
Many ancient historical sites and places of worship stand near modern shopping centers and industrial zones.
Architecture from the late 1800's and early 1900's displays European influences.
Usefulness rather than style characterizes new apartment buildings constructed by the government as housing for immigrants.
Culture Jerusalem can be described as a vast open-air museum because of the many archaeological sites throughout the area.
The city also has many indoor museums, some Jerusalem 99 Mea Shearim is a center of Orthodox Jewish life in Jerusalem.
In addition to apartments, Mea Shearim includes many religious schools called yeshivas as well as stores that sell religious books and religious articles. tsrael Ministry of Tourism dealing with the city’s Biblical history.
Notable museums include the Rockefeller Museum and the Bible Lands Museum, both famous for their archaeological treasures; the L A Mayer Museum of Islamic Art, which displays Islamic textiles, pottery, and other arts and crafts; and the Israel Museum, which has collections of fine art and archaeology.
The Israel Museum includes a white© Esaias Baitel, Gamma/Liaison Housing developments have been constructed on the outskirts of Jerusalem to accommodate the large population increase in the city since the 1967 war.
The distinctively designed development called Ramat Polin, above, in northwestern Jerusalem houses many Orthodox Jewish families.
Students from throughout the world attend seminaries there to become rabbis, ministers, priests, or Islamic religious leaders.
Jerusalem's Islamic seminaries are supported by Muslim foundations called wagfs , which receive income from endowed land and other property throughout the Islamic world.
The foundations also support Islamic law schools, prayer rooms, colleges, orphanages, homes for the poor, public fountains, baths, mosques, and tombs.
Jerusalem also has many schools called yeshivas for study of the Talmud, a collection of Jewish religious and civil laws.
The Jerusalem Symphony Orchestra plays regular concerts at Henry Crown Symphony Hall.
Music lovers can also enjoy concerts by chamber music ensembles and choirs, and performances by several dance companies.
Night life flourishes at many of the city’s restaurants and cafes, and at motion-picture theaters.
Local and international festivals provide a wide variety of cultural events that range from opera and theater to classical music and rock music.
The city has hundreds of hotels, restaurants, travel agents, taxis, and guides to serve tourists.
Construction has become a major source of employment as the city continues to grow.
Jerusalem is also the headquarters of many technology companies and government-related activities.
Jerusalem has almost no heavy industry but does have some modern factories.
They produce chemicals, clothing, leather goods, machinery, and plastics.
There are also printing, diamond-polishing, and food-processing industries.
OldYad Vashem is a memorial in western Jerusalem to the Jews who were killed during the Holocaust, the mass murder of European Jews by the Nazis.
The memorial includes an archive, a shrine, a monument, the Avenue of the Righteous Gentiles, and a Museum of Holocaust Art The scene at the left comes from the permanent exhibition at Yad Vashem called “Warning and Witness,” which illustrates the horrors of the Nazi period. tsrael Ministry of Tourism er handicraft industries include embroidery, pottery and glassware, silverwork, and wood carvings.
The citizens of Jerusalem elect a 31-member Municipal Council for fiveyear terms.
About 1,000 B.C, King David captured the city from a people called the Jebusites and made it the capital of the Israelites.
David's son, King Solomon, built a magnificent place of worship, the First Temple, in his capital city.
Solomon also built a great palace complex consisting of many buildings.
The returning Jews then rebuilt their center of worship, the Second Temple.
Alexander and the kings who succeeded him granted administrative power to the priests and allowed the Jews to follow their own religion.
Judah Maccabee’s family, the priestly Hasmoneans, established an independent state that lasted about 80 years.
In 63 B.C,, the Roman general Pompey the Great captured Jerusalem and made it part of the Roman Empire.
In 54 B.C, the Roman general Marcus Licinius Crassus stole the Temple's funds.
Herod began a huge building program and made major architectural changes in the city.
Roman rule was generally peaceful, but riots were sometimes set off by leaders who claimed to be sent by God to preserve Judaism.
The Romans arrested most of these leaders, who were called Zealots, and crucified them.
Jesus of Nazareth arrived in Jerusalem in about A.D. 28 and declared the coming of the Kingdom of God.
They brought Him before the Roman procurator, Pontius Pilate, who sentenced Him to be crucified.
Jerusalem remained largely uninhabited until about 130, when the Roman emperor Hadrian announced plans to build a Roman city on the site.
He renamed the city Aelia Capitolina and built temples to Roman gods, including one to the god Jupiter on the Temple Mount.
Hadrian drove out the rebels three years later and tried to end all Jewish hope of regaining Jerusalem by prohibiting Jews from visiting or living there.
By the early 300’s, the ban against Jews visiting the city was no longer strictly enforced.
After Constantine the Great became the sole emperor in 324, he made Christianity the official religion of the Roman Empire.
He replaced Jerusalem's Roman structures with Christian monuments and built several churches there, including the Church of the Holy Sepulcher.
In 395, the Roman Empire split into the West Roman Empire and the East Roman Empire, also called the Byzantine Empire.
Byzantine forces regained control but lost Jerusalem again in 638, this time to Muslim Arabs.
The Caliph Abd al-Malik constructed the Dome of the Rock, which was completed in 691.
During the 900’s and 1000's, a number of Muslim groups fought for control of Jerusalem.
The Crusaders killed both Muslims and Jews and established a Crusader state called the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem served as capital of the kingdom until 1187, when the Muslim leader Saladin reconquered the city.
Saladin repaired the city walls, and Muslims and Jews returned to the city in large numbers.
The city was controlled by the Mamelukes, Muslims from Egypt, from 1250 to 1516.
Then the Ottoman Empire, a Muslim empire centered in what is now Turkey, took the city.
At first, most of the city’s population were Muslims, and even Christians greatly outnumbered Jews.
By the mid-1800's, construction had spread outside of the walls of the Old City.
New communities in West Jerusalem included Yemin Moshe, constructed in 1860 with the financial assistance of Sir Moses Montefiore, a Jewish philanthropist from England.
Orthodox Jews built several neighborhoods north and west of the Old City, particularly Mea Shearim, established in the mid-1870's.
Christian and Muslim groups also built new communities outside the walls.
In December 1917, during World War I, British troops under General Edmund Allenby captured Jerusalem and ended Ottoman control over the city.
A month earlier, the British government had issued the Balfour Declaration, an official document supporting a national homeland for Jews in Palestine.
The League of Nations, a forerunner of the United Nations, made Palestine a mandated territory—that is, an area administered by Britain, under the League’s supervision, in preparation for self-government.
Jewish immigration to Jerusalem increased during the 1920's and 1930's.
One was the increasing strength of the Zionist movement, which advocated a Jewish homeland in Palestine.
The other was the rise of the Nazi regime in Germany, which had anti-Jewish policies.
Many new Jewish neighborhoods, such as Rehavia and Beit Hakerem, were established, primarily in West Jerusalem.
Anti-Zionist feelings developed among the Arabs in Palestine who wanted to create an independent Arab state.
The UN voted to end the British mandate and divide Palestine between the Arabs and the Jews.
In May 1948, British control ended and Israel declared its independence.
By the end of 1948, Israeli soldiers held West Jerusalem, and Jordanian troops controlled East Jerusalem and the Old City.
The loss of the Western Wall and other Jewish shrines bitterly disappointed the Israelis.
Armistices between Israel and neighboring Arab countries ended the war in 1949.
This strip of land formed the frontier between Israeli and Jordanian territory.
The border ran along the west wall of the Old City and extended north and south of the wall.
However, many countries refused to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital because of the UN plan to make it an international city.
These countries instead established their embassies in Tel Aviv, Israel's chief commercial, financial, and industrial center.
After a brief conflict that Israelis call the Six-Day War and others call the June War, Israel captured the Old City and East Jerusalem.
Huge crowds of joyful Jews entered the Old City for the first time in 19 years to pray at the Western Wall.
Israel extended the boundaries of Jerusalem to make East Jerusalem, the Old City, and nearby villages part of the city.
The people of East Jerusalem were granted the same rights and responsibilities that all other Israeli residents had, and were given the opportunity to apply for Israeli citizenship.
In 1980, the Knesset passed a law restating Israel's position that Jerusalem is the capital of Israel.
The law also guaranteed protection for the holy places of all religions and continued free access to them.
The future of Jerusalem remains one of the most complex and delicate issues in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Palestine Liberation Organization, the political body that represents the Palestinian people, would like to establish an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.
The Israeli government remains committed to keeping Jerusalem as both the Israeli capital and an undivided city.
Arab-Israeli conDavid Mount of Olives flict Gethsemane Muslims Ark of the Hezekiah Palestine Covenant Israel Saladin Balfour DeclaraJesus Christ Solomon tion Jews West Bank Bethlehem Judah Maccabee Western Wall Calvary Judea Zion Crusades Mandated terZionism Cyrus the Great ritory Outline Il.
The plant gets that part of its name from the potatolike tubers it produces underground.
The tubers are also used as food for livestock, and in the production of fructose (also called /evulose}) a type of sugar.
The plants grow quickly WORLD BOOK illustration by Nancy Lee Walter The Jerusalem artichoke is related to the sunflower.
This plant produces yellow flowers. from tubers left in the earth and can become a serious weed pest.
Growers remove the tubers from the soil each year and plant new ones the following year to control the plants’ growth.
Jester was a person whose duty it was often to amuse kings, queens, nobles, and their family and guests. — — Ee eee wee a The jester was sometimes called the court fool.
Jesters earned their support with their wit and by performing antics much like those of today’s clowns.
He wore a hood, sometimes decorated with an ass’s ears or the head or comb of a cock.
He also wore bells attached to his skirts, the elbows of his coat, his long, pointed shoes, and the peak of his hood.
Before that, a history of William the Conqueror (who lived in the 1000's) names his court fool, Goles.
He was almost a member of the family, taking part in private gatherings, sharing family secrets, and playing with the children.
It is easy to understand how William Shakespeare's Hamlet felt when gravediggers uncovered the skull of his father's jester, Yorick.
Don B Wilmeth Jesuits, /EHZH u ihts or JEHZ uh wihts, are members of a Roman Catholic religious order of men.
The order operates more than 4,000 schools, colleges, and universities throughout the world.
In the United States, the Jesuits direct about 45 high schools and 28 colleges and universities.
The order has produced many important explorers, missionaries, scientists, theologians, and writers.
For example, Saint Francis Xavier, a Spanish Jesuit, converted thousands of people in the Far East during the 1500s.
Jacques Marquette, a French Jesuit, helped explore the Mississippi River in the late 1600's.
Gerard Manley Hopkins, an English Jesuit, ranks among the leading poets of the 1800's.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, a French Jesuit, became a leading pa/eonto/ogist (expert on prehistoric life) and theologian in the 1900s.
The best-known Jesuit saints include Robert Bellarmine, Peter Canisius, and Isaac Jogues.
Membership and training. |mmediately after entering the order, a Jesuit begins two years of spiritual training.
After training, he takes vows of poverty and of obedience to his superiors.
The brothers are full members of the order but are not ordained to the priesthood.
The professed take a vow of special obedience to the pope in addition to taking vows of celibacy, obedience, and poverty.
Jesuits must study for many years before becoming spiritual coadjutors or professed.
This period of study, which usually lasts about 15 years for a high school graduate, provides both spiritual and academic training.
A Jesuits superiors determine if he is qualified for the rank of professed.
They base their decision on the individual's record in his studies and on his qualities of spiritual leadership.
For administrative purposes, the order is divided into regions called provinces, viceprovinces, and mission territories.
An official called a provincial supervises each province and vice-province.
Provinces that share a common Janguage or cultural background are grouped together into ass/stancies.
An assistant serves as an adviser to the superior general on matters involving each assistancy.
The superior general is elected for life by a congregation made up of assistants, provincials, and elected delegates from the order.
The congregation also elects several principal assistants to the superior general.
But in 1544, the pope authorized the order to increase its membership without limit.
Ignatius wrote the order's constitutions , which have become models for hundreds of other Roman Catholic religious communities.
Under the leadership of Ignatius, the Jesuits grew to almost 1,000 members.
By the time he died in 1556, the order had become firmly established in Europe, primarily through its activities in education.
The Jesuits also conducted widespread missionary work in Africa, Asia, and North and South America.
The Jesuits aroused opposition as their membership and influence increased.
From 1814 until the 1960's, the Jesuits steadily increased their membership.
Today, the largest concentrations of Jesuits are in the United States and India.
Most Christians believe that He is the Son of God who was sent to earth to save humanity.
Even many people who are not Christians believe that He was a great and wise teacher.
The term Christis a title which was so closely associated with Jesus that it became part of His name.
Muhammad, the prophet of Islam, regarded JeSus as a great prophet and adopted many of His ideas.
Moral standards of equality, responsibility, and care for the weak owe much to Jesus lessons in brotherhood and kindness.
Four short books of the New Testament tell nearly all we know of the life of Jesus.
Christian tradition attributes the Gospels of Matthew and John to men who followed Jesus during His life.
The other two Gospels are attributed to men who became followers of Jesus after His death.
Today, many scholars doubt that any of the writers of the Gospels knew Jesus during His lifetime.
Other New Testament writings include the Epistles <. + aes ¥a eS * PAO RL at tah RS aa * CAS oi ee Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan, Italy The Last Supper was the final meal that Jesus shared with His 12 apostles.
This painting shows Jesus, seated in the center, just after He had told the apostles that one of them would betray Him.
The famous Italian artist Leonardo da Vinci finished painting the scene on a monastery wall about 1497. of Paul and the Acts of the Apostles.
They tell us about the early followers of Jesus after His death and include information about Jesus.
Jesus was born during the lifetime of Herod the Great, who ruled Palestine.
Herod died in 4 B.C., so Jesus must have been born no later than the year of Herod's death.
The day of His birth was first celebrated on December 25 in the early 300s.
The Gospels of Matthew and Luke tell of the people, places, and events connected with the birth of Jesus.
According to Matthew, Mary was betrothed (engaged to be married) to Joseph.
When Joseph discovered that Mary was pregnant, an angel appeared to him in a dream.
After Jesus was born, wise men traveled from the East to see the newborn Messiah.
But they had been warned not to go to Herod, and so they took another route home.
He ordered the deaths of all boys in Bethlehem 2 years old and younger.
An angel had appeared to Joseph in another dream and warned him about this decree.
After Herod died, they returned and settled in the town of Nazareth in Galilee.
The angel Gabriel visited Mary and announced that her child would be the Son of God and the Messiah that was promised in the Hebrew Bible.
After Mary and Joseph had done everything commanded by Jewish law, they returned with Jesus to Nazareth.
Luke says that when Jesus was 12 years old, He went with Mary and Joseph to Jerusalem for the feast of Passover.
He sat among the scholars in the Temple and amazed them with His knowledge of religion.
The only other remark in Luke about Jesus childhood is that “the Child grew, and waxed strong in The Adoration of the Shepherds , an oil oainting on canvas by Rembrandt; Alte Pinakotbek, Municb, Germany The birth of Jesus, called the Nativity, took place ina stable in Bethlehem, a small town in Judea.
This painting shows Mary and Joseph watching over Jesus while several shepherds worship Him.
At the age of 12, He went to Jerusalem with Joseph and Mary to celebrate the feast of Passover.
There He met with scholars in the Temple, above, and amazed them with His knowledge of religion. on wood by Piero della Francesca, the National Gallery, Landon Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist with water from the River Jordan.
In this painting, the three angels at the left watch the baptism while the Holy Spirit, in the form of a dove, appears above Jesus head.
According to Christian tradition, Jesus was born in Bethlehem and raised in Nazareth.
Jesus probably grew up in Nazareth and helped Joseph in his carpentry work.
Public life Jesus’ public life began after He was baptized by John the Baptist in Judea with water from the River Jordan.
John the Baptist preached repentance and baptized those who accepted his message.
The mission of Jesus was to announce that the Kingdom of God was coming, and that it had begun to arrive even as He announced it.
He did this both in words and in actions, by His miracles and His teaching.
By the “Kingdom of God,” Jesus meant a new state of affairs on earth, which God would bring about.
After Jesus baptism, He went to Galilee to begin to spread His message.
According to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, the first part of Jesus’ ministry was in Galilee and the area around it.
At the end of His ministry in Galilee, Jesus traveled to Jerusalem, where He died.
According to John, however, Jesus traveled between Galilee and Judea several times.
His miracles showed that what He said about the Kingdom of God was true.
In each miracle, the Kingdom of God broke into human life in a small way.
According to the Gospel of John, Jesus’ first miracle took place at a wedding feast at Cana.
According to the Gospel of Luke, Jesus performed another early miracle at the Sea of Galilee.
There, the apostle Peter caught so many fish that the weight of the fishing net almost sank the boat.
Another time, Jesus divided five loaves of bread and two fishes among 5,000 people so that everyone would have food.
Jesus performed other miracles that healed sick people or relieved them from other kinds of suffering.
The Gospel of John tells of Jesus’ miracle that brought His friend Lazarus back to life after Lazarus had been dead and buried for four days.
Jesus used His power to perform miracles in order to show the love and mercy of God.
In addition to proclaiming the Kingdom of God by His miracles, Jesus also proclaimed it by His teaching.
One of Jesus’ well-known parables, 7he Prodigal Son, is found in Luke 15:11-32.
The parable describes a father’s great joy at the return of his wayward son.
Jesus used this story to teach God's love and forgiveness for sinners who repent.
Jesus also told His followers what kind of life they would have to live in the Kingdom of God.
Jesus stressed that each person should treat others as he or she wished to be treated.
The beggar rejoices, far right, at being able to see for the first time. to fight back if they were attacked.
The Passion Jesus proclamation of the Kingdom of God was good news for many people.
They believed that Jesus changed accepted religious practices, such as the Sabbath laws.
But most of all, the leaders feared that His popularity would encourage a rebellion against the Roman Empire.
Jesus felt that He had come to save other people by giving His own life.
The Passion is a term used to indicate Jesus’ suffering during the final days of His life.
People cheered Him and covered His path with clothing and the branches of palm trees.
Many of them believed that He would bring a better life to the Jewish nation.
Jesus went into the Temple and drove out the men who were changing money and selling doves.
He taught that the house of God must be for prayer, and not for making money.
During the next few days, Jesus spent part of His time teaching in Jerusalem.
His followers Peter, James, and John are shown sleeping in the foreground.
In the background, Jesus’ betrayer Judas Iscariot leads the soldiers to the garden.
According to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, this supper was the Passover meal.
After the meal, Jesus and His disciples went to Gethsemane, a garden on the slope of the Mount of Olives, opposite the Temple.
According to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, Jesus prayed there in agony, knowing the things that were to happen to Him, but He submitted Himself to God's will.
According to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, they asked Him if He was the Messiah.
The Jewish leaders took Jesus before Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor of Judea.
They said that Jesus claimed to be King of the Jews and charged Him with treason against Rome.
According to the Gospel of Luke, Pilate found out that Jesus was a Galilean and sent Him Pr Christ on the Road to Calvary \ahout 1340), a tempera painting nn wood hy Simone Martini, the Louvre, Paris {Cliche Musees Nationaux) Jesus’ last hours.
According to the Gospel of John, a Roman soldier later pierced Jesus body in the side with his spear, right to Herod Antipas, the ruler of Galilee.
Herod mocked Jesus, dressed Him in a kingly robe, and sent Him back to Pilate.
It was the custom for the Roman governor to release one Jewish prisoner at the Passover season.
Pilate took Jesus and a condemned criminal named Barabbas onto the steps of his palace and told the crowd to choose which one should go free.
According to Matthew, Mark, and John, the Roman soldiers mocked Jesus for claiming to be King of the Jews.
They dressed Him in a red robe, placed a crown of thorns on His head, and put a reed in His hand.
The Gospel of John says that Jesus carried His own cross to the place of the Crucifixion.
According to the other Gospels, the soldiers made a man named Simon of Cyrene carry the cross.
According to both Matthew and Mark, Le Coup de Lance , an oil painting on wood by Peter Paul Rubens; Koninklijk Museum voor Schone Kunsten, Antwerp, Belgium & NG illuminated manuscript by the Limbourg brothers from the Duc de Berry's 7rés Riches Heures; Musee Conde, Chantilly, France The Resurrection of Jesus, as related in the Gospels, occurred on the third day after His Crucifixion.
In this picture, Jesus greets an angel on His tomb, while the Roman guards collapse on the ground in fear and awe.
After Jesus died, a disciple named Joseph of Arimathea took His body to a new tomb and sealed the tomb with a stone.
Christians refer to Jesus's return to life as His Resurrection, and celebrate it on Easter Sunday.
The Gospels tell how Mary Magdalene went to Jesuss tomb on Sunday morning.
The Gospels also record various appearances of Jesus after the discovery of the empty tomb.
According to the Acts of the Apostles, Jesus stayed on earth during the next 40 days and taught His disciples.
The early Christians The Resurrection of Jesus convinced His disciples that He was not only the one who announced the coming of the Kingdom of God, but also the Messiah, who would bring the Kingdom into being.
They believed that through His death and Resurrection, Jesus began to free the human race from all suffering and evil.
The disciples also believed that He would come again to complete the work He had begun.
The missionary activity of the apostle Paul helped to spread Christianity throughout the eastern Mediterranean area within 30 years after the death of Jesus.
Finally, in 313, Emperor Constantine the Great gave the Christians freedom of worship.
Eventually they came to see that He was not only the Messiah, but also the Son of God in a special sense not shared by anyone else.
The Christians explained the relationship of Jesus to God by means of the doctrine of the Trinity.
The doctrine of the Trinity explained why Jesus had absolute authority for His teachings and absolute power to forgive sins and give eternal life.
Annunciation Holy Grail New Testament Apostles Holy Week Palm Sunday Beatitudes Jerusalem Parable Bible (The New john the Baptist, Paul, Saint Testament) Saint Peter, Saint Christian Era Joseph Pilate, Pontius Christianity judas Iscariot Resurrection Christmas Lazarus Shroud of Turin Communion Magi Transfiguration Easter Mary Transubstantiation God Maundy Thursday __ Trinity Golden Rule Messiah Wandering Jew Good Friday Miracle Gospels Mount of Olives Outline I Early life Il.
Jet is a kind of coal so hard and uniform that it can be carved and polished to look like black glass.
Jet-propelled airplanes can reach much higher speeds than propeller-driven ones.
Jet propulsion also makes flight possible at extremely high altitudes—and even in outer space.
Jet engines cause less vibration than do piston engines, which are used in some airplanes to turn propellers.
This smoothness of operation results in a safer and more comfortable ride.
However, a jet engine burns more fuel than a piston engine that creates an equal amount of thrust.
About A.D. 60, the scientist Hero of Alexandria built a small toylike device that was probably the first jet engine.
The first flight of an airplane powered by a jet enHow a jet engine works gine occurred in Germany in 1939.
Since then, jet propulsion has powered aircraft of all types, including supersonic airliners and spacecraft that have journeyed to other planets.
How jet propulsion works The principle of jet propulsion can be demonstrated with a garden hose connected to a water supply.
When the nozzle at the end of the hose is closed, the water pushes in all directions against the inside of the nozzle.
It also pushes back against the water in the hose that is trying to squeeze into the nozzle.
When the nozzle is open, some of the water squirts out through the opening.
It releases the pressure pushing forward just inside the nozzle opening.
But the water that is still in the nozzle continues pressing backward and to the sides.
If you let go of the nozzle, the unbalanced, backward-pushing pressure will propel it backward.
The nozzle will move in the direction opposite that of the jet of water escaping from the nozzle.
The principle of jet propulsion was first described in 1687 by the English scientist Sir Isaac Newton in his third law of motion.
This law states that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
The equal and opposite reaction is the backward movement of the nozzle.
The pressure pushing in one direction is released in a powerful stream of jet exhaust.
The action of this exhaust escaping from the rear of the engine causes an equal and opposite reaction that pushes the engine forward.
For this reason, airplanes with jet engines cannot fly outside the earth's atmosphere.
The combustion gases push in all directions but can escape only at the rear of the engine.
The action of these gases accelerating as they leave the engine creates a reaction that pushes the engine in the opposite direction.
WORLD BOOK diagram by William Graham Fuel and air combustion ee Action—gases escape to the rear Power in a jet engine is produced by burning fuel in a combustion chamber.
The hot gases created by the burning of the fuel with a supply of air then rush out through a nozzle, creating jet thrust.
It is then compressed until it has from 3 to 40 times as much pressure as that of the outside air.
A liquid petroleum fuel similar to kerosene is the most commonly used jet engine fuel.
The mixture of fuel and air is ignited and the fuel burns, releasing a large amount of energy.
However, the remainder of the compressed air is mixed with the hot combustion gases to lower the temperature of the gases by about 50 percent.
This process cools the walls of the combustion chamber and other parts of the engine.
The mixture of gases then escapes through a nozzle at an extremely high speed.
The first jet-propulsion engines created thrust by accelerating a small amount of gas to great speeds.
Modern jet engines approach the efficiency of propeller engines, which move a large amount of air at a low speed, leaving little unused energy in the air.
The amount of thrust produced by a jet-propulsion engine is about the same at.all flight speeds.
But the amount of thrust generated by a propeller drops off as the flight speed increases.
Thus, jet-propelled aircraft can reach much higher flight speeds than propellerdriven aircraft can.
The thrust produced by an aircraft engine is expressed in pounds or newtons.
A test stand holds a running turbofan engine in order to measure the thrust the engine produces.
Turboprops and turbofans generate most of their thrust by turning propellers or propellerlike fans rather than by pure jet propulsion.
Jet engines also differ in the way they compress the air that enters the intake ducts.
An inlet duct scoops air into the turbojet and carries the air to the compressor.
The job of the inlet duct becomes more complicated in jet fighters and other aircraft that fly faster than the speed of sound.
Supersonic flight causes shock waves to develop in the air as it rushes through the inlet duct.
These shock waves remove energy from the air, which can reduce the engine's thrust.
However, a turbojet can reduce the loss of energy caused by such shock waves by continually adjusting the shape of the inside of the inlet duct.
Turbojets are equipped with either an axia/-flow compressor or a centrifugal-flow compressor.
An axial-flow compressor consists of several wheels with many small, winglike blades attached, as in an electric fan.
These wheels are arranged one behind another along a shaft that runs through their centers and turns them at high speeds.
Some axialflow compressors raise the air pressure to a level about 40 times that of the air entering the inlet duct.
A centrifugal-flow compressor squeezes the air by taking it in near the center of a rapidly spinning wheel and throwing the air out toward the rim.
As a result, they are used less frequently in turbojet engines than axial-flow compressors are.
After the air leaves the turbojet compressor, it enters the combustion chamber.
The photographs | on the opposite page show examples of aircraft that use these types of engines.
Compressor Combustion chamber Afterburner fuel injector Turbofan Air inlet Compressor Turbine Fan turbine Hot gases Fuel injector Combustion chomber Fan Turboprop Propeller Compressor Turbine Power turbine | Combustion chamber Air inlet Fuel injector A ramjet engine must be brought up to high speed by a rocket or another jet engine before it can operate.
In the combustion chamber, the compressed air is mixed with fuel supplied by the fuel injector and burned.
The pressure produced by the burning fuel and air sends hot exhaust gases out the jet nozzle and drives the engine forward.
For this reason, they have been used chiefly to propel guided missiles, such as the one shown at the right.
Turbojet engines have a compressor with fanlike blades that squeeze the incoming air.
The compressor blades also force the compressed air into a set of combustion chambers.
There, the compressed air is mixed with fuel and ignited, forming burning gases.
The gases expand rapidly and rush through the blades of a turbine, making it spin.
The turbine is connected by a shaft to the compressor and keeps the compressor turning.
An afterburner gives a turbojet extra thrust by supplying the hot exhaust gases with extra fuel.
Metal grids called flame holders prevent the fast-moving gases from blowing out the flames.
Turbojet engines power the F-5E Tiger Il fighter aircraft pictured at the right.
Turbofan engines resemble turbojet engines but have a huge propellerlike fan at the air inlet.
Most of the air drawn through the fan passes around the rest of the engine, creating thrust.
The rest of the air enters the enclosed engine, which operates like a turbojet to produce thrust.
It consists of a compressor, combustion chambers, and two kinds of turbines.
One turbine drives the compressor and the other, called a fan turbine, turns the fan.
By using two methods to produce thrust, a turbofan can create more thrust at low speeds than a turbojet can.
The turbojet engine is used chiefly to turn the propeller, which supplies most of the turboprop’s driving power.
The propeller rotates when burning gases from the combustion chambers turn the power turbine.
This turbine is connected to a shaft that drives the propeller by a system of gears.
When the hot gases escape from the engine, they provide a small amount of additional thrust Turboprop engines are most efficient at relatively low flight speeds.
They are smaller and lighter in weight than piston engines that produce the same amount of power.
Turboprops are widely used in small business aircraft, such as the Beechcraft Super King Air pictured at the right.
The rest of the air from the compressor is then mixed with these gases to cool them.
The combustion gases spin the turbine wheels, which rotate the shaft that turns the compressor.
A small amount of cold air is bled from the compressor through holes in the turbine blades to keep them from melting.
After passing through the turbine, the combustion gases rush out through the nozzle.
Nozzles designed for flight speeds below the speed of sound narrow gradually to the opening.
Nozzles designed for supersonic flight narrow and then flare out again.
This widening of the nozzle helps accelerate the gases beyond the speed of sound.
In a turbojet, the afterburner sits between the turbine and the nozzle.
In the afterburner, additional jet fuel is mixed with these gases and burned, greatly raising the temperature.
The energized gases then accelerate through the nozzle, reaching extremely high speeds.
However, the process of accelerating the gases uses a large amount of fuel.
For this reason, turbojets are used only for short periods, such as during emergency maneuvers, rapid take-offs, or steep climbs.
Turboprop is basically a turbojet that uses nearly all its power to turn a propeller.
The arrangement of the compressor, combustion chamber, and turbine in a turboprop is similar to that in a turbojet.
However, the turboprop also has a second turbine just to the rear of the turbine that turns the compressor.
Combustion gases spin the second turbine, which is sometimes called the power turbine.
This spinning motion is transferred by a shaft and a gearbox to the propeller.
There is still a little energy left in the combustion gases after they have turned the power turbine.
These gases shoot out of the nozzle, adding a small amount of jet thrust to the thrust produced by the propeller.
The turboprop is smooth running, reliable, and economical, but it is limited to subsonic flight speeds.
Turboprops are much smaller and lighter than piston engines that produce the same amount of power.
The Cessna Conquest, which is a small business airplane, and the Beechcraft 1900, a 19-passenger commuter airliner, use turboprops.
Turbofan is essentially a turbojet that uses part of its power to turn a large fan.
The fan is powered by a turbine and is enclosed in a duct at the front of the engine.
Most of the air is forced back along the outside of the engine, creating thrust.
Fuel is mixed with the compressed air and burned, and the hot gases are released to generate thrust.
By combining the two propulsion methods, a turbofan achieves some of the efficiency of a turboprop aircraft without sacrificing the high-speed performance of a turbojet.
The speed of gases leaving a turbofan is lower than the speed of turbojet exhaust.
Most military jets, including the Grumman F-14 Tomcat fighter and the Lockheed Martin F-16A Fighting Falcon, also are powered by turbofans.
This air is compressed by the ramming action of more air trying to enter the duct as the ramjet travels at high speed.
Fuel is mixed with the compressed air and burned, and the combustion gases are accelerated through the nozzle to create thrust.
The major disadvantage of the ramjet is that it functions poorly at subsonic flight speeds.
If sufficient airflow is not achieved, the combustion gases will exit both ends of the engine, and the engine could explode.
Such an occurrence is avoided by first accelerating a ramjet to supersonic operating speed by a turbojet or rocket.
The ramjet engages after there is an adequate highpressure flow of air through the engine.
In one type of ramjet, called a supersonic combination ramjet or scramjet, combustion takes place at supersonic air velocities through the engine.
A scramjet has flown at more than 7 times the speed of sound, and scientists believe scramjets may be able to fly at speeds approaching 15 times the speed of sound.
The United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration Hyper-X program is devoted to developing such aircraft.
It was powered by steam escaping from a hollow sphere through two nozzles that pointed in opposite directions.
The steam turned the sphere in much the same way that jets of water spin a rotating lawn sprinkler.
But jet engines were not used to power aircraft for nearly 1,900 years after Hero’s invention.
The growing tensions that led to World War II (19391945) accelerated the development of jet engines to propel aircraft.
This airplane, the Heinkel He-178, was powered by a turbojet designed by Hans von Ohain, a German physicist.
In Italy, the jet-propelled CaproniCampini CC2 airplane was built and flown in 1940.
A more successful turbojet soon was developed by Frank Whittle, an officer in the United Kingdoms Royal Air Force.
His engine powered the Gloster E 28/39, an experimental airplane that first flew in 1941.
The first successful jet fighter was the German Messerschmitt Me262, Wright-Patterson Air Force Museum The first jet aircraft was the German Heinkel He-178.
The plane was powered by a turbojet designed by Hans von Ohain, a German physicist. which began to fly combat missions near the end of World War Il.
During World War II, Germany pioneered the use of jet propulsion for guided missiles.
In 1947, the rocketpowered Bell X-1, built in the United States, became the first airplane to fly faster than the speed of sound.
During the 1950's, turbojets and turboprops began to power some commercial airliners.
Also at this time, ramjets propelled such early United States guided missiles as the Bomarc and Talos.
During the 1960's, the turbofan began to replace the turbojet on commercial and military aircraft.
Because of the turbofan’s efficiency and low noise, it came into widespread use in the 1970's.
Aerodynamics Motion (Newton's Jaws of moAircraft, Military tion) Airplane Rocket Aviation {A new age of flight) Space exploration Guided missile Outline I How jet propulsion works A The principle of jet propulsion B Power in a jet engine ll.
In 1958 and 1959, the laboratory sent two probes ona mission to explore the space between the planets.
Engineers at the center guided the Ranger space probes that photographed the moon.
The engineers also guided the Surveyor spacecraft that made the first unmanned United States moon landings.
These missions, flown from 1962 to 1968, prepared the way for astronauts to land on the moon.
Mariner probes controlled from the laboratory have reached Venus, Mars, and Mercury.
The laboratory also controlled the Viking probes, which studied the atmosphere and soil of Mars during the mid-1970's.
It designed and operated the PioneerSaturn and the Voyager probes, which flew past Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune in the late 1970's and the 1980's.
The Magellan probe, controlled from the laboratory, began mapping the surface of Venus in 1990.
The laboratory also participates in missions to observe the earth's atmosphere and surface from satellites.
A tew students at the California Institute of Technology established the laboratory in 1936 as a place for rocket research.
Daniel J Kevles Jet stream is a band of fast-moving air currents that occur at high altitudes.
Jet streams flow in wavelike fashion around the Northern and Southern hemispheres.
They change position constantly and move both vertically and horizontally.
A jet stream’'s core of strongest winds is about 60 miles wide and about 1 mile (1. kilometers) thick.
There are three main jet streams in the upper troposphere, the layer of the atmosphere nearest the earth.
They occur at altitudes of 6 to 9 miles (10 to 15 kilometers) above the ground.
These three jet streams are the polar jet, the subtropical jet, and the equatorial jet.
The polar jet and the subtropical jet both weaken during the summer and move farther north.
Other jet streams occur at higher altitudes than those found in the troposphere.
For example, the po/ar night jetis in the stratosphere, the atmospheric layer above the troposphere.
Jet streams were not widely known until World War II , when American and German pilots encountered them at high altitudes.
The jet streams shown on these maps occur in the troposphere, the layer of the atmosphere closest to the earth.
These air currents flow from west to east, except the one nearest the equator.
In addition, the force of the winds in and near jet streams may cause aircraft in their vicinity to experience turbulence.
These air currents are often associated with storms and even tornadoes.
Wayne M Wendland Jetty is a pier or wal] built out from the shore of a river, lake, or ocean to control the flow of water.
A jetty at a river mouth or harbor entrance may deepen a channel leading into the river or harbor so that ships will not run aground.
A jetty also may extend a channel in order to prevent sand from blocking the channel's mouth.
A type of jetty called a groin protects shores from erosion by trapping sand and silt.
Jetties may be made of timber, stone, concrete, or steel, sometimes in combination with sand.
A jetty deepens a channel by narrowing it, causing the water flowing out of the channel to move faster.
The faster-moving water picks up more particles of sand or mud from the bottom of the channel, thus deepening it.
In areas where currents deposit sand around a channel's mouth, a jetty can extend the length of the channel to United States Army Corps of Engineers, Portland District make the current carry sand away from the mouth.
The Columbia River, which empties into the Pacific Ocean, has one of the world’s longest jetties.
The harbor has a mechanically dredged channel 55 to 60 feet (17 to 18 meters) deep.
Jewels are generally set in precious metals and worn primarily as ornaments for personal adornment. /ewe/ also refers to the pivot bearing in a watch.
John S Lizzadro Jewel Cave National Monument, in western South Dakota, contains one of the longest cave systems in the United States.
The most common types are bracelets, brooches, earrings, necklaces, and rings.
But it has also been worn for religious or magical purposes, or as a symbol of wealth or A jetty is used to extend or deepen a channel by increasing the current.
This photograph shows the jetty located at the mouth of Oregon's Umpqua River.
Chinese hair ornaments, be/ow right, were made of amber, metal, pearls, and feathers.
Indians of Peru wore gold and turquoise ear ornaments, /ower right Naples National Museum, ltaly status.
Most fine jewelry consists of precious metals and gems created in artistic designs.
Gold is the chief metal used, but silver and platinum are also widely used.
Prehistoric jewelry consisted largely of crude necklaces and bracelets.
They were made of leather or reeds strung with pebbles, berries, feathers, shells, or animal bones.
People used decorative thorns or sharp bones to hold clothing together.
Eventually, people pierced their ears, lips, and noses to wear such objects.
They believed certain jewelry could prevent sickness and protect them from bad luck.
As early as 3500 B.C, craftworkers discovered that gold heated with fire could be pounded into thin sheets and then shaped.
They believed that gems had magical powers and wore them for good luck.
The ancient Egyptians made jewelry from a variety of gemstones as well as from glass, faience, and enamel.
They wore beaded co//ars, which covered the shoulders and chest; breast ornaments called pectora/s; and crownlike diadems.
The Egyptians included jewelry in tombs because they believed it would be useful in the afterlife.
The Greeks valued fine metalwork in their jewelry and rarely used inlaid gems.
Greek jewelry featured beautiful f/igree, a lacelike decoration made by twisting fine wires of gold or silver into patterns.
The highly decorated necklace shown at the left was made of enameled gold and jewels during the 1500's.
The modern silver necklace shown at the right reflects the streamlined design that became fashionable in the 1900's. their jewelry.
They used gold settings but placed greater emphasis on precious stones.
The Romans were probably the first to use rings as a symbol of engagement.
During the early Middle Ages, beginning in the A.D. 700's, the wearing of jewelry was almost entirely restricted to royalty and members of the royal courts.
This class began to acquire jewelry, wearing it as a sign of social status.
Gold was still the most prominent precious metal, though some bronze and silver was also used.
Jewelry most often took the form of brooches, buckles, head ornaments, and rings.
Jewelers often set gems in heavy pendants that were fastened to the sleeve, as well as on a chain around the neck.
During the 1600's and 1700's, diamonds became popular as a result of advances in gem cutting.
Chinese jewelry was very delicate and elaborate and often took the form of ornate headdresses.
However, the Japanese first used jeweled objects to decorate swords and ceremonial objects.
Japanese jewelry consisted primarily of earrings, hair ornaments, necklaces, pendants, and rings.
American Indian art created before A.D. 1500 is called pre-Co/umbian because it” was produced before Christopher Columbus arrived in the New World in 1492.
During pre-Columbian times, the Indians of the Inca empire inhabited large parts of South America.
The Inca cultures were highly skilled at working with metals, especially gold and silver.
Most of | the Inca jewelry was melted down by Spanish conquerors in the 1500's.
These | include large round rings, armbands, headdresses, masks, ornate necklaces, and earrings.
The Maya Indians of southern Mexico and Central America made jewelry of gold, jade, and other materials in the region.
The Maya created bracelets, large necklaces, and ceremonial masks with geometric designs.
Costume jewel/ry, which is inexpensive mass-produced jewelry, is also popular.
Cameo Etruscans Gold Platinum Indian, American Ring Lapidary Silver Pearl Watch Pin Additional resources Codina, Carles.
She became known for her short stories about the seaport villages and rural communities of New England, especially her native state of Maine.
Jewett dealt with her subjects in a colorful, yet honest, realistic, and unsentimental way.
Local color writing describes the customs and other characteristics of a particular time or place.
Jewett established her literary reputation with Deephaven , a collection of sketches about life in rural Maine.
Her most important work is 7he Country of the Pointed Firs , a collection of sketches and tales about the people who live in an isolated Maine seaport.
Jewett was born on Sept., 1849, in South Berwick, Maine, and died there on June 24, 1909.
Those visits deepened Jewetts sympathetic understanding of the lives of New Englanders.
Jewish community centers are agencies that offer Ronald T Curran JCC Association Jewish community centers offer a range of cultural, educational, recreational, and social activities.
In this picture, an adult assists a child with an art project at a JCC summer camp.
Jewish community centers—often called )CCs—offer informal programs in such areas as arts and crafts, dance, drama, health, literature, music, and Jewish culture and education.
Activities include camping and such sports as basketball, racquetball, softball, swimming, tennis, and volleyball.
The centers also offer group discussions and lectures, and special programs for people with disabilities.
The activities are directed by social workers and by specialists in the arts, child education, adult Jewish education, and health and physical education.
JCC Association provides the centers with published program materials, professional guidance in program planning, and technical advice on administration, building construction, and operation of camps.
JCC Association also recruits and places social workers, health and physical-education instructors, Jewish education specialists, and cultural arts workers for the centers.
Jewish community centers trace their origin to 1854, when the first Young Men's Hebrew Association opened in Baltimore.
Jewish Theological Seminary of America is the academic center of Conservative Judaism.
Critically reviewed by the Jewish Theological Seminary of America Jewish Women, National Council of, is a volunteer organization in the United States that sponsors educational and community service programs for children, teen-agers, and the elderly.
The organization is also concerned with such subjects as constitutional rights, women’s issues, the aging, Jewish life, and Israel.
The National Council of Jewish Women has also supported affordable, quality child care.
In 1983, the NCJW established the Center for the Child, which promotes the well-being of children and families in the United States.
The structure, also called the Wailing Wall, is all that remains of the Jews holy Temple from Biblical times.
During Biblical times, the Hebrews—who came to be called Israelites—lived in what is now Israel.
But their country fell to a series of conquerors, and the Jews scattered throughout the world.
By the A.D. 700's, they had established communities as far west as Spain and as far east as China.
They produced the Hebrew Bible, which, with its belief in one God and its moral teachings, became a cornerstone of two world religions, Christianity and Islam.
The Jews were a minority group almost everywhere they settled, and they often suffered persecution.
During World War II , about 6 million Jews died in the Nazi campaign of mass murder known as the Holocaust.
Beginning in the late 1800's, many Jews from Eastern Europe immigrated to Israel, then called Palestine.
Because of the long and varied history of the Jews, it is difficult to define a Jew.
Jewish identity is a mixture of religious, historical, and ethnic factors.
According to Jewish law, anyone born to a Jewish mother or converted to Judaism is considered a Jew.
Most Ashkenazim are descendants of members of Jewish communities of central and Eastern Europe.
The Sephardim are descendants of Jews from Spain, Portugal, or other Mediterranean countries and the Middle East.
Other groups of Jews include those descended from Jewish communities of Ethiopia and India.
The largest Jewish population—about 6 million—lives in the United States.
Other countries with large numbers of Jews include France, Russia, Britain, Canada, and Argentina.
This article traces the history of the Jewish people throughout the world.
According to the Bible, God told Abraham to leave Mesopotamia and settle in Canaan, the area that later became Israel.
Abraham, his son Isaac, and his grandson Jacob—also named Israel—are the patriarchs of the Jewish people.
By order of birth, they were Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, Joseph, and eee Benjamin.
During the early centuries of their history, the Hebrews were organized into groups that traced their descent to Jacob’s sons.
The Bible describes how Jacob's son Joseph was sold into slavery in Egypt.
Joseph's wisdom and honesty enabled him to become prime minister to the Egyptian pharaoh.
The Israelites lived peacefully in Egypt for many vests) until a new pharaoh enslaved them.
The Bible tells how a leader named Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt.
The Jewish festival of Passover celebrates their deliverance, called the Exodus.
According to tradition, God dictated His laws to Moses ina collection of teachings called the Torah after the Israelites left Egypt.
The Bible says that after receiving the Torah, the Israelites wandered in the wilderness for 40 years.
Moses died before his people entered Canaan, but his successor, Joshua, led them into their old homeland.
The Judges served as judicial and military leaders who united the Israelites in times of crisis.
About 1029 B.C., the threat of warfare with the Philistines led the Israelites to choose a king, Saul, as their leader.
Saul’s successor, David, unified the people and founded the kingdom of Israel.
Under David and his successor Solomon, the kingdom grew in size and power.
David captured the city of Jerusalem from a people called the Jebusites and made it his capital.
The Temple, known today as the First Temple, served as the center of religious life.
About 1000 B.C, MINSRAEL they united to form the King4 dom of Israel, later called Judah or Judea.
The southern tribes kept Jerusalem as their capital and called their kingdom Judah.
In the kingdom of Israel, there were struggles for power between various families.
During this period, religious teachers called prophets developed many of the principles of Judaism.
The Bible contains the teachings of the major prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and 12 minor prophets.
Unlike the ten lost tribes, the people of Judah did not lose their identity.
Inspired by the prophet Ezekiel, they continued to practice their religion.
Many Jews returned and rebuilt the Temple, which became known as the Second Temple.
This was the first time since the Exodus that Jews had chosen to live outside Israel.
Later, the communities of Jews scattered outside Israel became known as the Diaspora.
Alexander and his successors, the Ptolemies in Egypt and the Seleucids in Syria, brought Hellenistic culture to the Jews.
The Jews, led by the warrior Judah Maccabee, revolted and overthrew the Syrians.
Judah Maccabee’s family, the Hasmoneans, established an independent state that lasted about 80 years.
The divided kingdom resulted from a split in the 900's B.C. between Israel in the north and Judah in the south.
The groups disagreed over such matters as the ora/ /aw—the traditional interpretation of the Torah.
The Pharisees believed God had revealed the oral law along with the Torah.
Pharisees taught in synagogues and were supported by the common people.
The Sadducees accepted only the Torah and found support among the rich and the temple priests.
A third group, the Essenes, stressed personal holiness, through strict rules that included the sharing of property in communities apart from society.
Roman rule, In 63 B.C., the Romans conquered Judah, which they called Judea.
The most famous ruler of Judea during this time, Herod the Great, is known for both his ruthlessness and his building activities.
The Romans executed Jesus because they thought he was a threat to their rule.
Most Jews kept their traditional beliefs and did not accept Jesus as the Messiah.
But in 70, the Roman general Titus conquered Jerusalem, destroyed the Temple, and took many Jewish captives to Rome.
The Western, or Wailing, Wall in Jerusalem is all that remains of the Temple.
Some Jews, called Zealots, refused to surrender even after Jerusalem fell.
As the Romans were about to conquer the fortress, the defenders supposedly committed suicide rather than surrender.
After the defeat of Bar Kokhba, the Romans prohibited Jews from living in Jerusalem.
New centers of Jewish learning arose in Galilee, an area in northern Palestine; and in Babylonia.
In about 200, the head of the Sanhedrin, Rabbi Judah ha-Nasi, wrote down the oral law in a book called the Mishnah.
For many centuries, Jews throughout the world turned to the Babylonian Jewish community for religious and scholarly leadership.
Jews sent questions of law and interpretation to scholars at Babylonian academies called yeshivas.
The greatest such scholar, Saadia Gaon, lived in the late 800’s and early 900’'s.
In the mid-600's, Arabian Muslims founded an empire that soon included southwestern Asia, northern Africa, and Spain.
The Muslims permitted Jews and Christians to practice their own religions.
But both Jews and Christians had to pay a special tax and were not equal to Muslims under the law.
Large Jewish communities existed in such Muslim lands as Babylonia, Egypt, Morocco, and Yemen.
The period from the 900’s to the 1100's in Spain is known as the Golden Age of Jewish history.
Jews worked in crafts, in medicine and science, and in business and commerce.
Outstanding writers of the time included physician and philosopher Moses Maimonides, poet and philosopher Solomon ibn Gabirol, and poet Judah Halevi.
After the fall of the Roman Empire, the Christian Church became the most powerful force in Europe.
In the early Middle Ages, the Jews lived fairly peacefully with their Christian neighbors.
But some Christians blamed the Jews for the death of Jesus and mistrusted them because they would not accept Christianity.
The situation of the Jews became worse beginning in 1096, when a series of military expeditions called the Crusades began.
These campaigns to free the Holy Land from the Muslims stirred a wave of intense feeling against non-Christians.
The Crusaders killed many Jews and sometimes massacred entire Jewish communities.
In the mid-1300’s, a terrible plague, now known as the Black Death, swept Europe, eventually killing from a fourth to half of the population.
Many Christians unfairly blamed the Jews for the Black Death, and mobs killed thousands of Jews.
Christians commonly accused Jews of murdering Christian children as part of their religious rituals.
This accusation, which became known as the blood libel, was used as an excuse to attack Jews.
Political and religious leaders required Jews in certain areas to wear badges or special clothes that identified them as Jews.
In numerous cities, Jews were forced to live in separate communities that became known as ghettos.
Beginning in the late 1200's, the Jews were expelled from England, France, and parts of central Europe.
To avoid persecution, some Jews in Spain and Portugal, which had become Christian countries, pretended to convert to Christianity but continued to practice Judaism secretly.
Ferdinand and Isabella, the king and queen of Spain, established a special court called the /nquisition to punish people suspected of not following Christian teachings.
The Inquisition used torture to force confessions from its victims, many of whom were Marranos.
In 1492, Jews who had not converted to Christianity were expelled from Spain.
In the 1500's, a movement called the Reformation led to the development of Protestantism in Europe.
But when the Jews failed to convert to the new branch of Christianity, persecution continued.
But in 1648 and 1649, the massacre of thousands of Jews in Ukraine— then a part of Poland—began a time of crisis for Polish Jews.
Hundreds of thousands of Jews in Europe and the Middle East believed in Shabbetai.
Throughout Jewish history, learning and study had formed the foundation of Jewish life and culture.
In the mid-1700's, a movement called Hasidism developed among Jews of Eastern Europe.
Hasidism, founded by a Polish teacher known as Ba‘al Shem Tov, stressed joyful worship over the study of the Talmud.
Opponents of Hasidism, called Mitnaggedim, considered Hasidism’s noisy praying and dancing undignified.
Today, some Jews in Europe, Israel, and the United States still practice Hasidism.
At about the time that Hasidism developed in Eastern Europe, a movement called the Haska/ah arose in Western Europe.
The Haskalah, founded by German Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn, called on Jews to modernize their religious thinking.
The movement stressed the importance of nonreligious, as well as Jewish, education.
As the Haskalah modernized Jewish religious thinking, other forces were working to free the Jews from discrimination.
In France, the ideas of liberty and equality that took hold during the French Revolution (17891799) led many Christians to demand equal rights for all.
By the end of the 1800's, most Western and Central European Jews had been emancipated.
During the early and mid-1800's, two new branches of Judaism developed.
During the Revolutionary War in America (17751783), many Jews fought in the colonial army.
A Jewish financier named Haym Salomon gave much of his fortune to help the newly established United States government.
Jews gained full legal equality in the new nation, and many Jews immigrated to escape anti-Semitism in their native lands.
By the 1920's, United States Jews were the largest and most secure Jewish community in the world, though they still suffered discrimination.
During the late 1800's, anti-Semitism became a powerful force in European politics, especially in Germany, Austria-Hungary, and France.
Many anti-Semitic writers tried to prove that Jews were inferior to Germans and other peoples of northern Europe, whom the writers called Aryans.
Unlike the Jews of Western Europe, those of the east had never been emancipated.
In Russia, Jews were crowded in an area along the western border called the Pale of Settlement.
Beginning in 1881, many Jews were killed in a series of massacres called pogroms.
The pogroms caused hundreds of thousands of Jews to flee to the United States.
Many Jews saw an independent Jewish state in Palestine as the best escape from anti-Semitism.
In the late 1800's, Palestine was a poor, thinly populated region ruled by the Turkish Ottoman Empire.
Most of its people were MusCentral Zionist Archives, Jerusalem The Zionist movement grew out of the Jews’ longing for a national homeland.
The Zionists bought Jand in Palestine and established farming communities.
In 1894, the trial of Alfred Dreyfus, a French army officer and Jew who had been falsely accused of treason, helped convince Theodor Herzl, an Austrian Jewish journalist, that Jews could never be secure until they had a nation of their own.
In 1897, at the First Zionist Congress, Herzl organized the Zionist movement on a worldwide scale.
During World War 1 , many Jews in Palestine fought with the British against the Ottomans.
In 1917, Britain issued the Balfour Declaration, supporting the idea of a Jewish national home in Palestine.
The League of Nations—a forerunner of the United Nations—gave Britain temporary contro] of Palestine in 1920.
In the 1920's and 1930's, Jewish immigration to Palestine increased, despite Arab opposition.
Germany's defeat in World War | and a worldwide depression in the 1930's left the German economy in ruins and made many Germans angry and resentful.
He blamed the Jews for Germany's troubles and began a vicious campaign against them.
Most nations had restrictive immigration policies, and the Depression led workers to fear that Jewish refugees would take their jobs.
Beginning in 1939, Britain bowed to Arab pressure and limited immigration to Palestine. eS A AP/Wide World The Holocaust was a vicious campaign against the Jews and others by the Nazis.
This picture shows piles of bodies at the Dachau concentration camp after it was liberated in 1945.
Israel Government Press Office | Israel's declaration of independence in 1948 led to the first Arab-Israeli war.
Hours after Israeli leader David Ben-Gurion read the declaration, shown here, Arab forces invaded Israel.
The Nazis soon conquered large parts of Europe, bringing most European Jews under their domination.
By 1945, about 6 million Jews had been murdered—two of every three European Jews.
Several Jewish revolts against the Nazis took place in ghettos, slave labor camps, and death camps.
Although the Jews were surrounded and poorly armed, some held out for about four weeks.
Many Jews who managed to escape the ghettos joined bands of fighters called partisans who performed acts of sabotage.
In most occupied countries, the local people were indifferent to the Holocaust.
The Danish underground saved | 7,000 Jews, most of the Jews of Denmark.
The Holocaust left the Jewish people wounded in spirit and greatly reduced in numbers.
But out of the tragedy came a new determination to establish a Jewish state in Palestine.
The Arabs there continued to oppose this plan, and violence often broke out between Arabs and Jews.
In 1947, the United Nations | recommended that Palestine be divided into Arab and Jewish states.
The Jewish state, which called itself Israel, declared its independence on May 14, 1948.
Israel defeated the invaders, and hundreds of thousands of Jews flocked to the Jewish state.
The Arabs continued to oppose Israel, and full-scale wars broke out in 1956, 1967, and 1973.
However, despite its constant struggle with its neighbors, Israel kept a democratic form of government and became one of the most prosperous countries in the Middle East.
Today, Jewish life continues to thrive, both in Israel and in the Diaspora.
The Jews of Israel still face the threat of conflict with neighboring Arab states.
In addition, they must confront the social, military, and moral issues stemming from conflict with Palestinian Arabs living in lands occupied by Israel.
Among the most recent immigrants are hundreds of thousands of Jews from Russia, Ukraine, and other former republics of the Soviet Union.
The large number of immigrants has led to overcrowding and unemployment.
For many years, the main centers of Jewish life in the Diaspora were the United States and the Soviet Union.
The government discouraged religious practice, and it restricted emigration to other countries.
In the 1970's and 1980's, Soviet Jews attracted worldwide attention with demonstrations demanding the right to emigrate and to observe Jewish customs.
In 1987, the government began to permit an increasing number of jews to emigrate to Israel.
After the Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991, Jews continued to move to Israel from the former Soviet republics.
In the United States, Jews have increasingly adopted the culture of the non-Jewish society in which they live.
Some Jews fear that this process, called assimilation, will cause Jews to lose their identity.
But many other American Jews are experiencing a renewed interest in their heritage.
A growing number worship in religious groups called Aavurot Many send their children to Jewish day schools.
See Israel, Judaism, and Palestine and their lists of Related articles.
Jew’s-harp is a small musical instrument that is used mainly in folk music and by children.
The jews-harp consists of a flexible, metallic reed at one end of a curved metal frame.
The other end of the reed is tapered and bent forward at a right angle.
Players hold the metal frame against their lips and make the reed vibrate by hitting its forked end with their free hand.
Players are able to produce different notes by changing the size and shape of the mouth cavity.
Musical instruments similar to the jew’s-harp have been Cameramann International, Ltd.
Caryle Calvin The jews-harp consists of a flexible metal strip within a metal frame.
A player holds the frame in the mouth and creates musical notes by striking the metal strip with the finger. found in various parts of the world, including Borneo, China, Japan, and Siberia.
The jews-harp has been played in China since the 1100's and in Europe since the 1300's.
Valerie Woodring Goertzen Jiang Qing, jee ahng cheeng , also spelled Chiang Ching, was a Chinese political leader.
She was married to Mao Zedong, Chinas top political leader, from about 1939 until] Mao's death in 1976.
Under Jiang’s leadership, many Chinese dramas and operas were rewritten so that they presented examples of the changes in Chinese government and Chinese society favored by Mao.
In 1969, she was elected to the Politburo, the most powerful ruling body of China.
After Mao's death, Hua Guofeng and Deng Xiaoping became China’s main leaders.
The government referred to Jiang and her followers by the scornful name of the Gang of Four.
It accused the Gang of Four of failing to follow Mao’s teachings and of harming China's development.
In 1980, the government charged them with treason and put them on trial.
In January 1983, the sentences of Jiang and Zhang were reduced to life imprisonment.
Jiang succeeded Zhao Ziyang, who was dismissed as general secretary for supporting a prodemocracy movement in 1989.
This movement involved large demonstrations by students and other citizens in which many people were killed by Chinese troops.
In 1990, he succeeded Deng as chairman of the Chinese government's Central Military Commission.
Deng resigned from these posts to strengthen Jiang’s ties to the military, which is dominant in Chinese politics.
In 1993, Jiang was named to the largely ceremonial government post of president.
He was appointed mayor of Shanghai in 1985 and proved to be an effective leader.
The jicama plant is cultivated in Mexico, Central America, China, and India.
It is also called yam bean and Mexican turnip. \t is a legume and bears seeds in pods.
The tubers are either round like beets or long and slender like icicles.
The tubers of jicama plants are rich in calcium, iron, vitamin C, and protein.
Rotenone is a natural insecticide, and so jicama plants resist insect attack.
Jidda, //H duh , is the chief seaport and air terminal of Saudi Arabia.
It is also spelled Jeddah and Juddah. jidda is the gateway to the Muslim holy cities of Mecca and Medina.
Muslim pilgrims from throughout the world pass through Jidda on their sacred journeys to these cities.
Today, the city is one of Saudi Arabia's major business and industrial centers.
The city’s most important industries include oil refining, paper manufacturing, and shipbuilding.
King Abdul Aziz International Airport, one of the world’s largest airports, serves Jidda.
Jim Crow refers to practices, institutions, or laws that result from or support segregation of blacks from whites.
The term came into common use in the 1880's, when racial segregation was made legal in many parts of the Southern United States.
The term originally referred to a black character in a popular song composed in the 1830's.
However, most of these laws were declared invalid by several Supreme Court decisions in the 1950's and 1960's and by the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1968.
Jiménez, hee MAY nayth, Juan Ramon , Spanish poet, won the 1956 Nobel Prize for literature.
His poems were identified with the literary movement _ called modernism because of their elegant styleand profound emotion.
Jiménez’s poetry reflects his belief in . the simplicity of nature and an awareness of God's eter— nal presence.
Jiménez constantly revised his poems, and his works greatly influenced later poets.
A good introduction to Jiménezs poetry is Forty Poems, translated in 1967 by the American poet Robert Bly.
In Jiménez most famous work, Platero and 1, the poet chats with his donkey, reminiscing about life in the village of Moguer, where he was born.
He created lyrical descriptions that are transformed into perceptive prose poetry.
Dick Gerdes Jiménez de Quesada, hee MAY nayth duh kay SAH thah, Gonzalo, gawn THAH /oh, was a Spanish conqueror.
He established the first Spanish set tlement in the interior of what is now the South American nation of Colombia.
By 1538, Quesada’s party had defeated the Indians and gained control over the area.
From 1569 to 1572, he went to eastern Colombia to search for E] Dorado, a fictitious kingdom of great wealth.
Jimmu Tenno, also called /immu, was supposedly the first emperor of Japan and founder of the family that has ruled Japan throughout its history.
Folk tales say he led a force of men from Kyushu in southwestern Japan to Yamato, the area surrounding Nara and Osaka.
The tales are not wholly true, but a force from the southwest did form a government in Yamato.
Jimson weed, also called thorn apple, is a large, bushy, poisonous plant.
It grows throughout North America and is common in the central part of the United States.
The jimson weed reaches a height of 5 feet (1. meters) and has erect white or violet trumpet-shaped flowers about 4 inches long.
The jimson Helen Delpar Tetsuo Najita Hans Reinhard, Bruce Coleman Ltd The jimson weed is a large, bushy poisonous plant.
The drug Stramonine, also called daturine, is made from the leaves and seeds of the jimson weed.
The name jimsonis a popular shortening of Jamestown, which was an early Virginia settlement.
The British government, headed by Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, hesitated to interfere in a war between Russia and Turkey.
We dont want to fight, But, by jingo, if we do, We've got the ships, Weve got the men, Weve got the money, too.
The same attitude of militant superiority toward other nations was called spread-eagleism in the United States during the 1800's.
Jinnah, //HN nuh, Mohammad Ali , was a leader in India’s struggle for independence, and has been called the great leader and the founder of Pakistan.
When Pakistan was created as an independent Muslim majority nation in 1947, Jinnah became its first governor general.
Jinnah became permanent president of the Muslim ‘League of India in 1934.
Jinnah began demanding a separate Muslim state in 1940 because he feared that the Hindu majority would dominate an independent India.
Jinrikisha, jihn RIHK shuh or jihn RIHK shaw, is a light two-wheeled cart once widely used as a taxicab in East Asian cities.
The jinrikisha usually had a top, or hood, to protect passengers from the weather.
The runner, or hiki, often pulled an occupied jinrikisha 20 to 30 miles a day.
The use of jinrikishas was declared illegal in many Chinese cities because authorities felt using “human horses” was undignified.
Robert C Post Jivaro Indians, HEF vuh roh, are a tribe famous for their fierceness and for their head shrinking.
They live in tropical forests on the eastern slopes of the Andes Mountains in Ecuador.
Although the Jivaro are spoken of as a tribe, they are split into many small groups which used to fight among themselves.
In early times, the Jivaro lived like tropical-forest Indi128 Joan of Arc, Saint © Walter R Aguiar Jivaro Indians are a South American people who live in the tropical forests of Ecuador.
The Jivaro fished with traps and with barbasco, a drug that stupefies fish so they can be speared easily.
The Inca of Peru probably taught the Jivaro how to keep llamas and guinea pigs.
A typical Jivaro village had only one large dwelling, which housed 40 to 80 people.
The Jivaro were famous warriors who fought mainly to avenge the death of a relative.
Most of them have given up warfare and live peaceably among themselves and with their neighbors.
Joan of Arc, Saint , was a French national heroine who became a saint of the Roman Catholic Church.
She was a simple peasant girl who rescued France from defeat in one of the darkest periods of the Hundred Years’ War with England.
Her first great triumph was to lead a French army against the English who had laid siege to the city of Orléans.
She has often been called the Maid of Orléans in honor of that victory.
Jeanne d‘Arc, as she was known in France, was born at Domrémy, near Nancy.
She grew up asa devout Catholic under the strong influence of her deeply religious mother.
Some historians believe that Joan may have been a c/airvoyant—that is, a person who has knowledge of events happening far away or in the future without using any of the five senses.
By the age of about 13, Joan was having religious visions and hearing what she believed were the voices of saints.
These voices in time persuaded Joan that God had chosen her to help King Charles VII of France drive the English from French soil.
She went to the town of Vaucouleurs to ask the military commander for an escort because she had to see the king.
Much of southern France had recognized young King Charles VII as their ruler since 1422.
But his enemies, the English and the Burgundians , controlled Paris and the northern part of France.
Charles had never been crowned, because the city of Reims, where French kings were crowned, lay in enemy territory.
In addition, the quarrels of his advisers paralyzed his government, and the treasury was empty.
If the English captured Orléans, Charles's position would be desperate.
His situation was so hopeless that he was willing to listen to the young girl who had arrived at his castle in Chinon claiming to have heard the voices of saints.
Slipping into the ranks of his courtiers, he let one of his nobles occupy the throne.
Joan, however, was not deceived, and quickly identified Charles as her king.
But when she told him exactly what he had asked of God when he prayed alone, he realized she had unusual powers.
People at that time often feared such powers were the work of the devil.
But members of the clergy accepted Joan's beliefs, so Charles gave her armor, a banner, and the command of troops.
Joan set out with her army in April 1429 to rescue Orléans from the English.
However, they soon realized that all went well when they followed her orders.
Joan's forces broke the siege of Orléans in only 10 days, and the English fled.
After this victory, she persuaded Charles of the need Detail of an illuminated manuscript by an unknown artist; Archives Nationales, Paris (Josse} Joan of Arc, a national heroine of France, believed that God had chosen her to free her country from English rule. for a coronation.
To a deeply religious person like Joan, Charles was not a true king until he was crowned in the cathedral at Reims.
She led Charles and his military escort through enemy territory, and her troops defeated the English in several battles along the way.
Joan entered the city in triumph and stood beside Charles when he was crowned king on July 17, 1429.
After the coronation, Joan became anxious to free Paris from English control.
The king doubted her chance of success at this time, but he allowed Joan to make an attempt on Paris.
Although important prisoners could bring high ransoms, the English were determined not to give her up to the French.
Despite the bullying of her English captors, she continued to insist that her visions and voices had come from God.
However, a tribunal of French clergy sympathetic to the English sentenced her to death.
Joan was burned at the stake before a large crowd in Rouen on May 30, 1431.
Her courageous death led many to fear that they had witnessed the martyrdom of a saint.
Because heretics could not receive a Christian burial, Joan's ashes were thrown into the Seine River.
In 1455, Joan's family asked for a new trial to reconsider the charges against Joan.
Beatification is a preliminary step toward canonization in the Roman Catholic Church.
Saint Joan , a famous play by Irish-born playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw, shows Joan as a woman with Protestant beliefs who opposed the authorities of the Roman Catholic Church.
Joan of Arc is admired by patriots, supporters of womens rights, and even people who study the supernatural.
She is also memorialized in monuments and works of art throughout the world.
Even during the 1400's, some people claimed that another person had died in her place at Rouen.
These questions include why righteous people suffer and why evil exists in a world that is governed by an all-powerful God.
In the prologue, God allows Satan to test Job’s faith by inflicting a series of misfortunes on the man.
In the dialogues, Job's friends cannot believe that his misfortunes are undeserved, and they urge him to repent.
God then appears to Job in a whirlwind and criticizes Job for daring to question His will.
Many scholars believe that the book teaches that there is no direct relationship between right actions and reward in human history.
Humanity can question God's will but never truly understand God's ultimate design.
Job Corps is a United States government program that provides job training, education, and other services for disadvantaged young men and women.
The basic goal of the program is to teach job skills to people who range in age from 16 to 22 years old.
The Job Corps also offers counseling, health care, job placement, and classroom instruction to finish high school.
More than 75 percent of the people who complete the program find a job, return to school, or join the armed forces.
The Job Corps provides its services in residential centers in the United States and Puerto Rico.
Most of the young men and women stay at a center for six months of training, but some remain as long as two years.
Most of the centers serve people from a particular state or region and design their programs to meet job needs in that locality.
At many centers, for example, labor unions offer special apprenticeship programs in such construction trades as bricklaying, carpentry, and the operation of heavy equipment.
The corps was administered by the Office of Economic Opportunity until 1969, when it was transferred to the Department of Labor.
Critically reviewed by the Department of Labor Job’s Daughters, jo/hbz, is an organization for girls associated with the men’s fraternal society of Masons.
Girls between the ages of 11 and 20 with a relative who has earned at least the degree of Master Mason may become members.
Job's Daughters promotes the desire for knowledge, respect for parents, community spirit, and reverence for the Bible.
It has about 24,000 active members and about 1,200 bethels in several countries, including Australia, Canada, and the Philippines.
The chief executive officer of Job’s Daughters is called the Supreme Guardian.
Critically reviewed by the International Order of Job's Daughters See also Masonry.
Jodl, YOHD uhl Alfred, AHL frayt , signed the unconditional surrender of Germany in Reims, France, in 1945.
At that time, he was chief of the Operations Staff of the German Armed Forces High Command.
As Hitler's personal military adviser, he failed to try to curb the dictator's evil ambitions.
Otis C Mitchell Jodrell Bank Observatory, /OH druhl, near Manchester, England, is one of the world’s leading radio astronomy observatories.
The Lovell telescope, the first giant radio telescope, began operating there in 1957.
Today, astronomers at Jodrell Bank study the radio emissions from celestial objects called pu/sars {see Pulsar) and gas and dust in galaxies.
The official name of the observatory is the Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories, Jodrell Bank.
The book is part of a collection called the Prophets in both Jewish and Christian editions of the Bible.
Many scholars believe the account refers to an actual plague, which Joel believed was a warning of God's anger against His sinful people.
The prophet calls upon the priests, the elders, and the people to repent their sins and seek God’s mercy to end the plague.
God's anger will pour down on all others, especially the heathens who exiled the Israelites.
Joffre’s reputation grew when he defeated the Germans in the First Battle of the Marne in 1914.
He was the first French general to defeat a German army in a major battle since Napoleon Bonaparte did so in the early 1800's.
By 1915, the opposing armies had reached a stalemate on the Western Front.
Joffre attempted to break the stalemate with offensives in Artois and Champagne, but they were failures.
In 1916, the French government replaced Joffre because it thought he was wasting French strength in exchange for minor gains.
Joffre was named marshal of France and given largely ceremonial duties.
After a career spent mainly in the French colonies, Joffre was promoted to chief of the general staff in 1911.
His original name was Anver Bey Abdullah Jaffa Khan, but his family, who were Afghan American, changed his name to Robert Joffrey.
Joffrey formed a school, the American Ballet Center, in 1953 and also taught there.
He and the American dancer Gerald Arpino created the Robert Joffrey Ballet in 1956.
Jogging is a popular form of exercise and recreation in which a person runs at a steady, moderate pace.
The actual pace depends on the individual's ability, but it should be one at which the jogger can talk without becoming breathless.
The popularity of jogging stems from its healthful benefits and its simplicity.
The only equipment needed is loose clothing and well-cushioned, flexible shoes that fit properly.
Jogging builds and maintains physical fitness by improving the function of the circulatory and respiratory systems.
Jogging also helps relieve mental stress and provides an opportunity to enjoy the outdoors.
To obtain the full benefits of jogging, an individual should develop a program that includes at least three jogs of 2 miles every week.
A beginner should start with short distances and gradually work up to 2 miles or more.
Persons more than 35 years old should have a complete medical examination before starting a jogging program.
Jogues, zhavwg, Saint Isaac , was a Jesuit missionary who worked among the Huron Indians in Canada.
He was born on Jan., 1607, in Orléans, _ France, and went to Canada after he was ordained in 1636.
He returned with a second delegation later the same year, and the Iroquois took him prisoner and killed him.
It is also the most important industrial, financial, and commercial center in Africa south of the Sahara.
Johannesburg is the capital of the province of Gauteng in northeastern South Africa.
According to 1991 census figures, the city of Johannesburg had 712,507 people, and the metropolitan area population was 1,907,229.
In 1994, the city’s boundaries were extended to include surrounding areas populated chiefly by poor black Africans.
These areas had been administratively separate under South Africa's apartheid policy.
The enlarged City of Johannesburg has a population of nearly 3 million.
The city has two universities, an art gallery, several museums, an international convention center, and a well-known medical research institute.
The city’s location near valuable gold deposits has made it the nation’s industrial center.
Gold mining drew laborers and fortune seekers to the area, and Johannesburg rapidly became southern Africa’s largest city.
Peter Sullivan Johanson, Donald Carl , an American anthropologist, is an authority on human origins.
A 1974 expedition led by Johanson at Hadar, Ethiopia, discovered the fossilized remains of what is now commonly regarded as one of the earliest types of humanlike creatures that walked fully upright.
The fossils, from a creature nicknamed “Lucy,” are between 3 million and 3,600,000 years old.
Johanson also has added to knowledge of Homo habilis, a species that many anthropologists consider one of the oldest members of the genus to which modern human beings belong.
In 1986, a team of anthropologists that Johanson led to Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, discovered the first set of skull and limb bones belonging to a single Homo habilis individual.
The length of the limb bones indicated Homo habilis was more apelike than scientists had previously believed.
The famous charter marked an important step in the development of constitutional thought and individual liberties in England.
John was unpredictable and often cruel, but he showed administrative ability.
He improved methods of tax collection and financial recordkeeping, and strengthened the courts of law.
In 1199, John succeeded his brother Richard the Lion-Hearted as king of England, and, in France, as Duke of Normandy, Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of Anjou.
John quarreled over his French territories with Arthur and King Philip Il of France.
John’s mismanagement—and rumors he murdered Arthur—angered French barons who had been loyal to John and led to the loss of most English holdings in France.
John disagreed with Pope Innocent II] over who should become archbishop of Canterbury.
In 1208, the pope placed England under an /nterdict, which banned church services throughout the country.
The pope then supported John, in return for liberties granted the church.
But many English barons and some clergy revolted anyway when the king's plans to reconquer the lost territories in France failed.
In June 1215, John grudgingly approved the settlement that became known as Magna Carta.
Sobieski, saw BYFHS kee , was king of Poland when the Turkish menace to Christendom was at its height.
Heading a Christian alliance, he defeated the Turks at the gates of Vienna in 1683.
He trained for a military career and fought against Cossacks, Tatars, and Turks.
John J Kulezycki John VI , also known as Joao VI, was king of Portugal from 1816 to 1826.
He assumed power in 1792, when his mother became unfit to rule due to mental illness.
In 1807, Emperor Napoleon | of France invaded Portugal because the Portuguese had supported Britain in a war between the French and British.
In 1815, John made Portugal and Brazil a single kingdom called the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil, and the Algarves.
He was the second pope to spend his reign in Avignon, France, instead of Rome.
A conflict with the German emperor Louis IV of Bavaria lasted from 1322 until John’s death.
Louis had attempted to assert imperial authority in Italy over the church, and John excommunicated him in 1324.
John also had a serious dispute with the Franciscan religious order over the issue of Franciscan poverty.
A number of Franciscans refused to conform to papal definitions of poverty, seceded from the order, and allied themselves with the emperor.
In 1317, he issued a significant collection of church laws, which dealt with the decrees of the Council of Vienne and those of Clement V, the preceding pope.
An antipope is a man determined to have improperly claimed to be or served as pope.
John had been an adventurer and accomplished soldier before his election, and he enjoyed the support of France, England, and several Italian states.
Under pressure from the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund, John agreed to call the Council of Constance to resolve the rival claims to the papal throne.
The council published revolutionary decrees that asserted its authority over the pope and accused John of serious crimes.
Many people thought that John would have a short, uneventful reign because he was nearly 77 years old.
But John surprised the Roman Catholic Church and the world early in 1959 by calling an ecumenical council.
John’s place in the church and in history rests on his courage and foresight in calling the Second Vatican Council, which met in 1962.
He rarely interfered with the council's activities but reserved the right to approve its final decisions.
Pope Paul VI continued the council and approved its decrees after it ended in 1965.
John’s other notable acts included his order to insert the name of Saint Joseph in the Canon of the Mass.
John also explored the possibility of unity with the Eastern Orthodox Churches.
Another important impact of John’s reign came from the personal impression he made on people.
He clearly recognized his limitations and displayed a lively sense of humor.
Beginning in 1925, he held a series of appointments as diplomatic representative of the Vatican.
John, Elton , is an English pop singer, composer, and pianist who made unusual eyeglasses and flashy costumes his trademarks.
His melodic songs, superb piano playing, and showmanship have made John one of the most successful performers of his time.
In 1967, John started a long collaboration with lyricist Bernie Taupin.
John performed an updated version titled “Candle in the Wind 1997” at the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales, who died in an automobile accident.
The recording of the new version became the biggest seller in music history.
John and Rice won the 2001 Grammy award for best musical show album for Ada.
Don McLeese John, Epistles of, are the 23rd, 24th, and 25th books of the New Testament.
Although the first and longest of them is called an epi/st/e , it is really a theological essay.
The author of the second and third Epistles calls himself the presbyter, or elder.
He wrote to a church he calls the “elect lady’ and to an individual named Gaius.
All three documents come from the circles that produced the Gospel of John.
The first and second Epistles call for mutual love among Christians and for the recognition that Jesus Christ was truly a human being.
Terrance D Callan John, Saint, was one ot the 12 apostles of Jesus Christ.
According to Mark 3:17, Jesus called John and James the “sons of thunder,” apparently because of their rashness.
John is usually associated with Peter and James as one of a select, inner group of disciples.
The Acts of the Apostles reporis that John was arrested with Peter because of his preaching in Jerusalem.
But many Biblical scholars believe that these works, or some of them, were written by his followers, not by John.
John has often been considered the “beloved disciple” mentioned in the fourth Gospel, but scholars are unsure of this reference.
In addition to the Biblical evidence, later tradition records that John preached in Ephesus in Asia Minor until he was very old.
In the Eastern Orthodox Churches, John’s feast day is celebrated on September 26.
John Bull is the name used for England and the English people, just as Uncle Sam stands for the United States and its people.
But John Arbuthnot, a Scottish writer, fixed the popular idea of John Bull.
In 1712, Arbuthnot published pamphlets advocating the end of the War of the Spanish Succession.
The pamphlets were republished in 1712 as The History of John Bull \n this book, John Bull, representing England, appears as a jolly, honest, plaindealing, hot-tempered farmer.
Sir John Tenniel, famous cartoonist of Punch magazine in the 1800's, pictured John Bull as a dignified gentleman.
The John Bull usually seen today appeared in the drawings of Sir Francis Carruthers Gould, published in the Westminster Gazette in the late 1800's and early 1900's.
His trousers are tucked into riding boots, and the British flag sometimes appears on his waistcoat.
John Day Fossil Beds National Monument includes three areas in north-central Oregon that contain fossils of animals and plants that lived from about 55 million to about 10 million years ago.
Established in 1974, it is the first national monument in which scientists have found fossils from five prehistoric epochs that followed one another consecutively.
John Howard Association is a private, nonprofit agency that works for fair and effective correctional programs in the United States.
It monitors and investigates prisons and jails and reports on conditions in them.
It also works to develop and promote just policies on important correctional issues, such as the treatment of Mary Evans Picture Library “John Bull’ is a symbol of the English people.
The association's public education program sponsors speakers and publishes a newsletter and special reports.
The association was founded in 1901. tt was named for John Howard, a British prison reformer of the 1700's.
Critically reviewed by the John Howard Association John of Gaunt, gawnt or gafnt , Duke of Lancaster, was an English soldier and political leader.
Beginning in 1377, he was the power behind the throne during much of the reign of his nephew, King Richard II of England.
For nearly 10 years, he fought under Richard in the Hundred Years’ War against France.
He became Duke of Lancaster after the father of his first wife, Blanche of Lancaster, died in 1361.
By his marriage in 1372 to Constance, daughter of King Pedro | of Castile , John claimed the Castilian throne.
His son Henry IV was the first English king from the House of Lancaster.
After Constance’s death, John married Katherine Swynford, his mistress, in 1396.
George B Stow John Paul I was elected pope of the Roman Catholic Church in 1978.
His reign from his election on August 26 to his sudden death on September 28 was one of the shortest in papal history.
John Paul was born in Forno di Canale (now Canale d’‘Agordo), Italy, near Belluno, of working-class parents.
He was named bishop of Vittorio Veneto in 1958 and in 1969 was appointed patriarch of Venice.
Gerald P Fogarty John Paul II was elected pope of the Roman Catholic Church in 1978.
John Paul, who was born in Poland, became the first non-Italian pope since Adrian VI, a Dutchman elected pope in 1522.
More than any other pope in history, John Paul made the papacy part of the world scene by traveling to over 60 nations, the majority of them developing nations.
The pope used these journeys to show the universal character of the Roman Catholic Church and to personally deliver the message of the Gospel to many peoples.
He skillfully used television and other media to convey his vision of faith to the modern world.
In 1984, John Paul negotiated with the Italian government a new concordat recognizing the separation of church and state.
Also in 1984, the pope and President Ronald Reagan of the United States announced the establishment of diplomatic relations and the exchange of ambassadors between the United States and the Vatican.
In 1994, the Vatican established full diplomatic relations with the state of Israel.
John Paul has an outgoing personality that has made him enormously popular.
He attracted such large crowds to his weekly audiences that the audiences had to be moved from St.
He has strongly upheld traditional church teachings and opposed changes such as allowing priests to marry or admitting women to the priesthood.
In 1992 he approved a new catechism, a detailed statement of Catholic belief.
Many of John Paul's speeches, encyclicals (letters to the entire church), and other messages have reflected his progressive social views.
Several encyclicals have urged governments to improve the condition of the world’s poor and called upon the rich nations to work toward a new world economic order.
The pope strongly defends human rights and stresses the solidarity of all human beings as one family created by God.
Many people believe he played an influential role in the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
He was ordained a priest in 1946 and taught ethics and philosophy for a number of years at universities in Krakow and Lublin.
He became auxiliary bishop of Krakow in 1958, archbishop of Krakow in 1964, and a cardinal in 1967.
In 1994, his written responses to interview questions were published as Crossing the Threshold of Hope.
John the Baptist, Saint , in Christianity, was a prophet regarded as the forerunner of Jesus Christ.
In his public ministry, John baptized Jesus, an event seen as the start of Jesus's ministry.
John was probably raised in a Jewish community in the wilderness of Judea.
Pious Jews fled to these wilderness communities to escape the sinfulness they saw in their nation.
John urged people to repent, to turn away from their old lives, and to adopt new lives of piety and obedience to God.
All this was in preparation for the coming of one who they believed would baptize them in the Holy Spirit.
Many people were attracted to John and his call for repentance, and a large body of followers grew up around him.
Within the larger group, John had a smaller group of disciples whom he instructed in pious living and who observed Jewish religious practices.
The political authorities were suspicious of the crowds John attracted.
They feared the possibility of a popular uprising against the Roman rulers of Palestine.
John was arrested by Herod Antipas, the governor of Galilee, imprisoned in a fortress, and executed.
As Jesus's ministry emerged, many of His followers | The Baptism of Christ about 1472), a tenypera painting on wood, Uffizi Gallery, Florence (Scala/Art Resource} John the Baptists baptism of Jesus was portrayed in this painting by Andrea del Verrocchio and Leonardo da Vinci. seem to have been drawn from John’s followers.
After John’s death, many more of his followers apparently joined Jesus's movement.
But John’s followers still made up a movement that continued after his death.
Saint Paul found a group of John’s followers in the Greek city of Ephesus in the A.D. 50's.
Johns, Jasper , is an American artist famous for his paintings of common objects, such as flags, targets, numbers, and maps.
He sought a new content for painting that would not communicate emotion.
He challenged his viewers to make distinctions between the real world and art.
In addition to painting, Johns is also noted for his sculptures, prints, and drawings.
In his paintings, Johns tested the limits of what painting could accomplish by narrowing the gap between an object and its depiction.
Johns restricted his themes to patterns, such as flags and targets, that were already flat, abstract designs.
He also chose shapes that fit precisely into the proportions of the canvas.
In isolating such objects from their normal setting, Johns called attention to them, and to their function, forms, and meanings.
Johns gave his pictures a recognizable subject matter that had been absent from much American painting since the rise of Abstract Expressionism in the late 1940's.
In the same spirit, Johns created sculptures depicting such commonplace subject matter as beer cans and light bulbs.
The two worked closely together, sharing ideas and criticizing each other’s work.
He began to paint more personal works about memory, aging, and the life cycle.
C Whiting School of Engineering, the School of Continuing Studies, the School of Medicine, the School of Hygiene and Public Health, the School of Nursing, the Paul H Nitze School of Advanced International Studies, the Peabody Institute, and the Applied Physics Laboratory.
C Whiting School of Engineering are on the Homewood campus On Baltimore's north side.
They offer studies in engineering, natural sciences, social and behavioral sciences, quantitative studies, and the humanities.
The Schools of Medicine, Hygiene and Public Health, and Nursing are in east Baltimore.
They share a campus with the Johns Hopkins Hospital, a separate but closely associated institution.
The School of Hygiene and Public Health offers graduate-level education in public health.
The School of Nursing has integrated study programs with three Baltimore hospitals.
Founded as an independent graduate school in 1943, it became part of the university in 1950.
The Peabody Institute, in Baltimore, is the oldest chartered music school in the United States.
It was established in 1857 as the Peabody Conservatory of Music and became affiliated with Hopkins in 1977.
The Applied Physics Laboratory, in Howard County, Maryland, is devoted entirely to research and development.
It is noted for contributions to national security, space exploration, and development of medical devices.
The university is also the home of the Space Telescope Science Institute.
Upon his death in 1873, Baltimore merchant Johns Hopkins left a $7-million gift to found a university and hospital.
Johnson, a Democrat from Tennessee, inherited the wartime dispute between Lincoln and Congress over how to treat the South after the war.
This disagreement soon intensified, as more and more Republicans in Congress came to oppose Johnson's views.
The division became so wide that the United States House of Representatives voted to impeach him.
Throughout his life, and especially his presidency, Johnson aroused either strong support or fierce dislike.
Some view him as an unfit leader who was too generous to the Southerners after the war.
Others have portrayed him as a leader of unusual vision who accurately saw that harsh treatment of the Southern States would increase divisions in the Union.
Some scholars believe Johnson's acquittal in the impeachment trial preserved the independence of the presidency.
A tailor by profession, he lacked formal schooling and educated himself with the help of his wife.
An unshakable faith in the Constitution guided his actions during his 20 years as a United States representative, a governor, and a United States senator.
During Johnson's term, the United States purchased Alaska, and Nebraska became a state.
Southerners worked to repair their ruined towns and farms, and to reorganize their economy without slavery.
Important ‘firsts’ during this time included the first oil pipeline, practical typewriter, and railroad refrigerator car.
Tailors usually employed someone to read to the workers as they sat at their tables stitching clothes.
Andrew became familiar with the Constitution, American history, and politics through reading newspapers and a few books.
He ran away from home after two years, in part because his youthful pranks were getting him in trouble with the law, and in part because of his independent spirit.
Johnson set himself up as a tailor at Carthage, North Carolina, and then at Laurens, South Carolina.
Johnson brought his poverty-stricken mother and stepfather to Tennessee in 1826.
They settled in Greeneville. | a” aN (Cad | Existing state fe] New state | Territory ea Acquisition The United States flag had 35 stars when Johnson took office in 1865, even though the country had 36 states.
On May 17, 1827, Johnson married Eliza McCardle , the daughter of a Scottish shoemaker.
With hard work and thrift, Johnson built a profitable tailoring business and bought property in town.
He was a devoted father who worried about the health, education, and values of his children.
Even when away from home on government service, he wrote them letters of advice.
One son developed tuberculosis, another was an alcoholic, and a third died when thrown from his horse.
Political and public career Andrew Jackson, a fellow Tennessean and Democrat, became Johnson's political role model.
He saw himself as the champion of small white farmers and craftworkers against the great landowners who controlled Tennessee.
Soon he attractImportant dates in Johnson's life 1808 1827 Born in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Antiseptic surgical methods were developed in 1865 by | the English physician Joseph Lister.
Literature published during Johnson's Administration included Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll of England, “Snow-Bound” by the American poet John Greenleaf Whittier, and Little Women by Louisa May Alcott, also of the United States.
The first diamond field in South Africa was discovered ina bed of the Vaal River in 1867.
The Dominion of Canada was established in 1867 by the British North America Act.
Austria and Hungary formed the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary in 1867.
Other inventions of this period included the first practical typewriter, developed in 1867, and the railroad refrigerator car, created in 1868.
In 1829, the year Jackson became President, Johnson won his first election.
In 1835, the voters elected him to the Tennessee House of Representatives.
There, he opposed a bill for state assistance in the construction of railroads because he feared dishonesty, monopolies, and wasteful spending.
But Johnson represented eastern Tennessee, which needed railroads because of its mountainous isolation.
His vote contributed to his defeat for reelection in 1837, the first of only two times in his 45-year political career that he ever lost a popular vote.
At that time, Whigs and Democrats had almost equal numbers in the state legislature.
In 1843, Johnson won the first of five terms in the United States House of Representatives.
In the House, he favored limited spending by the federal government and the lowest tariff rate possible.
He favored a revision of the Electoral College to permit direct election of the President and a runoff if necessary.
He proposed popular election of senators 62 years before it became part of the Constitution.
Johnson often complained about lack of presidential leadership and believed that party considerations counted for more than national issues.
The issue of slavery became increasingly important during Johnson's years in the House.
But Johnson's votes on slavery questions merely reflected his belief that individuals had a right to own slaves and that states had a right to protect the institution.
In 1846, he introduced a homestead bill to help poor white settlers obtain public land.
Southerners bitterly opposed the bill, knowing that such settlement would add free states to the Union.
As governor, he favored laws to proJohnson's wife and his oldest daughter shared the duties of hostess at White House functions during his presidency.
His daughter, Martha Patterson, /eft, often served in place of her mother. ee oes We roe as FY Library of Congress; Culver vide free public education.
He also fought unsuccessfully the use of prison labor to compete with free labor.
His courage and speaking skill were valuable in the rough and tumble politics of the day.
The campaign was a bitter one, with rumors that Johnson would be shot at a public meeting.
In 1857, Johnson returned to Washington as a United States senator and continued to push for the Homestead Act.
It finally passed in 1862, after the Civil War had begun and Southerners had resigned from Congress.
As the slavery question became more critical, Johnson continued to take a middle course.
At the same time, he made it clear that his devotion to the Union exceeded his devotion to slavery.
Johnson's stand in favor of both the Union and slavery might have made him a logical compromise candidate for President.
However, he was not nominated in 1856 because of a split within the Tennessee delegation.
In 1860, the Tennessee delegation nominated Johnson for President at the Democratic National Convention.
But the convention and the party broke up completely, and he withdrew from the race.
In the election, Johnson supported Vice President John C Breckinridge of Kentucky, the candidate of most Southern Democrats.
Johnson believed until almost the last minute that the South would not secede from the Union.
In December 1860, he made a powerful speech in the Senate pleading for unity.
Johnson stood by his principles when the Southern States started to leave the Union.
Johnson returned to Tennessee in April, just before a special state election to decide if Tennessee would remain in the Union.
Angry mobs stopped Johnson's train again and again as he traveled across the state speaking against secession.
Eastern Tennessee supported Johnson's position, but the state as a whole voted to secede.
The Tennessee militia had orders to arrest Johnson as a traitor, but he escaped.
Johnson was the only Southern senator who refused to secede with his state.
Then Lincoln appointed Johnson military governor of the state, an unusual position designed to give Johnson extensive civil and military authority.
His main task was to organize the loyal Unionists, assure their protection, hold free elections, and restore federal authority in the state.
Johnson's policy, a mixture of harsh and mild treatment, required Tennesseans to sign an oath of loyalty in order to vote.
His policy also required Tennesseans to accept emancipation of the slaves.
He had control over very little territory, and only after final liberation of the whole state from Confederate troops in late 1864 could meaningful elections occur.
Johnson was ideally suited to run as a vice presidential candidate with Lincoln in 1864.
He had strongly supported the Union, he was a Southerner, and he was a leading member of the War Democrats.
The War Democrats were Democrats who had been loyal to Lincoln throughout the war.
He had recently recovered from an attack of typhoid fever and was still weak.
In the heat of the Senate chamber, and because of his weakened condition, Johnson became tipsy.
For many years, Johnson's opponents accused him of drunkenness, but the accusation was unjustified.
The next morning, Johnson took the presidential oath of office in his hotel room.
Johnson’s Administration At the beginning of his Administration, Johnson kept Lincoln's Cabinet.
It had to repair the damage of four years of war and determine the place in society of the newly freed blacks.
For the background of the period following the war, called Reconstruction, see Reconstruction.
Lincoln had not firmly decided the details of a Reconstruction plan at the time of his death.
His wartime plan filled a temporary need but was not adequate for a postwar solution.
Lincoln would have expected as a minimum assurances of future loyalty, recognition of the end of slavery, and protection for Southern Unionists and blacks.
Widely regarded as a moderate, he could favor restricting rebel leaders without desiring punishment.
But there were many shades of opinion in President Johnson's party, and the so-called Radical Republicans favored more extreme measures.
The Radical leaders included Representative Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania and Senators Charles Sumner of Massachusetts and Benjamin Wade of Ohio.
The Radicals regarded black suffrage as a way to ensure that the Republicans would not become a minority party of the restored Union.
Thus, the Radicals thought Johnson would cooperate in their plan for a harsh Reconstruction.
But Johnson had also often expressed his belief that the common people of the South had been led into rebellion by the rich and powerful planters.
It soon became apparent that he favored generous treatment to all former rebels except military and political leaders.
Congress was not in session when Johnson became President, and so he proceeded with his mild Reconstruction plan.
On May 29, 1865, he granted a general amnesty to rebels who would sign a loyalty oath, except political and military leaders of the Confederacy and those Southerners whose property had a value greater than $20,000.
Even they could apply for special pardons, which Johnson granted regularly.
He appointed provisional governors and set forth conditions that the reorganized state governments must meet.
But these conditions were minimal because Johnson took a limited view of the goals of the war and what the federal government could require afterwards.
In the summer and fall of 1865, the provisional governors carried out their duties, including arranging for the election of representatives to Congress.
Many Northerners questioned Johnson's plan, especially after the beginning of 1866.
They doubted the fitness of the Southern States for readmission because of reports of violence against blacks and their white supporters, the passing of laws unfair to blacks, and the frequent election of former Confederate leaders.
When Congress met in December 1865, it rejected Johnson’s plan and would not seat the newly elected Southern congressmen, and some congressmen criticized Johnson's plan.
From February 1866 to March 1867, Congress and the President argued over a number of bills designed to replace Johnson’s plan.
Congress pushed through, over presidential vetoes, several of these bills.
One of them continued the Freedmen’s Bureau, which assisted the former slaves.
Another, the Civil Rights Act, provided broad federal protection for civil rights.
Johnson thought it was wrong to pass such laws when the South was not represented.
He believed such subjects were not appropriate concerns of the federal government.
It included blacks in that definition. it also laid a basis for far-reaching changes in the relationship of state and federal governments to the individual. in addition, the amendment barred former rebels from holding political office.
Johnson strongly objected to the 14th Amendment, though the President has no official function in the constitutional amending process.
Johnson decided to present his view to the people before the congressional elections of 1866.
The President lost his temper when hecklers tried to break up his meetings.
Increased tension developed after March 2, 1867, when Congress passed two laws that Johnson considered unconstitutional.
One law was the First Reconstruction Act, which put the Southern States under military rule and established strict requirements for their readmission to the Union.
This act also disfranchised the rebels whom the proposed 14th Amendment prohibited from holding office.
It did this by barring these people from voting to elect delegates to new state constitutional conventions and from serving as convention delegates.
It required Senate approval before the President could fire members of his Cabinet and other officials who had been confirmed by the Senate.
On Aug., 1867, Johnson suspended Secretary of War Edwin M Stanton, with whom he no longer could work harmoniously.
But Grant was unwilling to hold the office when the Senate would not approve Stanton’s suspension, and Grant allowed Stanton to reclaim the office in January 1868.
The President then formally dismissed Stanton and appointed General Lorenzo Thomas.
Stanton locked himself in his office and would not allow Thomas to take over.
Stanton continued to serve as secretary of war until after Johnson’s impeachment trial. impeachment had long been a goal of the Radicals.
The most important articles were the first, which charged that the President had violated the Tenure of Office Act by dismissing Stanton, and the 11th, which claimed that he had conspired against Congress and the Constitution.
On March 5, 1868, the Senate organized itself as a court to hear the impeachment.
Seven representatives, including Thaddeus Stevens, Benjamin Butler, and George Boutwell, led the attack.
A team of lawyers, including Benjamin Curtis and William M Evarts, defended Johnson, who did not appear at the trial.
Library of Congress An admission ticket for the first day of Johnson's impeachment trial entitled the bearer to watch the proceedings from the Senate gallery.
Some of Johnson's accusers tried to implicate him in Lincoln's murder, but failed.
As the trial went on, it became clear that the Radicals had a weak case and were no match for Johnson's skilled lawyers.
Johnsons defense team argued that Johnson had not violated the Tenure of Office Act because it was unconstitutional and did not apply to Stanton.
They emphasized issues over which honest individuals might differ, including whether the act applied to Stanton.
This tactic offered the best opportunity to gain the support of senators whose minds were not already made up.
Conviction required a two-thirds vote, or 36 votes from the 54 members of the Senate.
Acquittal required only 19 votes, and Johnson knew he could count on the 9 Democrats and 3 conservative Republicans.
He also needed the support of at least 7 of the 12 “doubtful” Republicans.
Because it charged a general intent to obstruct the will of Congress, Johnson's opponents believed it had the best chance of passing.
The roll call vote lasted over an hour, and the outcome was in doubt until the very end.
The final tally of 35 “guilty” and 19 “not guilty” acquitted Johnson by one vote.
Ten days later, following the Republican National Convention, the Senate voted on the second and third articles, with the same result.
The verdict ensured that something more serious than political opposition to Congress would be necessary to justify removing a President from office.
Foreign relations included two important achievements by Secretary of State William Seward.
A French army had overthrown the Mexican government, and Napoleon Ill named Maximilian of Austria as emperor of Mexico in 1864.
In 1865, Seward warned that the United States Army would drive out the French by force if necessary.
Seward’s second accomplishment was the purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867.
The Russians feared they might lose the colony to Great Britain and offered it to the United States for $7,200,000.
For many years, Americans called Alaska “Seward’s folly,” little dreaming that it would one day be one of the states.
Life in the White House became livelier during Johnson's Administration than it had been during the gloomy war years.
The household included the Johnson's two surviving sons, Robert and Andrew; their daughters, Mrs.
Patterson of TenLibrary of Congress ae ak Te ee The impeachment trial of President Johnson lasted from March 13 to May 26, 1868.
The President's supporters and enemies both brought great pressure on the Republican senators who were undecided on whether to convict him.
The President's wife had been an invalid for many years and lived in quiet seclusion.
The final months of Johnson's Administration after the impeachment trial were uneventful.
Johnsons last important official act was a proclamation on Christmas Day in 1868 of a complete pardon for all Southerners who had taken part in the Civil War and were still unpardoned.
He also granted pardons in 1869 to three men still in prison for their part in Lincoln's assassination.
These actions showed Johnson's desire to end the sectional bitterness dividing the nation.
Assured by friends that bribery would induce two state legislators to change their votes, Johnson indignantly refused.
In 1872, Johnson ran for the United States House of Representatives as an independent against a Republican and a Democratic exConfederate general.
But he won election to the United States Senate in 1875, and thus became the only former President to serve as a senator.
Johnson attended a short special session in March 1875, along with 13 of the 35 senators who voted for his conviction in 1868.
Many fellow senators greeted his entrance with applause, and bouquets of flowers decorated his desk.
Johnson was buried in Greeneville, wrapped in a United States flag and with his well-worn copy of the Constitution under his head.
Impeachment Lincoln, Abraham President of the United States Reconstruction Vice President of the United States Outline 1.
Military governor B United States representative of Tennessee C Governor F Vice President D United States senator Ill.
Additional resources Castel, Albert E The Presidency of Andrew Johnson.
The Historic Ilmpeachments of Justice Samuel Chase and President Andrew Johnson.
Johnson, Charles Spurgeon , was an American sociologist and educator who studied and wrote about the life of blacks in the United States.
Johnson was director of research for the National Urban League from 1921 to 1928.
Johnson founded Opportunity, the league's journal, in 1923, and edited it until 1928.
The journal featured works by young black artists, musicians, and writers.
Johnson, Herschel Vespasian , was the Northern Democratic candidate for vice president of the United States in 1860.
That year, the Northern and Southern Democrats split and ran separate sets of candidates.
He and presidential candidate Stephen A Douglas lost to Republicans Abraham Lincoln and Hannibal Hamlin.
Johnson served as a United States senator from Georgia in 1848 and 1849, filling a vacancy.
He was elected to the United States Senate in 1866 but was not permitted to serve.
Michael F Holt Johnson, Hiram Warren , was governor of California from 1911 to 1917 and a United States senator from 1917 to 1945.
Elected governor as a Republican, Johnson helped pass a series of progressive reforms.
As a senator, he was an /solationist (one who resisted involvement in international affairs) and opposed United States membership in the League of Nations and the United Nations.
In the 1930's, he favored many early programs of the New Deal, President Franklin D Roosevelt's domestic economic policy.
Robert W Cherny Johnson, Hugh Samuel , was an American government administrator and soldier.
During the war, Johnson also worked for the United States Army General Staff and served on the War Industries Board.
In 1933 and 1934, Johnson directed the National Recovery Administration.
Johnson was born in Fort Scott, Kansas, and graduated from the United States Military Academy in 1903.
Johnson’s defeat of Jeffries resulted in racial violence in many United States cities.
In 1913, Johnson was found guilty of violating the Mann Act, a Jaw that banned the transporting of women across state lines for immoral purposes.
Many scholars believe Johnson was unjustly accused and convicted of this violation.
Johnson returned to the United States in 1920 and served 10 months in jail for his 1913 conviction.
After 1928, Johnson was primarily a lecturer and show-business performer.
Free Pr., 1985. Johnson, James P , was an American pianist and composer.
Johnson made important contributions to ragtime, jazz, and popular music.
He was part of a group of ragtime pianists on the East Coast who created a solo jazz piano style called stride.
As a youth, he studied classical piano, but he was also exposed to blues, ragtime, and show music.
Johnson wrote the lyrics for the song “Lift Every Voice and Sing” , sometimes called the Negro national anthem.
The novel tells of an attempt to escape racial discrimination against black Americans and provides an understanding of cultural attitudes of black Americans in the early 1900's.
In his hometown, he was a school principal, a newspaper editor, and a lawyer.
There, he wrote songs for musicals and vaudeville with his brother, Rosamond.
Johnson was United States consul to Venezuela and to Nicaragua from 1906 to 1913.
James Weldon Johnson Additional resources MckKissack, Patricia and Fredrick.
Johnson, John Harold , is one of the leading publishers in the United States.
The magazines include Ebony, a monthly picture and news magazine; Ebony /r/,a monthly children’s magazine; and Jet, a weekly news magazine.
Johnson began his publishing career in 1942 when he founded the Johnson Publishing Co. in Chicago and started Negro Digest, a literary magazine.
Johnson represented the United States on trips to Africa, Poland, and the Soviet Union.
He became President on Nov., 1963, following the fatal shooting of President John F Kennedy in a street in Dallas, Tex.
A stunned nation rallied behind the energetic and ambitious new President, a product of the Texas hill country.
They received more than 61 per cent of the votes cast—the largest percentage in United States history.
Lyndon Baines Johnson had served in Congress for almost 24 years before he was elected Vice President in 1960.
In 1937, at the age of 29, he won election to the United States House of Representatives.
Five years later, at the age of 44, he was made Senate Democratic leader—the youngest person ever elected to lead either party in the Senate.
Johnson led the Democratic-controlled Senate during the Administration of Republican President Dwight D Eisenhower.
Johnson was powerful and shrewdly mixed the demands of party politics with a sense of cooperation between Democrats and Republicans.
As President, his image as a master politician caused many people to mistrust him.
After Kennedy's assassination, Johnson moved with poise and confidence to hold a shocked nation together.
He turned his attention to the urgent domestic problems facing the country.
He was highly successful in getting Congress to approve many of the social programs Kennedy had proposed, as well as many of his own proposals.
The words Great Society became the slogan of the Johnson domestic program.
Johnson's skill in congressional politics was not enough, however, to overcome the problems raised by the Vietnam War.
His failure to explain the deepening United States involvement in the war cost him much support and Important dates in Johnson’s life 1908 1930 Born near Stonewall, Tex.
With over half a million United States troops in Vietnam in what appeared to be an endless struggle, disagreement at home increased.
Johnson surprised the nation and the world on March 31, 1968, by giving up politics and removing himself as a candidate for a second full term.
In a dramatic televised speech, he recognized that he had become the symbol of the unpopular war, as well as other divisions in the country.
Johnson said he hoped his withdrawal from the presidential race would help solve these problems.
Although Johnson's presidency ended in frustration and division, he left a vivid imprint on the nation.
He became widely known by his initials, LB/ His wife, called Lady Bird, and their two daughters, Lynda Bird and Luci Baines, had the same initials.
His Texas ranch bore the 1B) brand, and two family dogs were called Little Beagle Johnson and Little Beagle Junior.
Lyndon Baines Johnson was born on Aug. 27, 1908, in a farmhouse near the central Texas town of Stonewall.
He was the eldest of the five children of Samuel Ealy Johnson, Jr., a farmer and schoolteacher who served five terms in the Texas House of Representatives.
He also had three sisters—Rebekah , Josefa , and Lucia , Lyndon was an active, healthy child.
The Beatles, a British rock music group, toured the United States in 1964, creating a sensation everywhere they went.
The most destructive riots included those in the Watts section of Los Angeles in 1965 and in Detroit in 1967.
The Second Vatican Council, a meeting of Roman Catholic Church leaders, ended in 1965.
It issued a series of proclamations to modernize and revitalize the church.
American combat troops entered the war in 1965, and United States planes started to bomb North Vietnam.
Many Americans opposed the new United States role, and antiwar protests began to break out.
The National Organization for Women , founded in 1966, and other groups fought to end discrimination against women.
The Six-Day War between Israel and three Arab nations—Egypt, Jordan, and Syria—broke out on June 5, 1967, and ended on June 10.
Israel gained control of Jerusalem and the surrounding area, the Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights, and the Sinai Peninsula.
When Lyndon was 5, his family moved to nearby Johnson City, a town founded by his grandfather.
Lyndon attended public school in Johnson City, but he did not like to study.
His mother made him do his lessons, however, and he usually made good grades.
At the Johnson City high school, he and a friend won a countywide debating competition.
Lyndon’s parents wanted him to go to college, but the boy wanted no more studying.
Lyndon picked grapes for a short time, then worked as a clerk for his cousin Tom Martin, a lawyer. tn the fall of 1925, he rode back to Johnson City with his Uncle Clarence, Tom’s faLyndon Baines Johnson Library Johnson's birthplace, a small frame house near Stonewall, Texas, was torn down in 1935.
A replica of the house, shown here, was built on the original foundation in 1966.
He borrowed $75 from the Johnson City bank to get himself started at college.
Johnson developed an interest in campus politics, and became the star debater among the students.
This group took control of campus politics from the Black Stars, an organization dominated by athletes.
Johnson also edited the college newspaper and became a leader in other campus activities.
Then, after saving money from his teaching job, he returned to college.
After graduation, Johnson taught public speaking and debate in Sam Houston High School in Houston.
That year, Richard M Kleberg, a Democrat and an ownThe White House As asmalFtown schoolteacher in Cotulla, Texas, in 1928-1929, Johnson saved money te complete his college education.
He then taught at the Sam Houston High School in Houston. er of the famous King Ranch, ran for the United States House of Representatives.
Kleberg won the special election of November, 1931, and took the 23-year-old Johnson along to Washington as his secretary.
Johnson asked Taylor for a date immediately after meeting her, but she could not accept.
After Johnson returned to Washington, he began to make long-distance telephone calls to her.
Two months later when he went to Texas again, Johnson proposed to her and she accepted.
The Johnsons were married on Nov., 1934, and took a honeymoon trip to Mexico.
Johnson, the youngest NYA state administrator, put about 12,000 youths to work in such projects as playgrounds, roadside parks, and soil conservation.
His organization also helped about 18,000 young Americans go through high school or college.
He ran in a special election to fill the seat of James P Buchanan of the 10th Congressional District of Texas, who had died.
Johnson had nine opponents, many of whom were better known and had more money for campaigning.
Johnson supported Roosevelt's program, including the President's proposal to reorganize the Supreme Court.
Johnson's opponents charged Roosevelt was trying to “pack” the court with justices who would always favor the New Deal, and they attacked Johnson for favoring the plan.
Two days before the election, Johnson entered an Austin hospital for an emergency operation to have his appendix removed.
He was lying in his hospital bed when the election returns came in on the night of April 10, 1937.
He had won election to the House of Representatives with almost twice as many votes as his nearest opponent.
When Johnson left the hospital, President Roosevelt was on a fishing cruise in the Gulf of Mexico off the coast of Texas.
The President let it be known that he wanted to see the new congressman.
Johnson went aboard the presidential yacht at Galveston, then rode through Texas with Roosevelt on the President's special train.
President Roosevelt and the young congressman developed a warm, lasting friendship.
Johnson was sworn in as a United States Representative on May 14, 1937.
Johnson also sponsored projects that gave his Texas district soil conservation, public housing, lower railroad freight rates, and expanded credit for loans to farmers.
In 1938, Johnson was elected with no opposition to his first full term in the House.
As a member of the House Naval Affairs Committee, Johnson helped plan a huge naval air training base at Corpus Christi, Tex.
During the 1940 election campaign he served as head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.
The next year, Johnson announced his candidacy for the unexpired term of United States Senator Morris Sheppard of Texas, who had died in April 1941.
Johnson lost the election to Governor W Lee O’Daniel, a New Deal foe, by only 1,311 votes.
On Dec., 1941, the Japanese bombed the Pearl Harbor Naval Base in Hawaii.
An hour after the United States declared war, Johnson, who had been a member of the Naval Reserve for several years, asked to be called up for active duty.
Three days later, Johnson was sworn in as a lieutenant commander, the first congressman to go into uniform.
As a special representative of President Roosevelt, Johnson went to New Zealand and traveled through the Pacific area of operations.
After a mission aboard a bomber that was attacked by Japanese fighter planes, MacArthur personally awarded Johnson the Silver Star for gallantry.
In the spring of 1942, while Johnson was overseas, his supporters entered him as a candidate for reelection to the House.
In July 1942, Roosevelt ordered all members of Congress in the armed forces to return to Washington.
He was opposed in the primary election by 10 men, including Coke Stevenson, a popular former governor.
However, a runoff election between the two candidates was necessary because Stevenson did not get a majority of the total votes cast.
Lady Bird, whose maiden name was Claudia Taylor, came from a wealthy Texas family. military preparedness in the Cold War with the Soviet Union.
After the Korean War began in 1950, he called for more troops and for improved weapons.
His chief job was to see that party members were present when a bill came up for a vote.
While serving as whip, Johnson increased his ability to persuade people to reach agreement.
Johnson supported Governor Adlai E Stevenson of Illinois against General Dwight D Eisenhower in the 1952 presidential campaign.
During one three-day period, Johnson made more than 20 campaign speeches for Stevenson.
Eisenhower, a Republican, won the election, and the Democrats lost their majority control of the Senate.
In January 1953, Senate Democrats unanimously elected Johnson minority leader.
At the age of 44, he was the youngest man either party had ever chosen Senate leader.
He won the Democratic primary by a margin of nearly three to one over his closest opponent.
In the election campaign, Johnson worked hard for Democratic candidates in many states.
Johnson became majority leader of the Senate in January 1955. in this post, he had the responsibility of keeping the legislative process running smoothly.
He also decided when various bills would be taken up and who would sponsor the bills.
Skilled in the techniques of give and take, Johnson paved the way for bills before they reached the Senate floor for voting.
He checked the views of each Democratic Senator on controversial measures.
Johnson delayed Senate voting until he had done everything he could to persuade Senators to vote his way.
He spent five weeks in the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Mad., then went to his Johnson City ranch to recuperate.
After he had recovered, he returned to Washington and resumed his post as Senate majority leader.
A strong supporter of the exploration of outer space, Johnson helped establish the Senate Aeronautical and Space Committee, and made himself its first chairman.
In 1957, Johnson put through the Senate the first civil rights bill in more than 80 years.
Three years later, in 1960, he beat down a Southern filibuster, and the Senate passed another civil rights measure.
Vice President Johnson announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination a week before the party‘s 1960 national convention.
Kennedy's choice of Johnson as his running mate was intended to attract Southern votes.
Kennedy was a liberal Bostonian and a Roman Catholic. johnson was more conservative, a Southerner, and a member of the Disciples of Christ.
In the November election, Kennedy and Johnson narrowly defeated the Republican team of Vice President Richard M Nixon and Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., of Massachusetts.
Johnson was reelected to a third term in the Senate in the same election.
In January 1961, Johnson resigned from the Senate and was sworn in as Vice President.
He took a more active role in the government than had any previous Vice President.
He served as chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, the Peace Corps National Advisory Council, and the Presidents Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity.
On Nov., 1963, President Kennedy was assassinated while riding in an open automobile through Dallas, Tex.
Governor John B Connally of Texas, riding in the car with Kennedy, was wounded.
After the assassin fired his first shot, a Secret Service agent guarding Johnson shoved him to the floor of the automobile and lay over him.
An hour and 39 minutes after Kennedy died, Johnson was sworn in as the 36th President of the United States.
The ceremony took place at 2:39m. aboard the presidential Air Force jet at Love Field in Dallas.
At Johnson‘s request, the oath of office was administered by an old friend, United States District Court Judge Sarah T Hughes of Dallas.
The Cold War with the Soviet Union and other Communist countries kept the world in danger of a nuclear war.
In Vietnam, Communist rebels fought troops supported by the United States.
Racial tension and a high unemployment rate were the main problems that plagued the United States.
Major parts of the Administration's program were bogged down in Congress.
Communist agents in Central and South America threatened democratic governments.
As the first days passed, the country felt the impact of a new, but experienced, leader.
Stock values, which had dropped sharply at the news of Kennedy's death, went back up when the exchanges opened after the funeral.
The President pushed hard for legislation that had been proposed by President Kennedy.
He urged quick passage of a tax cut and a strong civil rights bill, both Kennedy measures.
This was $500 million less than the previous budget, and $2 billion less than most people had expected.
This program included creating new jobs and building up areas where the economy had faltered.
Congress also responded on two other major proposals. it cut taxes for both individuals and corporations, and passed a new civil rights law.
This law opened to blacks all hotels, motels, restaurants, and other businesses that serve the public.
The railroad crisis, in April 1964, plunged Johnson into one of the toughest United States labor disputes.
The railroads and the union members who ran the trains had been battling over work rules for almost five years.
The companies said outdated rules forced them to hire workers no longer needed.
Under pressure from Johnson, the two negotiating teams settled the dispute in only 12 days.
Johnson conferred with many of the world leaders who came to Kennedy's funeral.
Tensions eased after Johnson telephoned Panama's president and agreed to discuss outstanding problems.
The United States continued its technical and financial assistance to South Vietnam against the Viet Cong.
The Viet Cong were Communist-supported guerrilla forces from North and South Vietnam.
On August 4, Johnson announced that the North Vietnamese had again launched an attack in the gulf, this time against the Maddox and another United States destroyer, the C Turner Joy.
Some Americans doubted that the August 4 attack had occurred, and the attack has never been confirmed.
Nevertheless, Johnson ordered United States planes to bomb North Vietnam's torpedo-boat bases.
On August 7, Congress approved these powers in the Tonkin Gulf Resolution.
Johnson used the resolution as a legal basis for increased United States involvement in the war.
He showed great energy, often speaking several times a day at widely separated places, then going back to his desk in Washington.
He entertained many guests there, and usually gave them big, wide-brimmed Texas hats.
Johnson's two attractive daughters added youthful zest to the White House.
Lynda often cornered her father's visitors to ask them about current affairs.
Johnson tried to keep life normal for her daughters, but this was sometimes impossible.
For example, Secret Service agents had to accompany the girls on their dates.
Luci was married to Patrick J Nugent in the Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, D.C., on Aug., 1966.
She was the first daughter of a President to marry while her father was in office since Eleanor Wilson in 1914.
Johnson entertained graciously, and usually included dancing at White House social functions.
President Johnson danced with many of the women guests, and he often selected dancing partners for his guests.
Johnson added some of the family’s favorite paintings to the White House decorations.
She gave up active direction of the family investments during her husband's presidency.
Full-term President In 1964, President Johnson easily won nomination for his first full term.
In a sad, solemn ceremony, Johnson took the presidential oath of office 1 hour and 39 minutes after President John F Kennedy was assassinated.
He stood between his wife, /eff, and Jacqueline Kennedy, the widow of the slain President.
The term Great Society caught on, and was used to describe many of the President's domestic programs.
These programs included continuing the War on Poverty, improving the educational system, providing for elder citizens, and aiding urban areas.
Johnson was extremely successful in 1965 and 1966 in getting his proposals passed by the 89th Congress.
Congress passed his Appalachia bill, a measure to improve living standards in an 11-state Appalachian Mountain region.
It also passed his proposals for increased federal aid to education, a cut in excise taxes, stronger safety measures for automobiles, and the establishment of two new executive departments—the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Department of Transportation.
In 1965, Congress passed a voting rights law designed to ensure voting rights for blacks.
Among other things, the law outlawed literacy tests as a voting requirement.
The Civil Rights Act of 1968 was designed to end racial discrimination in the sale or rental of houses and apartments.
A new housing law, also passed in 1968, provided over $5 billion in federal funds to help the needy buy houses and rent apartments.
When he became President, United States forces in Vietnam consisted of about 16,300 military advisers. in the spring and summer of 1965, he ordered the first United States combat troops into South Vietnam to protect United States bases there and to stop the Communists from overrunning the country.
United States planes stepped up bombing attacks against Lyndon Baines Johnson Library we eee wor The Johnson family in 1968 consisted of, /eft to right, sonin-law Patrick J Nugent; daughter Luci; Lady Bird; Johnson and grandson Patrick; daughter Lynda; and her husband, Charles S Robb.
By 1968, there were more than 500,000 United States troops in South Vietnam.
A bitter debate developed in the United States over the United States role in the war.
Many Americans became hawks, favoring sterner military action to end the war.
Many others became doves, calling for a cutback in the fighting and eventual United States withdrawal from the war.
In mid-1965, rebels tried to overthrow the government in the Dominican Republic.
All United States troops were withdrawn by mid_ 1966, after order was restored and elections were held.
Johnson named the first black to the Cabinet when he made Robert C Weaver secretary of housing and urban development in 1966.
In 1967, he appointed Thurgood Marshall to the Supreme Court of the United States.
In October 1966, he discussed the Vietnam War with six Asian Allied leaders in Manila, Philippines.
In June 1967, he met Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin in Glassboro, N.J., to discuss world problems.
More _ Republicans were elected to the 90th Congress, and many of them opposed Johnson's Great Society programs.
Some members of Congress said government _ spending at home should be cut to help absorb the _ costs of the Vietnam War.
That is, the government could continue programs to help the people at home while paying the war costs.
In 1968, Congress voted a temporary surtax in addition to the regular income tax to help pay for the war and check inflation.
Opposition grew to the increasing United States role in the Vietnam War, and racial unrest increased.
Johnson had to send federal troops to Detroit in July 1967, to _ stop a riot there.
He appointed a special commission of prominent Americans headed by Governor Otto Kerner _ of Illinois to try to determine causes of the riots.
The war and racial problems at home caused many _ Americans to question both foreign and domestic poli_ cies.
Many began to doubt statements by Administration officials on the progress of the war.
Johnson shocked the nation by announcing on March 31, 1968, that he would not run for reelection.
For me, it is a deep personal tragedy. | know that the world shares the sorrow that Mrs.
Speech on Nov., 1963, after the assassination of President John F Kennedy All i have [ would have given gladly not to be standing here today.
It will not be a short or easy struggle, no single weapon or strategy will suffice, but we shall not rest until that war is won.
State of the Union message on fan., 1964 The challenge of the next half century is whether we have the wisdom to use that wealth to enrich and elevate our national life .. . . we have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society, but upward to the Great Society.
I shall not seek, and [ will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your President.
Television broadcast on March 31, 1968 Pove vision in the American house” and that he was withdrawing in the name of national unity.
At the same time, he announced a reduction in bombing of North Vietnam.
Johnson's order to reduce bombing led to talks between United States and North Vietnamese representatives.
Johnson halted all bombing and other United States attacks on North Vietnamese territory on Nov., 1968.
Retirement Johnson retired to his Texas ranch after Republican Richard M Nixon’s inauguration as the 37th President on Jan., 1969.
After leaving office, Johnson avoided active participation in politics.
The family cemetery at the ranch, where Johnson is buried, is part of the national historic park.
After Johnson’s death, the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston was renamed the Lyndon B Johnson Space Center.
Also, the Texas state legislature made August 27, Johnson’s birthday, a legal holiday in the state.
African Americans (The civil Kennedy, John F rights movement) Medicare Austin President of the United States Civil Rights Act of 1964 Texas Great Society Vice President of the United States Humphrey, Hubert H Vietnam War Johnson Space Center Outline 1.
Full-term President A The Great Society B The widening Vietnam War Vill.
Dwight D Eisenhower, John F Kennedy, Lyndon B Johnson.\st Century Bks., 1996.
Johnson, Magic , ranks as one of the greatest players in basketball history.
Johnson revolutionized the guard position because no player of his height had previously blended quickness and agility with superior dribbling, passing, and shooting skills.
He was nicknamed “Magic’ after a sensational performance in high school.
Johnson won the NBA‘’s Most Valuable Player award for the 1986-1987 and 19881989 seasons.
His career total of 9,921 assists was an NBA record until it was broken by John Stockton in the 1994-1995 season.
He returned to competition as a member of the “Dream Team,’ the United States basketball team that won the gold medal at the 1992 Summer Olympic Games.
He returned to the Lakers as a player early in 1996 but again retired at the end of the season.
Johnson, Pauline , was a Canadian writer known for poetry about Indian life.
She was born on March 10, 1861, on an Indian reservation near Brantford, Ontario.
She also wrote Legends of Vancouver , a series of stories about Canada’s Squamish tribes.
Rosemary Sullivan Johnson, Philip Cortelyou , is an American architect.
The catalog defined and named the style that dominated European and American architecture in the early and mid-1900's.
Johnson based the design on the works of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, a leader of the International Style.
However, many of his buildings reveal a romantic quality and an emphasis on historical elements not found in typical examples of the International Style.
In the 1970's, Johnson became a leader of a movement called postmodernism.
Postmodern architects make free and explicit use of the arch and other traditional archi-tectural elements.
Nicholas Adams See also Architecture (introduction [picturel; Architecture today); Postmodernism.
Johnson won the 1995 Cy Young Award as the best pitcher in the American League.
Johnson has led the major leagues in strikeouts eight _times, from 1992 through 1995 and from 1998 through 2001.
In 2000, he became only the 12th pitcher in major league history to strike out 3,000 batters during a career.
His size and his powerful fast ball make him one of baseball's most intimidating pitchers.
He was signed by the Montreal Expos in 1985 and pitched in the minor leagues until 1988, when he made his major league debut with the Expos.
Dave Nightingale johnson, Richard Mentor , was vice president of the United States from 1837 to 1841 under President Martin Van Buren.
In the election of 1836, no vice presidential candidate got the majority of electoral votes required by the 12th Amendment.
Congress presented him with a sword for his bravery during the War of 1812.
Johnson served in the United States House of Representatives at various times and in the Senate from 1819 to 1829.
Johnson, Samuel , was the greatest English writer of his day and the subject of a famous biography by his friend James Boswell.
Boswell preserved the wit and brilliance of Johnson’s conversation; the sharpness of his opinions on people, politics, and literature; and the vigor of his personality.
These qualities enabled Johnson to outshine even the most gifted people of his age, including Sir Joshua Reynolds, Edmund Burke, David Garrick, Oliver Goldsmith, and other members of the Literary Club, which Johnson and Reynolds founded in 1764.
Although Johnson was a remarkable man, his achievements as a writer are even more impressive.
Johnson said he talked for pleasure and wrote for bread—and yet he did both very well.
His style marked a high point in English prose, and he wrote with a sense of the moral and intellectual responsibilities of authorship.
Johnson was born on Sept., 1709, in Lichfield, the son of a bookseller.
He contributed to The Gentleman’s Magazine from 1738 to 1743, serving chiefly as a reporter of parliamentary debates.
His poem London , written in the style of the Roman satirist Juvenal, brought him to the attention of the public.
The major productions of this early period were a biography of his friend Richard Savage and his most famous poem, The Vanity of Human Wishes , a Christianized imitation of Juvenal’s Tenth Satire.
Between 1747 and 1755, Johnson produced almost single-handedly his massive Dictionary of the English Language, which established his fame as a scholar.
But the works are notable for their keenness and strength of judgment, and the force and polish of the writing.
Johnson, Walter , was one of the greatest fast ball pitchers in baseball history.
He held the major league record for most career strikeouts with 3,508 until Nolan Ryan broke it in 1983.
From 1910 to 1919, Johnson won 20 or more games each season, with a high of 36 in 1913.
Also in 1913, Johnson pitched 55 4 consecutive innings without allowing a run, an American League record.
Johnson led the league in shut-outs 7 times and holds the major league career record with 110.
A major general in the French and Indian War , he defeated the French at the Battle of Lake George.
Johnson helped bring the Mohawk Indians over to the British side in the wars against France.
The British government made him superintendent of Indian affairs in the North.
Johnson acquired more than 250,000 acres (100,000 hectares) of land in the Mohawk and Susquehanna val, leys.
Fred W Anderson Johnson, William Samuel , a lawyer, political leader, and scholar from Connecticut, was a signer of the Constitution of the United States.
He attended nearly all the sessions of the Constitutional Convention of 1787, where he became an effective supporter of the Great Compromise.
This compromise gave the states equal representation in the United States Senate.
Johnson also served as chairman of the committee on style, which drew up the final form of the Constitution.
Johnson largely educated himself in law and opened a legal practice in Stratford.
He also entered politics and served many terms in the Connecticut legislature between 1761 and 1789.
From 1767 to 1771, Johnson acted as a special agent for Connecticut in London.
Johnson served in the Congress of the Confederation from 1785 to 1787 and in the United States Senate from 1789 to 1791.
Jere Daniell johnson Foundation is one of the largest private charitable organizations in the United States and the largest one devoted to improving health and health care.
It focuses on populations most vulnerable to illness, specific diseases of regional or national concern, and broad national health issues.
The foundation was established in 1936 by Robert Wood Johnson, chairman and chief executive officer of Johnson & Johnson, a large health and medical-care products company.
He died in 1968, and his estate of more than $1 billion was donated to the foundation in 1972.
Critically reviewed by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Johnson Space Center is the headquarters for all astronaut projects conducted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States.
The space center serves as training headquarters for United States astronauts.
After a space flight carrying astronauts lifts off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, the Mission Control Center at the space center controls the flight.
Mission Control monitors the various systems that keep the astronauts alive and the spacecraft functioning.
Engineers at the space center supervise the design, development, and construction of spacecraft.
The vehicles are built in factories and then checked thoroughly at the space center.
Special chambers at the space center reproduce flight vibrations, the vacuum of space, and the great temperature changes in space and on the moon.
Construction of the Manned Spacecraft Center began in 1962, and the center became the headquarters of the United States astronaut program in 1964.
Scientists and engineers at the center directed the first landing of astronauts on the moon in July 1969.
The space center was renamed in February 1973, after the death of former President Lyndon B Johnson.
In April 1862, he attacked General Ulysses S Grant's forces at Shiloh, Tennessee.
Grant held a strong position with an army nearly as large as Johnstons.
Yet | Johnston drove Grant's troops from their positions and almost won the battle.
He served in the Black Hawk War and then in Texas's war for independence from Mexico.
Johnston fought in the Mexican War , and served | in Utah from 1858 to 1860.
He commanded the main Confederate Army in Virginia in 1861 and early 1862.
In 1863, he was sent to relieve Vicksburg, Mississippi, which was besieged by General Ulysses S Grant.
In December 1863, he took charge of the Army of Tennessee and in 1864 began a long retreat in front of General William T Sherman’s advance toward Atlanta.
President Jefferson Davis believed Johnston was afraid to fight and relieved him.
He did not command again until 1865, when he fought at Bentonville, North Carolina.
He graduated from the United States Military Academy and became quartermaster general of the United States Army just before the Civil War.
Tourism, coal mining, and the production of steel, textiles, transportation equipment, and wood products also contribute to the city’s economy.
Johnstown is the corporate headquarters for two major real estate developers.
Johnstown was named for a Swiss immigrant, Joseph Johns, who settled there in 1793.
In the 1850's, William Kelly developed a new method of making steel there, similar to the Bessemer process.
That same year, the dam of the South Fork Reservoir, about 12 miles east of the city, burst during heavy rains.
The resulting flood killed more than 2,000 people, and destroyed property worth more than $10 million.
The flood killed 85 people and caused damage of more than $300 million.
William C Rense Joint is the place at which two or more bones meet in the skeleton of the body.
Fixed joints are seams between bones that lie directly against each other, or are separated only by a thin layer of connective tissue.
In case of a blow or an accident, these joints may absorb just enough shock to keep the bones from breaking.
The joints of the cranium (covering of the brain) are fixed and protect the brain.
Hinge joints are those that permit a forward and backward motion in one plane, like the motion of a door on its hinges.
Pivot joints give a rotating motion, such as the movement of the head from side to side.
These joints are made up of a large round end of a long bone that fits into the hollow of another bone.
The arms of the body can move more freely than the legs because of the way that the joints are arranged, and because the shoulder blade is only loosely attached to the chest wall.
A smooth layer of cartilage covers the ends of bones that move over one another.
Bones are held together at the joint by strong, fibrous tissues called /igaments that attach above and below the joint.
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Charles Wellek Pivot joints, such as those found in the elbow, permit a rotating kind of movement.
Ball-and-socket joints, like the shoulder, provide swinging and rotating movements. like a collar to keep the joint in place.
A sprain occurs when the ligaments around a joint are torn or badly stretched.
Serious sprains are painful, and if neglected may result in instability of the joint.
Dislocated joints should be treated as soon as possible by a physician.
Inflammation of the joints may result from infections or from such disorders as arthritis.
Ankle Bunion Gout Rheumatology Ankylosis Bursitis Hip Sprain Arthritis Dislocation Knee Wrist Arthroscopy _—_ Elbow Ligament Joint Chiefs of Staff is the highest military advisory group in the United States.
The chairman of the JCS is the principal military adviser to the United States president, the secretary of defense, and the National Security Council.
Other members include the chiefs of staff of the Army and Air Force, the chief of naval operations, the commandant of the Marine Corps, and a vice chairman.
The Joint Chiefs prepare military plans and review overall military requirements.
They represent the United States on military committees of international organizations.
They also direct the unified and specified combatant commands under the secretary of defense.
The chairman regularly reviews these commands and makes appropriate recommendations to the president.
It includes directorates of personnel, intelligence, operations, logistics, plans and policy, and communications-electronics.
Previously, the commandant had been a member only when the JCS discussed Marine Corps matters.
In 1986, Congress strengthened the chairman's position and added the vice chairman position.
Joel Slackman Joint-stock company was a form of business organization in which the funds to carry on business were obtained by selling shares of stock to a number of individuals.
See also Colonial life in America ; East India Company; Hudson's Bay Company.
Joint tenancy is the ownership of a piece of property by two or more people.
Each owner has equal rights to the use of the property during their lives.
The last survivor becomes the sole and exclusive owner of the property, with the absolute right to sell or give it to anyone.
Joint tenancies were once limited to real estate, but today they may be created in personal property as well.
For example, two or more people might own a painting as joint tenants with the right of survivorship.
The right of survivorship distinguishes a joint tenancy from the ordinary tenancy in common.
Under a tenancy in common, each tenant's share passes to his or her successors at the death of the tenant.
While living, a joint tenant can convey the share in the joint-tenancy property to another person.
In the United States, a few states do not recognize the joint tenancy of real estate.
Joel C Dobris Jojoba, hoh HOH buh, is an evergreen shrub that grows wild in desert regions of northwestern Mexico and the southwestern United States.
In 1971, the United States government banned whaling and the import of whale products.
As a result of the ban, jojoba oil has become a valuable substitute for sperm whale oil in lubricants, cosmetics, and many industrial chemicals.
Joliot-Curte, zhaw LYOH koo REE, trene, ee REHN , was a French physicist known for her work with radioactivity, especially the production of artificial radioactive elements.
She was the daughter of the Nobel Prize-winning physicists Marie and Pierre Curie.
JoliotCurie and her husband, Frédéric, shared the 1935 Nobel Prize for chemistry.
In 1933, the Joliot-Curies determined the conditions under which positrons could be emitted when high-energy radioactive particles passed through matter.
In 1934, they demonstrated that the bombardment of boron by alpha particles created a radioactive isotope of nitrogen.
This discovery, which led to the production of artificial radioactive elements, resulted in their being awarded the Nobel Prize. lréne Curie was born in Paris.
She served as her mother's assistant at the Radium Institute (now the Curie Institute}, where she met Frédéric Joliot.
Under the direction of this group, France put a nuclear reactor into operation in 1948.
Romualdas Sviedrys Jolliet, /OH lee eht, Louis, /wee , also spelled /oliet, was a French-Canadian explorer who led an expedition down the Mississippi River.
He and Jacques Marquette, a French missionary, were probably — the first white explorers to reach the upper Mississippi and parts of Illinois and Wisconsin.
From 1669 to 1671, Jolliet explored much of the Great Lakes region for the government of New France.
During this time, he became a skilled mapmaker and also worked as a fur trader.
About 1670, Jolliet established a fur-trading post at Sault Sainte Marie in what is now Ontario, Canada.
He traded guns, knives, and other items to Indian trappers in exchange for beaver pelts, which brought great profits in France.
The Indians of the Great Lakes region often talked about a great waterway that flowed to the sea.
They called it the Mississippi, which in their language meant big river.
The French thought this river might flow west to the Pacific Ocean and provide a trading route to the Far East.
In 1673, Governor General Comte de Frontenac of New France sent Jolliet to find the Mississippi and trace its course.
Marquette, a Jesuit priest who had worked among the Indians as a missionary and knew their languages, was chosen to accompany Jolliet.
In May 1673, Jolliet and Marquette, accompanied by five other men, set out in two canoes from St.
When the group reached the mouth of the Arkansas River, they began to encounter unfriendly Indians.
A friendly Indian told Marquette that white people lived farther south on the Mississippi.
Jolliet and Marquette assumed these people must be Spaniards who had settled near the Gulf of Mexico.
Fearing attacks by the Indians and the Spaniards, the party turned back.
Lawrence River near Montreal, and all his maps and records of the journey were lost.
The government of New France gave Jolliet Anticosti Island in the Gulf of St.
He traveled up into Hudson Bay in 1679 and explored the coast of present-day Labrador in 1689 and 1694.
In 1697, he was appointed hydrographer of the king with headquarters in Quebec.
Jolson, Al , was a popular American stage and motion-picture entertainer.
He appeared in a number of other films during the late 1920's and the 1930's.
Jolson's family emigrated to the United States when he was 8 years old.
The sailors decide that Jonah is the reason for the storm, and they throw him into the sea.
God orders a “great fish,” traditionally considered a whale, to swallow Jonah.
Jonah lives in the fish for three days before God orders the fish to spit Jonah onto land.
Jonah’s prophecy frightens the Ninevites into changing their sinful ways, and God spares them.
God contrasts Jonah’s sympathy for the plant with his lack of sympathy for Nineveh.
According to one interpretation, the story contrasts the narrow concerns of Jonah with the universal concerns of God.
The story calls on the Jews to reject narrow nationalism and return to their mission of preaching God's forgiveness and mercy to all people.
Jones, Absalom , was a leader of the struggle to give African Americans control over their religious worship.
He founded the St Thomas African Episcopal Church, the first Episcopal Church for blacks in the United States, and also became the first black Episcopal priest.
In 1762, he moved with his master to Philadelphia, where he worked in his master’s grocery store.
He became a lay preacher at St George's Methodist Episcopal Church in Philadelphia.
George's, established the Free African Society, a service organization for blacks.
Later in 1787, he and Allen led black members of the church in a walkout protesting a new church policy that required blacks to sit at the back of the balcony.
Allen and the other group formed the Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church.
Jones, Bobby , an American golfer, was one of the greatest players in the history of the sport.
In 1930, Jones became the only player ever to win the United States Open, the British Open, the United States Amateur, and the British Amateur tournaments in one year.
After completing this “Grand Slam,” Jones retired from tournament play at the age of 28.
In addition to his Grand Slam, he won the United States Open in 1923, 1926, and 1929; the British Open in 1926 and 1927; and the United States Amateur in 1924, 1925, 1927, and 1928.
After his retirement, Jones and banker Clifford Roberts founded the Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia.
In 1934, they established an annual tournament for the course that was later called the Masters.
Marino A Parascenzo Jones, Casey , was an American railroad engineer who gave his life in a train crash to save his passengers and crew.
On April 30, 1900, he volunteered to replace a sick engineer on the train's southbound run from Memphis to Canton, Mississippi.
If Jones had not stayed in the engine to jam on the brakes, the crash would have been much worse.
The train wreck might have been forgotten except for Wallace Saunders, a black railroad worker.
He wrote a song about Jones that was based on a number of earlier ballads.
The vaudeville team of T Laurence Seibert and Eddie Newton rewrote Saunders's ballad and added it to their act.
They published the song in 1909, and their version became the basis of many ballads about Jones by singers in the United States, Europe, and South Africa.
John Luther Jones was born on March 14, 1864, in southeastern Missouri.
Jones, Davy, in sailors folklore, is a wicked spirit who rules over the souls in the ocean deep.
He is known chiefly through the term for the bottom of the sea, Davy Jones’s locker.
This is the final resting place of lost articles, sunken ships, and sailors who have drowned or been buried at sea.
Octavia N Cubbins Jones, Ernest , a British physician, helped introduce the principles of psychoanalysis in the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States.
He was a friend and strong supporter of Sigmund Freud, the Austrian physician who developed psychoanalysis as a method of treating mental illness.
Jones wrote The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud , a three-volume biography of Freud.
Jones was born on Jan., 1879, in what is now Gowerton, Wales, near Swansea.
He later studied neurology and psychiatry and became interested in psychoanalysis.
Jones met Freud in 1908 and worked from then on to promote psychoanalysis.
His efforts contributed to the eventual acceptance of Freud's theories by physicians and other scientists.
Jones helped establish the American Psychoanalytic Association in 1911 and the British Psycho-Analytical Society in 1913.
He also served as editor of the /nternational Journal of Psycho-Analysis.
Jones wrote many articles supporting his theory that psychoanalysis provides greater understanding of art, literature, and other creative fields.
Hannah S Decker Jones, Inigo , was the first major architect of the English Renaissance.
Jones studied the designs of the Italian architect Andrea Palladio in northern Italy during trips he took about 1600 and again in 1613 and 1614.
Its qualities appear in Jones's most admired building, the Banqueting House at Whitehall Palace in London.
He served as surveyor to King James | from 1615 to 1625 and to Charles | from 1625 to 1642.
Jones influenced later theatrical design with his designs of sets, costumes, and stage machinery while in the service of the English court.
His heroism against a larger and better-equipped fleet established a tradition that has never been forgotten.
His reply to a British demand to surrender, “I have not yet begun to fight,” has become a famous Navy slogan.
He went to sea when he was 12 years old, and in 1769 was given command of the merchant ship John.
On a trip to the West Indies, a sailor died a few weeks after Paul had flogged him.
The crew of the Betsey mutinied, and one of the members of the crew was killed.
The outbreak of the Revolutionary War in America in 1775 gave Jones a chance to go back to sea.
He received a commission as a lieutenant in the Continental Navy on Dec., 1775, and became first lieutenant of the A/fred, the first naval ship bought by the Continental Congress.
In May 1776, Jones took command of the Providence, and in August he was made a captain by Congress.
He received command of the Ranger in June 1777, with orders to sail to France.
Also in the Ranger in 1778, Jones raided Whitehaven on the Irish Sea coast of England but did not succeed in burning the ships in the harbor.
In 1779, Jones took command of the Bonhomme Richard , which he named in honor of Benjamin Franklin.
On September 23, his squadron met a large British convoy in the North Sea.
The Bonhomme Richard attacked the leading ship of the force, the Serapis.
The Serapis was larger and better armed than Jones's ship, so Jones took his vessel alongside the Serapis.
The ships were so close that their rigging became entangled and the muzzles of their guns touched.
In 1781, Jones took command of the America, a ship whose construction he supervised.
After the war ended in 1783, a move to promote Jones to rear admiral was defeated, and the American Navy was soon abolished.
Also in 1787, Empress Catherine of Russia persuaded Jones to serve as rear admiral in the Black Sea fleet, which was fighting the Ottoman Turks.
Russian officers made Jones's position difficult, and his experience was disappointing.
Jones was appointed United States commissioner to Algiers in 1792 but died before the appointment reached him in Paris.
Jones, Mary Harris , was a well-known figure in the United States labor movement during the late 1800's and early 1900's.
She also helped found the Industrial Workers of the World, a labor organization formed to oppose conservative policies in the labor movement.
Jones persuaded many laborers to strike for better working conditions, higher wages, and shorter hours.
She was jailed in West Virginia in 1902 and 1913, and in Colorado in 1913 and 1914, for leading miners’ strikes.
The jailing of a woman who was more than 70 years old aroused sympathy for the labor movement.
She taught school in Monroe, Michigan, and in Memphis before marrying George Jones, an ironworker, in 1861.
In 1867, her husband and their four children died of yellow fever in Memphis.
James G Scoville Jones, Quincy , is one of the most versatile talents in American music.
He is a composer, arranger, musician, conductor, and record and film producer.
Jones has succeeded in jazz, popular music, rhythm and blues music, musical theater, motion pictures, and television.
He began his musical career as a teen-ager, playing trumpet in Culver Pictures Mary H Jones 1598 Jonson, Ben the band of Lionel] Hampton.
In 1956, Jones became musical director for Dizzy Gillespie's jazz orchestra, which toured the Middle East and South America.
In the late 1950's and early 1960's, Jones led his own band, touring the United States and Europe.
He rose to vice president in 1964, the first African American to hold such a high executive position with a major white-owned record company.
Jonquil, /AHNG kwuhL, is any of several yellow narcissuses that came from southern Europe and northern Africa.
In the United States, the best-known types are a species named jonquil/and a species called campernelle jonquil The campernelle jonquil is a hybrid bred from different jonquil species.
The flowers’ petals are grouped around a tube about 1 inch AP/Wide World Quincy Jones Frank Tirro WORLD BOOK illustration by Robert Hynes The jonquil has bright yellow flowers and sword-shaped leaves.
He was proud of his Greek and Latin learning and severely criticized other playwrights of his day, including Shakespeare, for errors and carelessness he saw in their writing.
In 1616, Jonson became the first playwright to prepare an edition of his own works for publication.
He thus advanced the claim of the drama to serious consideration as literature.
He was also the center of the first literary “club” at the Mermaid Tavern in London.
Other members included Sir Walter Raleigh and playwrights Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher.
It is a realistic and satiric comedy of London life in which each character is motivated by a single /umour , such as jealousy.
In Jonsonss later satiric comedies, Vol/pone , The Silent Woman , and The A/chemist , the humours are generally an aspect of universal human failings, such as greed, ignorance, or superstition.
Jonson's most famous song, ‘Drink to Me Only with Thine Eyes,” shows his classical style with its deceptively simple form and vocabulary.
His superb epitaph on the death of his 7-year-old son shows the same skill used to hide his deep grief.
Joplin, Scott , was the leading composer of ragtime, a lively, rhythmic kind of music written chiefly for the piano.
He left home at the age of about 14 and played piano in various Mississippi Valley saloons.
He became increasingly depressed because no one would produce 7reemonisha.
An edition of the complete works of Joplin in 1971 revived interest in Joplin’s compositions.
In 1976, the Advisory Board on the Pulitzer Prizes awarded Joplin a special citation for his contribution to American music.
Richard Jackson Jordan is an Arab kingdom on the East Bank of the Jordan River in the heart of the Middle East.
The country is bordered by Syria; Iraq; Saudi Arabia; Israel; and the West Bank, a territory west of the Jordan River.
Much of Jordan's modern history has been shaped by events in an area often called Palestine.
Today, Israel, the West Bank, and the tiny Gaza Strip cover this region.
Jordan was once called 7ransjordan because it lay across the Jordan River from Palestine.
Jordan lost the West Bank during the Arab-Israeli war of 1967, and Israel occupied the territory.
In 1974, Jordan officially gave up political responsibility for the West Bank.
But Jordan continued to play important roles in the administration and financial support of the West Bank.
In 1988, King Hussein of Jordan broke Jordan's ties with the West Bank.
Jordan's varied terrain includes deserts, mountains, deep valleys, and rolling plains.
It mines phosphates and potash but lacks the petroleum deposits of its Arab neighbors.
Service industries, such as government and commerce, employ the largest number of workers in the country.
Agricu/ture—barley, cabbages, citrus fruits, cucumbers, eggplants, grapes, melons, olives, tomatoes, wheat Manufacturing—batteries, cement, ceramics, detergents, fertilizer, petroleum products, pharmaceutical products, shoes, textiles.
Jordan's capital and largest city, Amman, /eft, features modern office buildings and apartment houses.
The treasury at Petra, right, was carved into the cliffs of this trading center during the A.D. 100°'s. oe AE He appoints a prime minister to head the government, as well as members of the Council of Ministers, or cabinet.
The Senate is one house of the National Assembly, Jordan’s legislature.
The other house is the Chamber of Deputies. [ts 80 members are elected by the Ay people to four-year terms.
A governor appointed by the — Jordan's flag was adoptedin — The coat of arms displays king heads each district.28.
It features a seventhe shield, helmet, and eagle eee dans judicial system consists-of civilprelipointed star.
Civil courts handle most com_erses of the Quran, the holy Arabic, is the king's prayer for mercial, criminal, and civil cases.
The Jordan Arab Army consists of an army of about 90,000 men, an air force with more than 13,000 members, and a small navy.
The military employs a high percentage of Jordan's work force, thereby placing a burden on the economy.
But Jordan has fought wars with Israel and has faced rebellions by its own Palestinian population.
Because of these threats, the government maintains large armed forces despite the cost.
People Most Jordanians live in the fertile highlands of the northwest About three-fourths of the people live in towns and cities with populations of 5,000 or more.
Ames man, Jordan's capital and largest city, has nearly 1 milWORLD BOOK map lion people.
Other cities with more than 100,000 people Jordan is a country in the Middle East.
It is bordered by Iraq, Isare Az Zarga and Irbid. rael, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and the West Bank.
The remaining population of Jordan consists mainly of Palestinian Arabs, most of whom are refugees of the Arab-Israeli wars of 1948 and 1967.
Other Palestinians moved from the West Bank to Amman between the wars, when the West Bank was part of Jordan.
Ethnic minorities in Jordan include small numbers of Armenian Christians and Circassian Muslims.
In urban areas, almost all homes and apartments have electric power and running water.
But in general, living conditions are better than in many other developing countries.
About 10 percent of Jordans population lives in crowded Palestinian refugee camps set up by the United Nations.
Most rural Jordanians live in villages and have homes built of stone and mud, or of concrete.
They live in tents and move from place to place with their camels and sheep in search of water and pasture.
Some rural Jordanians, including Bedouin men and women, wear traditional flowing robes.
Jordanians eat a variety of foods, including cheese, cracked wheat, flat bread, rice, vegetables, and yogurt.
A traditional Jordanian dish called manseffeatures lamb cooked in yogurt and served ona large tray of rice.
Popular beverages include coffee, fruit juices, mineral water, soft drinks, and tea.
Jordanians enjoy watching and playing various sports, particularly basketball, camel racing, horse racing, martial arts, and soccer.
Large families frequently gather for a meal or for a picnic in the country.
Devout Muslims pray five times a day, attend a mosque (an Islamic house of worship), fast, give money or goods to the poor, and make a pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, the sacred city of Islam.
Most of the Jordanian Christians are members of the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Jordan has various other Christian groups, which include Roman Catholics and Protestants.
Jordan has many community colleges, vocational schools, and technical institutions.
Many Jordanians attend universities in other Arab countries, Europe, and the United States.
Jordanian craftworkers make a variety of decorative and useful objects, including jewelry, coffeepots, daggers, and Islamic prayer beads.
Many mosques and other buildings feature delicate geometric designs called arabesques.
The Jordan River Valley is a deep, narrow valley that extends, in Jordan, from just south of the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea.
The Jordan River flows through the center of the valley and ends in the Dead Sea.
The Jordan River Valley is part of the Great Rift Valley, a deep cut in the earth's surface.
The Transjordan Plateau rises steeply from the Jordan River Valley and the Dead Sea.
The plateau covers a wedge-shaped area that begins at the Syrian border and narrows as it extends southward to the region around Maan.
It consists of broad, rolling plains that have an average elevation of about 3,000 feet above sea level.
The plateau includes Jordan's largest cities and most of the country’s farmland.
Rainfall on the southern plateau is less dependable and averages between 10 and 15 inches a year— barely enough to grow wheat.
Average temperatures range between 64 and 86 °F during the summer and between 40 and 52 °F during the winter.
The Syrian Desert, also called the northern Arabian Desert, is a vast wasteland to the east and south of the plateau.
The desert receives less than 10 inches (25 centimeters) of rain annually.
The economy depends on foreign aid and on the larger economy of the Middle East.
Many Jordanians work abroad, in the service industries of wealthy, oil-producing Arab countries.
Today, irrigation and the use of plastic-covered hothouses, shown here, allow farmers to grow a variety of fruits, vegetables, and other crops.
The land rises, background, toward the Transjordan Plateau east of the valley.
Rami G Khouri Production of leather goods is an important industry in Jordan.
The factory workers shown here are sewing leather pieces to make boots. the total value of economic production.
Tourism helps support many businesses, including hotels and restaurants.
Manufacturing and mining employ about 20 percent of Jordan's workers and account for about 30 percent of the total value of economic production.
Large plants include a petroleum refinery and fertilizer and cement factories.
Smaller industries manufacture batteries, ceramics, cigarettes, detergents, food products, pharmaceutical products, shoes, and textiles.
Mining operations produce phosphates and potash, which are used in the production of fertilizer.
Because Jordan is mostly desert, only 3 percent of the land is cultivated.
Chief crops of the Jordan River Valley include citrus fruits and such vegetables as cabbages, cucumbers, eggplants, melons, and tomatoes.
On the Transjordan Plateau, farmers cultivate such grains as barley and wheat; grapes, olives, and other fruits; vegetables; and nuts.
Modern farming methods have become increasingly widespread, especially in the Jordan River Valley.
Jordan's main exports are phosphates, chemicals, potash, fruits and vegetables, and manufactured products.
Jordan’s chief trading partners are Saudi Arabia, the United States, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, Germany, and India.
Al Aqabah, Jordan’s only port, has been extensively developed to handle cargo shipped through the Red Sea.
Four daily newspapers—three in Arabic and one in English—are published in Jordan.
The government owns and operates the country’s radio and television stations.
An average of about 1 out of 5 Jordanians owns a radio and about 1 out of 8 owns a TV set.
Although the government closely controls communications, there is more freedom of expression in Jordan than in many other Arab countries in the Middle East.
Except for one dam that produces electricity, Jordan depends on imported oil to generate electricity.
Written history first mentions what is now Jordan in about 2000 B.C., when Semitic nomads entered the region.
By about 1200 B.C, four Semitic peoples—the Ammonites, Amorites, Edomites, and Moabites—farmed and traded in lands east of the Jordan River.
During the 900's B.C, the Israelites under Kings David and Solomon conquered and ruled the region.
Later, the Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, and Persians invaded and controlled the area.
The Nabataeans ruled from their unique capital city carved out of the rose-colored stone cliffs of Petra.
After his death, the Seleucids ruled the northern part of present-day Jordan, and the Nabataeans controlled the southern part.
When the Roman Empire split in the late 300’s A.D., Jordan became part of the Byzantine Empire, also called the East Roman Empire.
In 636, Arab Muslims from the Arabian Peninsula defeated Byzantine armies in the northern Jordan region.
The conquering Arabs established their language and religion among the people who lived in the region.
They developed an important route through Jordan for Islamic pilgrimages to Mecca.
At the close of the 1000's, Christian crusaders from Europe conquered the eastern Mediterranean coast, including Jerusalem and parts of Jordan.
The region had great religious significance for both Christians and Muslims.
In 1517, the Ottoman Empire easily defeated the Mamelukes, and most of Jordan became part of the Ottoman Empire.
During Ottoman rule, the region's only attraction for outsiders was the pilgrimage route.
The Ottomans did not govern Jordan directly until the late 1800's, when they brought Circassian families to settle in and near Amman.
In 1908, a railway was completed along the pilgrimage route, stimulating Jordan’s economy.
During World War | , Sharif Hussein of Mecca in Saudi Arabia led an Arab revolt against Ottoman rule.
With the help of the United Kingdom, the revolt led to the defeat of the Ottomans in the Middle East and the establishment of several Arab states.
In 1921, the British gave the territory east of the Jordan partial self-government by making it an emirate called Transjordan.
Abdullah, a son of Hussein, ruled Transjordan as emir under British supervision.
Abdullah made Amman the capital of Transjordan and established his authority with considerable help from the United Kingdom.
In 1923, the United Kingdom declared that Transjordan should become an independent state.
But the British kept control of the state's defenses, finances, and foreign affairs.
Transjordan gained complete independence in 1946, but still depended on the United Kingdom for economic aid.
This document supported the establishment of a Jewish homeland in Palestine without violating the civil and religious rights of the non-Jewish population.
At that time, thousands of Jews had immigrated to Palestine, and after World War I, tens of thousands more came.
Many came from Europe during the 1930's and 1940's because of German persecution.
The Jewish immigration led to fighting between Jews and Palestinian Arabs for control of the land.
That year, the British mandate of Palestine ended, and the Jews established the state of Israel.
Jordan held the West Bank, and Jerusalem was divided between Israel and Jordan.
Jordan's population of about 400,000 more than tripled as a result of the war.
It gained about 400,000 Palestinian residents of the West Bank and about 450,000 Palestinian refugees from Israel.
Some Palestinians competed for power with East Bank Jordanians who controlled the government.
The refugees burdened Jordan's economy because of the food, shelter, and services they required.
But some brought valuable skills and savings to Jordan and set up businesses.
By the mid-1950's, Jordan began to develop petroleum-refining, cement, and phosphate industries.
Other parts of the economy, including agriculture, manufacturing, and tourism, began a period of steady growth.
But Talal was removed from the throne in 1952 because of mental illness.
Talal’s son, 17year-old Hussein, succeeded him but did not officially take up the duties of king until he turned 18 in 1953.
Arab countries competed for political power in the Middle East, and the United States and the Soviet Union sought to extend influence in the region.
In 1956, King Hussein replaced the Arab Legion's British officers with Jordanians and renamed it the Jordan Arab Army.
In the late 1950's, the United States became Jordan’s chief Western source of financial and military support.
Tensions between Israel and Arab nations, including © Sautereau, Photo Researchers Palestinian refugee camps in Jordan swelled after the 1967 war between Arab nations and Israel.
Many Palestinians fled to these camps after Israel occupied their homes in the West Bank.
Arabs and Israelis disagreed over rights to the waters of the Jordan River.
Continuing problems of the Palestinian refugees led to the creation of the Palestine Liberation Organization in 1964.
The PLO organized raids into Israel from Jordan and Lebanon, and Israel] responded with raids into Arab territory.
Also in 1964, Jordan and other Arab nations united their armies under one command.
In June 1967, Israel defeated Jordan, Egypt, and Syria in a six-day war.
Jordan lost East Jerusalem and all of the West Bank to Israeli occupation.
About 300,000 Palestinians—both refugees and permanent residents—who had been living in the West Bank fled east.
Jordan's economy suffered from the loss of West Bank farmlands and tourist attractions.
After the 1967 war, many Palestinian refugees joined guerrilla groups to fight Israel and regain their homeland.
By early 1970, these forces represented an unofficial second government in Jordan and threatened to overthrow the monarchy.
On Sept., 1970, the Jordanian army attacked the Palestinian guerrillas.
Syrian forces entered Jordan to support the Palestinians but later withdrew.
But fighting between the army and isolated guerrilla groups continued into 1971 and beyond.
Drained by these ongoing battles, Jordan played a minor role in the 1973 Arab-Israeli war.
At a meeting of Arab leaders in 1974, King Hussein lost influence in Palestinian affairs when the PLO was declared the only representative of the Palestinian people.
Hussein and other Arab leaders agreed that the West Bank should become part of an independent Palestinian state in the event of an Israeli withdrawal.
They gave the PLO responsibility for any West Bank territory from which Israel might withdraw.
However, Jordan continued to play important administrative and financial roles in the West Bank.
For example, the Jordanian government paid the salaries of many West Bank public service workers, including doctors and teachers.
Disagreements between Jordan and the PLO over Palestinian policy led to a major break in 1986.
King Hussein tried to set up new leader166 Jordan, Barbara Charline ship for the Palestinians.
But the next year, the Palestinians demonstrated their loyalty to the PLO in an uprising against Israel's occupying forces in the West Bank.
In 1988, Hussein broke Jordan's political and administrative ties to the West Bank.
He called for the PLO to fulfill the financial and other functions Jordan had handled.
The United States and many other countries, including many Arab nations, opposed the invasion and formed an alliance.
Jordan's relations with some Arab countries became strained when it remained neutral in the conflict.
Beginning in 1993, Israel and the PLO signed several agreements that led to the withdrawal of Israeli troops from portions of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip by early 1996.
In 1994, Jordan and Israel signed a peace treaty that formally ended the state of war that had technically existed between the two countries since 1948.
People A Ancestry D.Food and drink G Education B Languages __ E Recreation H The arts C Way of life F Religion Ill.
Jordan, a Texas Democrat, was a member of the House of Representatives from 1973 to 1979.
In 1976, she became the first black keynote speaker at a Democratic National Convention.
Jordan served in the Texas Senate from 1966 to 1972, the first black to hold a seat there since 1883.
In 1992, Jordan received the Spingarn Medal for her service in Congress.
He helped develop quantum mechanics, a field of physics that describes the structure of atoms and the motion of atomic particles.
In 1925, Jordan helped two other German physicists, Max Born and Werner Heisenberg, write the first mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics.
By 1928, he developed a way of analyzing interactions between many atomic particles or waves.
He also added to the knowledge of subatomic particles called neutrinos and to the theory of gravitation.
He has played guard and forward for the Chicago Bulls for most of his career.
His spectacular shooting, especially his acrobatic shots near the basket, has attracted huge turnouts in every NBA arena.
Only Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Karl Malone, and Wilt Chamberlain have scored more.
He played on the United States teams that won first place in men’s basketball at the 1984 and 1992 Summer Olympic Games.
Jordan helped lead the Bulls to NBA titles in the 1990-1991, 1991-1992, 1992-1993, 19951996, 1996-1997, and 1997-1998 seasons.
Jordan was named NBA Rookie of the Year for the 1984-1985 season after scoring 2,313 points, more than any other player that season.
He led the NBA in scoring average a record 10 seasons, including 8 consecutive seasons beginning with the 1986-1987 season.
Jordan was named the NBA’s Most Valuable Player for the 19871988, 1990-1991, 1991-1992, 1995-1996, and 1997-1998 seasons.
He decided to play professional baseball, signing a minor league contract with the Chicago White Sox in 1994.
Jordan rejoined the Bulls in March 1995 and retired again in January 1999.
In 2000, he became part owner and president of basketball operations of the Washington Wizards of the NBA and part owner of the Washington Capitals of the National Hockey League.
In 2001, Jordan resigned his Wizards management position and announced he would join Washington as a player beginning with the 2001-2002 season.
Jordan, Vernon Eulion, Jr. , is an American civil rights leader and lawyer.
He was head of the National Urban League from 1972 to 1981, when he resigned and jcined a private law firm.
Before Jordan assumed the leadership of the league, he had led drives to register African American voters in the South and to raise funds for black colleges.
In 1980, he was shot and seriously wounded by an unknown assailant in Fort Wayne, Indiana.
In late 1992 and early 1993, Jordan served as chairman of the group that helped United States president-elect Bill Clinton prepare for his presidency.
In 1962, he led a boycott against stores in Augusta, Georgia, and persuaded them to hire blacks.
From 1965 to 1969, Jordan served as director of the Voter Education Project of the Southern Regional Council.
His success in registering nearly 2 million black voters helped increase the number of black officeholders in the South from about 72 to 564.
Jordan received the 2001 Spingarn Medal. jordan River, the only important river of Israel and Jordan, rises in the springs of Mount Hermon in Syria.
Much of the rest of the river is not more than about 5 feet (1. meters) deep, except in March.
Then, the melting snow from Mount Hermon often causes the river to flood.
The southern half of the river forms the border between the West Bank and Jordan.
The northern section forms part of Israel's borders with Jordan and Syria.
Peter Gubser Joseph was the husband of Mary, the mother of Jesus, and a descendant of David, the second king of Israel.
According to the Bible, Mary was found to be pregnant after she had been betrothed to Joseph, but before they were married.
Joseph took steps to break the betrothal, but in a way that would not put Mary to shame.
Joseph then took Mary as his wife and legally accepted her child as his own by naming Him.
Joseph and Mary raised Jesus according to traditional Jewish customs and rites.
Jesus was circumcised and presented at the Temple for the prescribed rites of purification and dedication of the first-born.
Little is known about Joseph’s life after he and his family settled in Nazareth.
But there are no later mentions of Joseph, though the Gospels mention Mary.
There is no mention of Joseph at Jesus's’ death and no indication of his presence among the first Christian community in Jerusalem.
Early Christian legends portrayed Joseph as an aged widower with children when betrothed to Mary.
But based on marriage customs of the times, Joseph must have been in his midteens when he married Mary.
The Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Episcopal churches honor Joseph as a saint.
In 1962, Pope John XXiil honored Joseph by decreeing that Joseph's name be included immediately after Mary in the list of saints in the Canon of the Mass.
Joseph was the Hebrew boy who was sold into Egypt by his brothers and became the great prime minister of Pharaoh.
One day, when he was 17, he appeared among them in a coat with long sleeves.
Peasants or herders could not wear such a cloak, because its long sleeves would get in the way.
So the cloak was a sign that Joseph was intended for some better occupation.
But they agreed to put him in a deep pit without harming him, after taking his beautiful coat.
Their camels were Carrying spices and precious things from Gilead into Egypt.
Judah and some of the other brothers drew Joseph out of the pit and sold him to the Ishmaelites for 20 pieces of silver.
The brothers then killed a goat, tore the coat, stained it with the goats blood, and took it to Jacob.
Joseph served his master so faithfully that he became overseer of the household.
But he offended Potiphar's wife, because he would not return her love for him.
But Joseph soon won the jailer's confidence and was placed in charge of all the prisoners.
Pharaoh's chief butler and baker offended their lord, so they were also put in prison.
Two years later, Pharaoh had two very strange dreams that no one could understand.
In Pharaoh's first dream, seven fat cows were grazing in the reeds near the river.
In the second dream, seven good ears of grain sprang up, but seven thin ones ate them.
Joseph said the dreams meant that there would be seven years of plenty in Egypt, followed by seven years of famine.
He advised Pharaoh to choose a wise man to gather the extra food in times of plenty to eat when famine came.
Pharaoh was so pleased with Joseph's wisdom that he chose him to oversee the grain storing of all Egypt.
They did not recognize Joseph as their brother when they were brought before him because 20 years had passed.
He pretended to think that they were spies and asked them about their home.
Benjamin was his own brother, the son of Rachel, Joseph's mother, while the others were all half brothers.
The brothers were ashamed to look at Joseph, but he forgave them for their wickedness.
After their happy reunion, he told them to bring their father and families to Egypt, where they would have plenty of food.
At first Jacob could not believe that Joseph still lived and was a ruler in Egypt.
But when he saw the wagons sent to carry his family into the new land, he said, “It is enough.
So his children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren journeyed to the land of Goshen, where Joseph met them.
Joseph had two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, who became the fathers of the two tribes that bore their names.
Joseph, his sons, and his brothers were the legendary ancestors of the Twelve Tribes of Israel.
Their story connects the stories of the patriarchs in Genesis and the deliverance in Exodus.
He became famous for a retreat he led through Idaho and Montana in 1877.
In June 1877, war broke out between Joseph's band and United States troops.
The fighting began shortly after government officials had ordered the band to move from its homeland in the Wallowa Valley of Oregon to a reservation in Idaho.
Joseph's forces won several battles, but he realized that they could not defeat the Army.
He ordered a retreat to Canada, where he hoped to join forces with Sioux Indians who had fled there.
In October 1877, he finally surrendered about 40 miles (64 kilometers) from the U.S.Canadian border.
In 1878, the government sent Joseph and his people to the Indian Territory in OkLibrary of Congress Chief Joseph lahoma.
After about 1885, he lived on the Colville Indian Reservation in Washington.
Joseph of Arimathea, 48 uh muh THEE uh, was a wealthy member of the Jewish Sanhedrin (ruling council) in Jerusalem at the time of Jesus.
After the Crucifixion, Joseph received permission to take the body of Jesus.
Joseph came from Arimathea, a town of uncertain location but probably east of what is now Tel Aviv, Israel.
He is said to have taken care of Mary after the Ascension of Jesus until her death.
According to another story, Joseph kept the Holy Grail, the cup Jesus used at the Last Supper.
Josephine was the beloved wife of Napoleon Bonaparte, one of French history's most important figures.
She was the daughter of a French planter in Martinique, in the West Indies.
The vicomte was one of the last victims of the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution.
Josephine was in prison for a time and narrowly escaped being guillotined.
Josephine soon became friendly with Vicomte de Barras, a government leader.
Through his influence, she got back some of her husband's property, and she became a leader in Paris society.
She was graceful and stately in her public appearances, which made her an asset to Napoleon in his climb to power.
It was often reported that she had love affairs while Napoleon was absent during his military campaigns.
Josephine was also an intelligent woman and may have given Napoleon much advice.
By 1809, Napoleon was afraid that he might die without a son, and that his empire would crumble.
Josephine then retired with imperial honors to Malmaison, the small estate near Paris which Napoleon had bought for her.
Josephine heard the cannon shots announcing the birth, and Napoleon sent her a special message.
He once brought his son to Malmaison, without Marie Louise's knowledge.
Marie Louise was not allowed to go with Napoleon to exile at Elba. josephine wrote a letter to Napoleon and asked permission to join him.
He wrote 7he Jewish War, a history of the war between the Jews and Romans, and Jewish Antiquities, a history of the Jews.
The Jews were defeated, but Josephus was spared by the Roman commander.
D Brendan Nagle Joshua, /AHSH uh wuh, a lieutenant of Moses, led Israel in the conquest of Canaan after Moses’ death.
The walls of jericho fell flat at the blast of the Israelites’ trumpets.
Israel then took all Canaan with three lightning-fast campaigns, killed the area's inhabitants, and divided the land among the 12 tribes of Israel.
Carole R Fontaine joshua Tree National Park is in southern California near the town of Twentynine Palms.
According to legend, Mormon pioneers named the trees after the Biblical character.
The trees rise as high as 40 feet (12 meters) and measure up to 14 feet in diameter.
The park's animal life includes bighorn sheep, bobcats, cougars, coyotes, deer, desert tortoises, foxes, and rattlesnakes.
Josiah, joh SY uh, was one of the last and most unselfish rulers of Judah.
Josiah came to the throne at the age of 8, after his father, Amon, was killed.
He stopped idolatry in Judah and reinstituted the feast of the Passover in Jerusalem.
Assyria soon became too weak to demand tribute from its many provinces.
He met Josiah at Megiddo, and Josiah was fatally wounded in the ensuing battle.
Carole R Fontaine Jouett, /OO eht, Jack , a Revolutionary War patriot, earned the nickname Pau/ Revere of the South.
In 1781, he learned of a British plan to capture Thomas Jefferson, former governor of Virginia, and members of the Virginia legislature.
After the war, Jouett served in the Virginia assembly and the Kentucky legislature.
James Kirby Martin Joule, joo/ or jow/, a unit in the metric system of measurement, is used to measure work or energy.
The joule is used to measure all forms of energy, including heat, electrical energy, and mechanical energy.
A calorie is the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water by 1 Celsius degree.
One joule of energy per second is required to pass an electric current of 1 ampere through 1 ohm resistance.
In the inch-pound system of measurement customarily used in the United States, work or energy is measured in foot-pounds.
Hugh D Young Joule, joo/ or jow/, James Prescott , a British physicist, helped prove the law of conservation of energy.
This law states that energy is neither created nor destroyed when it changes from one form to another.
Joule’s experiments demonstrated that energy seemingly lost is actually converted into heat.
His results supported the theories of German physicists Hermann von Helmholtz and Julius Robert von Mayer, and British physicist Lord Kelvin.
In 1840, Joule discovered a mathematical relationship between the energy of an electric current and the amount of heat produced by that current.
In 1847, he announced the discovery of a similar relationship between mechanical energy and heat.
An important event may be covered by journalists from many news organizations.
Their stories are reported in newspapers and magazines and on radio and television.
Journalism Journalism is the gathering, writing, and editing of material for news sources, such as newspapers and television.
It informs citizens about events in their community, their nation, and the world.
The reports of journalists also help people form opinions about current affairs.
Journalists inform the public through several means of communication, especially newspapers, magazines, radio, and television.
These means of communication are often referred to as the press or the news media.
Additionally, many journalists report news on the Internet, a worldwide network of computers.
Every day, journalists throughout the world gather, write, and edit material for thousands of news stories.
Local reporters cover school board meetings, fires, sports events, and other local stories.
In democratic societies, people depend on the news media for the fair and truthful reporting of current events.
Free nations grant the press freedom to report news and opinions without government interference.
Freedom of the press encourages the exchange of ideas among citizens, which is essential for a democracy to work.
In government-controlled societies, however, the news media presents chiefly news that supports the policies of the government.
Related fields include advertising, book publishing, and public relations.
However, newspapers cannot compete with radio or TV to be first to report the news.
Radio and TV stations can interrupt their programs at any time to broadcast a news bulletin.
A paper must be printed and distributed before it can bring a story to the public.
The great advantage of newspapers over radio and TV is that they can report stories in depth.
In most cases, a local paper has a larger staff than do the local radio and TV stations.
A newspaper devotes more space to reporting the news than a radio or television station provides air time for newscasts.
For example, the a script of a half-hour newscast would fill only part of the front page of a standard-sized newspaper.
Newspapers also have other advantages over radio and television newscasts.
Newspapers enable readers to absorb the news at their own pace and on their own schedule.
Newspapers therefore are able to print certain material that appeals to only a small percentage of readers.
Such material includes death notices, stock market listings, and want ads.
Large newspapers, national newsmagazines, and national radio and television networks have reporters stationed in major cities at home and abroad.
The rest of the press relies chiefly on news services for national and international news.
Their stories, as well as photographs, are transmitted mainly by satellite to members of the press that pay for the service.
News services were formerly known as wire services because they sent news reports over wires to printing devices called te/etypewriters.
News services supply most of both the national and international news reported by the press.
The major news syndicates are owned by newspapers that have a large staff of reporters at home and abroad.
The syndicate distributes to its clients many of the same stories that appear in its own paper.
Feature syndicates are operated by business organizations that sell such material as advice columns, comic strips, and opinion columns.
Magazines, like newspapers, enable people to absorb the news at their own pace and to select only the stories that interest them.
In general, the literary quality of magazines, which are published weekly or at longer intervals, is superior to that of newspapers.
Weekly newsmagazines especially have gained wide popularity because they summarize and analyze the biggest news stories of the preceding week.
Many magazines specialize in providing news or information related to a specific topic, such as fashion, television entertainment, or sports.
Opinion magazines publish thoughtful articles on politics and the arts.
Trade and business magazines provide news of a particular profession, business, or industry, such as medicine, banking, or publishing.
For more information on the kinds of magazines and how they are produced, see Magazine.
Radio is generally the first of the news media to report a local story or a news service bulletin.
A radio announcer can interrupt a program with a news flash as soon as the report comes in.
Millions of people depend on the radio for regularly scheduled newscasts.
In a five-minute broadcast, for example, the stories average less than 30 seconds each.
Many people also rely on radio for weather forecasts and traffic reports.
Television is the chief source of news in many households around the world.
TV does what none of the other media can—it brings the sights and sounds of important news events to the public by means of filmed, taped, or live reports.
Like regular radio newscasts, daily TV news programs provide only brief accounts of relatively few stories.
But the visual aspect of a TV news story can often help viewers understand the story.
TV news may have difficulty, however, explaining in a brief period complex stories that do not lend themselves to visual presentation.
In addition to regular news coverage, television covers special news events.
In November 1963, for example, the major United States networks canceled nearly four days of scheduled programs-to cover live the story of President John F Kennedy's assassination and funeral.
Television has also presented live broadcasts of the first walk on the moon, various governmental hearings, and many other important events.
Cable TV, a rapidly growing part of the TV industry, offers a variety of news programs.
Larry Day The newsroom of a newspaper handles stories from throughout the world.
TV is the chief source of news for about two-thirds of all adult Americans.
Online journalism can deliver large volumes of news and commentary that can be received quickly all over the world.
People can access this information via the World Wide Web, the part of the Internet that, in addition to text, includes illustrations, sound, and moving pictures.
On many Web sites and in newsgroups (online discussion groups), readers can interact with reporters, commentators, or other readers.
Although much information distributed over the Web is reliable, some of it is biased or fictitious.
Such unreliable material exists on the Web because Internet journalists often do not verify their sources when they rush to tell a story first.
In addition, anyone who has access to the Internet can deliberately distribute false information.
Rumors and gossip appearing on Web sites and in newsgroups often leave people unsure what to believe.
Online reporting and commentary ranges from “secret’ tidbits about celebrities and gory details about local crimes to national and global events.
Many journalistic Web sites are operated by established, dependable print or broadcast news organizations.
Almost all the news on such a site comes directly from the organization that operates the Web site.
The role of journalism In a free society, a journalist is able to perform most of his or her duties without government interference.
These duties include informing the public, investigating wrongdoing, influencing public opinion, and entertaining the public.
Reporters represent the public at events that most people cannot observe themselves.
Journalists therefore have an obligation to be accurate and to tell all sides of a story.
They also have the responsibility of deciding which events have enough importance or news value to be reported.
A free nation’s citizens especially need good information about current political events to help them decide which candidates to vote for and whether to support certain government policies.
Only through reliable reporting can people make intelligent decisions about how they want to be governed.
Many people, however, do not have the background knowledge or specialized information needed to understand complicated issues.
For this reason, journalists not only report the news, but they also often explain and analyze it through interpretive reporting. \n reporting on a speech by an international leader, for example, a journalist might analyze what effect the speech could have on the foreign policy of his or her country.
Investigating wrongdoing has become an increasingly important duty of journalism.
Many news organizations feel a responsibility to safeguard the rights of citizens.
Through investigative reporting, they search out and expose dishonesty in government, mismanagement of public funds, and unfair or illegal business practices.
One of the most dramatic examples of investigative reporting occurred in the United States in the early 1970's, when the press played a major role in uncovering the Watergate scandal.
Through editorials, the management of a news organization expresses its views on current issues and attempts to convince the public of the same views.
Many editorials encourage actions that a news organization believes will benefit a community or the nation.
For example, an editorial might urge citizens to approve a school bond proposal or to vote for a certain candidate for public office.
News organizations might also use editorials to fight for various social reforms.
Such editorial campaigning is sometimes called advocacy journalism because it advocates certain causes.
Commentaries reflect the opinions of individual journalists rather than those of the management of a newspaper, a magazine, or a radio or TV station.
Many news organizations regularly publish or broadcast commentaries that differ with management editorials.
Newscasts are among the few kinds of radio and TV programs that are not broadcast chiefly for entertainment, though they often include amusing feature stories.
Most newscasts concentrate on reporting the latest events, weather, and sports.
Newspapers may include such entertainment material as comic strips; crossword puzzles; hobby and travel sections; humor columns; and reviews of books, motion pictures, and plays.
Journalists in a free society argue that they have a right to gather news and to publish or broadcast any information they obtain.
A country’s government, on the other hand, prefers that certain information be withheld in the public interest.
Such information might include material that could endanger the security of the nation or jeopardize a defendant's right to a fair trial.
Many conflicts between the press and the government must be settled in court.
Court decisions have forbidden governments to censor material before it is published or broadcast.
The courts have noted that although such prior restraint could prevent abuses by the press in some cases, it could also be used to prevent the media from reporting misconduct in government.
The courts have therefore reasoned that prior restraint is nearly always too extreme a remedy for abuses by the press.
The news media may be brought into court, however, for publishing or broadcasting material that violates a court order.
In addition, the press may be held responsible if it abuses the rights of private citizens.
Journalists or news organizations may be sued for /ibe/ if they publish or broadcast false information that harms a person's reputation.
News organizations are occasionally sued for invading the privacy of private citizens.
In general, the media act responsibly and do not purposely abuse their right of freedom of the press.
News organizations may withhold information voluntarily if the government states that reporting the material might harm the public interest.
However, the press and the government often differ over what information should be withheld, especially in the areas of national defense and international affairs.
In most cases, the press argues that the right of the people to know about the actions of their government outweighs the benefits of maintaining secrecy.
For this reason, the government often tries to keep what it considers “sensitive” information from the news media.
Journalists sometimes obtain “sensitive” material from government sources who believe the material should be made public.
But these sources are afraid of losing their jobs if they are discovered.
Therefore, they ask journalists to promise to keep their identity confidential.
Reporters also use confidential sources in investigating organizations outside the government On occasion, journalists have been called as witnesses in trials and government investigations and ordered to reveal the identity of their confidential sources.
They have also felt that they must protect their sources to assure other people who have confidential information that reporters can be trusted.
Journalists argue that confidential sources are essential to investigative reporting and that many cases of wrongdoing would never be exposed without such sources.
Some journalists have gone to jail rather than reveal the identity of a source.
Some people believe that the political views of management and journalists often influence what they decide to report and how they report it.
But journalists believe that this mix of political views in news organizations helps keep news reports balanced and fair.
Critics have also accused the press of often creating a false impression of an event by emphasizing its sensational aspects.
In addition, many people feel that the press sometimes produces its own “media events’ by providing mass coverage of minor or insignificant stories.
Critics also say that the press often invades the privacy of people struck by tragedy and is insensitive to their feelings.
During the late 1900's, many news organizations were purchased by corporations engaged in a variety of businesses.
Reporters are often told to avoid taking risks that might cost the company money or reduce its audience.
The size of a news organization's audience determines how much advertisers are willing to pay the organization for advertising space or time.
In many countries, journalism depends heavily on advertising for its income.
As a result, some news organizations refrain from publishing or broadcasting stories that might offend advertisers.
In addition, some advertisers attempt to shape the news and information presented by an organization to suit the advertiser's needs and values.
Competition among journalists often creates sensational news reports calculated to attract a large audience.
Many critics charge that journalism increasingly emphasizes scandals, crimes, violence, and confrontations.
Experts also worry that much of the news reported is inaccurate or biased.
Cable television news channels that broadcast 24 hours a day require a constant flow of news and commentary.
To meet this demand, they sometimes report facts that have not been verified.
In efforts to keep up with the latest news, competing organizations often repeat the same unreliable information.
Journalism in free societies In general, newspapers and magazines in free societies are privately owned.
But in nearly every democracy except the United States, the government owns at least one radio and television network.
In most cases, however, these networks have as much independence in presenting the news as do the private media.
Privately owned radio and TV networks also operate in many free nations.
Some democracies, including Japan and Switzerland, do not allow prior censorship of news by the government.
Many democracies, however, have established legal or informal limits on what the news media may publish or broadcast.
For example, the Israeli government keeps tight controls over military news and other information that might endanger national security.
Journalism in government-controlled societies In government-controlled societies, the news media have only as much freedom as the national leaders allow.
The media in these societies may be privately owned or state owned. in Communist nations, the news media have traditionally been owned and operated by the state and have served mainly to convince the public of the virtues and achievements of government policy.
But in the late 1980's, the Soviet Union and other Communist countries of Eastern Europe began to allow the press to operate more freely.
By the early 1990's, the Communist governments had fallen in those countries, leading to even greater freedom of the press in many cases.
The governments of many countries in Africa and Asia have strict controls on the press.
Journalists who criticize the government may be fined or imprisoned, and their news organizations may be closed.
Censorship boards make sure that the news media follow government guidelines and support official policy.
The boards may also require the press to publicize official notices issued by the government.
Government-controlled societies also restrict reporting by journalists from other countries.
Foreign correspondents may be forbidden to interview certain government officials or to visit particular parts of the nation.
The government may also censor their reports, and it may even expel journalists from the country.
History The first newspapers were probably handwritten newssheets that governments posted in public places.
It reported the proceedings of the Roman Senate and such news as births and deaths.
The first regularly published printed newspaper in Europe was Avisa Relation oder Zeitung of Strasbourg, Germany.
A weekly newssheet founded in 1622 was the first paper regularly printed in England.
Early newspaper publishers had to obtain a government license for anything they wanted to print.
In 1644, the English poet and political writer John Milton criticized such licensing in his pamphlet Areopagitica.
England lifted its licensing system in 1695, and several other countries ended theirs in the 1700's.
For example, many countries tried to limit the number of people who could afford to publish newspapers by making them pay a heavy tax on each page they printed.
As a result, publishers made their pages as large as possible to print more material for the same tax.
By the 1800's, however, these taxes had been ended, and the press in many countries had considerable freedom.
Before the 1700's, the American colonists relied on pamphlets, handwritten newsletters, English newspapers, and town criers for the news.
In 1690, Benjamin Harris of Boston founded Publick Occurrences Both Forreign and Domestick, the first newspaper published in America.
In 1704, John Campbell established the Boston News-Letter, the first regularly published paper in the colonies.
John Peter Zenger founded the New-York Weekly Journal in 1733 and soon won a victory for a free press.
The governor's council had Zenger arrested, and in 1735 he was tried for libel.
The jury found Zenger not guilty after his attorney argued that Zenger had printed the truth and that truth is not libelous.
The act required that special tax stamps be placed on all newspapers, legal documents, and various other written material.
Newspapers continued to publish without buying the stamps, and they supported the colonists.
They also sold for about 6 cents a copy— far more than working-class people could afford.
The Sun attracted a large audience because of its low cost and its lively reports of fires, crimes, marriages, and other humaninterest news.
In addition to reporting the news, the 7ribune published book reviews and poetry and ran editorials opposing slavery and supporting women’s rights.
Other penny papers included the Philadelphia Public Ledger, the Baltimore Sun, and the Boston Daily Times.
The newspapers shared the cost of receiving news from telegraph agents throughout the nation and sold the reports to other papers.
In the 1850's, papers from such cities as Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, and St.
The age of sensationalism lasted from the late 1800's to the early 1900's.
During this period, American newspapers increasingly emphasized stories that dealt with crimes, disasters, and scandals.
At the same time, however, the papers started reform campaigns by hunting out and exposing corruption in business and government.
Magazines also began printing articles by reform writers, including Samuel Hopkins Adams, Lincoln Steffens, and Ida M Tarbell.
These two papers became strong rivals in the battle for readers and led the press in sensationalism.
The competition for readers sometimes resulted in inacTT curate, exaggerated reporting that came to be known as yellow journalism.
Another important publisher of the time, Edward WyIlis Scripps, established the first American newspaper chain.
Scripps organized United Press Associations in 1907, and Hearst established International News Service in 1909.
In 1923, Henry R Luce and an associate, Briton Hadden, established 7ime, the first newsweekly.
Luce later founded a chain of specialized periodicals that included Fortune, a business publication; Life, a pictorial magazine; and Sports //lustrated.
Radio journalism began in the United States in 1920, when station KDKA in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, broadcast the presidential election returns.
During the 1920's, coverage of political and sports events became the most important type of public affairs broadcasting.
Many regular news programs consisted merely of an announcer who read stories from newspapers or wire services.
In the 1930's, however, the radio networks hired many reporters from newspapers to gather and broadcast the news.
By the start of World War II , the networks had an experienced staff of journalists.
Murrow won fame for his on-the-scene broadcasts describing German bombing attacks on London.
Television journalism developed quickly after World War II, and many radio newscasters moved into TV news.
The first television interview program, “Meet the Press,’ began in 1947.
The programs in the series consisted of on-the-scene reports dealing with leading issues of the day.
Television played a major role in the 1960 presidential campaign between John F Kennedy and Richard M Nixon.
A nationwide audience watched as the men faced each other in the first televised debates between presidential candidates.
In 1965, the launching of Early Bird, the first commercial communications satellite, made possible live broadcasts of news events between North America and Europe.
Major improvements in broadcast technology continued during the 1970's.
The development of minicams made videotape practical for use on daily newscasts.
A story taped with a minicam can be broadcast minutes after a reporter delivers the tape to the TV station.
In addition, minicams are often used with specially equipped mobile vans that can relay a story to the station as it happens. journalism today.
By the late 1990's, the communications satellite had become an important tool of journalism.
A communications satellite orbits the earth and relays radio, telegraph, telephone, and television signals.
Communications satellites help journalists gather information and distribute news reports.
They also enable television journalists to instantly report news events to their TV stations thousands of miles away.
Many news services deliver reports to news organizations via communications satellite.
Newspapers also use satellites to transmit images of their papers to printing plants.
Recent trends in United States journalism include a significant decrease in the number of daily newspapers and AM radio stations.
At the same time, however, the number of FM radio stations and local cable television systems have experienced rapid growth.
Throughout the world, news-oriented Web sites and Internet newsgroups offer a huge volume and diversity of news and commentary at high speed.
Traditional news organizations operate Web sites in addition to their regular news media.
However, a few magazines, political commentators, and independent reporters appear exclusively online.
Because there are ever-increasing news sources, many people are shifting away from print media.
Careers in journalism Most jobs in the news media require a college degree.
However, journalists disagree about the best course of study to follow.
Some believe that students should get a bachelor's degree in journalism.
Others recommend a four-year liberal arts program, perhaps followed with a master’s degree in journalism.
But almost all advise students to get experience on their college newspaper or at their college radio or television station.
Most journalists begin working at news organizations in small towns or in rural or suburban areas, and many of them have a lifetime career with such organizations.
Others go on to jobs with big-city newspapers, the news services, newsmagazines, or large radio or TV stations.
Journalists in the print media include columnists, copy editors, editorial cartoonists, editorial writers, feature — writers, news editors, photojournalists, and reporters.
The broadcast media hire journalists for such positions as assignment editors, commentators, correspondents, news directors, newscasters, newswriters, and producers.
In general, the broadcast media offer lower salaries for starting positions than do the print media.
Journalism training also provides a background for careers in advertising, book publishing, and public relations.
Fields of journalism A Newspapers B News services C Magazines D Radio E Television Outcault, Richard F Tenniel, Sir John Publishing Pulitzer Prizes Radio Reuters Television United Press International War correspondent F Online journalism Il.
The role of journalism A Informing the public B Investigating wrongdoing C Influencing public opinion D Entertaining the public iti.
Journalism in free societies V Journalism in government-controlled societies Vi.
Joyce, James , an Irish novelist, revolutionized the treatment of plot and characterization in fiction.
Many critics consider William Shakespeare his only rival as a master of the English language.
He wrote all his works about that city, though he lived outside Ireland from 1904 on.
Joyce lived and wrote in Paris; Rome and Trieste, Italy; and Zurich, Switzerland, where he died on Jan., 1941.
Joyce suffered a painful eye disease for most of his adult life and became almost blind despite many operations.
Joyce's first major work was Dubliners , a collection of stories that reflects his concern with life among the Irish lower middle class.
A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man is a largely autobiographical novel. joyce appears as the character Stephen Dedalus.
Like Joyce, Stephen finds himself in conflict with his family, the Roman Catholic Church, and the nationalistic zeal of the Irish people.
In tracing Stephen's growth to young manhood, Joyce mixed conventional realist prose with passages using techniques known as interior monologue and stream of consciousness.
These techniques give the reader the illusion of following the character's thoughts.
Joyce lived in poverty and obscurity until 1922, when the publication of U/ysses made him one of the most celebrated novelists of the 1900's.
Ulysses takes its title from parallels Joyce established between the adventures of his main character, Leopold Bloom, and those of Ulysses.
Bloom suffers ridicule because he is Jewish and has peculiar sexual tastes and because his wife, Molly, is unfaithful.
He survives the pain and sorrow of his life by a remarkable capacity to absorb suffering—and even to enjoy it.
In this novel, Joyce portrayed one family and at the same time all families, everywhere, at all times in history.
The hero's initials, HCE, stand for Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker, a Dublin innkeeper.
Joyce crammed the book with topical and historical names, events, myths, songs, jokes, and gossip.
His goal was to make all people, places, things, and times repeat and resemble each other.
The book's last sentence breaks off in the middle but is completed by the book's first sentence.
The device is a grammatical representation of the cyclic theory of history that Joyce borrowed from the Italian philosopher Giambattista Vico.
The above sentence traces the flow of the River Liffey through Dublin, past the Church of Adam and Eve, out into Dublin Bay and the Irish Sea.
From there, by evaporation and recirculation, the water returns to the physical starting point of the book, Howth Castle.
The reference to Adam and Eve introduces a major theme of the book, the Fall of Man.
In Irish-Gaelic, the river is called Anna Liffey, meaning River of Life. t becomes interchangeable with Joyce’s major female character, Anna Livia Plurabelle.
Joyner-Kersee, Jackie , an American athlete, became the first woman to win consecutive heptathlon championships at the Olympic Games.
Joyner-Kersee won the Olympic heptathlon in 1988 and 1992, setting a world record of 7,291 points in the 1988 games.
In 1986, she married Bob Kersee, a UCLA track coach who became her personal coach.
He became king in 1975, after the death of Francisco Franco, the dictator of Spain.
His grandfather, Alfonso XIII, served as king of Spain from 1902 to 1931, when Spain became a republic.
Alfonso died in 1941, and Don Juan—his son and Juan Carlos’s father—claimed the Spanish throne.
In 1969, he declared that after his retirement or death, Juan Carlos would become king of Spain.
Juan Carlos was born on Jan., 1938, in Rome, where his parents were living in exile.
Stanley G Payne Juan Diego, Saint , was the earliest saint of the Roman Catholic Church born in the Western Hemisphere.
Juan Diego, a Mexican Indian, was canonized by Pope John Paul II in 2002.
In 1524 or 1525, Juan Diego converted to Christianity and was baptized, receiving his Christian name.
According to tradition, Juan Diego was hurrying over Tepeyac Hill in what is now Mexico City on Dec., 1531, when he saw a vision of a beautiful woman wearing a blue mantle.
The bishop did not believe Juan Diego until his fourth vision, on December 12.
After this vision, an image of the woman appeared on Juan Diego's cloak.
Honored as Our Lady of Guadalupe (also called the Virgin of Guadalupe), she is Mexico's patron saint.
The cloak hangs in a frame at the altar of the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe, built on the site of the visions.
After the visions, Juan Diego gave his business and his property to his uncle.
He moved into a room attached to a chapel that housed the sacred image on his cloak.
The island group has an area of 56 square miles and a population of less than 1,000.
The English writer Daniel Defoe partly based his Robinson Crusoe on Selkirk’s adventures.
Juana Inés de la Cruz, WAH nuh ee NAYS day lah KROOS , was the greatest poet of the baroque movement in colonial Latin American literature.
She was born on Nov., 1651, near Mexico City with the given and family name of Juana Inés de Asbaje y Ramirez She became a nun in 1667 and took her religious name.
Sor Juana was one of the greatest intellectuals of her time and, as a child, amazed adults with her love of learning.
She was regularly commissioned to write poetry commemorating important events in society.
Using her vast knowledge of the arts and sciences, she wrote lyrical poetry and religious dramas among other writings.
She is best known for poetry that explores human emotion from an intellectual perspective.
One of her finest prose works was Response to Sor Filotea de Ia Cruz , a brilliant defense of learning as a proper activity of women.
Dick Gerdes Juarez, HWARR ehz , is Mexico's largest city on the border with the United States.
For most of its history, Juarez was a quiet bordercrossing town with a small population engaged in cattle raising and commerce.
Developing industries were attracted to Juarez because of its location on the border with the United States.
Today, Juarez is a major industrial center and an important gateway for travel and commerce between the two countries.
James D Riley Juarez, HWARR ehz, Benito Pablo, bay NEE toh PAH bloh , was one of the greatest Mexican political leaders.
Juarez also directed Mexican liberals ina civil war against conservatives and later led his country in a war for freedom from French control.
He was born and educated in the state of Oaxaca and practiced law there from 1834 to 1846.
Juarez joined the liberal movement, which sought constitutional government, reduction of military and clerical power, and redistribution of the church's huge landholdings.
Juarez found the government in serious financial difficulty, and stopped payment on European loans for two years.
The French used his action as an excuse to invade Mexico and install Archduke Maximilian as emperor.
He separated church and state, established religious toleration, and altered the land system.
Judah, /OO duh, in the Old Testament, was the fourth son of Jacob and Leah.
Judah kept his brother Joseph from being killed and suggested instead that Joseph be sold to the Ishmaelites as a slave.
He was the son of a priest named Mattathias from the ancient city of Modin.
At that time, the Jews were subjects of the Seleucid Empire, one of the states formed out of Alexander the Greats empire.
The Seleucid king, Antiochus IV (called Epiphanes), wanted his subjects to adopt Greek culture and customs.
Antiochus also wanted to get possession of the treasures in the Jews Temple.
The practice of Jewish law was forbidden, and copies of the law were destroyed.
War broke out when an officer of the king came to Modin and tried to make Mattathias offer sacrifice to the pagan god.
He fled to the hills, and although he died soon after, his son Judah took his place.
Jews gather in their synagogue to worship on the Sabbath, /eft A ceremony called a bar mitzvah marks a Jewish boy's acceptance into the adult Jewish community, upper right A Jewish family celebrates the harvest festival of Sukkot by eating in a sukkah, a hut built specially for the festival, /ower right.
Judaism, /OO dee ihz uhm, is the religion of the world’s approximately 15 million Jews.
It is the oldest major religion and the first religion to teach the belief in one God.
Unlike the other major religions, Judaism is the religion of only one people—the Jews.
These religions accept the Jewish belief in one God and the moral teachings of the Hebrew Bible.
The basic laws and teachings of Judaism come from the 7orah, the first five books of the Hebrew Bible.
This article discusses the principal teachings and sacred writings of Judaism.
It also tells about the chief branches of Judaism and the structure of organized Judaism.
The teachings of Judaism The most important teaching of Judaism is that there is one God, who wants people to do what is just and merciful.
Judaism teaches that a person serves God by studying the scriptures and practicing what they teach.
Judaism teaches that all people are created in the image of God and deserve to be treated with dignity and respect.
Thus, moral and ethical teachings are as important in Judaism as teachings about God.
The covenant with God is a special agreement that Jews believe God made with Abraham, the ancestor of the Jewish people.
According to the Bible, God promised to bless Abraham and his descendants if they worshiped and remained faithful to God.
God renewed this covenant with Abraham’s son Isaac and Isaac's son Jacob.
Jacob was also called Israel, and so his descendants became known as the children of Israel or the Israelites.
God later gave the Israelites the Ten Commandments and other laws through their leader, Moses.
These laws explained how the Israelites should live their lives and build their community.
The Jews are sometimes called the Chosen People, meaning that they have special duties and responsibilities commanded by God.
For example, the Jews must establish a just society and serve only God.
Thus, the covenant assures the Jews of God's love and protection, but it also makes them accountable for their sins and shortcomings.
Unlike Christianity and many other religions throughout the world, Judaism does not actively try to convince others to adopt its beliefs and practices.
However, un’ der certain circumstances, it does accept people who choose to convert to Judaism.
Traditionally, Jews believed that God would send a Messiah to save them.
The word Messiah comes from the Hebrew word mashiah, which means the anointed one.
It consists of two triangles that interlace and form a six-pointed star.
In Hebrew, the symbol is called the Magen David, which means the Shield of David.
The star appears on the flag of Israel. of justice and peace will come through the cooperation of all people and the help of God.
The sacred writings of Judaism Judaism has two major collections of sacred writings, the Bible and the Talmud.
The first five books of the Hebrew Bible make up the Torah, the most important of all Jewish scriptures.
Today, however, many scholars believe that different parts of the Torah were passed down in several collections, which were later edited into the five books we have today.
In addition to the Torah, the Hebrew Bible contains books of history and moral teachings called the Prophets and 11 other books called the Writings.
The Talmud is a collection of legal, ritual, and ethical writings, as well as Jewish history and folklore.
It serves primarily as a guide to the civil and religious laws of Judaism.
Orthodox Jews believe the laws in the Talmud were an oral Torah,” which God gave Moses as an explanation of the written Torah.
About A.D. 200, scholars wrote down these oral laws in a work called the Mishnah, Later scholars interpreted the Mishnah.
The branches of Judaism Modern culture has posed challenges to traditional Jewish observance and faith.
Jews have made a variety of responses to these challenges that have resulted in the division into several branches of Judaism.
In the United States and Canada, the three main branches are Orthodox Judaism, Reform Judaism, and Conservative Judaism.
Orthodox Jews believe that God revealed the laws of the Torah and the Talmud directly to Moses on Mount Sinai.
They strictly observe all traditional Jewish laws, including the dietary rules and the laws for keeping the Sabbath.
Orthodox Jews pray three times daily—in the morning, in Jate afternoon, and after sunset.
The men wear hats or skullcaps (yarmu/kas or kipot) at all times as a sign of respect to God.
A kind of Orthodox Judaism known as Modern Orthodoxy attempts to combine the traditional way of life with participation in the general culture.
Hasidic Orthodox Jews, in contrast, wear traditional Eastern European Jewish clothing and stress the joy of worshiping God and performing His commandments.
At that time, some Jews started to question the traditional teachings of how the sacred writings of Judaism came into being.
For example, they considered the oral law a human creation rather than the revelation of God, and so its authority was weakened for them.
These people, who founded Reform Judaism, claimed that Judaism is defined principally by the Bible.
Today, Reform Jews believe that moral and ethical teachings form the most important part of Judaism.
Many feel that Judaism's ritual practices have no significance for them.
However, Reform Jews are increasingly returning to traditional practices.
Conservative Jews consider the Talmud as much an authority as the Bible.
However, they believe that Jewish practice may be changed to fit the times.
They believe that in this way, Judaism can remain relevant for each generation.
The Conservative movement requires observance of most traditional Jewish laws and customs.
The Reconstructionist movement, a smaller group that developed from the Conservative movement, stresses the cultural and community aspects of Judaism.
The structure of Judaism Judaism has no one person as its head and no international body with authority over religious practices.
Each local congregation chooses its own rabbi and manages its own affairs.
The synagogue is the Jewish house of worship and the center of Jewish education and community activities.
It may also include a school where children study Judaism, the Hebrew language, and Jewish history.
Most synagogues are constructed so that the worshipers face toward the holy city of Jerusalem during the service.
At the front of the sanctuary stands the ark, a chest in which the scrolls of the Torah are kept.
In front of the ark hangs the eternal light, an oil lamp whose constant flame symbolizes God's eternal presence.
The rabbi serves as spiritual leader, teacher, and interpreter of Jewish law.
Today, rabbis also deliver sermons during worship services in the synagogue, give advice to people with problems, and perform other functions.
A person who wants to become a rabbi must spend years studying Hebrew sacred writings and Jewish history, philosophy, and law.
Most rabbinical students also study a wide range of nonreligious subjects.
The cantor is often a professional who has a trained voice and special knowledge of Hebrew and the traditions of chanting.
Important parts of home worship include daily prayers, the lighting of the Sabbath candles, and the blessing of the wine and bread at the Sabbath meal.
Worship practices in the synagogue differ among the branches of Judaism and even within these groups.
Orthodox and Conservative synagogues conduct services daily, but most Reform synagogues have services only on the Sabbath and holidays.
In all Orthodox and some Conservative synagogues, at least 10 men must be present for a service to take place.
In most Conservative and Reform congregations, women may lead the service and be part of the minyan.
Synagogue worship consists mainly of readings from the Torah and the chanting of prayers from a prayer book called the s/ddur.
A different portion of the Torah is read each week, so the entire Torah is completed in a year.
In Orthodox synagogues, men and women sit separately and chant almost all the prayers in Hebrew.
In Conservative and Reform congregations, men and women sit together, and much of the service is in the language of the country.
Holy days and festivals The Sabbath in Judaism is the seventh day of the week, Saturday, which is a holy day of rest.
The Sabbath begins at sundown on Friday and ends at nightfall Saturday, at the time when it is calculated that three stars can be seen in the evening sky.
On the Sabbath, Jews attend worship services in the synagogue and have special meals at home.
The High Holidays, called Rosh Ha-Shanah and Yom Kippur, are the most sacred days of the Jewish year.
Like all Jewish holidays, they occur on different dates each year because they are based on the Hebrew calendar.
The High Holidays come during 7ishri, the first month of the Hebrew calendar, which usually falls in September or October.
Rosh Ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, begins on the first day of Tishri and lasts two days.
According to Jewish tradition, people are judged on Rosh HaShanah for their deeds of the past year.
The chief symbol is the shofar, a ram's horn that is sounded during the holiday worship.
Rosh Ha-Shanah begins the Ten Days of Penitence, which end on Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement.
On Yom Kippur, Jews fast and express their regret for bad deeds during the past year and their hope to perform good deeds in the coming year.
In ancient times, Jews were expected to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem during three major festivals—Passover, Shavuot, and Sukkot.
During the week of Passover, Jews eat an unleavened bread called matzah.
Shavuot, or Pentecost, comes 50 days after the beginning of Passover and commemorates the giving of the Torah to the Jewish people on Mount Sinai.
Many Reform congregations celebrate Shavuot by holding confirmation ceremonies as well.
Jews build small huts for Sukkot as a reminder of the huts the Israelites lived in during their wandering in the wilderness.
On the last day of this festival, called Simhat Torah, Jews celebrate the completion of the yearly reading of the Torah.
Other holidays commemorate major events in the history of the Jewish people.
That year, the Jews won their first struggle for religious freedom by defeating the Syrians, who wanted them to give up Judaism.
Hanukkah usually comes in December and is celebrated by the lighting of candles in a special Hanukkah branched candlestick called a menorah.
Purim is a festive holiday in February or March that commemorates the rescue of the Jews of Persia from a plot to kill them.
The Bible, chiefly in the books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy, commands that Jews follow certain dietary rules.
Jews who observe these rules do not eat pork or shellfish, such as shrimp or oysters.
They also store meat and milk products separately and do not serve them at the same meal.
The dietary laws allow only meat that comes from a healthy animal killed by ritual slaughter called shehitah.
This method of slaughter is designed to kill animals quickly and with as little pain as possible.
The ritual must be performed by a specially trained slaughterer, who says a special blessing before killing the animal.
Orthodox Jews consider these laws divine commandments and observe them strictly.
Many other Jews observe the rules as a sign of their faith or simply as a means of maintaining their Jewish identity.
This event is celebrated in the synagogue with a ceremony Called a bar mitzvah.
Some Reform and Conservative synagogues have a similar ceremony for girls called a bat mitzvah or bas mitzvah.
The young person reads from the Torah during the ceremony, which is followed by a social celebration.
A traditional Jewish marriage ceremony takes place under a /uppa, a canopy that symbolizes the union of the bride and groom. if a marriage breaks up, the hus182 Judas Iscariot band must give the wife a writ of divorce called a get Jews observe special rituals in connection with death.
Burial takes place as soon as possible, in most cases within a day after a death.
After the funeral, the family enters a seven-day period of deep mourning called SA/va.
The mourners recite the Kaddish, a prayer that praises God but does not mention death.
On each anniversary of the death, the relatives observe a memorial called a yahrzeit, reciting the Kaddish and lighting a candle in memory of the person.
Biographies For Biblical figures, see the list of Re/ated articles at the end of the Bible article.
Judas Iscariot, /OO duhs ihs KAR ee uht, was the apostle who betrayed Jesus Christ.
The Gospel of Matthew reports that Judas received 30 pieces of silver for betraying Jesus.
Scholars have speculated about what information Judas gave authorities when he betrayed Jesus.
Most assume that it was information telling where Jesus could be arrested.
The Gospel of Matthew reports that he returned the betrayal money and then hanged himself.
The Acts of the Apostles tells that Judas bought a field with the money and then fell in the middle of it and died.
Later tradition says that Judas hanged himself on the Judas tree, giving the tree its name.
Some traditions attempt to present Judas favorably either by stating that he acted according to God's plan, or that he believed he could make Jesus prove He was the Messiah.
Jude, jood, Epistle of, is a short letter that forms the 26th book of the New Testament.
It is one of eight books called General Epistles because they are letters addressed to Christians in general.
Its author attacks the false teachers who have arisen in the church and warns that God's judgment against them is certain.
Charlesworth Jude, jood, Saint, was one of the 12 apostles of Jesus Christ.
Jude was one of the apostles who was listed in the Gospel of Luke as the son of James, or as the brother of James in some versions of the Bible.
However, the lists in the Gospels of Matthew and Mark mention Thaddeus or Libbeus in place of Jude.
Biblical scholars believe that Jude, Thaddeus, and Libbeus are all the same person.
However, he should not be confused with Judas Iscariot, the betrayer of Jesus, or with Jude , the brother of Jesus.
Some scholars believe that he is the Judas mentioned in the Gospel of John.
Many Biblical scholars believe that he is not the Jude who wrote the Epistle of Jude, which is the 26th book of the New Testament.
In the Roman Catholic Church, Jude shares a feast day with Simon the Zealot on October 28.
Richard A Edwards Judea, joo DEE uh, was the name of a country in southern Palestine in ancient times.
The area was originally named for the tribe of Judah that had set| tled there.
Judea was mostly desert, but its people were able to produce olives, grapes, figs, citrus, and grain.
After King Solomon died, the nation was divided into — two kingdoms—lIsrael in the north, and Judah in the | south.
But in 70, the Romans recaptured Jerusalem and destroyed the Temple, putting an end to Jewish rule in 73.
Jewish rule over the region did not resume until the founding of the modern state of Israel in 1948.
The judges of high courts are called justices in the United States and in the United Kingdom.
The judge decides all questions of law, including the rules that govern what evidence may be admitted.
When all the evidence has been heard, and the lawyers for both sides have addressed the jury, the judge charges the jury, telling it what rules of law apply to the case.
Or perhaps the parties do not want a jury to decide the case, as in technical questions of science or industry.
An appellate judge hears appeals that question the accuracy of the trial judge's decisions on points of jaw.
Judges in Australia and in the federal courts of the United States are appointed for life.
Such appointments are intended to give judges independence from political considerations, and to encourage them to be fair and objective.
Federal judges may be removed only by impeachment for serious misconduct.
Some state judges are appointed under a similar system, but many are elected for long terms.
Judge advocate general is the officer in charge of legal matters in the United States Army, Navy, or Air Force.
This officer holds the rank of major general in the Air Force or Army, and the rank of rear admiral in the Navy.
Each judge advocate general serves as legal adviser to the chief of staff of the individual service and, in some Cases, to the secretary of the Department of Defense.
Their offices provide legal services of all types to the military community.
These services include prosecuting, defending, and reviewing courts-martial and offering legal assistance.
Other services include working with officials of the local civilian community on matters of common legal interest.
These leaders were not necessarily judges in the sense of people who make legal decisions.
According to the Bible, the judges were people whom God called to lead the Israelites at critical times.
Several judges were military leaders who saved the Israelites from their enemies.
The first part describes Israel's conquest of Canaan, an area later known as Palestine, and gives a general description and interpretation of the judges.
The second section tells the stories of the judges, including such famous Biblical figures as Deborah, Gideon, and Samson.
The final section tells about the problems of two ancient tribes of Israel— the Danites and the Benjamites.
A judgment by default is given by a court when the case is not defended by the defendant.
When the defendant admits the claim or charge, the court hands down a confessed judgment.
A judgment becomes, for the time, the law governing the particular case before the court.
In some states and provinces, a judgment of money due becomes a /fen upon the debtor's real estate.
It studies the procedures of the federal courts and recommends policy changes.
The 27-member Judicial Conference also examines the workload of each federal judicial circuit and district. lt may recommend the transfer of judges to circuits or districts that have the heaviest workloads or recommend the creation of new judgeships.
The group also handles complaints about federal judges who engage in misconduct or who are unable to perform their duties properly.
Once a year, it gives Congress its recommendations for changes in federal rules.
If the changes are approved by the Supreme Court, they take effect after 90 days unless Congress rejects them during that period.
The chief justice of the United States is chairman of the Judicial Conference.
Other members are the chief judge of each of the 13 federal judicial circuits and a district court judge from 12 of the circuits.
The chief judge of the United States Court of International Trade also serves.
Judicial review in the broadest sense refers to the power of a court to strike down any legislative or executive action that it finds in violation of a nation’s constitution or other law.
In its narrowest sense, judicial review refers to a court's power to declare laws unconstitutional.
For example, if the United States Congress were to pass a law forbidding criticism of public officials, a court would find that the law violates the right of freedom of speech set forth in the First Amendment of the Constitution.
By invalidating the law, the court would be exercising the power of judicial review.
Constitutional democracies worldwide accept the judicial review process.
Most constitutions written since World War II specifically provide for some form of judicial review.
The case marked the first time the Supreme Court declared an act of Congress unconstitutional.
Chief Justice John Marshall reasoned that the judicial branch must have the authority to issue authoritative interpretations of the Constitution; to decide whether an act of the legislative branch violates the Constitution; and to declare any such act unconstitutional.
Many cases of judicial review resemble the Marbury case itself, in that courts specifically determine a law's consistency with a nation’s constitution.
In other cases, courts determine the validity of rules and regulations made by executive agencies.
In such complex areas as tax law and environmental protection, for example, legislators may lack the time or the technical expertise to legislate every detail of the necessary rules.
Therefore, governments often call upon expert agencies—such as the Internal Revenue Service or the Environmental Pro184 Judith tection Agency, in the United States—to develop and enforce detailed rules and regulations.
Judicial review in this context ensures that agencies stay within the boundaries set by the relevant legislation.
When used properly, judicial review ensures that a nation’s constitution and other laws are honored not just in theory but also in practice.
But if courts exercise this power too aggressively, they may interfere inappropriately with lawmaking processes reserved for elected legislators, or with regulatory functions assigned to expert executive agencies.
The Assyrian general Holofernes attacked the Jews and laid siege to the town of Bethulia.
On their third night together, she cut off his head while he was asleep.
Gary G Porton Judo is a sport in which a person uses balance, leverage, and timing to pin or throw an opponent.
Judo developed from an ancient Japanese method of unarmed combat called jujutsu, also spelled /ujitsu.
Judo is taught at colleges, high schools, military bases, private clubs, YMCA’s, and YWCA‘s.
Many judo techniques depend on a contestant's yielding to an opponent's attack until the right moment to strike back.
The shover leans forward and goes off balance at least a little and so can easily be thrown down.
With such “gentle” methods, a skilled person can often defeat a heavier, stronger opponent.
However, many Gary M Prior, Allspor Judo is a sport in which an individual tries to throw or pin an opponent.
These men competing in the Summer Olympic Games are executing the judo throwing technique called nagewaza. judo techniques require considerable strength.
Practice and good instruction are more important than a person's age, size, strength, or weight.
Judo contestants wear a pajamalike costume called a judogi, which consists of a white cotton jacket and pants and a colored belt.
Many beginning courses consist of 36 hours of instruction during a 12-week period.
After learning to fall in all directions and from all positions without injuring themselves, the judoka practice other techniques.
Most beginners learn a foot sweep, hip throw, rear throw, shoulder throw, and some hand techniques.
Judoka also learn the Japanese names for these movements and other judo terms.
In addition, they practice judo etiquette, including ceremonial bows and proper ways of sitting on the mats.
The United States Judo Federation officially recognizes three belt ranks—white, brown, and black.
Beginners wear white, intermediate competitors wear brown, and experts wear black.
In addition, each color rank consists of various degrees of achievement.
Many clubs award other colors, such as green or yellow, for the degrees within the white-belt rank.
Nagewaza includes dozens of basic throws classified by the part of the body used.
They include hand throws, hip throws, leg sweeps, and side and back throws.
Katamewaza includes on-the-mat methods of choking, holding, and pinning.
Atemiwaza includes techniques of kicking or striking various parts of the body to cause injury, paralysis, or even death.
There are two kinds of judo competition, kata and randori.in kata, the contestants perform judo techniques in a specific order.
In randori, or free competition, the contestants use any technique they wish.
A referee and two judges watch most judo matches to make sure contestants follow the rules.
Then, at the referee's command, they grasp each other's jacket lapel and sleeve in a certain manner.
The referee starts and stops the match, which lasts from 3 to 7 minutes.
The referee enforces rules and awards points for the correct performance of techniques.
For example, a contestant can score a point by throwing an opponent or by pinning an opponent for 30 seconds.
A contestant can also win by using an elbow lock or choking method to force an opponent to give up.
Judo developed from jujutsu, an ancient form of self-defense practiced by the Japanese warrior class called samurai.
Jujutsu included such techniques as choking, kicking, and twisting an opponent's arm.
In 1882, Jigoro Kano, a Japanese educator, began to select techniques from many jujutsu schools.
He adopted jujutsu’s safest techniques and eliminated the rough, dangerous ones.
He looked upon judo as an art, a mental discipline, and a sport which could be used as a means of education.
Judo grew in popularity and, in the early 1900's, became a required subject in Japanese schools.
President Theodore Roosevelt became one of the first judoka in the United States.
After World War Ii ended in 1945, judo began its greatest period of growth in the United States.
Judo gained international recognition in 1964 when men’s competition became part of the Olympic Games.
Judson, Adoniram, 40 of NY ruhm , a Baptist clergyman, was largely responsible for the founding of the first American Congregationalist and Baptist foreign missionary societies.
His interest in missionary work in the Far East resulted in the organization of a Congregationalist missionary society.
But Judson soon left the Congregationalist church, deciding he disagreed with its practice of infant baptism.
He offered to serve the American Baptists, who then organized a foreign missionary society.
He had written a Burmese grammar and baptized his first convert by 1819.
He completed the Burmese Bible in 1834 and finished an English-Burmese dictionary in 1849.
Henry Warner Bowden Juggernaut, /UHG uhr nawt, is a famous wooden image of the Hindu god Krishna.
It is housed in a decorative temple in Puri on the northeast coast of India.
The large image is named /agannath, a Sanskrit word that means Lord of the World.
The elaborate forms of worship and the festivals celebrated at the Jagannath temple © Bernard Pierre Wolff, Photo Researchers The juggernaut is an image of the Hindu god Krishna mounted on a huge cart.
It is displayed during festivals in Puri, India, flanked by carts bearing images of Krishna’s brother and sister. are known throughout India.
In English, juggernaut refers to a huge or powerful object or task, or threatening force.
The word comes from an annual festival in which the image of Krishna is placed on a huge, brightly decorated cart 45 feet (14 meters) high.
Hundreds of worshipers pull it through the city by means of long, thick ropes.
According to legend, some worshipers have thrown themselves before the wheels to be crushed to death.
During this parade, Jagannath is accompanied by images of Krishna’s brother Balabhadra and his sister Subhadra, riding in separate carts.
Anantavarman Choda Ganga, an Indian king, commissioned the temple in the 1100's.
Juggling is throwing and catching more than one object in one hand, or three or more objects in two hands.
Jugglers most often use balls, hoops, or clubs shaped like bowling pins.
The world's best jugglers can briefly throw and catch as many as 10 balls, 12 hoops, or 7 clubs.
Jugglers can keep a pattern going for a longer time, but only with fewer items.
To do so, jugglers throw one object into the air as they are about to catch another.
They keep their eyes on the top of the arc of each throw to establish the necessary timing.
Another is balancing an object, such as a stick or a ball, on a part of the body.
American and European vaudeville performers of the early 1900's also used juggling in their acts.
Juggling is also taught as a physical education skill to develop hand-eye coordination.
Critically reviewed by the international Jugglers Association jugoslavia.
Jugular vein, /UHG yuh /uhr, is the name of each of four large veins that return blood to the heart from the head and neck.
The veins get their name from the Latin word jugulus, which means collarbone.
There are two jugular veins on each side of the neck, known as the external and internal jugulars.
The external jugulars lie close to the surface and carry blood from the outside parts of the head and neck to the heart.
The internal jugulars lie deeper and carry blood from the deeper tissues of the neck and from the interior of the skull.
The internal jugular veins are much larger than the external jugular veins and are the ones commonly referred to.
Opening an internal jugular vein usually proves fatal, because of the rapid loss of blood.
Dominick Sabatino Juilliard, /OOL ih ahrd, Augustus , an American merchant, financier, and philanthropist, was an outstanding patron of music.
It was established in 1920 under the terms of the will of Augustus Juilliard, a wealthy textile merchant.
It formerly consisted of the Juilliard Graduate School and the Institute of Musical Art.
The Juilliard School is a member of the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.
Julian Internal jugular vein External jugular vein WORLD BOOK illustration by Charles Wellek The jugular veins—two on each side of the head and neck—return blood to the heart.
He received a Christian education but secretly rejected Christian beliefs.
In 355, his cousin, Emperor Constantius Il, made Julian the caesar and defender of Gaul.
There, Julian distinguished himself, and his troops proclaimed him emperor in 361.
As emperor, Julian tried to halt the growth of Christianity by strengthening the Roman religion and prohibiting Christians from teaching in the schools.
He also tried to end corruption in government and restore prosperity during his 18-month reign.
Julian's death ended serious opposition to Christianity in the Roman Empire.
He developed synthetic drugs that are duplicates of substances produced in the human body.
In 1935, Julian discovered a way to make synthetic physostigmine, a compound found in the Calabar bean, the poisonous seed of an African plant.
He used one of them in a synthetic progesterone that he developed as a commercial product in 1940.
Progesterone, which is produced in the human body, regulates reproductive functions.
In 1948, Julian developed the first commercially successful synthetic cortisone, another substance produced in the human body.
Three years later, he left to found a manufacturing company and a research institute.
Julian was born on April 11, 1899, in Montgomery, Alabama, the grandson of slaves.
Martin D Saltzman Julian calendar, /OOL yuhn, was devised in 46 B.C. by the order of Julius Caesar.
Before then, the Roman religious officials had distorted the calendar so that it differed from the solar year by three months.
The Julian calendar divided the year into 12 months alternating from 30 to 31 days, except February which had 29.
To readjust the calendar, three months were added to the year 46 B.C, making it 15 months long.
Two years later, in 1582, Pope Gregory XIII corrected the calendar with the newly developed Gregorian calendar.
Juliana, joo /ee AN uh, was the queen of the Netherlands from 1948 to 1980.
From early childhood, she was trained to succeed her mother, Queen Wilhelmina.
As a young girl, Princess Juliana attended classes daily at the palace.
Juliana was made a member of the Council of State when she came of age on her 18th birthday.
Because German troops occupied the Netherlands during World War II, Juliana and her daughters lived in Canada from 1940 to 1945.
In September 1948, Queen Wilhelmina abdicated because of ill health, and Juliana became queen, after ruling as regent for several months.
She succeeded to the monarchy in a ceremony known as investiture inthe Netherlands.
Jan de Vries Julius HE was the most vigorous and forceful of all the Renaissance popes.
He was elected pope in 1503 and immediately became a strong defender of papal temporal power and undertook vast projects to beautify Rome.
As a cardinal, he was influential in papal politics and opposed Alexander VI, the pope from the powerful Borgia family.
Julius led armies in the conquest of Perugia and Bologna, and in 1509 joined the League of Cambrai against Venice.
Julius’s artistic projects were the most enduring aspect of his papacy.
He commissioned the artist Michelangelo to carve his tomb and to decorate the Sistine Chapel with frescoes.
He also employed the artist Raphael to work in the Vatican apartments, painting such masterpieces as the School of Athens.
Charles L Stinger See also Michelangelo; Pope (Renaissance and Reformation); Raphael.
Later, the Romans moved the beginning of the year to January 1 but did not change the names of the months.
On that day in 1776, the Continental important July events Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence.
This festival originated when the growing of sugar cane was a large part of life in that country.
Rastafarians honor the birth of Haile Selassie | on the 23rd of the month.
Barnum, American circus owner, born 1810. — Cecil Rhodes, British statesman and diamond king, born 1853. — Amendment 26 to the United States Constitution, which sets the voting age at 18, proclaimed in 1971.
Whistler, American painter, born 1834. — Wyoming became the 44th United States state, 1890. — Battle of Britain in World War Il began, 1940.
B.C — Josiah Wedgwood, British porcelain maker, born 1730. — Henry David Thoreau, American author, born 1817. — Sir William Osler, Canadian physician, born 1849. — George Eastman, American inventor, born 1854. — Andrew Wyeth, American painter, born 1917. — Panama Canal opened, 1920.
Carole S Angell Quotations Then came hot July, boiling like to fire, That all his garments he had cast away.
Edmund Spenser if the first of July be rainy weather, It will rain, more or less, for four weeks together.
Francis Thompson Hot July brings cooling showers, Apricots and gillyflowers.
Bastille Day Canada Day Ruby British North Independence Summer America Act Day Water lily Calendar 15 Rembrandt, Dutch painter and etcher, born 1606. — Manitoba became a province of Canada, 1870. — Second Battle of the Marne in World War | began, 1918.
July 14—French Revolution began July 16—first atomic bomb explosion — Alexandre Dumas the Elder, French author, born 1802. — Pioneer Day; Mormons settled Salt Lake City, Utah, 1847. — Amelia Earhart, American aviator and first woman to fly over the Atlantic, born 1897. — Arthur Boyd, Australian artist, born 1920.
July Revolution of 1830 took place in Paris when the French people revolted against King Charles X and brought Louis Philippe to the throne.
Charles had tried to move France toward the absolute monarchy it had been before the French Revolution began in 1789.
In the elections of 1830, the liberals had won a large majority in the Chamber of Deputies, France's legislature.
King Charles, who opposed the liberals, then issued the July Ordinances.
They called for strict censorship of the press, dissolved the newly elected Chamber of Deputies before it had met, set a date for new elections, and reduced the number of voters.
Journalists and other middle-class professionals called for demonstrations.
Workers set up barricades in the streets of Paris and controlled the city center for three days.
But the Marquis de Lafayette threw his great influence behind a limited monarchy under Louis Philippe, the Duke of Orléans, who then became king.
Louis Philippe was seen as a bourgeois king rather than an aristocratic king such as Charles X had been.
A wave of revolutions swept through Europe following the July Revolution in France.
Louis Philippe became steadily more conservative during his reign, known as the July Monarchy.
Jumping bean, the seed of a Mexican shrub, is famous for its quick, jumping movements.
The movements of a jumping bean are actually caused by a caterpillar that lives inside the seed.
Moths of the species Laspeyresia saltitans deposit their eggs in the shrub’s flowers.
After the eggs hatch, the caterpillars burrow into the young seeds of the shrub.
The seeds later develop a hard outer wall that conceals any indication of how the caterpillar entered.
The caterpillar eats away the inside of the seed, but it leaves the seed wall undamaged.
Scientists believe the jumping helps scare away animals that might try to eat the seeds.
Then the caterpillar makes a circular lid by cutting through the seed wall.
When the change is completed, the adult moth pushes through the lid and leaves the seed.
William C Burger WORLD BOOK illustration by Oxford Illustrators Limited Jumping beans, /eft are actually the seeds of a Mexican shrub.
A caterpillar lives in each jumping bean, right By grasping the silken wall of the bean with its legs and vigorously snapping its body, the caterpillar makes the bean move suddenly.
A jumping mouse is about 4 inches long, excluding its 5-inch (13centimeter) tail.
Most species have a line along the sides of their bodies where the darkcolored and the lighter-colored fur meet.
Most North American species live _ in meadows and thickets along the edges of woods in _ the northern United States and in Canada.
The female jumping mouse gives birth to a litter of about five young twice a year.
North American jumping mice are in either of two genera, Zapus or Napaeozapus.
There are five subspecies of dark-eyed juncos in the United States — gray-haired junco, Guadalupe junco, Oregon junco, slate-coJored junco, and white-winged junco.
E R Degginger The woodland jumping mouse, shown here, normally lives in meadows and thickets along the edge of woods in the northern sections of the United States and in Canada.
The dark-eyed junco is a small bird that lives throughout much of North America.
The Oregon junco, shown here, is one of four subspecies that live in the United States.
June was the fourth month in the early Roman calendar, and it once had 29 days.
The Romans later moved the beginning of the year to January 1, making June the sixth month.
When the Roman statesman Julius Caesar reformed the calendar in 46 B.C., he gave June 30 days.
Some authorities believe the Romans named the month for Juno, the patron goddess of marriage.
June was believed to be the best time for marriages, and it remains a popular month for weddings.
The Junius family was powerful and important throughout the early history of ancient Rome.
June 1 marks Gawai Dayak , the most important holiday celebrated in the state of Important June events Sarawak in Malaysia.
In the United States, Flag Day is celebrated on June 14, the anniversary of the adoption of the United States flag by the Continental Congress in 1777.
The third Sunday of the month is Father's Day in Canada and the United States.
Some Americans observe Juneteenth, though it is not a national holiday.
The name Juneteenth is a shortening of June 19th, the date on which many of the slaves in Texas first learned of their emancipation.
John the Baptists Day, is celebrated in many countries, and customs surrounding the holiday vary from place to place.
Also known as Midsummer's Day, this holiday often combines a celebration of the summer solstice (which occurs between the 20th and Ei a ae ad i Se me ie me lll 1 Gawai Dayak , Malaysia. — Jacques Marquette, French explorer, born 1637. — Kentucky became the 15th United States state, 1792. — Tennessee became the 16th United States state, 1796. — Brigham Young, Mormon leader, born 1801. — Sir Frank Whittle, British inventor, born 1907.
June flower— rose June birthstone— pearl — Carl Nielsen, Danish composer, born 1865. — Cole Porter, American composer, born 1893.
Winfield Scott, American general, born 1786. — William Butler Yeats, Irish poet and playwright, born 1865. — Yukon Territory organized, 1898. — Carlos Chavez, Mexican composer, born 1899. — ""Red"" Grange, football hero, born 1903.
June 6— 22nd of June) with the commemoration of the anniversary of the birth of Saint John the Baptist.
Gems associated with the month are the pearl, alexandrite, and moonstone.
Then, if ever, come perfect days; Then Heaven tries earth if it be in tune, And over it softly her warm ear lays; Whether we look, or whether we listen, We hear life murmur, or see it glisten.
Douglas Mallock No price is set on the lavish summer; June may be had by the poorest comer.
United States, 1782. — Eli Whitney applied for a patent on the cotton gin, 1793.
It lies in the southeastern part of the state, the area known as the Alaska Panhandle.
It lies on the Inside Passage, a scenic water transportation route that extends from Washington to southeastern Alaska.
A state-operated ferry system on the Inside Passage connects Juneau to other communities in southeastern Alaska and to the lower 48 states.
The passengers enjoy such activities as a tour of historic downtown Juneau, a tram ride up nearby Mount Roberts, and a helicopter tour of the Juneau Icefield, which is a vast area of ice and snow that lies behind mountains bordering the city.
The local, state, and federal government provide about 45 percent of Juneau's jobs.
Juneau was founded in 1880 on the site of Alaska’s first major gold discovery.
The city was first called Harrisburgh for Richard T Harris, one of the two prospectors who first discovered gold there.
In 1882, the city was renamed Juneau, after the other prospector, Joseph Juneau.
The last of the gold mines closed in 1944 when operating costs exceeded income.
In 1970, the cities of Juneau and Douglas merged with the Greater Juneau Borough to form the City and Borough of Juneau.
In 1976, Alaskans voted to move the State capital from Juneau to south-central Alaska, nearer the state’s population center.
But in 1982, they voted Juneau, the capital of Alaska, lies at the foot of steep mountains.
Thad Poulson Junebug, also called /une beetle or May beetle, is a name for several large brown beetles often seen in the United States during May and June.
They are related to the ancient scarab beetles of Egypt, which were considered sacred.
They burrow into the soil in autumn and stay there two years or more, feeding on roots of corn, grains, grasses, and vegetables.
Junebugs are in the order Coleoptera and the scarab family, Scarabaeidae.
Jung, yoong, Carl Gustav , was a Swiss psychiatrist and psychologist who developed the field of analytical psychology.
His teachings extended beyond psychology and influenced other fields, including anthropology, philosophy, and theology.
Jung challenged many of the theories proposed by the famous Austrian physician Sigmund Freud, who had developed the method of therapy called psychoanalysis.
However, both Jung and Freud stressed the effects of unconscious ideas on human behavior.
WORLD BOOK illustration by Shirley Hooper, Oxford Illustrators Limited Junebug His life.
Jung, a ministers son, was born on July 26, 1875, in Kesswil, Switzerland.
As a boy, he developed a lifelong interest in superstition, mythology, and the occult.
They became close, and Jung participated in the psychoanalytic movement.
But Jung believed Freud placed too much importance on sexual instincts in human behavior.
Jung's de-emphasis of sexuality led to a break with Freud, and their friendship ended in 1913.
Extroverts seek the company of other individuals for personal fulfill ment.
Jung taught that therapists should help patients balance the two character types in themselves.
He believed the personalities of parents are major influences on a child.
Unlike Freud, Jung taught that sexuality does not become important until just before young people reach puberty.
Jung, like Freud, believed that the unconscious part of the mind contains personal drives and experiences of which an individual is not aware.
But Jung also thought that the members of every race share a deeper level of unconsciousness, which he called the co/lective unconscious.
According to Jung, the collective unconscious includes thought patterns called archetypes, which have developed through the centuries.
Jung thought archetypes enable people to react to situations in ways similar to their ancestors.
For this reason, Jung believed that the collective unconscious contains wisdom that guides all humanity.
He thought therapy should bring people in contact with the collective unconscious.
Jung's studies of mythology convinced him that archetypes of gods and supernatural powers are deeply rooted in the collective unconscious.
He believed religion enables people to express an unconscious need for religious experience.
Pantheon Electra Mythology (Mythology and Extrovert the individual) Freud, Sigmund Psychoanalysis Introvert Additional resources Jung, Carl G The Essential Jung.
It is located about 12 miles south of Interlaken, a famous resort town in the Bernese Alps.
The Jungfrau is part of a circular ridge enclosing several glaciers that unite to form the Aletsch Glacier.
People commonly use the word jungle to refer to what ecologists call a tropical rain forest A tropical rain forest is a plant and animal community with huge trees, long vines, and such animals as parrots and monkeys.
Some ecologists consider jungles to be one stage in a rain forest's development.
They regard jungles as thick tangles of plants growing where sunlight reaches the floor of the rain forest.
Such jungles grow in the rain forest along riverbanks and in clearings, where no trees block the sunlight.
Farmers and lumber companies often cut down sections of tropical rain forests, but the cleared areas Jater may become choked with jungle growth.
Jungles may be so thick that people can only move through them by hacking paths with long knives called machetes.
Thomas E Lovejoy Junglefowl is the name of a group of birds that live in southern Asia and the East Indies.
The hen’s cackle sounds much like that of our domesticated fowls, but the cock crows like a bantam rooster.
The wild red junglefowl lives mostly in mountain forests near small villages.
Red flesh forms a comb on top of the head and hangs as watt/es from the throat.
Junior Achievement is an organization that educates young people about business and economics.
Business and industrial firms sponsor the organization, which operates in cities, suburbs, and rural areas across the United States.
Junior Achievement, also known as JA, conducts activities that begin in kindergarten and continue through high school, with classroom programs, after-school programs, and Internet exercises.
Junior Achievement programs are taught by classroom volunteers from the business community.
In the Junior Achievement Company Program, an atter-school program, high school students form, manage, and operate their own companies during the school year.
They keep records, pay themselves small wages, and run their businesses.
At the end of the school year, the students dissolve their corporations and divide their capital and any profit among shareholders.
In 1975, Junior Achievement began the National Business Leadership Conference and the National Business Hall of Fame.
The conference is an annual forum in which business and education leaders discuss economic issues.
The hall of fame honors people who have made outstanding contributions to American business.
The Junior Achievement movement was founded in Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1919 by Theodore N Vail, president of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company; Horace A Moses, a paper manufacturer; and Senator Winthrop Murray Crane of Massachusetts.
Junior high school is a school designed mainly for students in the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades.
However, some junior high schools consist of only grades seven and eight.
The purpose of a junior high school is to help boys and girls from 12 to 15 years of age prepare for high school.
During these years, most young people begin to undergo the physical, mental, social, and emotional changes associated with adolescence.
Junior high school programs help students adjust to the differences between elementary school and high school.
Unlike elementary schools, junior high schools are organized around subjects taught by specialists.
Students move from one classroom to another to take courses offered by teachers trained in the specific subject they teach.
In this way, the junior high school is more like a high school than an elementary school.
Junior high school students continue studying many of the subjects they had in elementary school, such as English, social studies, science, and mathematics.
At the same time, they begin studying subjects that were once taught only in high school.
These subjects include foreign languages, home economics, and industrial arts.
Certain required subjects, especially English and social studies, may be combined into one course.
Courses combined in this way may be called b/ock-time classes, unified studies, or core programs.
In junior high school, part of each student's program consists of e/ective courses.
These are courses chosen from a variety of nonrequired subjects, such as business education or music.
Students also are encouraged to take part in clubs, sports, and social activities.
The first junior high schools were established in variOus parts of the United States about 1910.
Since the 1960's, however, an increasing number of school districts have been replacing junior highs with middle schools.
These schools consist of grades six through eight or five through eight.
Many educators believe that middle schools focus better on the needs and interests of students than do junior highs.
Stephen M Fain See also Library (Middle school and junior high school libraries); Middle school.
Junior Leagues are community service organizations for women from age 18 through 45.
The leagues encourage and train their members to participate in community affairs as volunteer leaders and workers.
Each league sponsors projects in such fields as the arts, criminal justice, education, health, and urban renewal.
Programs also address needs of specific groups, such as children, older adults, women, and the disabled.
Each league is self-governing, but all are affiliated with the Association of Junior Leagues, Inc.
The association, founded in 1921, advises the local leagues and coordinates programs.
Its activities include programs to train youth leaders and promote volunteer activities during retirement.
Juniper, /OO nuh puhr, is the common name of a group of evergreen shrubs and small trees of the cypress family.
However, they are not the same as Richard Shiell, Earth Scenes The Chinese juniper comes in many cultivated varieties.
Leaves of the tree may be needlelike and prickly, or they may be scalelike and lie tightly against the twigs.
It ranks as one of the most widely distributed woody plants in the world.
It grows throughout the Northern Hemisphere in countries with a cold climate.
The fruit of the common juniper contains an oil used in medicines and to flavor gin.
The Chinese juniper, another well-known species, is native to eastern Asia.
The eastern redcedar is the only juniper of commercial importance in the United States.
Oils from the leaves and wood of some species are used in perfumes and medicines.
The common juniper is £ communis, the Chinese juniper is / chinensis, and the eastern redcedar is / virginiana.
Junk is a wooden sailing vessel used in China and other countries of the Far East.
The first Junkers were descendants of knights who settled in Prussia in the Middle Ages.
The Junkers gained a monopoly of civilian and military offices during the reign of Frederick the Great in the 1700's.
Prussia, led by the Junkers under the statesman Otto von Bismarck, unified Germany in 1871.
After World War 1, liberals of the Weimar Republic tried to reduce the powers of the Junkers.
Paul von Hindenburg, a Junker elected president in 1925, prevented the reduction.
Later, Junkers who opposed Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler were executed after they plotted to assassinate him.
Juno, /OO noh, was the sister and wife of Jupiter, king of the gods of Roman mythology.
As Jupiter's wife, she was queen of the gods and the most powerful goddess.
She played the same role in Roman mythology as the goddess Hera did in Greek mythology.
She was the goddess of marriage, and, by the Latin name /uno Lucina , she was the goddess of childbirth and perhaps originally of the moon.
The Romans originally coined their money near this temple, and the words money and mintcome from moneta.
Juno, along with Jupiter and Minerva, was one of the three deities enshrined in temples on the Capitoline Hill.
Juno was jealous of Jupiter's love affairs with other goddesses and with mortal women, and she persecuted his mistresses.
In the Aeneid, an epic poem by the Roman author Virgil, Juno was the enemy of Aeneas, a Trojan hero.
After Greek armies destroyed Troy, Aeneas wandered for many years until he established a nation in Italy.
At the end of the Aeneid, Jupiter won Juno's support for Aeneas by promising Rome would rule a great empire in which Juno would be especially honored.
Junta, HUN tuh or JUHN tuh, is a small group that takes over a government and rules by decree.
A junta may seize power to restore order in a country or to make reforms.
The junta either serves as the government itself or sets up a government that follows its policies.
Junta rule occurs most often in countries that have unstable governments.
The term junta was once associated primarily with Latin-American nations.
One example of a junta taking over a country occurred in Egypt in 1952.
One member became prime minister, but the real power lay with junta members.
A struggle for power developed between the prime minister and a member of the junta, Gamal Abdel Nasser.
Its diameter is 88,846 miles , more than 11 times that of Earth, and about one-tenth that of the sun.
It would take more than 1,000 Earths to fill up the volume of the giant planet.
Its mean (average) distance from the sun is about 483,600,000 miles , more than five times Earth's distance.
Astronomers have studied Jupiter with telescopes based on Earth and aboard artificial satellites in orbit around Earth.
Astronomers witnessed a spectacular event in July 1994, when 21 fragments of a comet named ShoemakerLevy 9 crashed into Jupiter's atmosphere.
The impacts caused tremendous explosions, some scattering debris over areas larger than the diameter of Earth.
Physical features of Jupiter Jupiter is a giant ball of gas and liquid with little, if any, solid surface.
Instead, the planet's surface is composed of dense red, brown, yellow, and white clouds.
The clouds are arranged in light-colored areas called zones and darker regions called be/ts that circle the planet parallel to the equator.
The planet completes one orbit in 4,333 Earth-days, or almost 12 Earthyears.
As Jupiter orbits the sun, the planet rotates on its avis, an imaginary line through its center.
Scientists measure tilt relative to a line at a right angle to the orbital plane, an imaginary surface touching all points of the orbit.
It takes 9 hours 55 minutes to spin around once on its axis, compared to 24 hours for Earth.
Scientists cannot measure the rotation of the interior of the giant planet directly, so they have calculated the speed from indirect measurements.
They first calculated the speed using an average of the speeds of the visible clouds that move with interior currents, except for a more rapid zone near the equator.
Jupiter sends out radio waves strong enough to be picked up by radio telescopes on Earth.
Scientists now measure these waves to calculate Jupiter's rotational speed.
The strength of the waves varies under the influence of Jupiter's magnetic field in a pattern that repeats every 9 hours 55 minutes.
Because the magnetic field Originates in Jupiter's core, this variation shows how fast the plants interior spins.
Jupiter's rapid rotation makes it bulge at the equator and flatten at the poles.
The planet's diameter is about 6 percent larger at the equator than at the poles.
Its density averages 1.33 grams per cubic centimeter, slightly more than the density of water.
The density of Jupiter is about 1 that of Jet Propulsion Laboratory The layers of dense clouds around Jupiter appear in a photograph of the planet taken by the Voyager 1 space probe.
Because of Jupiter's low density, astronomers believe that the planet consists primarily of hydrogen and helium, the lightest elements.
Jupiter's mix of chemical elements resembles that of the sun, rather than that of Earth.
The core may be of about the same chemical composition as Earth, but 20 or 30 times more massive.
The force of gravity at the surface of Jupiter is up to 2. times stronger than on Earth.
The atmosphere of Jupiter is composed of about 86 percent hydrogen, 14 percent helium, and tiny amounts of methane, ammonia, phosphine, water, acetylene, ethane, germanium, and carbon monoxide.
The percentage of hydrogen is based on the number of hydrogen molecules in the atmosphere, rather than on their total mass.
Scientists have calculated these amounts from measurements taken with telescopes and other instruments on Earth and aboard spacecraft.
These chemicals have formed colorful layers of clouds at different heights.
The highest white clouds in the zones are made of crystals of frozen ammonia.
Astronomers had expected to detect water clouds about 44 miles below the ammonia clouds.
Jupiter's most outstanding surface feature is the Great Red Spot, a swirling mass of gas resembling a hurricane.
Its color may be due to small amounts of sulfur and phosphorus in the ammonia crystals.
Jupiter at a glance Jupiter, shown in blue, is the fifth closest planet to the sun.
Hydrogen, helium, methane, ammonia, carbon monoxide, ethane, acetylene, phosphine, water vapor.
The spot remains at the same distance from the equator but drifts slowly east and west.
The zones, belts, and the Great Red Spot are much more stable than similar circulation systems on Earth.
Since astronomers began to use telescopes to observe these features in the late 1600's, the features have changed size and brightness but have kept the same patterns.
Measurements made by ground instruments and spacecraft show that Jupiter's temperature increases with depth below the clouds.
The temperature reaches 70 °F —""room temperature —at a level where the atmospheric pressure is about 10 times as great as it is on Earth.
Scientists speculate that if Jupiter has any form of life, the life form would reside at this level.
Such life would need to be airborne, because there is no solid surface at this location on Jupiter.
The core temperature may be about 43,000 °F —hotter than the surface of the sun.
Most astronomers believe that the sun, the planets, and all the other bodies in the solar system formed from a spinning cloud of gas and dust.
The gravitation of the gas and dust particles packed them together into dense clouds and solid chunks of material.
By about 4. billion years ago, the material had squeezed together to form the various bodies in the solar system.
So much heat was produced when Jupiter formed that the planet still radiates about twice as much heat into space as it receives from sunlight.
The force of its magnetism extends far into space in a region surrounding the planet called its magnetic field.
Jupiter's magnetic field is about 14 times as strong as Earth's, according to measurements made by spacecraft.
Jupiter's magnetic field is the strongest in the solar system, except for fields associated with sunspots and other small regions on the sun's surface.
Scientists do not fully understand how planets produce magnetic fields.
They suspect, however, that the movement of electrically charged particles in the interior of planets generates the fields.
Jupiter's field would be so much stronger than Earth's because of Jupiter's greater size and faster rotation.
Jupiter's magnetic field traps electrons, protons, and other electrically charged particles in radiation belts around the planet.
The particles are so powerful that they can damage instruments aboard spacecraft operating near the planet.
Within a region of space called the magnetosphere, Jupiter's magnetic field acts as a shield.
The field protects the planet from the so/ar wind, a continuous flow of charged particles from the sun.
The trapped particles enter the magnetosphere near the ‘ Magnetic axis’ Retotion oxts WORLD BOOK illustration by Precision Graphics Jupiter acts like a giant magnet.
The curved lines indicate the direction of the magnetic field, the region in which the magnetism operates.
Radio waves given off by Jupiter reach radio telescopes on Earth in two forms—bursts of radio energy and continuous radiation.
Strong bursts occur when lo, the closest of Jupiter's four large moons, passes through certain regions in the planets magnetic field.
Continuous radiation comes from Jupiter's surface as well as from high-energy particles in the radiation belts.
The four largest, in order of their distance from Jupiter, are lo, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto.
The Italian astronomer Galileo discovered them in 1610 with a telescope. lo has many active volcanoes, which produce gases containing sulfur.
The yellow-orange surface of lo probably consists largely of solid sulfur that was deposited by the eruptions.
Callisto, with a diameter of 2,986 miles , is slightly smaller than Mercury.
Jupiter's remaining 35 satellites are much smaller than the Galilean moons.
Except for Metis and Adrastea, the small satellites were discovered by astronomers using large telescopes on Earth.
Scientists discovered Metis and Adrastea in 1979 by studying pictures that had been taken by the Voyager spacecraft.
The impact of Comet ShoemakerLevy 9 In March 1993, astronomers Eugene Shoemaker, Carolyn Shoemaker, and David H Levy discovered a comet near Jupiter.
The comet, later named Shoemaker-Levy 9, probably once orbited the sun independently but had been pulled by Jupiter's gravity into an orbit around the planet.
Calculations based on the comet's location and velocity showed that the fragments would crash into Jupiter's atmosphere in July 1994.
Scientists hoped to Jearn much about the effects of a collision between a planet and a comet.
Astronomers at all the major telescopes on Earth turned their instruments toward Jupiter at the predicted collision times.
Scientists also observed Jupiter with the powerful Hubble Space Telescope, which is in orbit around Earth; and the remotely controlled space probe Galileo, which was on its way to Jupiter.
The fragments fell on the back side of Jupiter as viewed from Earth and the Hubble Space Telescope.
But the rotation of Jupiter carried the impact sites around to the visible side after less than half an hour.
Hubble Space Telescope Comet Team and NASA Scars from the crash of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 appear on Jupiter's surface as a series of maroon blotches in this photo.
The comet broke into 21 pieces before it hit Jupiter in 1994. miles in diameter.
However, damage to certain of the probe's instruments limited its ability to record and send data.
The impacts caused large explosions, probably due to the compression, heating, and rapid expansion of atmospheric gases.
The explosions scattered comet debris over large areas, some with diameters larger than that of Earth.
The debris gradually spread into a dark haze of fine material that remained suspended for several months in Jupiter's upper atmosphere.
If a similar comet ever collided with Earth, it might produce a haze that would cool the atmosphere and darken the planet by absorbing sunlight.
If the haze lasted long enough, much of Earth's plant life could die, along with the people and animals that depend on plants.
Pioneer 10, Pioneer-Saturn, Voyager 1, Voyager 2, Ulysses, and Galileo.
Pioneer 10 was launched in 1972 and flew within 81,000 miles of Jupiter on Dec., 1973.
The probe revealed the severe effects of Jupiter's radiation belt on spacecraft.
Pioneer 10 also reported the amount of hydrogen and helium in the planet's atmosphere.
In addition, the probe discovered that Jupiter has an enormous magnetosphere.
Pioneer-Saturn flew within 27,000 miles (43,000 kilometers) of Jupiter in December 1974.
The craft provided close-up photographs of Jupiter's polar regions and data on the Great Red Spot, the magnetic field, and atmospheric temperatures.
Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 flew past Jupiter in March and July 1979, respectively.
These craft carried more sensitive instruments than did the Pioneers, and transmitted more information.
Astronomers used photos taken by the Voyagers to make the first detailed maps of the Galilean satellites.
The Voyagers also revealed sulfur volcanoes on lo, discovered lightning in Jupiter's clouds, and mapped flow patterns in the cloud bands.
Ulysses was launched in October 1990 and passed by Jupiter in February 1992.
The European Space Agency, an organization of Western European nations, had built the probe mainly to study the sun’s polar regions.
Scientists used the tremendous gravitational force of Jupiter to put Ulysses into an orbit that would take it over the suns polar regions.
As Ulysses passed by Jupiter, it gathered data indicating that the solar wind has a much greater effect on Jupiter's magnetosphere than earlier measurements had suggested.
One of Galileo’s missions was to measure the amount of water and other chemicals in Jupiter's atmosphere.
Its first task was to record on tape the data transmitted by the probe, then relay the data to Earth.
It then monitored Jupiter's atmosphere, and it observed the planet's major satellites.
Galileo then continued its observations under an extension known as the Galileo Millennium Mission.
Cassini, Giovanni Domenico Planet Callisto Satellite (pictures; Types of Europa satellites) Galileo Solar system Ganymede Voyager lo Additional resources Beebe, Reta.
Jupiter was king of the gods and ruler of the universe in Roman mythology.
Jupiter was originally the god of the sky and of such atmospheric phenomena as thunder and lightning.
He used a thunderbolt as a weapon, and he had the power to send the earth clear weather, rain, or destructive storms.
Jupiter made certain that mortals lived out their lives according to fate.
Jupiter was a son of Saturn—the son of the earth and sky and ruler of the universe.
Jupiter and Saturn's other children overthrew him, and Jupiter took Saturn's place.
His sisters were the goddesses Ceres, Juno, and Vesta. jupiter married Juno, who became queen of the gods.
Jupiter's other children included the gods Apollo, Bacchus, and Mercury; the goddess Diana; and the hero Hercules.
Jupiter also was the father of the nine Muses, who inspired art, poetry, and learning.
According to some myths, the goddess Minerva sprang full grown from Jupiter's head.
The religious center of Rome was Jupiter's temple on the Capitoline Hill.
These three deities (gods or goddesses) became known as the Capitoline triad.
Jura, /OO ruh, is a mountain range that lies between the Rhine and Rhone rivers.
The highest peaks are less than 6,000 feet (1,800 meters) above sea level.
Land on the middle and lower slopes of the range serves as pasture for the important dairy industry.
Economic centers of the Jura include the towns of Pontarlier, France; and La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland—both noted for making clocks and watches.
Jury is a group of citizens who hear the testimony in legal disputes and determine what they believe is the truth.
A petit, or petty, jury is a trial jury and the most common form of jury.
In a civil lawsuit, a petit jury decides who is at fault and how much money must be paid in damages.
In a criminal trial, the jury decides whether the defendant is or is not guilty.
The jury hears testimony by witnesses, then the lawyer for each side summarizes the case.
If the jurors are not convinced “beyond a reasonable doubt’ that a defendant is guilty, they must acquit him or her—that is, return a verdict of not guilty.
Until about 1970, juries consisted of 12 members and 1 or 2 alternate jurors.
A Aung juryis one in which the required number of jurors cannot agree on a verdict.
The court selects the names of possible jurors from such sources as tax rolls, voting lists, and telephone directories.
From the selected names, people are then chosen by lot and summoned for possible service ona jury.
Before becoming a jury member, a person is questioned by the trial judge, the opposing lawyers, or both.
For example, the person may be related to someone involved in the case.
The lawyers are also allowed a limited number of rejections called peremptory challenges.
But a new trial may be ordered if a judge decides that the lawyers have made their challenges solely on account of race.
The United States Constitution provides that jurors in a criminal trial must be neutral regarding the case.
In most situations, the jurors are selected from the community where the supposed crime occurred.
There are two kinds of grand juries in the United States, charging and investigatory.
A charging grand jury decides whether there is enough evidence to try a person suspected of a crime.
If the jury finds sufficient evidence, it makes a formal accusation, called an indictment, against the person.
An investigatory grand jury investigates suspected dishonesty of public officials and possible crime, especially organized crime.
A coroner's jury conducts an /nquest into the cause of death in cases that involve doubt.
During the A.D. 800’s, people in many European communities testified to a representative of the king about such matters as taxes and land boundaries.
Just, Ernest Everett , an American biologist, received the first Spingarn Medal, which is awarded annually to a black who has had outstanding achievement in his or her field.
When he won the award in 1915, he was studying fertilization in marine invertebrates and the role of the cell surface in the development of such organisms.
Just’s research led him to declare that all parts of a cell influence the cell's activities.
This idea differed from the traditional belief that only the nucleus of the cell controlled cell activity.
From 1909 through 1930, Just spent almost every summer conducting research at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts.
He spent most of the last 10 years of his life working in Europe to escape racial discrimination in American laboratories.
The Biology of the Cell Surface and Basic Methods for Experiments on Eggs of Marine Animals.
See Judge; Justice of the peace; Law; Supreme Court of the United States.
Justice, Department of, is an executive department of the United States government.
It enforces federal laws and provides legal advice for the president and the heads of the governments other executive departments.
The attorney general, a member of the presidents Cabinet, heads the department and ranks as the governments chief legal officer.
The president appoints the attorney general with United States Senate approval.
In 2002, President George W Bush proposed a reorganization of the federal government with an emphasis on protection against terrorism.
Under Bush's plan, some of the agencies of the Department of Justice would be transferred to a newly created Department of Homeland Security.
The Department of Justice investigates and prosecutes violations of federal laws.
These laws include antitrust, criminal, environmental, and civil rights laws.
In addition, it represents the federal government in the United States Supreme Court and in other federal courts.
A Justice Department official known as the solicitor general supervises this representation in Supreme Court cases.
Important agencies of the Justice Department include the Federal Bureau of Prisons, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Federal Bureau of Investigation , and the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
The Bureau of Prisons oversees federal prisons and supervises the custody of all federal prisoners.
The Drug Enforcement Administration enforces federal laws and regulations that apply to narcotics and other dangerous drugs.
The FBI investigates federal crimes and collects evidence in lawsuits that invalve the federal government.
It also gathers information about individuals and groups that it believes are dangerous to national security.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service administers and enforces United States immigration laws.
The Department of Justice also includes the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the National Institute of The seal of the Department of Justice Justice.
These agencies support police programs that are designed to prevent and control crime in the United States.
The agencies provide this support mainly by researching and analyzing various aspects of crime and the United States criminal justice system.
The attorney general served in the Cabinet but did not head an executive department.
The attorney general advised the president and represented the federal government in cases before the Supreme Court.
Almost every federal department had some part in enforcing national laws.
In 1870, Congress set up a new Department of Justice under the attorney general.
The new department took over most law-enforcement duties from the other departments.
Flags of the United States Prisons, Federal Bureau of government) Justice of the peace is an officer of a township, county, or other small unit of government in some states.
Justices of the peace may be appointed by the governor or elected by the people.
Justices of the peace may have the power to punish people for breaking minor criminal laws, such as traffic laws.
Sometimes they decide whether an accused person should be held for a grand jury, which then will decide whether the person should stand trial.
The trend has been to abolish this office and transfer its functions to other courts.
In large cities, police magistrates perform the same functions as justices of the peace.
Jack M Kress Justin the Martyr, Saint , was the first prominent defender of the Christian faith against nonChristians.
Justin is known as an apo/ogist because he defended Christian beliefs and practices against suspicions and false accusations made by non-Christians.
Justin's surviving writings use Greek philosophical ideas to explain Christian theological doctrines.
His writings also provide descriptions and explanations of Christian life and worship.
In two theological essays called Apologies, Justin defended Christians against charges of atheism, sexual immorality, and disobedience to civil authority.
Justin attempted to show that Christianity was superior to other religions and that Christians led pious lives.
Justin was born into a Greek family in what is now Nablus, in the West Bank region of southwest Asia.
He tried various Greek and Roman philosophies before converting to Christianity in about 130.
This code, also called the Justinian Code, is the basis of the legal systems in many nations today.
Justin died a few months later, and Justinian became sole emperor of the Byzantine Empire.
In 529, he closed the schools of philosophy in Athens, Greece, because he felt the schools taught paganism.
In 532, people in Constantinople revolted against Justintan and burned down the central part of the city.
Justinian rebuilt the city, including a new church, the famous Hagia Sophia.
He also built aqueducts, fortresses, harbors, churches, monasteries, and public buildings all over the empire.
In 533, Justinian began a series of wars against the Vandals, Ostrogoths, and Visigoths, who had conquered most of the West Roman Empire in the 400's.
Justinian Code, ju/hs TIHN ee uhn, was a collection of early Roman laws and legal principles.
The code clarified Roman laws and legal principles and illustrated them by cases.
It is recognized as one of the greatest Roman contributions to civilization.
The Digest contained interpretations of many trials and decisions by lawyers of the A.D. 100's and 200's.
The Novels were collections of legislation enacted after the publication of the Codex.
Jute, joot, is along, soft, shiny fiber that can be spun into coarse, strong threads.
It is one of the cheapest natural fibers, and is second only to cotton in amount produced and variety of uses.
Jute fibers are composed primarily of the plant materials cellulose, lignin, and pectin.
Both the fiber and the plant from which it comes are commonly called jute.
Jute is used chiefly to make cloth for wrapping bales of raw cotton, and to make gunny sacks and gunny cloth.
The fibers are also woven into curtains, chair coverings, carpets, and burlap.
The fibers are used alone or blended with other types of fibers to make twine and rope.
Jute butts, the coarse ends of the plants, are used to make inexpensive cloth.
China, India, and Bangladesh rank as the world’s main producers of jute.
The fibers are off-white to brown and 3 to 15 feet (0. to 4. meters) long. jute is pressed into bales for shipment to manufacturers.
These three tribes were Germanic or Teutonic, and they were thought to have come from what is now Denmark and northern Germany.
The Jutes settled in parts of southeastern Britain that are now known as Kent, southern Hampshire, and the Isle of Wight.
Much of the information about the Jutes in England comes from Ecclesiastical History of the English People , a book by the English historian Saint Bede.
Archaeological findings have shown that the Jutes had much in common with both the Saxons in Britain and the ancient Franks, a people of what are now Belgium, France, western Germany, and the Netherlands.
Some historians say the Jutes came from the area of Denmark known today as Jutland.
C Warren Hollister Jutland, Battle of, was the only major fight between German and British fleets during World War I On May 31, 1916, the British fleet, commanded by Admiral John Jellicoe, and the German fleet, under Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer, met off the coast of Denmark in a two-day battle.
Although the Germans destroyed more British ships, they lost a greater percentage of their smaller navy.
Both sides claimed victory, but the battle left Britain in control of the seas.
These pieces ridi_ cule the extravagance, corruption, and immorality he saw in Rome.
Juvenal thought society should be run by men, like himself, of the old upper class who were of Italian birth.
Juvenal's 3rd and 10th satires are his best known and have often been imitated.
The 3rd satire attacks Rome because it is noisy, uncomfortable, dangerous, and full of criminals and foreigners.
His mildest satire, the 10th, shows the dreadful consequences of seeking beauty, power, or material success.
It urges the reader to desire only “a sound mind in a sound body’—that is, a healthy and simple life.
His full name in Latin, the language of ancient Rome, was Decimus Junius Juvenalis.
Elaine Fantham Juvenile court is a special court that handles cases involving children who have committed crimes or who need the care and protection of society.
Most delinquency cases involve children who have broken the law or who are difficult to control.
Neglect cases involve children whose parents do not or can not care for them properly.
Both the United States and Canada have extensive juvenile court systems.
In the United States, most states include the juvenile court as a division of the main state court or of the county court.
Most juvenile courts handle the cases of youths who are under 18 years of age.
But some serious cases involving children as young as 11 may be transferred to an adult court for trial.
Juveniles charged with delinquency may be held in temporary confinement until their cases are heard in court.
Juvenile courts generally cannot issue sentences that would confine youths beyond the age of 21.
Before the establishment of juvenile courts, judges tried children for lawbreaking in the same way that they tried adults, and they sentenced many to prison.
Juvenile courts were the result of a change in attitudes toward child offenders during the late 1800's.
According to these new attitudes, the juvenile courts were to be places to help, not punish, children.
Children were not supposed to experience the harsh atmosphere and treatment often found in adult courts.
Instead, trained social workers were to give the judge information on the child's background, and the judge would freely discuss problems with the child, usually in a private hearing.
The judge then was supposed to reach a decision based on the child’s best interests.
This decision could result in a warning, a fine, probation, or referral or transfer to another agency.
In 1872, Massachusetts became the first state to provide separate court sessions for children.
In 1967, the Supreme Court of the United States issued a landmark decision regarding juvenile courts.
In the Gau/t decision, the court ruled that the private and informal procedures used by juvenile courts had deprived many children of certain rights guaranteed by the Constitution.
It ruled that children must be granted these rights, including the right of children and their parents to be given adequate notice of the specific charge; the right to have a lawyer in any case which may result in confinement; the right to question witnesses; and the right to remain silent.
Also in 1967, a special presidential commission reported that juvenile courts had failed in their efforts to decrease juvenile delinquency.
Since then, juvenile courts have used an approach much like that used in adult criminal courts.
However, there is more emphasis on rehabilitation in the juvenile courts than in the adult correctional system.
In Canada, a separate, nationwide court system for juvenile offenders was established by the Juvenile Delinquent Acts of 1908.
Today, individual provinces have special juvenile courts that operate under the federal Young Offenders Act of 1984.
Under this act, youths up to age 18 are treated as juveniles, while children under 12 are freed from any criminal responsibility.
Judges may not impose sentences longer than three years, although the combined duration of consecutive sentences may exceed three years.
However, judges also have authority to transfer to the adult courts those youths accused of more serious crimes.
Juveniles guilty of less serious offenses, such as shoplifting or vandalism, may avoid the court process altogether by participating in such activities as community work, counseling, or repayment of victims.
Jack M Kress See also Juvenile delinquency. juvenile delinquency usually refers to the violation of a law by a juvenile.
It includes those acts that would be crimes if committed by adults, such as automobile theft and burglary, and also those acts that are illegal only for boys or girls, such as staying out after a curfew or drinking alcoholic beverages.
Many people use the term juvenile delinquency to include anything youngsters do that goes against the standards of society, regardless of whether this action is legal or illegal.
The legal age at which a person is considered to be a juvenile varies from place to place.
Most states in the United States define anyone under 18 years of age asa juvenile.
Most states allow youngsters who are young enough for juvenile-court handling to be tried by regular criminal courts under certain circumstances.
Juvenile delinquency is regarded as a serious social problem in the United States and many other countries.
It has caused increasing public concern, but it is by no means a new problem.
Young people formed violent street gangs in American cities during the 1800's, and delinquency rates were reported rising during the early 1900's.
Delinquency is found in all nations and is partic206 Juvenile delinquency ularly widespread in highly industrialized nations that have large cities.
The legal term juvenile delinquent was established so that young lawbreakers could avoid the disgrace of being classified in legal records as criminals.
Juvenile delinquency laws were designed to provide treatment, rather than punishment, for juvenile offenders.
Young delinquents usually are sent to juvenile courts, where the main aim is to rehabilitate offenders, rather than to punish them.
A youngster can be labeled a delinquent for breaking any one of a number of laws, ranging from robbery to running away from home.
But an action for which a youth may be declared a delinquent in one community may not be against the law in another community.
In some communities, the police ignore many children who are accused of minor delinquencies or refer them directly to their parents.
But in other communities, the police may refer such children to a juvenile court, where they may officially be declared delinquents.
Extent of delinquency Crime statistics, though they are often incomplete and may be misleading, do give an indication of the extent of the delinquency problem.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation reports that in the early 1990's, nearly half of all United States arrests for motor vehicle theft and arson (the causing of fires) were of people under age 18.
In any year, about 4 percent of all children between the ages of 10 and 18 appear in a juvenile court.
The percentage of this age group who are sent to court at least once is much higher.
A third or more of those boys living in slum areas of large cities may appear in court at least once.
Today, about 1 of every 5 youngsters appearing in juvenile court is a girl.
In the early 1900's, this ratio was about 1 girl to every 50 or 60 boys.
Sociologists have conducted a number of studies to determine how much delinquency is not reported to the police.
Most youngsters report taking part in one or more delinquent acts, though a majority of the offenses are minor.
Experts have concluded that youthful misbehavior is much more common than is indicated by arrest records and juvenile court statistics.
Many studies have been made in an effort to determine the causes of delinquency.
Most of these have focused on family relationships or on neighborhood or community conditions.
The results of these investigations have shown that it is doubtful that any child becomes a delinquent for any single reason.
Family relationships, especially those between parents and individual children, have been the focus of several delinquency studies.
An early study comparing delinquent and nondelinquent brothers showed that over 90 percent of the delinquents had unhappy home lives and felt discontented with their life circumstances.
Whatever the nature of the delinquents’ unhappiness, delinquency | appeared to them to be a solution.
It brought attention to youths neglected by their parents, or approval by delinquent friends, or it solved problems of an unhappy home life in other ways.
More recent studies have revealed that many delinquents had parents with whom they did not get along or who were inconsistent in their patterns of discipline and punishment.
Many of these inquiries concentrate on differing rates of delinquency, rather than on the way individuals become delinquents.
A series of studies have shown that delinquency rates are above average in the poorest sections of cities.
They also have poor schools, high unemployment, few recreational facilities, and high crime rates.
Many young people see delinquency as their only escape from boredom, poverty, and other problems.
Social scientists have also studied the influence of other youngsters on those who commit delinquencies.
For example, they point out that most youngsters who engage in delinquent behavior do so with other juveniles and often in organized gangs.
Studies indicate that the causes of delinquency also extend to a whole society.
For example, delinquency rates tend to be high among the low-income groups in societies where most people are well-to-do.
The pain of being poor and living in slum conditions is felt more strongly in a rich society than in a poor one.
Prevention of delinquency Many efforts have been made to develop programs of — delinquency prevention.
There is little evidence, however, that any of these programs is truly effective.
Some programs provide counseling services to youths who appear to be on the verge of becoming delinquents.
Other programs draw youngsters into clubs and recreational centers in an effort to keep them away from situations in which delinquency is likely to occur.
In recent years, many efforts have centered on improving the educational and work skills of youngsters.
For those juveniles who have already become delinquents, there are programs designed to prevent them from committing future delinquent acts.
Probation services are offered through juvenile courts in an effort to provide guidance for delinquent children.
The more progressive institutions for juveniles attempt to provide treatment programs for offenders—work experiences, counseling, education, and group therapy.
However, many other institutions provide little more than protective custody for juvenile delinquents.
It was also a letter in the alphabet used by the Semites, who once lived in Syria and Palestine.
They probably adapted an Egyptian hieroglyphic of an open hand to represent the letter.
The ancient Greeks took the letter into their alphabet and called it Kappa.
K or k is about the 22nd most frequently used letter in books, newspapers, and other printed material in English.
K is used as an abbreviation for knight or knights, as in KC for Knights of Columbus and K.G. for Knights of the Order of the Garter.
In chess, K Development of the letter K The ancient Egyptians, about 3000 B.C, used a symbol that represented a slightly cupped hand.
K Common forms of the letter K Kk XA Kk Kk Handwritten letters vary Roman letters have small from person to person.
Manu_ finishing strokes called serifs script letters, /eft that extend from the main have simple curves and strokes.
K is used as an abbreviation for the Ke/vin scale of absolute temperatures.
In some countries, k represents a unit of money—Arone in Germany, Denmark, and Norway; krona in Sweden; and kopeck in Russia.
In English, a person pronounces & in such words as king with the tongue back and with its sides touching the velum, or soft palate.
The & is silent when it appears before n at the beginning of a word, as in such words as knee, knock, and know.
Marianne Cooley The small letter k first appeared during the A.D. 800s as a rounded letter.
The peak, which reaches 28,250 feet (8,611 meters), is snow-covered and usually hidden in clouds.
The mountain originally was named for Henry Haversham Godwin Austen , an Englishman who surveyed it in the late 1850's.
An Italian expedition reached the top of the mountain for the first time in July 1954.
James A Hafner Kaaba, KAH buh, also spelled Caaba, is the most sacred shrine of Islam.
It is a small, cube-shaped building with a flat roof near the center of the Great Mosque in Mecca.
The famous Black Stone, enclosed in a silver ring, rests in the eastern corner of the Kaaba.
Pilgrims run and walk around it seven times, praying and reciting verses from the Quran.
Richard C Martin Kabbalah, kab uh LAH, is the traditional name for the teachings of Jewish mysticism.
The term—also spelled Cabala, Kabala, or kabbala—means what is handed down or received in Hebrew.
The early writings describe the wondrous journeys of sages who ascend through heavenly palaces filled with angels to behold the Divine Presence on His throne.
Other early works explore the secrets of creation as well as magical formulas and practices.
The greatest period of Kabbalah came in the Middle Ages, reaching its peak in the 1200's in Spain.
Although de Leon and his followers claimed the Zohar was written by an ancient sage named Simeon bar Yohai, most modern scholars believe de Leon was the author.
These aspects consist of qualities such as Beauty, Glory, Judgment, and Mercy that are called Seffrot.
A second important center of Kabbalah arose in Palestine in the early 1500's.
Luria instructed his followers that strict observance of Jewish law, understood mystically, could release sparks of imprisoned divine light and hasten the coming of the Messiah.
The last major flowering of Kabbalah came in Hasidism, a mystical movement that began in the 1700's in Poland and spread throughout Jewish eastern Europe.
Hasidism emphasizes prayer and song and other religious experiences as a way of communing with God.
Some people associate Kabbalah with fantastic interpretations of the hidden meanings of numbers and letters in the Bible and with miraculous acts.
However, these elements play a smaller role in Kabbalah than popularly supposed.
The city lies 5,890 feet (1,795 meters) above sea level in the Hindu Kush mountains.
Various tribes of Afghanistan and other parts of Asia controlled the Kabul area until the A.D. 1700's.
During a civil war in the 1990's, Kabul was shelled repeatedly by the various factions.
Thousands of people in Kabul were killed, and many buildings were destroyed or damaged.
The city came under attack again in 2001 when Afghan rebels, aided by United States air strikes, forced Afghanistan's Taliban rulers from power.
It exported many goods produced in Afghanistan, including carpets, skins of Karakul sheep, and fresh and dried fruits and nuts.
Kabul’s industries made drugs, furniture, machine tools, textiles, and wine.
Kachina, kah CHEE nut, is the name of a religious ceremony of the Hopi Indians and of carved wooden dolls used in the ceremony.
Each winter, the Hopi dedicate services to the spirits of the dead to bring a good harvest.
Kadar gained power in 1956, after Soviet troops crushed a revolt by the Hungarian people.
Kadar was born Janos Czermanik on May 26, 1912, probably in what is now western Croatia.
During World War Il , Kadar joined the Hungarian underground and fought the Germans.
When Communists gained control of Hungary in 1948, Kadar became minister of the interior and chief of the secret police.
He was imprisoned from 1951 to 1953 for sympathizing with the Yugoslav Communists, who had split with the Soviet Union.
Kafirs thrive in the plains region of North America where rainfall is light.
Kafka, KAHF kah, Franz, frahnts , was a Czech writer who gained worldwide fame only after World War Il.
Kafka wanted his unpublished manuscripts to be burned after his death, but his friend Max Brod edited and published them anyhow.
Kafka's highly imaginative works have been associated with such intellectual movements as expressionism, surrealism, and existentialism.
But he could not identify himself with any particular creed, class, or ethnic group, and his writings do not belong to any particular literary school.
Kafka’s writings uniquely combine a realistic, sometimes grotesquely exact description of details with an overall atmosphere of fantasies, dreams, and nightmares.
He portrays objects and events with precision, but they appear to have no purpose or meaning.
Kafka presents a world in which people are deprived of spiritual security, and tortured by anxiety and loneliness.
Kafka’s characters repeatedly are frustrated in attempts to gain their goals, such as knowledge, social acceptance, or salvation.
Their lives are marked by patterns of hope and despair, attempt and failure.
This alienation is rooted in personal guilt and at the same time appears as an inescapable destiny.
In his novel The Tria/, a man is arrested, convicted, and executed by a mysterious court.
His attempts to learn the nature of his guilt and of the secret court fail, and he dies in ignorance.
Amerika is a comic novel about the adventures of an adolescent European immigrant in America.
Werner Hoffmeister Alfred Knopf Franz Kafka Additional resources Karl, Frederick R Franz Kafka.91.
Kahlo, Frida , was an important Mexican painter known for her harsh, revealing self-portraits.
At the age of 15, she was severely injured in a bus accident in Mexico City.
Kahlo lived in constant pain and was crippled for the rest of her life.
She underwent about 35 operations, including the amputation of one leg.
Unable to pursue her dream of becoming a doctor, Kahlo taught herself to paint.
Their stormy relationship involved separations, divorce, and remarriage.
Kahlo’s paintings are mostly self-portraits that reflect her physical and emotional suffering.
Many of her pictures include startling symbolic images and elements from Mexican history.
She often portrayed herself wearing colorful Mexican Indian costumes and ornaments.
Kahn developed a theESTO Louis Kahn's works include the Salk Institute for Biological Sciences in La Jolla, California.
This research center, built of concrete and wood, was completed in 1965.
The “servant” spaces are functional areas, such as stairwells and air ducts.
Kahn considered the “servant” areas essential to a building's beauty and creatively incorporated them into his designs.
As a teacher, he influenced many architects of the middle and late 1900's and his influence continued to grow after his death.
His ability to blend historical sources with modern materials is highly influential.
German emperors of the Holy Roman Empire sometimes used this title in its German form.
Wilhelm | of Prussia took the title of kaiser in 1871, when he became emperor of a united Germany.
Robert M Berdahl Kaiser, KY zuhr, Georg, gay OHRKH , was a German expressionist playwright.
His dramas are marked by visions of the renewal and regeneration of humanity.
The Burghers of Calais shows how society can be saved through individual sacrifice.
Kaiser mixed brief, staccatolike Janguage and impassioned, flowery speeches.
His characters tend to be types and abstractions rather than individuals.
Characters representing specific attitudes appear in his Gas trilogy, which attacks capitalism.
Peter Gontrum Kaiser, KY zuhr, Henry John , an American industrialist, attracted national attention during World War II by the speed with which he built ships.
He ignored the usual methods of building from the keel up, and used assembly line methods.
Kaiser and Joseph W Frazer founded the Kaiser-Frazer Corporation to build automobiles in 1946.
In 1953, this corporation bought Willys-Overland Motors, Inc., and later stopped making pleasure cars in the United States.
Kaiser Jeep Corporation was sold to American Motors Corporation in 1969.
Kaiser also had interests in aluminum, aviation, cement, health care, housing, land development, magnesium, and steel.
Today, the major Kaiser companies are Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation, Kaiser CeNicholas Adams ment and Gypsum Corporation, and Kaiser Steel Corporation.
William H Becker Kala-azar, KAH lah ah ZAHR, is a disease that affects humans and animals.
It is caused by a parasite that belongs to Leishmania, a group of one-celled organisms.
The disease occurs throughout the warmer parts of Asia, the Mediterranean region, and various parts of Africa and South America.
In humans it causes fever, anemia, and enlargement of the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes.
Kala-azar in Hindi means black fever, which refers to the darkening of the skin that may occur.
It also is known as dumdum fever, named after a town in India that has suffered from kala-azar epidemics.
Kala-azar is transmitted by various species of sand flies and commonly affects dogs and rodents.
Kalahari Desert, «au /uh HARR ee, is a large, dry sandy basin that covers about 190,000 square miles in southern Africa.
It spreads across much of Botswana, and parts of Namibia and South Africa.
Like a typical desert, the Kalahari has vast areas of waterless ground surface covered by red sands and hundreds of sand dunes.
According to some definitions, a true desert receives less than 10 inches (25 centimeters) of rainfall annually.
But many parts of the Kalahari sometimes receive more than that amount of rain.
Animals that live in the region include brown hyenas, lions, meerkats, several species of antelope, and many types of birds and reptiles.
Vegetation in the Kalahari consists of dry grassland and scrubby acacias.
African people known as the San were the first known human inhabitants of the Kalahari.
SSS eer, eee rl ee rrLhCU er eer 3 og ee ee iar sain he oS Ont ibe Fy i ee ogenny a Bh are 3S pa a of ad The Kalahari Desert, in southern Africa, is one of the continents last wildlife paradises.
Antelope, shown here, are one of the many types of animals that live in the region. wilderness have become legendary.
Today, only a small number of the San follow their traditional way of life in the Kalahari.
Modern civilization is threatening the natural resources of the Kalahari.
Mineral companies have discovered large coal, copper, and nickel deposits in the region.
In addition, one of the largest diamond mines in the world is at Orapa in the Makgadikgadi, a depression of the northeastern Kalahari.
Kalb was born on June 29, 1721, in what is now Bavaria, in southern Germany.
In 1777, Kalb traveled to the American Colonies with a group of French soldier adventurers led by the Marquis de Lafayette.
The group hoped to help the colonies defeat Britain, France’s most important enemy.
That year, he briefly commanded the American army in the south until] Major General Horatio Gates took over.
Under Gates, the army suffered a terrible defeat at Camden, South Carolina.
Kalb fought brilliantly and bravely, but he was wounded 11 times and died three days later, on Aug., 1780.
Charles W Ingrao Kale, kay/, is a vegetable somewhat like cabbage but with loose, curly leaves instead of a head.
These leaves are boiled or steamed and eaten alone or mixed with potatoes.
Kale has additional value because it is a green vegetable available during winter.
Its scientific name is Brassica oleracea, variety acephala. i Se. of ogee $ © Michael Fogden, Bruce Coleman Inc.
Most kaleidoscopes are from 2 to 3 inches in diameter and about 10 inches long.
Both ends are closed, but one end has a small peephole through which you can look into the kaleidoscope.
At the far end of the kaleidoscope are two disks, the one closer to the eyehole made of clear glass and the other of ground glass.
The ground glass throws the reflections in many directions, and patterns are formed.
When the kaleidoscope is turned, the beads and glass shift, and the patterns Debbie Dean Dick Loftus A kaleidoscope, above, is a tube containing two mirrors and two small plates that hold beads and pieces of colored glass.
The mirrors reflect the beads and glass as colorful symmetrical patterns, right These patterns change continuously as the tube is turned.
Designers have used the kaleidoscope to find new patterns for rugs, wallpaper, and fabrics.
Kaliningrad, ku/h LEE nihn Gran , is the westernmost port city of Russia.
Kaliningrad serves as an important seaport because its deep harbor remains free of ice the year around.
The city's industries include shipbuilding, ship repair, machine building, and fishing.
The oblast is separated from the rest of Russia by Lithuania and Belarus.
The city became the cultural and political center of the German state of East Prussia in the 1600's.
The city and surrounding territory became part of the Russian republic of the Soviet Union in 1945.
When the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991, Kaliningrad remained part of Russia.
Kamakura period, «H muh KOO ruh, in Japanese history lasted from 1185 to 1333.
The samurai (warrior class) dominated the imperial government from military headquarters in Kamakura, near Yokohama.
Kamchatka Peninsula, kam CHAT kuh, extends southward from eastern Siberia, in Russia, between the Bering Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk.
The others belong to Siberian tribes and include the Koryak, Even, Chukchi, Itelmen, and Aleut.
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, on the eastern coast, is the capital and chief port.
Theodore Shabad Kamehameha I, kah may hah MAY hah , founded the Kingdom of Hawaii.
After Kalaniopu'u, the chief of Hawaii, died in 1782, Kamehameha conquered the island.
He later won additional victories, climaxed in 1795 by the bloody Battle of Nuuanu Pali on the island of Oahu.
Kamehameha used cannons to drive Oahu's defenders over a cliff near Honolulu.
He kept alive the customs and religion of his people but, after his death, missionaries spread Christianity throughout the islands.
The kamikazes dived airplanes loaded with explosives into certain targets, usually American warships.
Its military leaders viewed the kamikazes as the last hope of stopping the powerful Allied advance.
Fliers volunteered for kamikaze missions because they considered it a privilege to die for their emperor.
The first kamikaze attacks occurred in October 1944, when the Allies invaded the Japanese-held Philippines.
More than a thousand kamikazes took part in the defense of Okinawa in 1945.
But the kamikazes failed to sink any large aircraft carriers—their main targets—and in time proved to be a costly failure.
They became more important for the kind of resistance they symbolized than for the damage they caused.
It originally referred to a typhoon that destroyed a fleet sent by the Mongol conqueror Kublai Khan to attack Japan in 1281.
The name Kam/oops comes from an Indian word that probably means meeting of the waters.
The city is the financial, educational, and transportation center of a farming, logging, and mining region.
The North West Company and the Pacific Fur Company built trading posts in the Kamloops area in 1812.
The gold rush of the 1850's and the completion of the Canadian Pacific Railroad in 1885 stimulated Kamloops growth.
Graeme Wynn Kampala, kahm PAH Iuh , is the capital and largest city of Uganda.
Kampala replaced Entebbe as capital when Uganda became independent in 1962.
Kanawha River, kuh NAW wuh, is one of the chief waterways of West Virginia.
The land along the river contains deposits of coal, natural gas, and salt.
Kandahar, KAN duh hahr, also spelled Qandahar (pop. 191,345), is the second largest city of Afghanistan.
The old section of Kandahar includes many ancient buildings and bazaars.
Kandahar serves as the center of an important trade route between India, Iran, Pakistan, and Kabul.
Ahmad Shah Durrani, the empire's founder, built the modern city of Kandahar in 1761.
In the 1990's, Kandahar became the headquarters of a conservative, militant Islamic group known as the Taliban.
Riffat Sardar Kandinsky, kan DIHN skee, Wassily, VAS uh lee , was a Russian artist.
He is generally considered to have discovered abstract painting, which has no recognizable subject.
Kandinsky believed that painting— like music—is primarily a form of personal expression, rather than a way to tell a story or express an idea.
During this period, Kandinsky painted with bright, pure colors in a free, spontaneous style.
His ideas on the expressive qualities of color and form appear in his book Concerning the Spiritual in Art.
One of Kandinsky’s works, Black Lines, is reproduced in the Painting article.
During World War I , Kandinsky returned to Russia and was a teacher in Moscow.
From 1922 to 1933, he taught the theory of form at the Bauhaus school of design in Germany.
Kane, Paul , was the first artist to paint an extensive record of Indian life in western Canada.
While in England, Kane was inspired by pictures of Indians painted by the American artist George Catlin.
With financial support from the Hudson's Bay Company, Kane traveled across Canada, sketching and painting Indians and Indian life.
It originated as a small kingdom in the area north of Lake Chad in about the 700s.
The early kingdom engaged in trans-Saharan trade with Muslim North Africa.
The profits from this trade helped Kanem expand and conquer other kingdoms and territories.
Cloth, copper, glass, and horses from North Africa and the Mediterranean region were traded in Kanem’s markets for ivory, leather goods, and slaves.
At its height, Kanem included parts of what are now Cameroon, Chad, Libya, Niger, Nigeria, and Sudan.
After Bornu, on the southwest side of Lake Chad, became a province of Kanem, the empire was often called Kanem-Bornu.
Mai Idris Alooma, who ruled from 1580 to 1617, reconquered the lost territory and extended the empire to its greatest size.
Starting in the 1600's, Kanem began to decline because trade centers shifted from inland routes to the coast.
Kevin C MacDonald Kangaroo is a type of furry mammal that hops on its hind legs.
Kangaroos are marsupials—mammals that give birth to extremely undeveloped offspring.
The young of kangaroos complete their development ina pocketlike pouch on the belly of the mother.
Other macropods include such animals as bettongs, potoroos, rat-kangaroos, and wallabies.
The word macropod means /arge foot Most macropods have tong hind legs and feet and small front legs.
There are about 55 species of macropods, and all of them are native to Australia, New Guinea, or nearby islands.
The two main types of kangaroos are the red kangaroo and the gray kangaroo.
The red kangaroo inhabits the deserts and dry grasslands of central Australia.
Gray kangaroos are found in the forests and grasslands of southern and eastern Australia.
There are two species, the eastern gray kangaroo and the western gray kangaroo.
Shortly after a joey leaves the pouch, most female kangaroos give birth to a new joey.
Taylor, Ardea Photographics A kangaroo can hop on its powerful hind legs at speeds up to 30 miles per hour.
The animal uses its long muscular tail for balance when hopping. or gray fur.
When kangaroos hop, they use only their hind legs, which they move together.
Large kangaroos can hop as fast as 30 miles per hour for short distances.
A kangaroo uses its tail for balance when hopping and also for support when standing upright or when walking on four legs.
In general, kangaroos rest in the shade during the day and search for food at night.
Otherwise, kangaroos usually spend their time in small groups that often consist of a mother and her offspring.
Female gray kangaroos generally breed in the late spring or early summer.
About one month after mating, the female usually gives birth to one offspring, called a joey.
The joey spends six to eight months in the mother’s pouch, attached to one of her feats and nourished by her milk.
The female has four teats, and older offspring often attempt to suck milk from them long after leaving the pouch.
Kangaroos generally live from six to eight years, but many younger individuals may die in times of drought.
Red kangaroos have a special system of reproduction that helps their populations quickly return to normal size after a drought.
The embryo (unborn young) formed from this mating does not develop into a joey until after the first joey leaves the pouch or unless the first joey dies in the pouch.
After the second joey is born, the mother usually mates again, and the cycle continues. ee Other macropods vary widely in size and live in a variety of habitats.
It inhabits open forests and grasslands along the northern coast of Australia.
The smallest macropod is the musky rat-kangaroo, which grows to about the size of a rat.
The musky rat-kangaroo lives in rain forests of northeastern Australia.
Hare-wallabies and potoroos inhabit grasslands, bettongs live in dry woodlands, and tree kangaroos are found in rain forests.
Kangaroos have few enemies besides human beings and wild dogs called dingoes.
Kangaroos are protected throughout Australia by laws that prohibit killing them.
In some areas, however, hunters are licensed to kill large kangaroos to protect crops or to provide meat, fur, and leather when the kangaroos are abundant.
Some small macropods, including certain rat-kangaroos and wallabies, are in danger of extinction because farmers and ranchers have destroyed much of their habitat.
The eastern gray kangaroo is M giganteus, and the western gray kangaroo is M fuliginosis.
Kangaroo court is a slang term for an unauthorized gathering of people who take the law into their own hands by acting as a court.
Such groups usually disregard the principles of law and justice, and impose unfair or excessive punishments.
Pioneer judges traveled from place to place handling trials quickly and were paid with the fines from convicted prisoners.
Critics of a lawfully appointed court often use the term when they feel such a court's judgments completely disregard legal rights or procedures.
Their silky fur is yellow or brown on the upper parts and white on the underparts.
Kangaroo rats live in the deserts of the southwestern United States and Mexico.
They nest in burrows (tunnels) and come out at night to gather plant food.
Kangaroo rats use their small front feet to stuff food into furlined pouches on the outside of their cheeks.
Kangaroo rats, like their relatives the pocket mice, do not need to drink water.
They use the water that is produced when food inside them combines with the oxygen that they breathe.
At night, kangaroo rats come out from their burrows and search for food.
He expanded the empire’s power over what is now Pakistan, Afghanistan, and northwest India.
Kanishka adopted Buddhism as the empire’s official religion and called together a council of Buddhist monks and philosophers.
At his capital, near Peshawar, he built a famous towering monument to house relics of Buddha.
Kanishka supported the Gandharan school of sculpture, one of the first schools to produce stone images of Buddha.
Earlier, sculptors had created things only associated with Buddha, such as his footprints.
Kanishka probably adopted the Saka Fra, a calendar system still used by the Indian government.
Kanpur, KAHN poor (pop.,532,138; met. area pop. 2,690,486), is the largest city in Uttar Pradesh, a state in northern India.
Kanpur's factories produce cotton, leather goods, military equipment, silk, and wool.
The city’s oldest section, in the west, has narrow, winding streets lined by buildings that are crowded together.
An Indian leader ceded Kanpur, then called Cawnpore, to the British East India Company in 1801.
Cawnpore grew rapidly from a small village into a thriving commercial city.
Karan Kansa Indians, KAN saw, or Kaw Indians, were a Plains tribe who lived along the Kansas River in eastern Kansas.
They lived in earth lodges made of wooden posts and woven mats banked with soil.
The tribe sold their Kansas lands to the government in 1873 and moved to a reservation in Oklahoma.
Diseases, such as smallpox, took a heavy toll, and few Kansa remain today.
Kansas wheat fields are so productive that the state has earned the nicknames Wheat State and Breadbasket of America.
Kansas _ The Sunflower State Kansas leads all the states of the United States in wheat production.
In early summer, the vast wheat fields on the state's prairies look like golden seas of grain.
Busy mills throughout Kansas grind wheat into flour, to be shipped to the world’s bakers.
Thousands of oil and gas wells dot the prairies, and Kansas leads the states in the production of civilian airplanes.
Manufacturing and trade are the state’s most important economic activities.
Kansas was named for the Kansa, or Kaw, Indians who once lived in the region.
Before Alaska and Hawaii joined the Union, the geographic center of the United States was near Smith Center, in north-central Kansas.
This point serves as the reference point, or point of origin, for all United States government maps of North America.
The governments of Canada and Mexico also use this point in producing their maps.
Kansas received two nicknames because of its stormy history of the mid-1800's.
The conflict over slavery led to such violence that newspapers of the 1850's called the area Bleeding Kansas.
Raiders crossed from Kansas territory into Missouri to attack and sometimes kill slaveholders.
This activity came to be called javhawking, and the raiders were known as jayhawkers. "" | 4 ¥ ete eee Interesting facts about Kansas Prohibition first became part of a state constitution in 1880, when Kansas passed an amendment prohibiting the manufacture, distribution, and sale of liquor.
A newspaper called the Siwinowe Kesibwi (Shawnee Sun), was established in Kansas in 1835.
The monthly publication was the first newspaper published in Kansas and the first in North America to be printed entirely in an Indian language.
The newspaper was published in the Algonquian language for members of the Shawnee tribe by the missionary Jotham Meeker.
Indian-language paper The state's history of the 1860's through the 1880's has become well known through books, motion pictures, and TV programs about the cattle trails, cattle towns, and lawmen of that time.
The nickname of Dodge City, Kansas—Cowboy Capital of the World—suggests Kansas's background as cattle country.
When Dodge City got its nickname, it was a major regional shipping point for cattle.
Cowboys herded Texas longhorns great distances over cattle trails to reach the railroads in Dodge City, Abilene, and other cattle centers.
Such famous lawmen as Wyatt Earp, Wild Bill Hickok, and Bat Masterson tried to keep the peace among the cowboys and outlaws who gave these cattle towns their reputations as brawling, lawless places.
Dodge City is still a cattle center, but some of its cowboys no longer ride horses.
Mounted on motorcycles or on all-terrain vehicles the cowboys herd cattle in Dodge City's feed lots.
Today, Kansas ranks among the leading states in production of beef cattle.
The first female mayor in the United States, Susanna Salter, was elected mayor of the town of Argonia in 1887.
The election also marked the first time women in Kansas were allowed to vote in city elections.
Because helium can be removed from natural gas easily, the discovery led to the development of the commercial helium industry.
The collection includes works by such noted artists as Charles Marion Russell and Frederic Remington.
Cattle markets played a key role in the development of Kansas, and beef production remains a leading agricultural activity.
Kansas in brief Symbols of Kansas The state flag was adopted in 1927 and modified in 1963.
Above the state seal is the state crest—a twisted blue and gold bar with a sunflower, the state flower.
On the state seal, adopted in 1861, the rising sun represents the East, from where most Kansas settlers came.
The farmer plowing and the settlers cabin symbolize the future prosperity State flag State seal of the state through agriculture.
Ad Astra per Aspera (To the Stars Through Difficulties). , Topeka has housed the State Capitol since 1861.
Lowest—680 ft above sea level along the Verdigris River in Montgomery County.
Important dates Fighting over the slavery issue gave the region the name Bleeding Kansas. a CC Kansas became United States territory Kansas became the 34th Kansas oil and gas fields began as part of the Louisiana Purchase. state on January 29. producing.
Services include community, business, and personal services; finance; government; trade; and transportation, communication, and utilities. /ndustry includes construction, manufacturing, and mining.
The Department of Commerce and Housing also handles requests for information about the state's economy.
The state's official Web site at www.state.ks.us also provides a gateway to much information on Kansas's economy, government, and history.
An amendment increasing the terms for governor and other top state officials from two to four years became effective.
The 2000 United States census reported that Kansas had 2,688,418 people.
The population had increased 8 5 percent over the 1990 figure, 2,477,574.
According to the 2000 census, Kansas ranks 32nd in population among the 50 states.
The metropolitan areas of Lawrence, Topeka, and Wichita are located entirely in Kansas.
The Kansas City, Missouri, metropolitan area extends into eastern Kansas.
For the populations of these metropolitan areas, see the /ndex to the political map of Kansas in this article.
The state's other large cities, in order of population, include Overland Park, Kansas City, Topeka, Olathe, and Lawrence.
About 5 percent of them live on reservations in the state—the li TI, TENE var «eal e 4 Kansas Dept. of Commerce and Hnusing Mennonite women attend a rummage sale in Hutchinson.
Mennonites, who believe in simple living and modest dress, settled in Kansas during the 1870's.
People lowa, Sac and Fox, Kickapoo, and Potawatomi Indian reservations.
The first schools in Kansas were established for Indians by missionaries during the 1830's.
In 1855, the territorial legislature passed laws providing for free education for white children.
In 1859, the territorial legislature extended the laws for free education to all children in Kansas.
It appoints a commissioner to administer elementary and secondary education.
Since 1963, many small districts have been combined to make better use of school buildings and funds.
Kansas Dept. of Commerce and Houstng Indians participate in a ceremony at an Indian center in Wichita, shown here.
Population density More than half of the people of Kansas live in metropolitan areas.
The western half is 25 to 50 my 10 to 20 heavily rural and relatively 10 to 25 4to 10 thinly populated.
Today, young Indians prepare there for careers in business and industry.
Today, the State Library of Kansas in Topeka provides materials for and about the state government.
Mailing address Baldwin City Atchison Lindsborg North Newton Kansas City Wichita Lawrence * Salina Manhattan McPherson Olathe Wichita Ottawa Pittsburg Leavenworth Winfield Sterling Hillsboro Fort Leavenworth Topeka Wichita The Kansas Museum of History in Topeka, operated by the Kansas State Historical Society, is the largest historical museum in the state.
Dwight D Eisenhower Library The Eisenhower Library in Abilene contains documents and other items associated with Dwight D Eisenhower, president of the United States from 1953 to 1961.
The library is part of a complex that includes a museum and Eisenhower’s burial place.
G 13 ichita’s Century Wl, right. serves as a cultural and civic center.
G 5 includes exhibit and convention halls, a theater, and a concert hall.
Towns that were once wild cow towns feature museums depicting the exciting days of cattle drives.
Visitors can see wheel ruts left by wagons on the Santa Fe Trail and other westward trails.
Preserved forts that once provided travelers protection now offer living history events during the year.
Ye* y A Places to visit Following are brief descriptions of some of Kansas’s many interesting places to visit: Boot Hill Museum, in Dodge City, is on the original site of the Boot Hill cemetery.
The site consists of historic and reconstructed buildings, including the one-block reconstruction of Front Street, the original business district of Old Dodge City.
Eisenhower Library and Museum, in Abilene, house the mementos and papers of President Dwight D Eisenhower.
His boyhood home and the Place of Meditation, where Eisenhower and his wife Mamie are buried, are also there.
Exploration Place, in Wichita, features interactive exhibits and activities related to flight, health and human life, people, places, and the environment of Kansas.
Fort Larned National Historic Site, near Larned, includes a fort built in the 1860's to protect travelers on the Santa Fe Trail.
Fort Leavenworth, near Leavenworth, was the first permanent white settlement in Kansas.
The fort Visitors guide out Kansas, a leader in wheat production, celebrate the state's farming heritage.
Visitors to Kansas’s aviation museums can see displays of the many commercial and military aircraft built in the state.
The Flint Hills region is one of the largest remaining areas of tallgrass prairie.
Kansas State Fair in Hutchinson © Van Bucher, Photo Researchers i a ee ae now houses the United States Army Gormmnaind and General Staff College, and Leavenworth Prison, a federal penitentiary.
Many buildings, including a cavalry museum, an early Kansas Capitol, and the home of General George A Custer, still stand on the grounds of the fort.
Fort Scott National Historic Site, in Fort Scott, is a restored cavalry post of the 1840’s.
Eleven historic buildings, including a hospital, barracks, and officers’ quarters, stand there.
Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center, in Hutchinson, is a wide-ranging museum that features a large space exploration exhibit.
Exhibits contain original spacecraft, space suits, a lunar roving vehicle, and the Apollo 13 command module.
Kansas’s system of state recreation areas — includes 23 state parks, about 40 state lakes, and many small roadside parks.
Most of Kansas is a rolling plain that The Southeastern Plains cover the area south of the increases in elevation from east to west.
They are divided into the Osage Cuestas in the The Dissected Till Plains cover the northeastern coreast and the Flint Hills in the west.
Cuestas is the Spanish ner, lying generally east of the Big Blue River and north word for upraised ridges. of the Kansas River.
The area’s rich soil was left as the The Osage Cuestas were formed by the erosion of glacier that once covered the region retreated.
The area's natural resources incut into the soil, creating high bluffs, and winds deposit_ clude limestone, natural gas, and petroleum.
Bluestem grasses that grow abundantly there make the area a lush pastureland.
This region slopes upward from about 1,500 feet (457 meters) above sea level in the east to about 4,000 feet at the Colorado border.
This is the flattest part of the state, though it is also the highest in elevation.
The Red Hills are along the southern border and the Smoky Hills in the north.
This area also contains lowlands that fill with water and provide wetland habitats WORLDBOOKmap for a great variety of birds and other animals.
DISSECTED TILL PLAINS Smoky Hill R GREAT ia PLAINS “oN Ark Sas , ie SOUTHEASTERN PLAINS Land regions of Kansas Rivers and lakes.
The Kansas, or Kaw, River system drains the northern part of the state.
The Missouri River, along the state's northeast border, is the only major waterway for barges.
Other important rivers of Kansas include the Big Blue, Cimarron, Neosho, Republican, Saline, Solomon, Smoky Hill, and Verdigris rivers.
In some parts of western Kansas, small streams may flow for a short distance and then disappear as the water soaks into the dry soil of the streambed.
Milford Lake, a reservoir on the Republican River covers about 16,000 acres and is the largest lake.
Other large lakes include Cedar Bluff, Cheney, Fall River, John Redmond, Kanopolis, Kirwin, McKinney, Pomona, Toronto, Tuttle Creek, and Webster.
The state's largest natural lake is Lake Inman, which is about half a mile across.
Trees include the ash, black walnut, elm, hackberry, hickory, locust, maple, oak, pecan, redcedar, sycamore, and willow.
Cottonwood trees grow along streams and rivers throughout the state, especially in the moist river valleys of the east.
Shorter types, such as blue grama and buffalo grass, are found in the west.
Other wild flowers include asters, clover, columbines, daisies, goldenrod, thistles, verbena, and wild morning-glories.
Today, bison have been reintroduced in small herds, but smaller animals are most plentiful.
These include coyotes, muskrats, opossums, prairie dogs, rabbits, and raccoons.
Birds found in Kansas include blue jays, cardinals, crows, meadowlarks, robins, sparrows, woodpeckers, and several kinds of hawks.
Game birds, such as ducks, geese, pheasants, prairie chickens, and quail, live Average January temperatures Kansas has cold winters.
Cold air from the north moves across the flat plains, moderating as it travels southward.
The northwest generally has the mildest summer temperatures. throughout the state.
Fishes in the state’s lakes, rivers, and streams include bass, bluegills, catfish, and crappies.
There are many kinds of reptiles, including two kinds of poisonous snakes—copperheads and rattlesnakes.
Cold air from the north moves easily across the flat plains in winter, and hot winds sweep up from the south in summer.
Northern Kansas usually has cooler weather than southern Kansas, but the difference is often slight.
The record high temperature of 121°F occurred in 1936 on July 18 in Fredonia and on July 24 near Alton.
WORLD BOOK maps Degrees Celsius Above 27 26 to 27 ; 24 to 26 Inches Centimeters More than 36 More thon 91 2B 10 36 |} 71 1091 201028 | | 51 to 71 less thon 20} | Less thon 51 ,Goodland Economy Service industries, taken together, account for the largest portion of Kansas’s gross state product—the total value of all goods and services produced in a state ina year.
Such activities as finance, government, and trade have replaced agriculture as the mainstay of the state’s economy.
Kansas remains a leading farm state, however, and farming contributes to the larger sectors of the economy.
For example, getting agricultural products from farms to processors provides economic opportunities for people employed in the areas of wholesale trade and transportation.
Wichita is famous as the nation’s leading producer of commercial and private aircraft.
Construction and mining are relatively small parts of the state's economy.
The mining industry in Kansas consists mainly of extracting petroleum and natural gas from fields in western Kansas.
The most important natural resources of Kansas are fertile soil and rich mineral deposits.
Most of Kansas has a loamy, fertile soil suitable for growing many kinds of crops.
Central and northwestern Kansas have fertile soil, but these rich areas get less rain than eastern Kansas.
The soil of southwestern Kansas is often sandy, and there are some sand dunes along the Arkansas River.
Severe droughts in the 1930's and 1950's taught Kansas the importance of conserving soil and water.
The state and federal governments built many dams to create reservoirs and ponds to hold water and to keep it from washing away the soil.
Farmers use special methods of farming, such as contour plowing, limited tillage, and terracing, to conserve soil and water.
Other valuable mined products found in Kansas include clays, gypsum, helium, natural gas liquids, salt, sand and gravel, and stone.
Service industries account for the largest part of the gross state product of Kansas.
Wholesale and retail trade ranks first among the service industries of Kansas in terms of the gross state product.
The leading types of retail establishments are automobile dealerships and grocery stores.
Department stores, restaurants, and service stations are also important.
Leading wholesale trade activities include distributing farm products, groceries, machinery, and motor vehicles.
The Kansas City and Wichita areas are the leading centers of wholesale and retail trade in Kansas.
Community, business, and personal services rank second among Kansas‘s service industries.
This industry group consists of a variety of establishments, including private health care, law firms, data processing companies, hotels, and repair shops.
Government services rank third among Kansas‘s service industries in terms of the gross state product.
These services include the operation of public schools and hospitals, and military activities.
The federal government operates Fort Leavenworth, Fort Riley, and McConnell Air Force Base.
The federal penitentiary and a nearby state penitentiary employ many people in the Leavenworth area.
Local school districts and public universities are major employers in Kansas.
Ranking next among the service industries of Kansas are finance, insurance, and real estate.
Overland Park, at the southern end of the Kansas City area, is the home of dozens of insurance companies and several major banks.
Insurance companies are also concentratPoe Cessna Aircraft Company Light-airplane manufacturers in Wichita build about twothirds of the civilian aircraft produced in the United States.
The Wichita area is an important financial base for people of the central Kansas region.
Transportation, communication, and utilities are a more important part of the economy in Kansas than in most other states.
Kansas’s central location makes it an important link in the United States transportation system.
The state’s farmers rely on trucks and trains to transport crops and livestock to processing centers.
Pipelines transport natural gas and petroleum to Wichita, Kansas City, and major cities outside the state.
Television and telephone companies make up the most economically important parts of the communications industry.
Goods produced in Kansas have a value added by manufacture of about $20 billion annually.
Value added by manufacture is the increase in value of raw materials after they become finished products.
The Kansas City and Wichita areas are the leading manufacturing centers.
The light-airplane industry of the United States is centered in the Wichita area, which produces about two-thirds of the nation’s general aviation aircraft.
Military airplanes, missiles, and aircraft parts are also manufactured in the Wichita area.
Railroad freight cars, locomotive parts, and passenger cars are manufactured in Atchison, Kansas City, Lawrence, Topeka, and Wichita.
Other transportation equipment produced in Kansas includes truck parts, snowplows, and trailers.
Food processing ranks second among Kansas‘s manufacturing activities in terms of value added by manufacture.
The largest flour mills in Kansas are located in Hutchinson, Topeka, and Wichita.
Factories in Lenexa, McPherson, Wichita, and Winfield make a variety of plastics products.
Motor vehicle tires are the most important rubber product made in the state.
The production of printed materials is also a leading manufacturing activity in Kansas.
Kansas City has the state's largest business printing and newspaper operations.
A plant in Topeka is one of the largest producers of school yearbooks in the United States.
Other products manufactured in Kansas include chemicals, electrical equipment, paper products, petroleum products, and stone, glass, and clay products.
Kansas ranks among the country’s leading states in the value of farm products.
Beef cattle and wheat generate more income for Kansas farmers than any other products.
Together, these two products account for nearly three-fourths of Kansass farm income.
Beef cattle bring in about 60 percent, and wheat earns about 13 percent.
Kansas ranks among the nation’s leaders in wheat production and in number of beef cattle.
The other leading farm products include corn, soybeans, grain sorghum, hay, and hogs.
Kansas is among the leading states in the production of hay and grain sorghum, both of which are used for livestock feed.
In some dry parts of western Kansas, farmers plant crops on only half or two-thirds of their land each year.
This procedure, called summer fallowing, allows moisture to collect in the unused portion of the land.
The Ogallala aquifer, a vast underground reservoir, is a major source of water for irrigation in the western quarter of the state.
Kansas farmers served by this aquifer grow corn, hay, sorghum, sugar beets, and wheat.
Farmers increasingly use conservation measures to protect the aquifers supply of irrigation water.
Petroleum and natural gas are the state’s most valuable mined products.
Barton, Ellis, Rooks, and Russell counties combine to produce nearly a fourth of the state's oil.
Most of the natural gas produced in Kansas comes from the southwestern part of the state.
The Hugoton gas field, which stretches across eight Kansas counties, is one of the largest natural gas reserves in the United States.
Limestone, which is used mainly for crushed stone in roadbeds, comes mostly from eastern Kansas.
Salt comes from brine wells and rock salt mines near Hutchinson, Kanapolis, and Lyons.
About two-thirds of the electric power in Kansas is produced by plants that burn coal.
The rest of the state’s electric power comes from plants that burn natural gas or petroleum.
The central location of Kansas makes the state an important link in the United States transportation system.
Pioneer wagon trains followed trails through the region during the 1800's, and early railroads chose routes across the flat plains of Kansas.
The first railroad in the state was a 5-mile line that was built in 1860.
Today, Kansas has about 133,000 miles (214,000 kilometers) of roads and highways.
It ranks among the leading states in total distance covered by highways.
The extensive road system is needed to connect the state's many farm communities with market centers.
Interstate 70 crosses the entire state, stretching from the Colorado border on the west to the Missouri border on the east.
Kansas City International Airport, which serves the Kansas City metropolitan area, is located in Missouri.
The state's first newspaper was the monthly Shawnee Sun, published by Jotham Meeker, a missionary, in 1835.
Meeker printed the paper in the Shawnee Indian language for members of that tribe.
The first English-language paper, the Kansas Weekly Herald, appeared in Leavenworth in 1854.
Today, the state's leading newspapers are 7he Topeka Capital-Journal and The Wichita Eagle.
KFH, Kansas’s first radio station, began broadcasting from Wichita in 1922.
The first commercial television station in Kansas, KTVH, began operating in Hutchinson in 1953.
Kansas is governed under its original Constitution, which was drawn up in 1859.
Amendments must be approved by two-thirds of the members in each house of the Legislature, and by a majority of the voters.
Such a convention may be called only with the approval of two-thirds of the legislators and a majority of the people who vote on the issue in a statewide election.
The Legislature must call an election to approve the convention's actions.
They may be elected to an unlimited number of terms, but not more than two ina row.
Other top elected state officials include the secretary of state, attorney general, treasurer, and commissioner of insurance.
Each is elected to a four-year term, and may serve an unlimited number of terms.
Senators serve four-year terms, and representatives serve two-year terms.
The Legislature meets each year, beginning on the second Monday in January.
Special sessions may be called by the governor or by a petition of two-thirds of the members of the Legislature.
In 1933, Kansas became the first United States state to forma legislative council.
This council, now known as a legislative coordinating council, consists of leaders of the state Senate and House of Representatives.
The law requires the Kansas Supreme Court to approve each reapportionment plan.
Kansass highest state court is the Supreme Court, made up of seven justices.
New justices of the state's Supreme Court are appointed by the governor from a list of candidates made up by a Supreme Court nominating commission.
After a new justice has held office for a year, the voters decide in an election whether the justice can continue for a regular term.
The justice with the longest service on the Supreme Court serves as the courts chief justice.
The chief justice of the Supreme Court appoints the chief judge of the Court of Appeals from among the judges.
Republican 1961-1965 William H Avery Republican 1965-1967 Robert Docking Democratic 1967-1975 Robert F Bennett Republican 1975-1979 John W Carlin Democratic 1979-1987 Mike Hayden Republican 1987-1991 joan Finney Democratic 1991-1995 Bill Graves Republican 1995cases.
A board of county commissioners consisting of three or five members administers each county.
Commissioners are elected from separate districts and serve four-year terms.
Other county officials include the county attorney, county clerk, register of deeds, sheriff, and treasurer.
Each of the four counties with the largest populations has an election commissioner.
Most of them, especially the smaller cities, have a mayor-council form of government.
In 1961, an amendment to the state constitution gave the cities of Kansas home rule power.
This power gave the cities control over their own affairs in such matters as licensing and taxation.
In 1974, the Legislature granted the counties of Kansas home rule power similar to that of the cities.
The government of Kansas gets more than half of its general revenue from state taxes.
Personal and corporate income taxes and a general retail sales tax provide most of the money.
The state levies taxes on motor vehicle licenses and motor fuels to pay for highway construction and maintenance.
Kansas has traditionally voted strongly Republican in both national and local elections.
Kansas voters usually elected Republican governors during the late 1800's and early 1900's.
But since 1956, Democrats have won more gubernatorial elections than Republicans.
Before Europeans came, four Indian tribes probably lived in what is now eastern Kansas.
The Arapaho, Cheyenne, Comanche, Kiowa, and other tribes came to the central plains after obtaining horses during the early 1600's.
In 1541, the Spanish explorer Francisco Vasquez de Coronado led the first Europeans into the Kansas region.
But the Spaniards found no treasure, and they left without establishing settlements.
In the late 1600's, French explorers claimed large areas of North America for France.
The French settled only in the northeastern corner of the Kansas region.
Spain still claimed a small portion in the southwestern part of what is now Kansas.
The government of the Kansas region changed several times during the early years of United States control.
At various times the region was part of the District of Louisiana, the Louisiana Territory, and the Missouri Territory.
In 1825, the federal government decided to take land from Indians in the East and give them Kansas land in return.
Between 1825 and 1842, about 30 tribes were forced off their eastern lands and settled on reservations in the Kansas region.
These tribes included the Chippewa, Delaware, Fox, lowa, Kickapoo, Ottawa, Potawatomi, Sauk, Shawnee, and Wyandot.
Other reservations were set aside for the Indians who already lived in the region.
Fur trappers, merchants, and settlers used the Santa Fe and Oregon trails through the region.
In 1827, an army officer, Colonel Henry Leavenworth, established the first United States outpost, Fort Leavenworth.
Pressure to open Kansas to white settlement and railroad construction increased about 1850.
The United States government negotiated with the Indian tribes and took back most of the land.
In the west, the Plains Indians fought the settlers who poured across the prairie.
Major groups in the 1800's included immigrants from England, Ireland, Germany, Sweden, and Russia.
Other settlers included Austrians, Bohemians, Czechs, Italians, and Germans from Russia.
In the 1850's, Kansas became the symbol of a nationwide struggle over slavery.
During the first half of the 1800's, the slavery issue divided the people of the United States.
In Congress, Northerners and Southerners clashed on whether new states and territories would permit slavery.
In 1854, Congress found a way to create new territories and avoid the issue of slavery.
The answer was popular sovereignty, also known as squatter sovereignty.
The settlers, sometimes called squatters, in each territory would decide for themselves whether to allow slavery.
Andrew H Reeder was appointed as territorial governor by President Franklin Pierce.
Soon settlers from both North and South were streaming into Kansas, aided by groups who wanted to influence the decision on slavery.
Kansans who opposed slavery formed a political group called the Free State party.
In the elections of 1855, many citizens of the slave state of Missouri crossed the border and voted illegally in Kansas.
Proslavery candidates won control of the territorial legislature and passed many proslavery laws.
Violence broke out, particularly in the area close to the Missouri border.
In 1856, supporters of slavery burned part of the Free State town of Lawrence.
The violence in Kansas over the slavery issue attracted attention throughout the United States.
The proslavery group wrote a constitution favoring slavery, but Kansas voters rejected it.
Finally, the Free Staters gained control of the legislature and repealed the proslavery laws.
A treaty with the Osage Indians gave travelers through Kansas safe passage on the Santa Fe Trail.
John Brown, an opponent of slavery, led a raid on proslavery sympathizers in a small Kansas settlement on the Pottawatomie Creek in 1856.
Nancy Kassebaum of Topeka was elected to the United States Senate from Kansas in 1978.
She thus became the first woman elected to a full term in the United States Senate who did not succeed her husKansas cattle towns, such as Abilene, Dodge City, and Wichita, shipped longhorn cattle to other parts of the country by railroads during the 1860's and 1870's. band in either house of Congress. important dates in Kansas WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick 1541 ‘The Spanish explorer Francisco Vasquez de Corona1894 Kansas oil and gas fields began producing. do entered Kansas.05 The country’s first helium was found near Dexter.
She raised the first Turkey Red wheat in Kansas. was the first woman elected to the office. for statehood.
Southern Democrats in Congress would not vote to admit a new Republican state.
Kansas became the 34th state on Jan., 1861, after several Southern states had left the Union.
The American Civil War started within a few weeks, and Kansas became involved in new violence.
Antislavery leader Jim Lane led “jayhawking’ raids into Missouri, attacking slaveholders and bringing back freed slaves.
During the war, Kansas sent more men to the Union army, in proportion to its population, than any other state.
After the war ended in 1865, thousands of Union veterans and newly freed slaves moved into Kansas to claim land.
In 1877, blacks established the all-black town of Nicodemus, which still exists.
During the late 1860's and the 1870's, railroads built lines into Kansas.
The railroads brought settlers in and carried farm products to the East.
Cattle owners began to drive herds of longhorn cattle from Texas to Kansas railroad towns.
The trails, the towns, and the people of this era have provided material for books, motion pictures, and television.
Famous cattle trails included the Chisholm Trail and the Western Trail.
For 10 years after 1875, this bustling city was a major regional shipping point for cattle.
The cowboys liked to “whoop it up’ after hard weeks of herding cattle, and the cattle towns became wild and disorderly.
Wyatt Earp, Wild Bill Hickok, Bat Masterson, and other Jawmen won fame for taming the wild towns.
Kansas ranches continued to operate, and the state had developed a meat-packing industry.
Many early Kansas farmers grew corn and wheat, but drought and insects often ruined their crops.
In the 1870's, a religious group called the Mennonites arrived from Russia.
It was harvested early in the summer, and thereby escaped summer heat and many insects.
The farmers suffered during a period of dry weather in the late 1880's and 1890's.
To solve these problems, they formed a group called the Farmers Alliance, which won control of the Kansas Legislature in 1890.
The Populist candidate won the state's electoral votes for president in 1892, and Populist governors were elected in 1892 and 1896.
A spirit of reform swept Kansas, and the ideas of the reform group grew to include a broad program of social change.
A limit was placed on interest rates, and new regulations limited the power of banks, railroads, and other large companies.
Many saloons were selling alcoholic drinks in violation of Kansas’s prohibition law, until a woman named Carry A Nation began smashing saloons with a hatchet.
They passed Jaws outlawing child labor, setting up juvenile courts, and reducing railroad rates on grain shipments.
Other laws gave women the vote and set up primary elections to choose candidates for office.
In 1911, the Legislature passed the nation’s first b/ue-sky Jawto proKansas State Historical Society A Confederate raid in Kansas during the Civil War resulted in the destruction of most of Lawrence.
Much of the reform program was passed with the support of a group of newspapermen.
This group included Henry J Allen, Joseph L Bristow, Arthur Capper, William Allen White, and others.
After the United States entered World War | in 1917, many factories were built in Kansas to produce war supplies.
Farm production, particularly of wheat, was increased to meet wartime food needs.
Farmers, however, did not share in the prosperity of the 1920's because farm prices were low.
People often could not eat or drink without feeling gritty dust between their teeth.
Many farmers left their damaged land, but others fought back with help from the federal and state governments.
They tried new methods of farming, and planted trees to break the sweep of the wind.
In 1936, the Republican party nominated Landon for United States president.
World War II created a great demand for Kansas farm and mineral products.
It also stimulated growth of the aviation industry, especially in Wichita.
Some aspects of the economy continued to grow during the 1950's and 1960's.
But the state's main industries, energy and agriculture, suffered major problems.
Overall, with the poor condition of the agricultural economy, the state suffered a rapid loss of farms and had only a small increase in population.
A drought almost as severe as that of the 1930's struck in the 1950's, but with less disastrous effect.
Production of crops had also increased because of advances in technology.
Irrigation with ground water, a major development that began during the 1960's, allowed farmers to raise corn and grain sorghum in areas of little rainfall.
Even without irrigation, improved winter wheat varieties increased wheat production, and Kansas remained the leading wheat-growing state.
Agriculture remained important economically, but the population became largely urban.
Wichita and Kansas City became the fastest-growing population centers in the state.
Republican Dwight D Eisenhower, who grew up in Abilene, served as U.S president from 1953 to 1961.
FHT og Cattle drives were common in Kansas during the late 1860's and the 1870's.
Newly opened railroad lines in the state attracted cattle owners from Texas and other areas who used them to ship their livestock to eastern markets.
Dodge City, Abilene, and Wichita became cattle centers. ally Republican Kansas.
Democrats George Docking and Robert Docking, father and son who both served as governor, showed that, politically, Kansas had become a competitive two-party state.
In 1986, the voters approved the legalization of selling liquor by the drink and betting on horse and dog races.
Low prices plagued the oil industry, and financial difficulties caused the failure of many farms.
To try to improve the economy, the government and business people established Kansas, Inc., as the state's economic planning agency.
Its efforts and other developments contributed to improvement of the state's economy in the 1990's.
Joan Finney, a Democrat, served as governor of Kansas from 1991 to 1995.
A Places to visit Land and climate A Land regions B Rivers and lakes Economy A Natural resources B Service industries C Manufacturing D Agriculture B Annual events C Plant and animal life D Climate E Mining F Electric power G Transportation H Communication V Government A Constitution E Local government B Executive F Revenue C Legislature G Politics D Courts Vi.
Great dust clouds caused by winds whipping across the plains overwhelmed entire towns.
The main campus, in Lawrence, has a college of liberal arts and sciences, and schools of architecture and urban design, business, education, engineering, fine arts, journalism, law, pharmacy, and social welfare.
The university's medical center in Kansas City has schools of allied health, medicine, and nursing.
The school of medicine also offers clinical programs on its Wichita campus.
Museums of anthropology, art, classics, entomology, geology, and natural history are also on the Lawrence campus.
The city lies on the Kansas-Missouri border, along both banks of the Kansas River, just west of Kansas City, Missouri.
Kansas City forms part of the important industrial center known as Greater Kansas City.
It is part of the Kansas City, Missouri, metropolitan area, which has a population of 1,776,062.
The downtown area includes the Kansas City Municipal Building, courthouses, and a regional headquarters for the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Huron Indian Cemetery, an Indian burial ground dating from 1843, has been preRich Grosko The Municipal Building in Kansas City, Kansas, houses local government offices.
Only Wichita and Overland Park have more people. served in the downtown area.
The National Agricultural Center and Hall of Fame lies just west of the city.
Kansas City is also an agricultural center of the plains region of the United States.
The Kansas City International Airport and the Downtown Airport in Kansas City, Missouri, serve the metropolitan area.
Kansas City and Wyandotte County are governed by the Unified Government of Wyandotte County/Kansas City, Kansas.
Before whites arrived, the Kansa Indians lived in the area that is now Kansas City.
In 1804, the expedition led by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark camped there.
In 1818, the United States government made the surrounding area a reservation for the Delaware Indians.
The Wyandot Indians, a tribe from Ohio, purchased the land from the Delaware in 1843.
They built the first free school in Kansas, a church, a community store, and a council house.
In 1859, a convention in Wyandotte wrote the Constitution under which Kansas gained statehood.
The citizens of Wyandotte played an important part in the antislavery movement.
Many European immigrants came to Wyandotte as the meat-packing industry thrived.
In 1886, Armourdale and Kansas City combined with Wyandotte under the name of Kansas City.
Two more towns, Argentine and Rosedale, later became part of Kansas City.
The city pioneered in the development of industrial parks by locating industrial plants in open areas away from residential sections.
This facility is called the Jack Reardon Civic Center, after a three-term city mayor.
In 1987, General Motors completed a $1-billion automobile assembly plant to replace an existing plant.
Mike Belt Kansas City, Missouri, is the state's largest city and a Midwestern center of commerce, industry, and transportation.
It lies on the western border of Missouri, where the Kansas and Missouri rivers meet.
In 1821, American Fur Company employees establi i, lished a trading post at the site of what is now Kansas City, Missouri.
The oldest and most densely populated part of the city lies south of the river.
Kansas City's central business district, an area called the downtown /oop, is bounded on all sides by interstate highways.
Buildings in the freeway loop include City Hall, the 10th District Federal Reserve Bank, the Jackson County Courthouse, the Municipal Auditorium, a convention center, and state and federal office buildings.
It consists of Cass, Clay, Clinton, Jackson, Lafayette, Platte, and Ray counties in Missouri; and johnson, Leavenworth, Miami, and Wyandotte counties in Kansas.
About 96 percent of Kansas City’s people were born in the United States.
Kansas City is often called the Heart of America because it lies almost in the center of the United States.
This location has helped make Kansas City a distribution, telecommunications, transportation, and warehouse center.
Metropolitan Kansas City is the largest winter-wheat market in the United States.
It ranks highly among American cities in the capacity of its grain elevators.
The Scout, an American Indian memorial in Penn Valley Park, foreground, overlooks the city’s downtown area.
The American sculptor Cyrus E Dallin designed the memorial, which was dedicated in 1922.
Federal, state, and local governments and the wholesale and retail trade employ many workers.
The city is headquarters for several engineering and architecture firms.
Automobile assembly, food processing, and printing and publishing rank as the largest manufacturing industries.
Other important industrial activities include the production of chemicals, clothing, electric equipment, fiber-optic communication systems, metal goods, motorcycles, and soap.
The Kansas City School District and 16 other public school systems serve Kansas City.
In addition, thousands of students attend private and churchsupported schools.
Oth1930's for its many jazz clubs, where such musicians as er institutions of higher learning include Avila College, Count Basie and Charlie Parker began their careers.
The museum shares its space with the Negro William Jewell College is in nearby Liberty, and Park League Baseball Museum.
The Arabia Steamboat MuKansas City conducts scientific research. seum features items salvaged from a sunken steamboat.
The Kansas City Public Library and its branches serve The science museum Science City is located on the the city.
The Linda Hall Library is one of the country’s edge of the downtown area. largest privately financed libraries of scientific and techThe Lyric Opera of Kansas City presents an annual nical research materials.
It performs in the . nearby Independence houses documents and memenLyric Theatre.
The city-owned Starlight Theater, an out| tos of Truman's presidency. door amphitheater, offers a summer program of musiCultural life.
The Missouri Repertory Theater, a professional actknown for its fine collection of Asian art.
The also houses the Henry Moore Sculpture Garden, which Kansas City Symphony and the State of Missouri Ballet includes the largest collection outside the United Kingalso perform in the city. dom of the work of the famous British sculptor.
Swope Park, which occupies 1,769 acres (716 trict, which is known for its Spanish architecture and hectares), is one of the nation’s largest city parks.
It infountains. cludes the Kansas City Zoo, the Starlight Theater, golf Kansas City became famous during the 1920's and courses, and a swimming pool.
Kansas City is called the City of Fountains for its many public and private fountains.
The city is the home of the Kansas City Chiefs of the National Football League and the Kansas City Royals, a major league baseball team.
This event, held in the old stockyards and meatpacking district along the Kansas River, is one of the nation’s largest horse and livestock shows.
The council appoints a city manager as the chief administrative official.
The Kansa Indians lived at the meeting place _of the Kansas and Missouri rivers before the arrival of white settlers.
By the 1820's, the Kansa and another local tribe, the Osage, had left the area as the result of treaties.
During the 1830’, Indian tribes who had been forced from their lands in the East, such as the Shawnee -and the Wyandot, settled just across the border.
The first began in 1821, when Francois Chouteau and several other employees of the American Fur Company established a trading post there.
By the late 1820's, Chouteau had set up his headquarters at a site that became known as Chouteau's Landing.
In 1838, a group of investors purchased Chouteau’s Landing and named it the Town of Kansas.
Steamboat traffic on the Missouri River increased during the 1840's, and the Town of Kansas began to grow.
The second settlement, called Westport, was located 4 miles south of the Town of Kansas.
Westport was founded in the early 1830's and served as a trading center for New Mexico.
Overland traffic moved along the Santa Fe Trail, which cut through the _ town.
Later, settlers using the Oregon Trail and gold _ seekers headed to California traveled through Westport.
It served as the river port for Westport, and many _ people even called it Westport Landing.
Many people moved away after the area became the site of bitter fighting between Confederate and Union supporters.
The most vio_ lent clash, the Battle of Westport, took place in 1864, when about 30,000 soldiers fought just south of Westport.
By the end of the war, the profitable river and overland trade had died.
Business leaders realized that the future of the City of Kansas depended on railroads.
In 1869, the city opened the first railroad bridge over the Missouri River.
The bridge helped make the city a link in _ the nation’s transcontinental railroad system.
During the 1870's and 1880's, the city developed as a market for the grain of the surrounding farmland.
It also became a stockyard center as the railroads brought cattle from the West.
In 1889, a new charter officially changed the city’s name to Kansas City.
The Pendergast machine supported many civic improvements, but corruption became common among Kansas City politicians.
Harry S Truman, a Pendergast-supported United States senator from nearby Independence, became vice president in January 1945.
He assumed the presidency a few months later when President Franklin D Roosevelt died.
Since the 1950's, much urban redevelopment has taken place in Kansas City.
In the mid-1970's, a convention center was built in a previously run-down section of the downtown loop.
Crown Center, another major project, includes apartment buildings, hotels, office buildings, restaurants, and shops south of the loop.
In the mid1980's, developments in the downtown loop included new construction and the restoration of the old Quality Hill neighborhood.
The 1914 building at the edge of the downtown area became a theater and restaurant complex and the home of a science museum.
The area north of the depot, known as the Freight House District, has become a popular site of art galleries and restaurants.
A major flood control and beautification project improved Brush Creek, which flows through the Country Club Plaza.
It provided that two new territories, Kansas and Nebraska, were to be made from the Indian land that lay west of the bend of the Missouri River and north of 37 degrees north latitude.
Midwesterners had tried to get a new territory organized in Nebraska for four years.
Douglas was influenced by the Midwesterners, especially Missourians, and may also have been influenced by his desire for a railroad from Chicago to the Pacific Coast.
Douglas included in his bill a provision for “popular sovereignty in Kansas and Nebraska.
This provision stated that all questions of slavery in the new territories were to be decided by the settlers rather than by Congress.
The provision was designed to win the support of the Southern congressmen and was directly contrary to the Missouri Compromise of 1820.
The Missouri Compromise had declared that all land in the Louisiana Purchase north of 36° 30’, except for the state of Missouri, was to be free.
The Kansas-Nebraska Act made slavery legally possible in a vast new area.
The act revived the bitter quarrel over the expansion of slavery, which had died down after the Compromise of 1850, and it hastened the start of the Civil War.
His work was influential because he established the main lines for philosophical developments since his day.
In his chief work, Critique of Pure Reason , Kant discussed the nature and limits of human knowledge.
This question became important to him because of Scottish philosopher David Hume’s theories.
Before Hume, most philosophers assumed that our past experience could provide knowledge about matters that go beyond our experience.
But Hume argued that we cannot be certain of anything beyond our experience.
For example, the law of universal gravitation states that a force of attraction acts between all objects.
But our experience is restricted to only a few objects that we have observed.
Kant believed that we cannot justify claims beyond our actual experience as long as we continue to think of the mind and its objects as separate things.
He held instead that the mind is actively involved in the objects it experiences.
That is, it organizes experience into categories, or forms of understanding.
All things capable of being experienced are also arranged in these categories.
Kant believed that we can have knowledge of what we have not yet experienced as well as what we have already experienced.
Kant’ conclusions meant having to abandon any claim to know things as they are in themselves, things in which the mind is not involved.
But he did not deny the existence of things in themselves, which he called noumena.
Some philosophers regarded this refusal to claim absolute knowledge as too serious a limitation on a system of philosophy.
Other philosophers argued that we have an intuitive, nonrational knowledge of things.
He argued that the existence of God cannot be proved or disproved by the use of reason.
According to Kant, reason is restricted to ideas of possible experience, and the idea of God transcends all possible experience.
Yet Kant held that faith could be rational because we cannot think of the world as orderly or justify our morality without supposing the existence of God.
In ethics, Kant tried to show that doing one’s duty consisted in following only those principles that one would accept as applying equally to all, and that even assuming that scientists can predict what we are going to do, the predictions do not conflict with our use of free will.
Therefore, the predictions of scientists have no bearing on our duty to live morally.
Kaolin, KAY uh /ihn, is a pure white clay made of feldspar that has decomposed.
Kaolin is also called china clay and porcelain clay. lmportant kaolin-producing countries are the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany.
Kaolin-producing states include Georgia, South Carolina, Pennsylvania, Florida, and North Carolina.
Kaolin is either mined dry with a shovel, or dislodged with jets of water and sucked into a pump system.
Then it is washed and put through separation processes to remove sand, mica, and iron-oxide impurities.
Excess water is then removed, and the clay is formed into cakes that are dried and shipped to potteries.
Kaolin is also used in textiles, as a coating for paper, and as a filler for rubber tires.
Kapok, KAY pahk or KAP uhk, is a light, soft, lustrous, cottonlike fiber.
Kapok trees grow in Indonesia, the Philippines, India, Sri Lanka, tropical America, and Africa.
After the ripe fruit of the kapok tree is picked, the seeds and fibers are taken out and dried in the sun.
Workers then separate the seeds and fibers and pack the fibers into bales.
It is useful as a filling for mattresses and furniture, and also as a substitute for cork in life jackets.
But in many of these uses, kapok is being replaced by synthetic fibers, which cost less and are more durable.
The kapok, or silk-cotton, tree belongs to the bombax family, Bombacaceae.
Kara Sea, KAHR uh, an arm of the Arctic Ocean, lies off the northern coast of Siberia, between the Kara Strait — and the Severnaya Zemlya Islands.
Ice blocks the sea most of the year, but shipping to the Yenisey and Ob rivers occurs for about two months in summer.
Craig ZumBrunnen Karachi, kuh RAH chee , is the largest city and chief port of Pakistan.
It is also the country’s commercial and industrial center and the capital of Sind Province.
The Layari River flows through Karachi and forms an excellent harbor where it empties into the Arabian Sea.
The center of Karachi, which is next to the harbor, is the most heavily populated section.
It includes the main bazaar, or market, called the Sadr, and most of Karachi's important buildings.
Attractions in or near this area include the Mausoleum of Mohammed Ali Jinnah, the National Museum, and the Zoological Gardens.
Residential areas are scattered around the city, and the chief industrial districts are in the suburbs.
Karachi is an important educational center and has several universities and many other schools.
Factories manufacture textiles, printed materials, steel, food products, chemicals, transportation equipment, and other products.
The city has a shipyard, and its port serves as the gateway for Pakistan's foreign trade.
Karachi's international airport, one of the largest in Asia, is 9 miles from the city’s center.
In 1729, a trading village developed near the present site of Karachi’ harbor.
By the mid-1800's, about 14,000 people lived in Karachi and its suburbs.
After the British gained control of the region in 1843, Karachi became an important port and commercial center.
Karachi served as the new nation’s capital from 1947 to 1959, when Islamabad was named the capital.
Since 1945, Karachi’s population has grown from about 400,000 to over 5 million.
Hodge from Peter Arnold © Russ Kinne, Photo Researchers The kapok flower, upper left, usually blossoms every other year.
The kapok tree, right, has a short, thick trunk and many long branches.
The city faces other problems, including air pollution, overcrowding, slums, and violence.
The violence results from conflicts between rival ethnic, political, and religious groups.
Riffat Sardar Karajan, KAH rah yahn, Herbert von , was one of the leading symphony orchestra and opera conductors of the 1900's.
Karajan was known for his interpretations of the symphonies of Gustav Mahler and the music of Viennese composers of the 1900's.
Karajan was born in Salzburg, Austria, and received his musical training there and in Vienna.
He served as music director, conducting opera and orchestral music in Aachen, Germany, from 1934 to 1941.
In the late 1940's, he became a conductor of the Vienna Philharmonic and Vienna Symphony orchestras.
He served as artistic director of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra from 1955 until he resigned in 1989.
He was artistic director of the Salzburg Festival from 1956 to 1960, and rejoined the festival in 1964.
Karajan was director of the Vienna State Opera from 1956 to 1964, returning to the company in 1977.
Charles H Webb Karakul, KAR uh kuhl, is a fat-tailed sheep from which we get pelts called broadtail, Persian lamb, and caracul.
They can store up enough fat in their tails and back legs to live on when food is scarce.
The rams have widespreading, spiral horns, but the ewes usually have none.
The coarse fleece of the adult is white, yellowish, gray, brown, or black.
The fleece has a high luster, and is often curled until the fifth day after the lamb’s birth.
It has a silky, rippled appearance, and usually comes from lambs that were born too soon.
Persian lamb, formerly called astrakhan, is the tightly curled pelt of lambs from 3 to 10 days old.
Most skins are produced in central and southwestern Asia, India, southeyed.
Brown, ARDEA Karakuls are raised chiefly in central and southwestern Asia.
Karakum, «ar uh KOOM, is a large desert that occupies most of Turkmenistan.
Most of the desert was formed by sandy deposits from a river called the Amu Darya.
Karakum’s terrain includes flat clay plains, salt basins, and sand mounds.
Wildlife includes antelopes, wolves, wildcats, snakes, lizards, tarantulas, scorpions, and various rodents.
Most of the desert is used throughout the year as pasture for sheep, goats, and camels.
Karakum’s mineral resources include natural gas, petroleum, and sulfur.
Karan, KAR uAn, Donna , is aleading American fashion designer who creates clothes primarily for executive businesswomen.
Her designs brought a softer femininity to the business wardrobe and a new shaping to traditional tailoring.
Karan tries to achieve a total look for her customers, emphasizing accessories such as belts and jewelry.
She also designs separates, which are outer garments such as blouses, skirts, and sweaters.
Her company also produces perfume, and she licenses a number of products over her name, including eyewear, hosiery, and lingerie.
There she collaborated with Louis Dell‘Olio in creating the casual but sophisticated separates that gained her acclaim in the fashion world.
Karan started her own company, called the Donna Karan Company, in 1984 and showed her first collection in 1985.
Karate, kuh RAH tee, is a form of unarmed combat in which a person kicks or strikes with the hands, elbows, knees, or feet.
Karate is one of several Asian forms of unarmed combat called martia/ arts.
Most blows are aimed at body parts that are easily injured, such as the stomach and throat.
There are four major types of karate—Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Okinawan.
All use the same basic techniques, but each stresses certain skills and has its own characteristic style of movement.
Chinese karate, called kung fu, also spelled gongfu, uses a flowing, circular motion that differs from the hard, powerful movements of the other types.
American karate has a combination of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Okinawan features.
This style developed because many Americans learn more than one type of karate.
In the 1970's and 1980's, many motion pictures and television shows featured karate fights that have stimulated interest in this type of combat.
In addition, growing numbers of men and women are learning karate as a means of self-defense.
Hundreds of colleges, karate clubs, military and police training schools, and feminist groups teach karate techniques.
Karate training usually takes place in a gymnasium or hall called a dojo.
Students and teachers wear a uniform called a g/that consists of a loose cotton jacket tied with a colored belt, and pants with a drawstring or elastic waist.
The students begin by doing exercises to strengthen and stretch their muscles.
The students practice with punching bags, imaginary opponents, and each other.
When working with each other, they either stop short of hitting or touch their opponent only lightly.
Karate students may advance through various ranks of achievement, each of which is designated by a belt of a different color.
Schools award different colors, including brown, green, and purple, for intermediate ranks.
Students earn promotions by demonstrating to a licensed examiner or a group of licensed examiners the techniques required for the next rank.
Basic techniques include stances and methods of blocking, kicking, punching, and striking.
Stances include the back stance, cat stance, forward stance, and horse stance.
Kicking techniques include the front kick, hook kick, roundhouse kick, and side kick.
Students often practice these techniques in prearranged patterns called katas Sound plays a key part.
An attacker often gives a yell called a kiai (KEE aye/to put maximum force into the blow.
This yell is produced by expelling air from the lungs and tightening the stomach muscles.
Many exhibitions show ways of breaking various © Sheedy and Long, Sarts Hustrated Time |nc.
When karate students work out, they stop short of hitting each other, or they touch their opponent only lightly. objects with the hands and feet.
However, most karate schools do not require students to practice these techniques.
There are two kinds of karate contests, form competition and free fighting. \n form competition, each contestant demonstrates various forms to a panel of five judges.
Each judge awards the contestant _ 1to 10 points, and the contestant with the highest total _ wins.
In free fighting, the contestants fight without prearranged techniques.
A contestant scores when he delivers a blow that a majority of the judges consider effective.
A blow must start with full force but stop a split second before it hits.
Rules forbid hitting certain areas of the _ body and using many dangerous karate blows.
As early as the 400's B.C., Buddhist monks in India used a form of karate to defend themselves against wild animals.
During the A.D. 500's, a group called the _ Hwarang practiced karate in the country of Silla, which later became Korea.
A Japanese clan had conquered the island and _ passed strict laws against owning weapons.
As a result, _ the Okinawans developed many of the unarmed tech_ niques of modern karate.
Karate spread to Japan after Okinawa became a Japanese province in 1879.
After World War II ended in 1945, many United States _ servicemen brought the skill from the Far East.
But Sweden controlled part of the region from the 1200's to the late 1400's and from the 1600's to the early 1700's.
Finland controlled part of Karelia from 1918 to 1920 and from 1941 to 1944.
Karloff, Boris , was a British actor known for his chilling performances in American horror motion pictures.
Karloff toured Canada and the United States with small theatrical companies for several years before making his film debut.
Roger Ebert Karlovy Vary, KAHR law vih VAH rih, also called Karlsbad , is a famous health resort in the Czech Republic.
Its mineral springs contain bicarbonate of soda, sulfate of soda, and common salt.
Vojtech Mastny Karma, KAHR muh, is an important concept in several Eastern religions, especially Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism.
Followers of these religions believe that existence is a continuing cycle of death and rebirth.
They teach that the conditions of a person’s life result from his or her karma in previous lives.
Similarly, people's present actions determine their future destinies in this world, in heaven, or in hell.
Good deeds lead to rebirth in a higher state, perhaps as a wealthy person.
Thus, beliefs about karma both encourage ethical behavior and explain what appear to be unfair conditions in society.
Buddhists, Hindus, and Jains agree that the highest religious goal is to end all attachments to worldly things and so free oneself from the effects of karma.
The person then achieves a higher level of experience, called moksha by Hindus and nirvana by Buddhists.
Karsh, kahrsh, Yousuf, YOO suf, a Canadian photographer, became famous for his portraits of leading international figures in politics, literature, and the arts.
Karsh had a solemn photographic style in which light and shadow are placed in strong contrast for dramatic effect.
He used props and the natural expressions and gestures of his subjects to help reveal their personality.
Karsh’s photographs have been widely published and are included in the collections of many museums.
His best-known portraits include those of British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, United States President John F Kennedy, and the famous German-born physicist Albert Einstein.
Karsh later worked in Boston for a time as an apprentice to John H Garo, a photographer noted for his portraiture.
Charles Hagen Kart racing is a sport involving small, open racing cars that seat one person.
Sprint events are raced on short road courses 5 mile or less in length.
Most road races are one hour long and held on automobile racing tracks.
Some local kart races feature 8-year-old children competing against one another.
However, most national events require the contestants to be at least 16.
Critically reviewed by the International Kart Federation Kashmir, KASH mihr, also spelled Cashmere, is a large area on the border between India and Pakistan.
It has been the center of a dispute between India and Pakistan since 1947.
The capitals of Kashmir, by traditional use, are Srinagar in the summer and Jammu in the winter.
Several ranges of the Karakoram and Himalayan mountain systems cut across Kashmir.
Two of the world’s highest peaks, K2 and Nanga Parbat , are in northern Kashmir.
A tributary of the Indus, the Jhelum, flows through the famous Vale of Kashmir.
Most are Muslims, but about a fourth belong to other religions, including Hinduism.
Culturally, the Muslims and Hindus belong to the same group, with the same language and customs.
Others work in small industries, making shawls and rugs from cashmere wool.
Only about 6 percent of the land in Kashmir can be used for growing food, and some farms are perched on the sides of hills.
Corn and rice are the major crops, and there are many orchards and vineyards.
Prior to British withdrawal from the subcontinent of India in 1947, an absolute monarch ruled Kashmir.
The maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, a Hindu, tried to avoid joining either country.
Pakistani Muslims invaded Kashmir in an attempt to unite Kashmir with Pakistan.
War raged until 1949, when the United Nations arranged a cease-fire and set up a truce line.
The line left the northwestern third of Kashmir under Pakistani control.
But a so-called Free Kashmir Movement, made up of Muslims, refused to recognize the changes.
Pakistan objected vigorously to any move that seemed to link Kashmir more closely to India.
In August 1965, heavy fighting broke out again between India and Pakistan.
In 1966, India and Pakistan resolved to try to settle their dispute peacefully.
However, in 1971, civil war broke out in Pakistan, and Indian forces again fought Pakistanis in Kashmir.
In 1972, after the war ended, a new truce line was established between the Indian and Pakistani sections of Kashmir.
Since then, fighting has broken out along the truce line from time to time.
In the late 1980's, Muslims in the Indian section of Kashmir staged protests against Indian rule.
Some demanded independence for Kashmir, and some wanted Kashmir to unite with Pakistan.
Kasparov, kuh SPAHR awf, Garry , a Russian chess player, became the youngest world champion in chess history at the age of 22.
Kasparov had long been critical of the Fédération Internationale des Echecs , the organization that governs chess internationally.
In 1993, Kasparov and British challenger Nigel Short broke with FIDE in a dispute over arrangements for the next championship match.
He retained his PCA championship by defeating Viswanathan Anand of India in 1995.
In 1997, he lost to a more powerful IBM computer, called Deep Blue, in a six-game match.
In 2000, Kasparov lost to Vladimir Kramnik of Russia in a world championship match sponsored by the Brain Games Network, a British Internet company that focuses on chess.
Garry Kimovich Kasparov was born in Baku, Azerbaijan, when it was part of the Soviet Union.
Kassebaum, Nancy Landon , a Kansas Republican, served in the United States Senate from 1979 to 1997.
Kassebaum was the first woman elected to a full term in the Senate who did not succeed her husband in either the Senate or the House of Representatives.
Several women had previously been appointed to the Senate to Larry Evans —L a LA LL A LO _ senator.
In the Senate, she was considered a modercomplete their husbands’ terms.
Kassebaum never held a federal or state office before she became a ate Republican.
In 1996, she and Senator Edward M Kennedy successfully promoted the KennedyKassebaum bill, which includes a provision that workers can change jobs without losing their medical insurance coverage.
She is a daughter of Alfred M Landon, a former Kansas governor and Republican presidential candidate.
In 1956, she married John Philip Kassebaum, an attorney and businessman.
Lee Thornton Kathmandu, ka/fit mahn DOO , also spelled Katmandt, is the capital and largest city of Nepal.
KathOffice of Nancy Landon Kassebaum Nancy Landon Kassebaum _ mandu’s main industry is tourism.
Light industry in the — city includes brick, carpet, and concrete manufacturing; woodworking; and metalworking.
In 1768, the nearby kingdom of Gorkha conquered Kathmandu and united the region that became the modern kingdom of Nepal.
James F Fisher Katmai National Park, KAT my, is in southwestern Alaska.
In 1912, one of the volcanoes, Mount Katmai, produced one of the largest volcanic eruptions ever recorded.
Mount Katmais explosion created an ash-filled valley that became known as The Valley of the Ten Thousand Smokes.
Katmai has a great variety of wildlife, including _ Alaskan brown bears, bald eagles, moose, sea otters, — and sockeye salmon.
Katmai was established as a national monument in 1918 and became a national park in 1980.
Its name comes from the love call of the male of a certain species in the eastern United States.
Katydids rub the bases of their front wings together to make their sounds.
Many katydids are shaped like leaves, and the veins in their wings look like the veins of leaves.
Katydids lay their flat, oval, slategray eggs from early fall until frost appears.
Many of them lay their eggs in double, overlapping rows on the edges of leaves and on twigs.
The killings occurred in 1940 at Katyn, a village near the city of Smolensk in what was then the Soviet Union.
For nearly 50 years, the Soviet government denied responsibility for the massacre.
Both sides imprisoned tens of thousands of Polish soldiers and executed many of them.
In 1943, the Germans discovered a mass grave at Katyn filled with the bodies of Polish soldiers.
Investigators identified the soldiers as those who were ina Soviet prison camp before the German invasion.
But the Soviets said the Germans had killed the soldiers after invading the area in 1941.
After the war, Communists took power in Poland, and the Soviet Union gained a strong influence over the Polish government.
Polish and Soviet authorities forbade any mention of the Katyn incident.
In 1989, the postCommunist Polish government officially blamed the Soviets for the massacre.
In 1990, the Soviet government publicly admitted its responsibility for the Katyn murders, as well as for the killing of thousands of other Polish prisoners of war.
She specialized in portraits and in scenes from Greek and Roman mythology and history.
As a young woman she worked in Italy, where she gained a reputation as a portrait painter.
In 1766, Lady Wentworth, wife of an English ambassador and one of Kauffmann’s clients, persuaded the artist to return with her to England.
There Kauffmann became a close friend of the artist Sir Joshua Reynolds.
She joined him in his efforts to promote neoclassical painting, which emphasized themes from Greek and Roman culture.
In 1768, Kauffmann became a founding member of the Royal Academy of Arts in London.
She worked with architect Robert Adam in decorating house interiors that used Greek and Roman themes and artistic styles.
Ann Friedman Kaufman, KAWF muhn, George S&S. , was an American playwright.
He wrote more than 40 plays and musical comedies, nearly all of which were collaborations with other authors.
Kaufman's best-known works are lively, satirical comedies that often poke fun at big business and government.
Most of their plays concern ambitious young men who succeed with the help of a young woman.
Their plays are full of wisecracks and amusing characters who usually work in show business.
Perhaps their bestknown play is You Cant Take It with You , a comedy about an eccentric but loving family.
Malcolm Goldstein Kaunas, KOW nahs , is the second largest city of Lithuania.
Factories in Kaunas produce about a fourth of Lithuania’s manufactured goods.
Kaunas has schools of agriculture, engineering, medicine, and veterinary medicine.
Kaunas served as the capital of the independent nation of Lithuania from 1919 to 1939.
In 1940, the Soviet government forcibly made Lithuania part of the Soviet Union.
In 1991, Lithuania broke away from the Soviet Union and became an independent nation again.
V Stanley Vardys Kaunda, kah OON dah, Kenneth David (1924ib served as president of Zambia from 1964 to 1991.
In 1964, he led the movement that resulted in Zambia's independence from Britain and was elected president.
Kaunda was reelected in one-party elections in 1973, 1978, 1983, and 1988.
In 1991 and 1996, Kaunda and other UNIP candidates were defeated in multiparty elections.
He also supported construction of a railroad from Zambia through Tanzania to the Indian Ocean.
The peoples of the South Pacific use the juice to make a fermented drink called kava, ava, or kavakava.
The scientific names for the two kinds are Piper methysticum and P excelsum.
The symptoms of Kawasaki disease include prolonged high fever; redness of the eyes; sore throat; red, cracked, and bleeding lips; swollen lymph nodes in the neck; a red rash over the body; and swollen and red hands and feet.
After the rash clears, the skin peels, especially on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.
About 10 percent of all patients suffer heart damage, but only a very small number of these patients die.
Early in the illness, inflammation of the heart muscle can cause the heart to fail.
Later, inflammation of the arteries that supply blood to the heart can weaken and scar the artery walls.
Physicians give aspirin and disease-fighting proteins called gamma globulins to reduce the symptoms and the risk of heart damage.
Arnold W Strauss Kayak, KY ak, is a light, narrow boat that has an enclosed deck.
The deck has from one to four cockpits— openings in which the kayakers sit.
A kayaker wears a plastic covering, called a left Foott, Bruce Coleman Ltd.
The kayaker sits in an opening, called a cockpit, and uses a paddle that has a blade at each end.
The sprayskirt attaches to the sides of the cockpit and keeps water out of it.A kayak paddle has a blade at each end.
The two most common types of kayaks are whitewater kayaks and touring kayaks.
Whitewater kayaks are 11 to 13 feet long and are built for quick maneuvering on river rapids.
Touring kayaks, also called sea kayaks, are used to paddle along the coasts of oceans and large lakes.
They are 13 to 20 feet (4 to 6 meters) long and are built to handle ocean waves.
Most are made of a type of plastic called polyethylene, or of fiberglass.
Others, called fo/ding kayaks, are made of a rubberized fabric that covers a collapsible frame.
Inuit built the first kayaks thousands of years ago and used them for fishing and hunting.
Today, most kayaks are used for recreation or for racing, including events in the Summer Olympic Games.
Barton Parrott Kaye, Danny , a comedian, became noted for his lively pantomimes and his command of ingenious songs.
She became known for her interpretations of highly dramatic roles in such modern works as The Cage, Dark Elegies, Fall River Legend, Lilac Garden, and Pillar of Fire.
Kaye also won praise for her dancing in classics of the 1800's, including Giselle and Swan Lake.
For many years, she assisted her husband, Herbert Ross, a choreographer and director of musical comedies and motion pictures.
In 1980, Kaye became associate director of the American Ballet Theatre.
Joan Brock Pikula Kazakhstan, kah zahk STAHN, is a country that lies mostly in west-central Asia.
A small part of Kazakhstan lies west of the Ural River on the European continent.
For hundreds of years, the Kazakh people were herders who raised their livestock on the regionss plains.
They relied on their herds of sheep, camels, cattle, and horses for food, clothing, and transportation.
This lifestyle began to change in the 1800's, when the Russian Empire conquered the Kazakh region.
Kazakhstan 250a Kazakhstan became part of the Soviet Union in 1922, when the Soviet Union was formed under Russia's leadership.
During most of the 1900's, while Kazakhstan was under Soviet rule, industry grew steadily.
Meanwhile, most of the Kazakh people ended their nomadic ways and settled in rural villages or cities.
The president serves as head of state and is the most powerful government official.
The president appoints a prime minister to head the government and a cabinet.
The parliament consists of an upper house called the Senate and a lower house called the Mazhilis.
Kazakhstan is divided into 17 ob/asts for purposes of local government.
Kazakhs make up about 42 percent of the population, and Russians account for about 37 percent.
Other ethnic groups in Kazakhstan include Belarusians, Tatars, Uygurs, and Uzbeks.
A majority of Kazakhstan's people, including the Kazakhs, Tatars, Uygurs, and Uzbeks, are Muslims.
The flag is blue, with a yellow sun and eagle in the center and a yellow stripe of national ornamentation at the left.
One hundred tiyn equal one tenge. 250b Kazakhstan Most of the urban people of Kazakhstan live in modern apartments or houses.
But some Kazakh shepherds still live in traditional tentlike dwellings from their nomadic past.
Called yurts, these portable homes are made of a circular wooden frame covered with felt.
Kazakh men and their children generally remain a part of their parents’ households.
Many women work outside the home as teachers, doctors, and agricultural workers.
Most Kazakh men wear Western-style clothing, and some wear traditional felt hats.
Common Kazakh foods include meat dishes and milk products, such as cheese and curds.
Besh barmak, thinly sliced meat and noodles boiled in broth, is a popular dish.
The Kazakh people enjoy folk songs and legends, and they recite them for many occasions.
At some events, Kazakhs participate in a singing competition called an aitys.
Performances of Russian ballet, theater, and music take place in all the major cities.
Popular sports in Kazakhstan include volleyball, skating, and wrestling.
Kokpar is a traditional Kazakh game in which dozens of skilled horsemen try to carry the carcass of a goat or sheep across a goal.
Under the 1995 Constitution, Russian is used on an equal basis with Kazakh in government documents.
The government requires children to attend school from the ages of 6 to 17.
The schools use either Kazakh or Russian as the language of instruction.
The Kazakh Academy of Sciences includes over 30 separate research institutes.
In the west, the dry plains of the Caspian lowland border the Caspian Sea.
Dry lowlands extend over much of the western part of the country and around the Aral Sea on the southwest border.
High, grassy plains called steppes cover large areas of northern Kazakhstan.
Northeastern Kazakhstan consists of flat, highly elevated lands that are suitable for farming.
A series of mountain ranges, including the Tian Shan and the Altai Mountains, forms Kazakhstan’s eastern and southeastern borders.
Several ul Wm. ss HNMR Ny Ne ul ae i 1 Tree Wii f | bi © Alexander Nemenov, Agence France-Presse Republic Square in Astana, Kazakhstan's capital, is the site of the House of Government, /eft, and the parliament building, right.
Astana became the nation’s capital in 1997. mountain rivers in the east feed into Lake Balkhash, the largest lake entirely within Kazakhstan.
January temperatures average about 0 °F in the north and about 23 °F in the south.
July temperatures average about 68 °F in the north and about 81 °F in the south.
Mountainous regions are colder, and receive more rainfall, than the rest of the country.
Agriculture accounts for about two-fifths of the value of Kazakhstan's economic production.
In the last half of the 1900's, Kazakhstan’s crop production increased sharply due to expansion of agricultural lands and the irrigation of dry lands.
Industry accounts for about one-third of the value of the country’s economic production.
Kazakhstan’‘s industries include food processing, mining, and the manufacture of chemicals, textiles, and heavy machinery.
Almaty, Pavlodar, Qaraghandy, and Shymkent rank among the chief industrial centers.
The Baykonur Cosmodrome, the former Soviet Union’s main space-launch facility, is near the city of Leninsk.
The mines of the Kazakhstan region yield many valuable minerals, including bauxite, borax, chromium, gold, iron, lead, nickel, phosphate, silver, tin, tungsten, uranium, and zine.
Airlines link cities within Kazakhstan, and several airports handle international flights.
Newspapers are published in several languages, including Kazakh and Russian.
The national television station broadcasts from both Almaty and Astana.
Nomadic people lived in what is now the country of Kazakhstan before the birth of Jesus Christ.
During the 1200's, Mongols from the east invaded the area and defeated the Turkish people.
Many of the country’s people are descended from the Turkish and Mongol tribes.
During the early 1700's, Russians began migrating to the Kazakh region.
In 1731, after suffering attacks from neighboring peoples, the Kazakhs accepted Russian rule _for protection.
By the mid-1800's, the Russians had set up forts throughout the Kazakh region.
The Russian government took control of vast areas of land and encouraged Russian and Ukrainian peasants to settle in the northern parts of the region.
A nationalist movement seeking independence from Russia emerged in Kazakhstan following the Russian Revolution of 1917.
Kazakh nationalists set up a central government and sent troops to fight against the Bolsheviks, Communists who had seized power in Russia during the Russian Revolution.
By late 1919, however, the Kazakh nationalists had sided with the Bolsheviks.
Livestock farming is a major economic activity in Kazakhstan. called the Kazakhs Kyrgyz, the republic was called the Kyrgyz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.
The present-day Kyrgyz were referred to as the Kara Kyrgyz The Kazakh republic was renamed the Kazakh Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic in 1925.
The Soviet Union established a powerful Communist central government in Moscow and took control of all industry and land in Kazakhstan and the other republics.
Soviet law forbade certain traditional cultural practices, such as religious instruction.
During World War Il , the Soviet government forced many people from the western part of the Soviet Union to move to Kazakhstan.
During the 1950's, the Soviet government launched a program to expand the use of Kazakhstan's vast steppes for agriculture.
This program, called the Virgin Lands project, brought thousands of people from other parts of the Soviet Union to Kazakhstan.
During the 1980's, the Soviet government, under Mikhail S Gorbachev, made reforms toward giving people more freedom.
In 1990, Kazakhstan declared that its laws took precedence over those of the Soviet Union.
In December 1991, Nursultan Nazarbayev became the first democratically elected president in Kazakh history.
On December 16, Kazakhstan declared its independence, just nine days before the Soviet Union broke apart.
Kazakhstan joined other Soviet republics in a loose association called the Commonwealth of Independent States.
As an independent country, Kazakhstan replaced its Communist government system with a system based on democratic principles.
In 1997, Kazakhstan moved its capital from Almaty to the city of Akmola, now called Astana.
In 1999, in an election that Nazarbayev called earlier than expected, voters reelected him as president.
Almaty Commonwealth of IndependAral Sea ent States Caspian Sea Kyzylkum Nazarbayev, Nursultan Kazan, kuh ZAN , is the capital of Russia’s republic of Tatarstan.
It is a center of culture for the Tatars, who founded Kazan in the 1400's.
Zvi Gitelman Kazan, kuh ZAN, Elia, EEL yuh , became one of America’s best-known stage and screen directors.
He is regarded as Broadway's leading director of the late 1940's and the 1950's.
Kazan was born Sept., 1909, in Constantinople (now Istanbul), Turkey, to parents of Greek descent.
Gerald Bordman Kazantzakis, «4z uhn ZAK ihs, Nikos, NEE kows , was a Greek author.
He began his literary career writing tragedies, after which he turned to poetry.
Spiritual Exercises . in 1938, he finished what he believed was his masterpiece, The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel, an epic poem of 33,333 lines.
Later in his career, Kazantzakis turned to prose fiction and wrote several novels.
The three for which he is best known are Zorba the Greek , The Greek Passion , and 7he Last Temptation of Christ.
His autobiography, Report to Greco, was published in 1961, after his death.
He traveled widely from about 1920 to 1940 and wrote several travel books.
Kazantzakis was strongly influenced by the French philosopher Henri Bergson, and the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, whose works he translated.
Kostas Myrsiades Kea, KAY uhor KEE uh, is a parrot that lives in New Zealand.
It is also called the mountain nestor. \ts colors are dull olive-green with red under the wings.
The kea spends its summers in the mountains and its winters in the Jowlands.
Around human settlements, it may eat almost anything and become quite bold and tame in its search for food.
WORLD BOOK illustration by John Rignall, Linden Artists Ltd The kea of New Zealand has a powerful, hooked bill. —Sa, EE ll TL a lS GE — Kean, Edmund , was considered the greatest and most influential English actor of his time.
He was the first important performer to reject the polite, restrained style of acting popular in the early 1800's.
He introduced a more romantic and exuberant style that became the ideal for most of the 1800's.
Kean first gained fame for his emotional acting style as Shylock in William Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice in 1814.
The English poet and critic Samuel Taylor Coleridge wrote that watching Kean act was like reading Shakespeare by “flashes of lightning.
At the outbreak of the war, he became a brigadier general of New Jersey volunteers.
He served in the Eastern theater and rose to major general and division commander.
He was killed on Sept., 1862, during the Battle of Chantilly, in Virginia.
He lost an arm at Churubusco and won promotion to the rank of major for his bravery.
He joined the French Army in 1859 and fought in the war against Austria, winning the cross of the Legion of Honor.
Kearny was a nephew of Stephen Kearny, who commanded the western armies of the United States in the Mexican War.
He attended Columbia College for one year but left to join the army in the War of 1812.
In 1825, he joined an expedition to the Yellowstone Riv_ er, and after 1828 commanded several frontier posts.
During the Mexican War, Kearny led the armies that _ conquered New Mexico and California.
In 1847, Kearny and United States Navy Commodore Robert Stockton received conflicting orders concerning their authority in California.
But later orders from Washington gave Kearny control of the civil government.
The conflicting orders led to a dispute between Kearny and Frémont, and Fremont was court-martialed for insubordination.
He served as governor of Veracruz and Mexico City for a few months before his death on Oct., 1848.
He ranked among the most popular silent film comedians, along with Charlie Chaplin and Harold Lloyd.
Keaton created a character, sometimes called ‘The Great Stone Face,” who rarely smiled but overcame obstacles through a naive determination and mechanical ingenuity.
But he reappeared in motion pictures, as well as on television, shortly before his death.
He became part of his parents’ vaudeville act before he was 4 years old.
Robert Sklar Keats, keets, John , was an English poet of the Romantic period.
Keats's poetry is concerned, in various ways, with joy in the beauty of this world, sorrow over its inevitable passing, and attempts to find bridges between the perishable world we know and the eternal world we imagine.
His verse employs unusually rich and vivid images to express his intense feelings.
Keats was born in London on Oct., 1795, the son ofa livery stable keeper.
He attended the Clarke school in Enfield, outside London, and his interest in literature was first aroused there.
Keats later studied medicine and passed his medical examinations, but he never practiced because he had decided to become a poet.
Hunt was a journalist, essayist, and poet who held liberal political views.
In 1818, Keats finished his second volume of poetry, Endymion, a long mythological story in verse.
The reviewers for the powerful Tory journals, always eager to attack Hunt or his friends, ridiculed Endymion.
Adding to Keats's disappointment in 1818 were his brother's death from tuberculosis and Keats's premonition that he himself would suffer the same fate.
He began to develop a growing feeling that poverty and disease would prevent his marrying Fanny Brawne, whom he deeply loved.
Yet from the fall of 1818 through the fall of 1819, he experienced an intense burst of creativity, and his final and best volume was published in 1820.
He traveled to Italy, hoping a warmer climate might improve his health.
It showed the influence of Edmund Spenser and William Shake254 Keck Observatory speare, but it lacked the consistency these poets displayed.
In Endymion, Keats retold the classic story of the shepherd who loved and won the goddess of the moon.
Some people think that Keats simply let his imagination run wild, without a clear plan, in this 4,000-line poem.
Others see in the poem a symbolic story concerned, like much of Keats's early poetry, with showing how appreciation of the beauty of nature can lead to the understanding of eternal truth.
In the poetry of his final volume, Keats achieved the rich beauty and superb control of image, story, and language that has earned him lasting fame.
Agnes’ uses brilliant contrasts to tell a Romeo and Julietlike tale of dangerous young love.
The poem explores Keats's favorite theme of the relationship between dreams and the everyday world.
The unfinished “Hyperion” shows the influence of the English poet John Milton.
The style of its companion fragment, “The Fall of Hyperion,” was also somewhat influenced by that of the Italian poet Dante.
Together, they deal ona grand scale with the wars of the ancient gods and the principle of power in the universe.
The great odes “Ona Grecian Urn,’ “To a Nightingale,” “On Melancholy,’ and “To Autumn” present various aspects of the soul's eternal longing in a world ruled by time.
They explore many possibilities but do not insist upon any one answer to the enduring problems of life.
The intense experience of life, and not its perfect understanding, was Keats's main poetic concern.
Keck Observatory is an astronomical observatory on Mauna Kea, a mountain on the island of Hawaii.
The observatory consists of two identical telescopes, Keck | and Keck Il, which are the largest optical telescopes in the world.
Keck | and II collect and focus visible light waves and intrared waves from objects in space.
One use of the telescopes is to analyze radiation coming to Earth from the farthest known galaxies.
Astronomers can use the information gathered to determine a galaxy’s distance, size, age, and other characteristics.
Keck | and Il are reflecting telescopes—that is, they use a large mirror to collect and focus light.
The lightgathering mirror is a segmented mirror that consists of 36 smaller mirrors mounted together.
If a segment gets out of position, sensors on its edges activate pistons in the support structure that move the segment.
Keeshond, KAYS hahnd or KEES hahnd, is a Dutch dog of Arctic descent, related to the Samoyed, chow chow, and Pomeranian.
Critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club Kefauver, KEE faw vuhr, Estes, FHS tihs , a United States congressman from Tennessee, won fame in 1950 as head of a United States Senate committee investigating organized crime.
He and presidential candidate Adlai E Stevenson lost to President Dwight D Eisenhower and Vice President Richard M Nixon.
He practiced law, and he won a seat in the United States House of Representatives in 1939.
Keillor, KEE /uhr, Garrison , is a popular American radio host, humorist, and writer.
He first gained fame as the host and head writer for the popular weekly radio show “A Prairie Home Companion,’ which began in 1974.
This highly praised program presents comedy as well as music that ranges from yodeling to opera.
The highlight of each show is Keillor’s humorous monologue about a fictitious town called Lake Wobegon, Minnesota.
Keillor, whose real name was Gary Edward Keillor, was born on Aug., 1942, in Anoka, Minnesota.
Wilma J Kahn Keller, Gottfried, CAW freed , was the most famous Swiss author who wrote in German before the 1900's.
He is noted for his humor and a concern for the ethics of good citizenship.
They are the comic “Clothes Make the Man’ and the tragic “Romeo and Juliet in the Village.
Other important series include Seven Legends , humorously modernized versions of popular religious tales; the historical Zurich Novellas ; and The Epijames I Lengle gram , a collection of ironic love stories.
He failed as a student of painting in Munich and lived in poverty and isolation in Germany for several years.
He also wrote poetry, much of which he regarded as a service to Switzerland, and so he refused to be paid for it.
Jeffrey L Sammons Keller, Helen Adams , is an outstanding example of a person who conquered physical disabilities.
A serious illness, which her doctor called “acute congestion of the stomach and brain,” destroyed her sight and hearing at the age of about 1 5.
As a result, she could not speak and was totally shut off from the world.
But she rose above her disabilities to gain international fame and to help disabled people live fuller lives.
Shortly before the child was 7, Anne Sullivan arrived from Boston to teach her.
Sullivan had been nearly blind during childhood, but surgery in 1881 and 1887 partially restored her sight.
She later married John A Macy, but she remained with Helen Keller until her death.
Then Mary Agnes “Polly” Thomson, who had been Keller's secretary, took Sullivan's place.
Sullivan was able to make contact with the girl's mind through the sense of touch.
She used a manual alphabet by which she spelled out words on Helen's hand.
Within three years, she knew the alphabet and could read and write in braille.
Until she was 10 years old, Keller could talk only with the sign language of the deafmute.
She decided she would Jearn to speak and took lessons from a teacher of the deaf.
By the time she was 16, she could communicate well enough to go to prep_aratory school and to college.
Sullivan stayed with her through these years, interpreting lectures and class discussions for her.
After college, Keller became concerned with the conditions of the blind and the deafblind.
She became active on the staffs of the American Foundation for the Blind and of the American Foundation for Overseas Blind.
She appeared before legislatures, gave lectures, and wrote many books and articles.
An enthusiastic and untiring traveler, she lectured _in their behalf in over 25 nations throughout the world. , During World War II , Keller worked with sol_diers who had been blinded in the war.
With Anne Sullivan, center, she demonstrated the method for the American actor Joseph Jefferson. lege, and decorations from many governments.
The motion picture Helen Keller in Her Storytold the story of Keller's life.
The play The Miracle Worker and its movie adaptation described how Sullivan made contact with Keller through the sense of touch.
She promoted better working conditions, particularly for women, and child welfare.
Her work led to a state law that limited women’s work hours and banned child labor.
From 1893 to 1897, she enforced the act as the state’s chief factory inspector.
From 1899 to 1932, Kelley served as general secretary of the National Consumers League.
This organization identified manufacturers and stores that provided fair working conditions, and urged people to buy their products.
During the early 1900's, her speeches and writings helped bring about minimum wage laws in several states.
In 1912, Congress established the Children’s Bureau, an agency proposed by Kelley and Lillian Wald, who was a pioneer in public health nursing.
She was a lifelong socialist and a leader in the movement to gain women the right to vote.
See also Wald, Lillian D Kellogg, Frank Billings , was an American lawyer, diplomat, and statesman.
He won the 1929 Nobel Peace Prize for his work in framing the KelloggBriand Pact of 1928.
In 1930, Kellogg was appointed a judge of the Permanent Court of International Justice.
He had little formal education but read law and was admitted to the bar in 1877.
He prosecuted business trusts, chiefly the oil, railroad, and paper monopolies.
Kellogg served as a Republican United States senator from Minnesota from 1917 to 1923 and as United States ambassador to the United Kingdom in 1924 and 1925.
James S Olson See also International Court of Justice; KelloggBriand Pact.
He worked for many years for his brother, who ran a sanitarium in Battle Creek, Michigan.
Kellogg experimented with a new breakfast food called “corn flakes” and recognized its sales potential.
William R Childs Kellogg-Briand Pact, also called the Pact of Paris, condemned the use of war to solve international problems and called for peaceful settlement of disputes.
French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand originally proposed the pact in 1927 as a treaty between France and the United States.
Frank B Kellogg, the United States secretary of state, enlarged the plan in 1928 to include all nations.
The signers included all the nations in the world at that time except Argentina, Bolivia, E] Salvador, Uruguay, and the tiny countries of Andorra, Liechtenstein, Monaco, and San Marino.
Japan claimed this right in the 1930's, when it fought against China without formally declaring war.
The pact provided no way to enforce its provisions and could not prevent attacks, such as the one Italy launched against Ethiopia in 1935.
Although the pact has been violated many times, it has never officially been canceled.
After World War I! , the Allies used the pact against individuals, rather than against nations.
The pact became part of the legal basis for the Nuremberg and Tokyo war crimes trials.
Kellogg Foundation is a philanthropic organization that administers funds for educational and charitable purposes.
It provides start-up money to organizations and institutions for specific projects, mainly in the United States, Latin America, and southern Africa.
The foundation’s funding priorities include programs that involve youth, higher education, leadership, health services, food systems, rural development, philanthropy and volunteerism, and ground-water resources.
In Michigan, it also helps programs contributing to economic development.
The foundation does not make loans and does not support research projects or make grants to individuals.
Since that time, the foundation's total expenditures have exceeded $1. billion.
The headquarters of the Kellogg Foundation are in Battle Creek, Michigan.
Kellogg Foundation Kelly, Gene , became a popular American dancer, choreographer , actor, and director.
He ranked as one of the finest and most creative dancers in musical motion pictures.
His imaginative choreography combined tap dancing with elements of ballet and acrobatics.
Eugene Curran Kelly was born on Aug., 1912, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
He made his Broadway debut in 1938 in Leave /t to Me, and he gained his first recognition in the title role of the musical Pa/ Joey in 1940.
Kelly made his film debut in For Me and My Gal and appeared in over 30 musicals and dramatic films.
Kelly sang in many of his movies and directed or codirected several dramatic and musical films.
Gerald Bordman Kelly, George Edward , an American play. wright, became known for realistic, carefully constructed social comedies.
His first success was The Torchbearers , a broad yet biting satire on pompous amateur theater groups.
The Show-Off satirizes the eternal bragging sentimentalist, in the character of Aubrey Piper.
Kelly had created Piper in his long-running vaude— ville skit Poor Aubrey.
Kelly received the Pulitzer Prize for Craig’s Wife , a powerful character study of a cold-hearted woman.
He be. came a vaudeville performer in the early 1900's and wrote dozens of widely performed vaudeville sketches.
He turned to film writing in the 1930's after continued cool critical reception of his plays.
In 1954, she won the Academy Award as best actress for her performance in 7he Country Girl.
Rachel Gallagher Kelly, Ned , was the most famous of Australia’s bushrangers.
Bushrangers were bandits who operated in rural Australia from about 1790 to 1900.
Through the years, some people have considered Kelly to be a vicious criminal.
Others have admired him as a symbol of revolt against authority and injustice.
Kelly was born Edward Kelly in Beveridge, near Melbourne, in what is now the Australian state of Victoria.
In 1877, three years after his second prison term ended, he became involved in horse and cattle theft.
In 1878, a police officer who went to the Kelly house | to arrest Ned’s brother Dan for horse theft was wounded.
Ned and Dan Kelly escaped into the thickly forested Wombat Ranges, where two friends, Steve Hart and Joe Byrne, joined them.
But Ned and his companions surprised one of the patrols and killed three police officers in a shootout.
Two months later, they raided Jerilderie, a small town in southern New South Wales.
There, they locked up the two local police officers and robbed another bank.
Ned Kelly tried unsuccessfully to find the editor of the local newspaper.
He wanted the editor to print a document, now known as the Jerilderie Letter, in which he explained his actions and complained of injustice.
In June 1880, the gang took over the township of _ Glenrowan and held townsfolk captive in an inn.
During _ a12-hour siege by police, Dan Kelly, Hart, and Byrne EE ee _ won the election by promwere killed.
The police captured Ned Kelly, dressed in homemade armor, as he tried to rescue his companions.
On November 11, he was hanged. lan jones Kelly, Sharon Pratt , was the first black woman mayor of a major American city.
She changed her last name to Kelly in December 1991, when she married James R Kelly Ill, an American businessman.
A Democrat, Sharon Pratt Kelly replaced Washington Mayor Marion S Barry, Jr., who near the end of his 12 years in office had been convicted of possessing cocaine.
Kelly He Sharon Pratt Kelly ising voters that she would “clean house,” a reference to Barry's scandalous final term as mayor.
Kelly represented Washington, D.C., on the Democratic National Committee from 1977 to 1990, serving as committee treasurer from 1985 to 1989.
Lee Thornton Keloid is a mass of scar tissue that occurs at the site of a cut.
They usually are raised above the surface of the skin and extend beyond the original skin injury.
They often occur after the skin has been injured by a laceration or by surgery, but they may appear spontaneously.
Keloids can be surgically removed, but they frequently reappear weeks or months Jater.
David T Woodley Kelp is any of a variety of large, brown to brownishgreen seaweeds that grow underwater and on rocky shores.
One type of kelp, called giant kelp, may have hundreds of branches, each of which has hundreds of leaves.
In areas where many giant kelps live together, they form underwater forests.
Some species consist of a single branch and grow less than 3 feet long.
Kelps have a complex type of life cycle known as a/ternation of generations.
Other animals, including lobsters and many fish, use kelps for shelter.
People in China and Japan grow kelp for food on special farms in the ocean.
In the United States and many other countries, kelps are collected from the places where they grow naturally.
Harvested kelps yield a/gin, a substance used in the manufacture of ice cream, salad dressing, beer, paper, cosmetics, and many other products.
Queen Victoria knighted Kelvin for his work as the electrical engineer in charge of laying the first successful transatlantic cable in 1866.
Kelvin invented the mirror galvanometer used in cable signaling, and the siphon recorder, still used to receive the signals.
He invented the first ship's compass that reduced the magnetic influence of iron on the ship.
However, the discovery of radioactivity showed that his basic assumptions were incorrect.
Kemble, Fanny , a British author and actress, lived many years in the United States and became known for her strong antislavery beliefs.
In her book Journal of a Residence on a Georgian Plantation , she recorded observations she had made of Southern plantation life and sharply criticized slavery.
The book helped increase opposition to the Southern cause in both the United States and the United Kingdom.
She made her stage debut in 1829 in Romeo and Juliet In 1832, she came to the United States, where she won praise for her stage performances and readings from the works of playwright William Shakespeare.
The marriage, which ended in divorce, brought her in contact with slavery.
In addition, Kemble wrote poetry, plays, essays on Shakespeare, and a novel.
Gabor S Boritt Kemp, Jack French , became an important American political leader after a career as a professional football player.
He was the Republican candidate for vice president of the United States in 1996.
Kemp and his presidential running mate, Robert Dole, were defeated by their Democratic opponents, President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore.
A quarterback, he played on Occidental’s varsity football team for three years.
However, his best success came with the Buffalo Bills of the American Football League, from 1962 until his retirement in 1969.
Kemp helped organize the league's players association, and he served as its president from 1965 to 1970.
Kemp was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1970 and was reelected eight times.
In the House, Kemp attracted national attention for coauthoring the Kemp-Roth bill with Senator William V Roth, Jr., of Delaware.
The bill formed the basis of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which cut individual income tax rates 25 percent over three years.
He and other supporters of the supplyside theory believe tax-rate reductions encourage savings and investments and therefore stimulate production and national economic growth.
Kemp was an unsuccessful candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in 1988.
As secretary, he promoted enterprise zones to try to improve economic conditions in poor urban areas.
Businesses in enterprise zones receive tax cuts and freedom from such regulations as zoning laws.
In 1993, after leaving the Cabinet, Kemp cofounded Empower America, a center for research and study dedicated to conservative principles and ideas.
The park is named for fords (long, narrow inlets of the sea) that cut into its coastline on the Gulf of Alaska.
The fiords area features forests, deep valleys, rugged cliffs, and many sea animals.
Critically reviewed by the National Park Service Kendall, Henry Way , an American physicist, worked with Jerome Friedman of the United States and Richard Taylor of Canada in experiments that proved the existence of subatomic particles called quarks.
In the early 1970's, the three scientists fired particles into protons and neutrons, the objects that make up atomic nuclei.
For these discoveries, the three scientists shared the 1990 Nobel Prize for physics.
The quark theory was first proposed in 1964 by two American physicists, Murray Gell-Mann and George Zweig.
In 1971, the experiments of Kendall and his colleagues provided the first direct evidence of the existence of quarks.
They showed that protons and neutrons are made up of quarks, which have electric charges that are fractions of the charge of the electron and proton.
Until then, scientists had believed that protons and neutrons were indivisible.
In 1969, Kendall helped to found the Union of Concerned Scientists , a group that presses the United States government to control technologies that the group considers harmful, such as nuclear power.
Through a technique known as X-ray crystallography, the two scientists traced the structure of hemoglobin and myoglobin.
These are two proteins found in the blood and muscles of human beings and animals.
He directed the molecular biology laboratory at Cambridge from 1946 to 1975.
The novel, titled Schindler's Listin the United States, is based on the true story of a German businessman who saved the lives of more than a thousand Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
His other notable books include Bring Larks and Heroes , a story of colonial times in Australia; 7hree Cheers for the Paraclete , a novel dealing with conflict within the Roman Catholic Church; and 7he Chant of Jimmy Blacksmith , the story of an Aborigine caught between two worlds.
He served as a Democrat from West Virginia in the United States House of Representatives from 1877 to 1883 and in the United States Senate from 1883 until his death.
Kenna called for government funding to improve river navigation in West Virginia.
Edward A Lukes-Lukaszewski Kennan, George Frost , an American diplomat, is credited with developing the United States policy to prevent Soviet expansion after World War Il.
As ambassador to the Soviet Union in 1952, Kennan protested being restricted to Moscow.
He served on the United States Department of State policy-planning staff in 1947.
Kennan became a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, in 1956.
Paul B Frederic Kennedy, Anthony McLeod , became an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States in 1988.
President Ronald Reagan named Kennedy to fill the vacancy created by Justice Lewis Powell's retirement.
Reagan nominated Kennedy after the United States Senate rejected his first nominee, Robert H Bork, and after his second nominee, Douglas H Ginsburg, withdrew.
He practiced law in San Francisco from 1961 to 1963 and in Sacramento from 1963 to 1975.
In that year, President Gerald Ford appointed Kennedy to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
He is generally considered a conservative, as well as an advocate of judicial restraint in that he is reluctant to interfere with legislative policy unless that policy is clearly unconstitutional.
Kennedy, Edward Moore (1932from Massachusetts, has served in the United States Senate since 1962.
He was Democratic whip (assistant leader) of the Senate from 1969 to 1971.
From 1979 to 1981, he served as chairman of the Senate’s Judiciary Committee.
He was chairman of the Labor and Human Resources Committee from 1987 to 1995.
Kennedy is known as a national spokesman and defender of liberal causes.
He has supported greater government spending on programs to help the poor, the working class, minorities, and other disadvantaged groups.
In the Senate, he supported arms control, stronger antitrust laws, and tax reform.
Kennedy was an unsuccessful candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1980.
His brothers President John F Kennedy and Senator Robert F Kennedy were assassinated.
He was only 30 years old, the minimum age for a senator, but he won easily.
In 1969, Kennedy's automobile plunged from a bridge on Chappaquiddick Island in Massachusetts, and his passenger, Mary Jo Kopechne, was drowned.
He was shot to death on Nov., 1963, after 2 years and 10 months as chief executive.
The world mourned Kennedy's death, and presidents, premiers, and members of royalty walked behind the casket at his funeral.
Kennedy, a Democrat, won the presidency with his “New Frontier’ program, after a series of television debates with his Republican opponent, Vice President Richard M Nixon.
He was 46 when he was elected president) Kennedy was the first president of the Roman Catholic faith.
In his inaugural address, President Kennedy declared that “a new generation of Americans” had taken over leadership of the country.
He greatly increased United States prestige in 1962 when he turned aside the threat of an atomic war with the Soviet Union while carrying out negotiations that resulted in the Soviets withdrawing missiles from Communist Cuba.
Lyndon B Johnson Vice president 1961-1963 Official color photograph by Alfred Eisenstaedt, Life the Cold War as relations grew friendlier with the Soviet Union.
On the home front, the United States enjoyed its greatest prosperity in history.
African Americans’ demands for civil rights caused serious domestic problems, but African Americans made greater progress in their quest for equal rights than at any time since the Civil War.
During Kennedy's administration, the United States made its first piloted space flights and prepared to send astronauts to the moon.
The presidents ancestors were Irish farmers of Wexford County in southeastern Ireland.
His great-grandfather, Patrick Kennedy, left Ireland during the great potato famine of the 1840's and settled in Boston.
The president's grandfather, Patrick J Kennedy, became a state senator and the political “boss” of a ward in Boston.
Fitzgerald served in the state senate and the United States House of Representatives.
During the administration of President Franklin D Roosevelt, he served as the first chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission and as United States ambassador to the United Kingdom.
Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, Massachusetts, a Boston suburb.
The other eight Kennedy children were Joseph, Jr. , who Historic events of Kennedy's presidency included construction of the Berlin Wall and the first American manned space flights.
The Berlin Wall divided East and West Berlin, closing the route used by millions of Germans to flee Communist rule.
Astronaut John H Glenn, Jr., orbited the earth in the space capsule Friendship 7.
Jack, as his family called him, and Joe, his _ older brother, were especially strong rivals.
Jack was _ quiet and often shy, but he held his own in fights with _ Joe.
In 1930, when he _ was 13 years old, his father sent him to the Canterbury School in New Milford, Conn.
Kennedy was graduated from Choate in 1935 at the age of Important dates in Kennedy's life 1917.
It gave residents of the District of Columbia the right to vote in presidential elections.
In 1962, astronaut John H Glenn, Jr., became the first American to orbit the earth.
Adolf Eichmann, a top Nazi war criminal, was hanged in Israel in 1962 for his part in the massacre of European Jews during World War Il.
Aigeria won independence from France in 1962 after more than seven years of bloody fighting.
The communications sateilite Te/star J was launched by the United States in 1962.
It was the first satellite to relay television programs between America and Europe.
Silent Spring, Rachel Carson's book on the wasteful and destructive use of pesticides, helped Jaunch the United States environmental protection movement in 1962.
The Supreme Court ruled in 1962-1963 that official prayers and Bible reading in public schools were unconstitutional.
South Vietnamese generals overthrew and killed President Ngo Dinh Diem in 1963.
Traveling from country to country, he interviewed politicians and statesmen.
He sent his father detailed reports on their views of the crisis that soon led to World John F Kennedy National Historic Site Kennedy's birthplace was this three-story frame house in Brookline, Mass., a suburb of Boston.
Back at Harvard, Kennedy tried to explain in his senior thesis why the United Kingdom had not been ready for war.
His thesis, published as Why England Slept, became a best-selling book.
After taking a trip through South America, Kennedy enlisted as a seaman in the United States Navy.
He applied for sea duty following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on Dec., 1941.
After learning to command one of the small craft, he was commissioned as an ensign.
Kennedy's PT boat was assigned to patrol duty off the Solomon Islands in the South Pacific.
Shortly after midnight on Aug., 1943, a Japanese destroyer cut his boat in two.
Kennedy and the other 10 men clung all night to the wreckage of their boat.
Despite an injured back, he spent five hours towing one of the disabled crewmen to shore.
Kennedy spent most of the next four days in the water, searching for help.
On the fifth day, he persuaded friendly islanders on Cross Island to go for help.
For his heroism and leadership, Kennedy received the Navy and Marine Corps Medal.
In December 1943, the Navy returned Lieutenant Kennedy to the United States.
He was suffering from malaria and his injured back gave him great pain.
After recovering, Kennedy spent the rest of his naval service as an instructor and in various military hospitals.
Career in Congress The Kennedys had thought Jack would become a writer or a teacher.
He opposed nine others for nomination in the solidly Democratic 11th Congressional District of Massachusetts.
He won the nomination and went on to easily defeat his Republican opponent.
The 1946 campaign set a pattern that played a major part in Kennedy's political success.
His isolationism before World War II, his conservatism, and his wealth made him a controversial figure.
Later that year, he became seriously ill, and doctors discovered that he was suffering from a malfunction of the adrenal glands.
To control the ailment, he had to take medicine daily for the rest of his life.
But he kept that Kennedy Campaign Headquarters War hero Kennedy won the Navy and Marine Corps Medal as the skipper of a PT boat during World War Il.
Kennedy led his crew to safety after a Japanese destroyer cut the boat in two. fact from public view.
In Congress, Kennedy voted for most of the social welfare programs of President Harry S Truman.
Lodge, a popular and experienced legislator, seemed certain to win reelection.
Kennedy's mother and his brothers and sisters and their spouses joined him in the campaign.
Dwight D Eisenhower, the Republican presidential candidate, carried Massachusetts in the 1952 election.
Jacqueline “Jackie” Lee Bouvier was the daughter of a wealthy Wall Street broker, John V Bouvier Ill.
Later, she worked as an inquiring photographer for the Washington Times-Herald.
Senator Kennedy focused at first on helping industries in Massachusetts and New England.
He sponsored bills to help such industries as fishing, textile manufacturing, and watchmaking.
Kennedy served on the Senate Labor Committee, and the Government Operations Committee, chaired by Senator Joseph R McCarthy.
Robert Kennedy, his brother, served on the Government Operations Committee staff as an assistant counsel.
At the time, McCarthy was the most controversial figure in American politics.
Many people praised him for his attacks on Communist influence in government.
Others criticized McCarthy because they felt he had violated the civil liberties of people investigated by his committee.
Kennedy felt that McCarthy often abused his power and was endangering the honor of the Senate.
But he said later that if he had been present, he would have voted for the condemnation.
In October 1954, and in February 1955, he underwent corrective surgery.
While recovering, he wrote a book about some of the brave deeds of United States senators.
For the book, Profiles in Courage, Kennedy was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1957.
In 1957, Kennedy was appointed to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, a key assignment in Congress.
He criticized the foreign policy of the Republican administration, and supported a program of increased aid to underdeveloped countries.
Kennedy also worked for moderate legislation to end alleged corruption in labor unions.
He was a member of a Senate committee investigating racketeering in labormanagement relations.
The Kennedys and other committee members engaged in dramatic arguments with controversial Jabor leaders, including James R “Jimmy Hoffa, of the Teamsters Union.
In June 1956, a movement to nominate Kennedy for vice president had gained strength among Democratic leaders.
At the partys national convention in Chicago, Kennedy made the presidential nominating speech for former Governor Adlai E Stevenson of Illinois.
The delegates chose Stevenson to oppose Eisenhower for the second time.
But he lost to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee after a close battle.
Kennedy began working for the 1960 presidential nomination right after the 1956 convention.
In 1958, Kennedy won reelection to the Senate by a majority of 874,608 votes.
Many Democratic leaders thought Kennedy had several disadvantages as a presidential candidate.
Alfred E Smith, the only Roman Catholic ever nominated for president by a major political party, had been badly defeated in 1928.
Other possible shortcomings included Kennedy's youth, his family wealth, and his relative inexperience in international affairs.
Some Democrats opposed Kennedy because they thought he was too conservative and because he never actively opposed Senator McCarthy.
Kennedy decided that the key to the presidential nomination would be to win as many state primary elections as he could.
He believed that victories in the primaries would prove he could win the presidency.
At the Democratic national convention, Kennedy's chief opponents for the presidential nomination were Senator Lyndon B Johnson of Texas, Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri, and Stevenson.
The delegates, at the request of Kennedy, nominated Johnson for vice president.
The Republicans chose Vice President Richard M Nixon to oppose Kennedy for the presidency.
Kennedy's old opponent, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., then United States delegate to the United Nations, was Nixon's running mate.
He had the advantage of being vice president under Eisenhower, an unusually popular president.
His good looks, wealth, and attractive wife had made him a popular subject for articles in newspapers and magazines.
Television also helped Kennedy greatly during his four televised debates with Nixon.
His poise helped answer criticism that he lacked the maturity needed for the presidency.
The debates marked the first time that presidential candidates argued campaign issues face-to-face.
The televised debates between Kennedy and Richard M Nixon marked the first time presidential candidates argued face-to-face.
He charged that, under the Republicans, the United States had lost ground to the Soviet Union in the Cold War.
As he took office, he faced such national problems as increased racial tensions, unemployment, and a sluggish economy.
In foreign affairs, he faced the continuing spread of Communist influence, and the threat of nuclear war.
The national scene The New Frontier, the name Kennedy gave to his program, got off to a slow start.
But the 87th Congress finally began passing measures sponsored by the administration.
In April 1961, the legislators approved aid to economically depressed areas.
In May, Congress approved an increase in the minimum hourly wage from $1 to $1.25.
One of the most successful of Kennedy's programs was the United States Peace Corps.
It was launched by executive order in March 1961, and was later authorized by Congress.
The corps sent thousands of Americans abroad to help people in developing nations raise their standards of living.
Congress rejected a cabinet-level Department of Urban Affairs and Kennedy's plan for medical care for the aged.
Kennedy reorganized the nation’s defense policies by increasing conventional weapons.
He wanted to be prepared for nonnuclear wars and to make every effort to avoid using nuclear weapons.
In March 1962, the major steel producers signed a contract with the steelworkers union that increased workers’ benefits, but not their wages.
Kennedy praised the contract, which he said would help prevent inflation.
On April 10, the United States Steel Corporation led a move to raise steel prices $6 a ton.
Kennedy angrily denounced the move as causing needless inflation, and the companies canceled it.
They felt the presidents action toward the steel companies reflected an antibusiness attitude.
Kennedy aided business by increasing tax benefits for companies investing in new equipment.
In 1963, he proposed a $10-billion tax cut, which included lowering corporate taxes.
He thought that the public would be able to spend more if taxes were cut.
The increased spending would generate new business, and the taxes received from an expanded economy would more than offset the revenue lost in the tax cut.
Demands for equal rights for African Americans became the major domestic issue during the Kennedy administration.
In 1961, a group of nonviolent freedom riders, made up of blacks and whites, entered Montgomery, Alabama, by bus to test local segregation John F Kennedy Library Kennedy's inauguration as president took place on Jan.
White rioters attacked them, and Attorney General Robert F Kennedy sent United States marshals to the city to help restore order.
Two people were killed in the rioting that followed on the university campus at Oxford.
The president ordered 3,000 federal troops to the area to restore order.
In 1963, demands by African Americans for equal civil and economic rights increased.
Racial protests and demonstrations took place across the United States.
Kennedy federalized the Guard again in September to ensure the integration of public schools in three Alabama cities.
On Aug., 1963, more than 200,000 people _ staged a Freedom March in Washington, D.C., to dem_ onstrate their demands for equal rights for blacks.
He also asked Congress to grant the at_ torney general authority to begin court suits to desegre| gate schools on behalf of private citizens unable to start _ legal action themselves.
This was only the third time in the 1900's that the party in power increased its representation in Congress in a midterm election.
In his second year in office, Kennedy appointed two justices of _ the Supreme Court.
Caroline and John, Jr., were the youngest children of a president to live in the White House in more than 60 years.
Women in many countries copied Jacqueline Kennedy's stylish clothes and hairdo.
She gathered furnishings of past presidents and made the mansion a historic showplace and a tourist attraction.
See White House (Rebuilding and redecorating). j The president gave recognition to the creative arts by appointing a special adviser on the arts.
On April 17, 1961, Cuban rebels invaded their homeland to overthrow Fidel Castro, the Communistsupported dictator.
Another Cuban crisis erupted in October 1962, when the United States learned that the Soviet Union had installed missiles in Cuba capable of striking United States cities.
Navy ships were ordered to turn back ships delivering Soviet missiles to Cuba.
Then, Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev ordered all Soviet offensive missiles removed.
In 1961, the Soviet Union threatened to give Communist East Germany control over the Wests air Chicago Tribune Kennedy's courage during the Cuban missile crisis was compared by a cartoon with the bravery described in his book Profiles in Courage.
The threat was part of a Soviet effort to end the combined American, British, French, and Soviet control of Berlin, begun in 1945, when World War II ended.
In June 1961, Kennedy discussed Berlin with Khrushchev at a two-day meeting in Vienna, Austria.
In August, the East Germans built a wall between East and West Berlin to prevent people from fleeing to the West.
Kennedy called up about 145,000 members of the National Guard and reservists to strengthen United States military defense.
In 1961, the United States established the Alliance for Progress, a 10-year program of aid for Latin American countries that agreed to begin democratic reforms.
Kennedy hoped this program would bring social and political reform as well as fight poverty.
In 1961, Kennedy was interviewed by Khrushchev's son-in-law, then editor of /zvestia, the Soviet government newspaper. /zvestia printed the entire interview.
The western Atlantic alliance remained strong, but Kennedy had trouble establishing a united NATO nuclear force.
President Charles de Gaulle refused to commit France to the NATO nuclear force.
Kennedy ordered United States military advisers to the area in 1961 and 1962 when the Communists threatened South Vietnam and Thailand.
In the summer and autumn of 1963, the United States severely criticized the South Vietnamese government headed by Ngo Dinh Diem for its repressive policies against the country's Buddhists.
The government imprisoned many Buddhist leaders and students who were leading demonstrations against the Diem government.
Kennedy sent former Republican senator and vice presidential candidate Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., to South Vietnam as ambassador in 1963.
The tests broke an unofficial test ban that had lasted nearly three years.
The United States began testing shortly after the Soviets resumed their tests, but the United States conducted its tests underground, which created no dangerous fallout.
But in April 1962, the United States resumed testing in the atmosphere over the Pacific Ocean.
In July 1963, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States signed a treaty banning atomic testing in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water.
Kennedy's assassination John F Kennedy was shot to death by an assassin on Nov., 1963, as he rode through the streets of Dallas.
Harrison who was elected in a year that ended in “0” died while in office.
These presidents and the years of election were Harrison, who was elected in 1840; Abraham Lincoln, elected in 1860; James A Garfield, 1880; William McKinley, 1900; Warren G Harding, 1920; and Franklin D Roosevelt, 1940.
Johnson was the first Southerner to become president since Andrew Johnson succeeded Lincoln when Lincoln was assassinated in 1865.
Kennedy came to Texas accompanied by his wife and Vice President and Mrs.
The Kennedy party left Washington, D.C., on Thursday, November 21, and flew to San Antonio, Houston, and Fort Worth.
At 11:37m. the next day, the president's plane arrived in Dallas after a short trip from Fort Worth.
Kennedy, Johnson, and others to travel in a motorcade through the streets of Dallas to the Dallas Trade Mart.
After leaving the plane, Kennedy entered an open limousine for the trip to the Trade Mart.
Texas Governor John B Connally sat in a ‘jump’ seat in front of the president, and Mrs.
Behind the president's car was a limousine filled with Secret Service agents.
Dallas had a reputation as a center for people who strongly opposed Kennedy.
At 12:30m., the cars approached an expressway for the last leg of the trip.
Suddenly, three shots rang out and the president slumped down, hit in the neck and head.
Kennedy held her stricken husband's head in her lap as the limousine raced to nearby Parkland Hospital.
Doctors worked desperately to save the president, but he died at 1:00m. without regaining consciousness.
Doctors said that Kennedy had no chance to sur—— -_ ——Eee tT vive when brought into the hospital.
Television and radio flashed the news of the shooting to a shocked world.
Vice President Johnson raced to the hospital and remained until Kennedy died.
At 2:39m., United States District Judge Sarah T Hughes administered the oath of office to Johnson, who became the 36th president of the United States.
As Johnson took the oath in the airplane, he was flanked by his wife and by Mrs.
Then the plane carrying the new chief executive and his wife, the body of the dead president, and the late presidents widow returned to Washington.
The killer fired when Kennedy's car reached the spot marked by the cross.
Kennedy sat next to him, and Governor John B Connally of Texas sat in front of him.
Then they began a search for a building employee who had left the scene a few minutes after the shooting.
Oswald was finally arrested in a theater a short while later, and was charged with the murders of President Kennedy and Tippit.
Oswald had been given a hardship discharge from the United States Marines and had once tried to become a Soviet citizen.
He also had been active in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, a group that supported Cuba's Communist dictator Fidel Castro.
Dallas police claimed that the evidence against Oswald was overwhelming.
On Sunday, November 24, two days after the assassination, Oswald was scheduled to be taken from the Dallas city jail to the county jail.
As he was being led to an armored car for the trip, a Dallas nightclub owner, Jack Ruby , stepped out of the crowd and shot Oswald to death.
Jack Ruby was convicted of Oswald's murder in 1964, but the conviction was overturned in 1966.
The sudden death of the young and vigorous American president shocked the world.
Kennedy's body was brought back to the White House and placed in the East Room for 24 hours.
On the Sunday after the assassination, Kennedy's flag-draped coffin was Carried to the Capitol Rotunda to lie in state.
Throughout the day and night, hundreds of thousands of people filed past the guarded casket.
Representatives from over 90 countries attended the funeral on November 25.
Among them were Irish Presi268 Kennedy, John Fitzgerald © 1963, the Dallas Times-Herald and Photographer Bob Jackson Lee Harvey Oswald, the accused assassin, was shot by Jack Ruby, right, two days after Kennedy died.
Millions of television viewers saw Ruby kill Oswald, who was under police guard. 0 i 1 Pe ¢ A ‘ ids aid PO © 1963 Mauldin, Chicago Sun-Times The nation’s sorrow at the assassination of President Kennedy was eloquently expressed in this drawing of a grieving Abraham Lincoln by the cartoonist Bill Mauldin. my 3. dent Eamon de Valera, French President Charles de Gaulle, Belgian King Baudouin, Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie, Philippine President Diosdado Macapagal, and West German President Heinrich Luebke.
In one of his first acts, President Johnson named the National Aeronautics and Space Administration installation in Florida the John F Kennedy Space Center.
Other Quotations from Kennedy The following quotations come from some of Kennedy's speeches and writings.
Aman does what he must— in spite of personal consequences, in spite of obstacles and dangers and pressures—and that is the basis of all human morality.
Inaugural Address, jan., 1961 Let the word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans, ... unwilling to witness or per mit the slow undoing of those human rights to which this nation has always been committed and to which we are committed today at home and around the world.
Inaugural Address, Jan., 1961 No one has been barred on account of his race from fighting or dying for America—there are no “white” or “colored” signs on the foxholes or graveyards of battle.
Address at City Hall in West Berlin, Germany, June 26, 1963 When power leads man toward arrogance, poetry reminds him of his limitations.
When power narrows the areas of man’s concern, poetry reminds him of the rich ness and diversity of his existence.
For art establishes the basic human truth which must serve as the touchstone of our judgment.
Address at Amherst College, Oct., 1963 public buildings and geographical sites throughout the world were named for Kennetly.
The United Kingdom made 1 acre of ground permanent United States territory as part of a Kennedy memorial at Runnymede.
The Warren Commission, headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren, investigated the assassination.
Many believed Oswald was part of a group that had planned to murder Kennedy.
During the 1970's, a special committee of the United States House of Representatives reexamined the evidence surrounding the assassination.
The committee accepted the testimony of acoustical experts who claimed that shots were fired from two locations along the motorcade at almost the same time.
In 1982, the National Research Council, a scientific research organization, also disagreed with the House committee's finding.
Alliance for Progress Nixon, Richard M Cold War Onassis, Jacqueline Kennedy Cuba Oswald, Lee Harvey Cuban missile crisis Peace Corps Great Society President of the United States Johnson, Lyndon B Warren Report Outline I Early life A Family background C Education B Boyhood D War hero lil.
Career in Congress A United States representative B Campaign for the Senate Ill.
The solemn procession traveled past the Lincoln Memorial, shown here, on its way to Arlington National Cemetery, where the president was buried.
Kennedy was a self-made multimillionaire who earned most of his great wealth by investing in stocks, bonds, and real estate.
He held several government positions, and his sons included a United States president and two senators.
At the age of 25, he gained control of a small bank in East Boston and became the country’s youngest bank president.
He later managed a shipbuilding company and an investment banking firm.
He also served as president and board chairman of several theater and motion-picture organizations.
In 1934, President Franklin D Roosevelt named Kennedy to the newly created Securities and Exchange Commission, a government agency that regulates stock trading.
He served as United States ambassador to the United Kingdom from 1937 to 1940.
In 1914, Kennedy married Rose Fitzgerald, daughter of the mayor of Boston.
The oldest child, Joseph, Jr., was killed in 1944, during World War II, on a mission as a United States Navy pilot.
The other three Kennedy sons were John F Kennedy, United States president from 1961 until his death in 1963; Robert F Kennedy, who became United States attorney general in 1961 and a United States senator in 1965; and Edward M Kennedy, who became a United States senator in 1962.
The Kennedy daughters were Rosemary; Kathleen, the wife of the Marquess of Hartington; Eunice, the wife of Sargent Shriver, first director of the Peace Corps; Patricia, once married to actor Peter Lawford; and Jean, the wife of Stephen E Smith, a shipping company executive.
Eunice founded the Special Olympics, an athletic competition for mentally disabled children and adults.
Robert's son Joseph P Kennedy If represented Massa270 Kennedy, Robert Francis chusetts in the United States House of Representatives from 1987 to 1999.
Edward's son Patrick became a representative from Rhode Island in 1995.
Robert's daughter Kathleen Townsend took office as lieutenant governor of Maryland in 1995.
John’s son, John, Jr., was cofounder and publisher of the political satire magazine George.
He was assassinated in Los Angeles in June 1968, while campaigning for the Democratic nomination for president.
In 1969, Sirhan Bishara Sirhan, a Jordanian-born Arab, was convicted of the assassination and sentenced to death.
The sentence was changed to life imprisonment in 1972 after the California Supreme Court declared the state's death penalty unconstitutional.
Robert Kennedy was appointed attorney general of the United States by his brother, President John F Kennedy, in 1961.
After the presidents assassination in 1963, Kennedy continued as attorney general under President Lyndon B Johnson.
Kennedy resigned from the Cabinet position in 1964 to run for the Senate.
Kennedy had entered the government in 1951 as an attorney in the United States Department of Justice.
From 1953 to 1955, he was a counsel for the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations.
Kennedy gained public attention during the late 1950's when he was chief counsel for the Senate committee that investigated improper labor and management activities.
Kennedy managed his brother's campaigns for the United States Senate in 1952 and for the presidency in 1960.
His son Joseph P Kennedy II of Massachusetts was a member of the United States House of Representatives from 1987 to 1999.
The National Symphony Orchestra and the Washington Opera are resident companies of the center.
The Concert Hall, which has 2,750 seats, features concert music and popular entertainers.
The Opera House seats 2,200 spectators and presents opera, ballet, and musical comedies.
The Eisenhower Theater, which seats 1,100 people, offers plays and smaller opera and dance productions.
It is the primary launch and recovery site of the reusable space vehicle called the space shuttle.
The American architect Edward Durell Stone designed the center, which was erected as a national memorial to the late president.
The Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, which opened in 1971, is an affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution.
The president of the United States appoints 30, and 3 come from each house of Congress.
Critically reviewed by the John F Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Kennedy Space Center, on the east coast of Florida, is the launch facility for all United States space missions that carry crews.
The center is located on Merritt Island, across from a point of land called Cape Canaveral.
People often call the center Cape Canaveral because it was formerly located there.
NASA tests, repairs, and launches space shuttles at Kennedy Space Center.
To prepare a shuttle for launch, workers in the 52-story Vehicle Assembly Building attach the external fuel tank to the orbiter (the craft that carries the crew) and two booster rockets.
A huge tractorlike machine called a craw/er then carries the shuttle to one of two launch pads.
Kennedy Space Center evolved from NASA’s Launch Operations Directorate on Cape Canaveral.
The directorate was a part of the George C Marshall Space Flight Center, whose headquarters were in Huntsville, Alabama.
In 1962, NASA made the directorate an independent unit and renamed it the Launch Operations Center.
The center received its present name in December 1963, the month after the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
In 1964, NASA moved the center to Merritt Island because the Cape Canaveral facilities were not large enough to handle the assembly, service, and launching of huge rockets that were to be used for the flights carrying astronauts to the moon.
NASA continues to assemble and test satellites and space probes on Cape Canaveral.
One day, an epidemic of poliomyelitis struck, and Kenny could not get medical help.
She found that prompt application of hot woolen packs relieved muscle spasms and usually prevented the patient from becoming crippled.
She lectured and demonstrated the method in the United States in 1940 and secured funds to set up the Elizabeth Kenny Institute in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Elizabeth Fee Kensington rune stone is a slab inscribed with early Germanic characters called runes.
Olaf Ohman, a Swedish-born American farmer, claimed he found the stone on his farm near Kensington, Minnesota, in 1898.
It tells of a group of Swedish and Norwegian Vikings who set out on an expedition from an area of eastern North America called Vinland.
The language has some features that are more modern than typical language of the 1300's.
Ohman owned a book about runes, and many experts believe he forged the stone.
They argue that the message could only have been written by someone with great knowledge of the Norse language of the 1300's.
His Commentaries on American Law had great influence on American legal practice.
He found material for his books and many of his drawings on his travels to remote parts of the world.
These books and Sa/amina and N by E established him as both a writer and an artist.
Wood engraving ; Rockwell Kent Rockwell Kent's Drifter, shown here, is typical of the artist's black-and-white wood engravings.
Kent's style features bold patterns, simplified settings, and dramatic characterizations.
Kents work showed consistently sure draftsmanship and a strong sense of design.
His illustrated editions of books written by other authors include Moby-Dick, Beowulf, and The Canterbury Tales.
He studied painting with some noted artists, including William Merritt Chase and Robert Henri.
Charles P Green Kenton, Stan , was an American bandleader, pianist, and composer.
Throughout his career, Kenton led bands that departed from the big-band sound of the swing era.
For example, in 1950, he toured with his 40-piece Innovations in Modern Music Orchestra, which included strings.
In 1961, Kenton formed an orchestra featuring a brass instrument called the mel/lophone. \n 1965, he assembled a semisymphonic band of 27 pieces he called the Neophonic Orchestra.
Such Kenton compositions as “Artistry in Rhythm” , “Eager Beaver’ , and “Intermission Riff’ became famous.
Kenton helped establish the careers of such famous jazz musicians as alto saxophonists Lee Konitz and Art Pepper, trumpeter Maynard Ferguson, and drummer Shelly Manne.
In 1941, he formed his first band, which received wide praise for its precise, brassy sound.
Its popularity increased after Pete Rugolo began arranging the band’s music in 1945.
Many jazz critics disliked Kenton’s music during his lifetime, but his bands remained popular with listeners.
Kentucky horse farms produce some of the world’s finest thoroughbred race horses.
Most such farms, including the one shown here, are found in the state’s Bluegrass Region, near Lexington.
Ke ntucky The Bluegrass State Kentucky is one of the border states that lie between the North and the South of the United States.
Its long northern border is formed by the Ohio River, one of the traditional boundaries between the Northern States and the Southern States.
Kentucky also forms a link between two of the great land features of the United States.
Thoroughbred race horses still graze on the lush grass of the region around Lexington, in central Kentucky.
The region is known for the bluish grass blossoms that give Kentucky the nickname the Bluegrass State.
Each May, huge crowds thrill to the excitement of the country’s most famous horse race, the Kentucky Derby, held at Churchill Downs in Louisville.
It leads the states in the production of burley tobacco, and it ranks second only to North Carolina in total tobacco production.
Coal is mined in Kentucky's eastern Appalachian counties and in western Kentucky.
They include Cumberland Falls, Mammoth Cave, Natural Bridge, and Land Between the Lakes.
Most of the nation’s gold reserves are stored in the depository at Fort Knox, which is south of Louisville.
A group of colonists from Pennsylvania established the first permanent white settlement in what is now Kentucky in 1774.
During the American Civil War (18611865), Kentucky stayed in the Union, but thousands of Kentuckians joined the Confederate armies.
In 1900, an assassin’s bullet killed the governor of Kentucky, William Goebel, and Kentucky nearly had a civil war of its own.
From 1904 to 1909, Kentucky farmers fought a group of tobacco firms in the so-called Tobacco Wars.
Kentucky got its name from a Cherokee Indian word whose possible meanings include Land of Tomorrow and Meadow/land.
Kentucky was named a commonwealth to honor Virginia, which owned the region before Kentucky became a state.
Interesting facts about Kentucky The Mammoth-Flint Ridge cave system, entirely within Kentucky, is the longest known cave system in the world.
It includes the famous Mammoth Cave and is part of Mammoth Cave National Park.
The Kentucky Derby is the oldest continuously run horse race in the United States.
The first Derby was run in 1875 as part of the program for the opening of Churchill Downs race track in Louisville.
Now, each May, thousands of trackside spectators and millions of television viewers watch the “run for the roses’—the blanket of roses presented to the winning horse and jockey. pee The gold depository at Fort Knox contains more than $6 billion in gold bullion.
The bullion, placed in the vaults of the depository by the United States Treasury Department, represents nearly all of the gold owned by the United States government.
Before that, people generally recovered oil only when it seeped through the ground or accidentally gushed from salt wells.
Louisville lies on the shore of the Ohio River, which forms Kentucky's long northern border.
Whiskey manufacturing centers include Louisville, Bardstown, and Frankfort.
Kentucky in brief Symbols of Kentucky The state flag, first adopted in 1918, bears the state seal.
The lower portion of the seal is surrounded by a wreath of goldenrod, the state flower.
The goldenrod, gold lettering, and blue field display the state's official colors.
On the state seal, first adopted in 1792, a frontiersman and a statesman embrace, The state motto, United We Stand, Divided We Fall, appears above and below them.
LAs my Nd 1 WW ei ie General information Statehood: June 1, 1792, the 15th state.
Words and music The State Capitol is in Frankfort, Kentucky's capital since by Stephen Collins Foster.93.
Lowest—257 ft above sea level Fe we along the Mississippi River in Fulton County.
United States Census Bureau. eo ae Services 65% Economy Gross state product : Chief products Agriculture: tobacco, beef cattle, horses, soybeans, corn, milk.
The state's official Web site at www-state.ky.us also provides a gateway to much information on Kentucky's economy, government, and history.
Amendment approved allowing reelection of state officers to second consecutive term.
Kentucky Education Reform Act launched Amendment approved allowing reform of state’s public schools. yearly sessions of state legislature.
This popular annual event takes place in the foothills of eastern Kentucky.
The 2000 United States census reported that Kentucky had 4,041,769 people.
The population had increased nearly 10 percent over the 1990 figure, 3,685,296.
According to the 2000 census, Kentucky ranks 25th in population among the 50 states.
These areas are Cincinnati, Ohio; Clarksville -Hopkinsville; Evansville -Henderson; Huntington (West Virginia)-Ashland; Lexington; Louisville; and Owensboro.
For the populations of these areas, see the /ndexto the political map of Kentucky.
Other major cities include Louisville, Owensboro, Bowling Green, Covington, Hopkinsville, and Frankfort, the state capital.
Between 1950 and 1970, thousands of Kentuckians moved from rural to urban areas.
William Coomes, a pioPopulation density Many of Kentucky's most densely populated regions lie along the Ohio River, which forms the state's northern boundary.
The Lexington area of eastern Kentucky is another heavily populated region.
More than 40 20 to 40 10 to 20 Less than 10 WORLD BOOK map; based on United States Census Bureau data.
Some of the horses are sold at auctions for more than $1 million. neer schoolteacher, opened the school in Harrodsburg, Kentucky's first white permanent settlement.
Other early schools were established in McAfee’s Station in 1777, Boonesborough in 1779, and Lexington in 1783.
The first institution of higher learning west of the Allegheny Mountains was chartered in Kentucky in 1780.
The school, Transylvania Seminary, opened in 1785 in what is now Danville.
In 1838, the legislature established the state's first public school system.
In 1989, the Kentucky Supreme Court declared the state's school system unconstitutional because of vast differences in spending among school districts.
The Kentucky Education Reform Act of 1990 made sweeping changes in the way the state's schools are financed, managed, and held accountable for student learning.
Kentucky's state Department of Education administers. the public school system.
The commissioner of education heads the department and oversees public education.
For the number of students and teachers in Kentucky, see Education . gFrankfont e Lexington “Owensboro Richmond eBowling Green Hopkinsville — _——— Libraries.
The Lexington Public Library was organized in 1795 as a subscription library.
Members of this library contributed money to buy books, which they could then use free.
The Lexington Public Library is the oldest circulating library west of the Allegheny Mountains.
The Trappist Library at the Abbey of Our Lady of Gethsemane near New Haven has one of the South's most complete collections of Roman Catholic literature.
The Kentucky Historical Society Library in Frankfort is Kentucky's largest historical library.
Universities and colleges This table lists the universities and colleges in Kentucky that grant bachelor's or advanced degrees and are accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.
The John James Audubon Memorial Museum in Henderson County exhibits prints by John James Audubon—the famous painter of birds—and portraits and stuffed birds.
Waveland State Historic Site near Lexington has a museum with exhibits on daily life in Kentucky during the mid-1800's.
Speed Art Museum in Louisville; and the Patton Museum of Cavalry and Armor at Fort Knox.
Audubon lived in Henderson County in the early 1800's and did many of his bird illustrations there.
A 3 Frances. ...c@eses. eee f 4 Metropolitan areas Nicholas .........6,813.
F 14 CaSCY vxccces sees 15,447 .. 10 ot) NR eee ee ee Ae are } 13 Canitet fp sccccecet scans I 9 Eastview ..............26.
E 6 Mealy cv cocuncxsmasiceners H 15 Parkway Sardis. ccsaccecweues 149.
County seat. tCensus designated place—unincerperated but recognized as a significant settled community Places without pepulation figures are unincorporated areas. by the United States Census Bureau.
Cumberland Falls, in southeastern Kentucky, is often called the Niagara of the South.
Natural Bridge in Daniel Boone National Forest is also popular with tourists.
Constitution Square, in Danville, is the site where Kentucky's first Constitution was adopted in 1792.
Visitors may see replicas of the log courthouse, meeting house, and jail from pioneer days in Kentucky.
Fort Knox is the home of the nation’s gold depository and the Patton Museum of Cavalry and Armor.
Kentucky Derby Museum, in Louisville, is on the grounds of Churchill Downs.
It also offers a special theater presentation, hands-on displays, and exhibits.
The park includes a museum and offers a tour and a daily parade of more than 40 different breeds of horses.
The park also includes the gravesite of Man o’ War, perhaps the most famous race horse in American history.
Land Between the Lakes, in western Kentucky, is a 170,000acre (69,000-hectare} peninsula bordered by Lake Barkley and Kentucky Lake.
This national recreation area features a living history farm, a herd of bison, a nature center, audio-visuals, a planetarium, and observation areas.
Visitors guide lakes offer opportunities for fishing, boating, and other recreational activities.
The most famous race is the Kentucky Derby, held at Churchill Downs in Louisville on the first Saturday in May.
Focus on Sports Kentucky Derby winner at Churchill Downs, Louisville 5 ay My Old Kentucky Home, in Bardstown, is the home that inspired Stephen Foster to write the famous song, “My Old Kentucky Home,” now the state song.
It is furnished in the style of the early 1800's, and hostesses dress as women did during that period.
Shaker Village of Pleasant Hill, near Harrodsburg, ts a restored community founded by the Shaker religious group in the early 1800's.
Visitors may see more than 30 original buildings and watch artisans create Shaker crafts.
Mammoth Cave National Park, which includes the world’s longest known cave system, is about 90 miles south of Louisville.
Cumberland Gap National Historical Park lies in southeastern Kentucky and extends into Virginia and Tennessee.
Daniel Boone National Forest extends northeast from Kentucky's southern boundary.
This large, triangle-shaped region consists of mountain ridges, plateaus, valleys, rivers, and streams.
The Cumberland and Pine mountains, Kentucky’s chief ranges, rise along the southeastern border of the state.
Black Mountain, near Lynch on the southeastern border, rises 4,145 feet above sea level.
West of the Cumberland and Pine mountains, the Appalachian Plateau has been divided into a maze of sharp ridges and narrow valleys by eroding streams.
Coal is the major product found in this region, which is sometimes called the Eastern Coal Field.
Kentucky's largest cities, most of its horse farms, and much of its manufacturing are in the Bluegrass Region.
Along the eastern, southern, and western edges of the Bluegrass Region lies an arc of conelike sandstone knobs interlaced by stream flood plains.
The Pennyroyal Region is also known as the Mississippi Plateau. \t stretches along Kentucky's southern border from the Appalachian Plateau to Kentucky Lake.
The Pennyroyal Region is named for a small herb of the mint family that is common in the region.
The southern part of the region has flat and rolling farmland with limestone soils.
In the center of the region lies a treeless area, which early pioneers called The Barrens.
Many underground passages run beneath the limestone rock of the Pennyroyal Region.
The most faRivers and valleys cut through the forested hills of the Appalachian Plateau region of eastern Kentucky.
The Western Coal Field is a region of sharply rolling land in northwestern Kentucky.
The region is surrounded by the Ohio River on the north, and by the Pennyroyal Region on the east, south, and west.
The Jackson Purchase Region is part of the East Gulf Coastal Plain, which extends from Florida west to Mississippi and north to Illinois.
The region is bordered by Kentucky Lake on the east, the Ohio River on the north, and the Mississippi River on the west.
A double bend in the Mississippi River separates about 10 square miles of extreme southwestern Kentucky from the rest of the state.
In 1811 and 1812, severe earthquakes in the zone caused the Mississippi River to flow backward and formed Reelfoot Lake near the KentuckyTennessee border.
Kentucky's border extends across the Ohio River to the northern banks, not to the center of the river.
The principal rivers within Kentucky are the Cumberland, Green, Kentucky, Licking, Salt, and Tennessee.
All of these rivers are westward-flowing tributaries of the Ohio River.
The state's largest waterfall in terms of volume of water, Cumberland Falls, drops 68 feet on the Cumberland River near Corbin.
This Average January temperatures Kentucky has moist, cool winters with much of the state averaging above freezing.
The warmest temperatures are found along the length of the southern portion of the state.
Other artificially created lakes in Kentucky include Barkley, Barren, Dewey, Herrington, Malone, Nolin, and Rough.
The temperatures get increasingly cooler toward the eastern part of the state.
Degrees Fahrenheit Above 80 78 to 80 26 to 27 76 to 78 24 to 26 Below 76 Below 24 Degrees Celsius Above 27 WORLD BOOK maps a a te a Plant and animal life.
The thickest forests are in the Appalachian Plateau and in the Knobs Region of the Bluegrass.
The most common ones include the ash, beech, hickory, maple, red oak, yellow-poplar, walnut, and white oak.
The most common softwood trees include the hemlock, redcedar, shortleaf pine, Virginia pine, and white pine.
Some of the more common ones are blueberries, dogwoods, ferns, huckleberries, mountain laurels, mountain magnolias, redbuds, rhododendrons, serviceberries, wild azaleas, and wild plums.
Smaller woodland plants in the Appalachian Plateau include the dogtooth violet, jack-in-the-pulpit, May apple, snakeroot, trillium, and wild iris.
Such grasses as Bermuda grass, bluegrass, broom sedge, crab grass, and fescue flourish in most parts of the state.
The Knobs Region and the forests of the Western Coal Field have anemones, buttercups, spring beauties, toothworts, and other wild flowers.
The Bluegrass and Pennyroyal regions of Kentucky bloom with goldenrods, ironweeds, daisies, and violets.
Pennyroyals flourish in the Pennyroyal Region, in the central part of the state.
Animal life in Kentucky's fields and forests includes chipmunks, foxes, minks, muskrats, opossums, rabbits, raccoons, squirrels, and woodchucks.
They include bass, bluegill, buffalo fish, carp, catfish, crappies, gar, gizzard shad, muskellunge, rockfish, and walleye.
Kentucky has a warm, rainy climate with generally warm summers and cool winters.
January temperatures average 38 °F in western Kentucky, 34 °F in the central portion, and 39 °F in the east.
In July, temperatures average 79 °F in the west, 77 °F in central Kentucky, and 76 °F in the east.
The state's lowest temperature, —37 °F , was recorded at Shelbyville on Jan., 1994.
Precipitation in southern Kentucky averages from 48 to 52 inches a year.
Northern Kentucky has an average of 40 to 44 inches of precipitation a year.
Snowfall averages from 6 to 10 inches a year in the southwest, and from 15 to 20 inches (38 to 51 centimeters) in the southeast.
Economy Service industries, taken together, account for the largest portion of Kentucky's gross state product—the total value of all goods and services produced in a state in a year.
However, manufacturing is Kentucky's single most important economic activity.
The chief centers of manufacturing in Kentucky are located in Louisville and Lexington.
Huge coal deposits provide Kentucky with billions of dollars in income.
Farming is important in the Bluegrass, Pennyroyal, and Purchase regions.
Natural resources of Kentucky include rich soils and large coal deposits.
The area of the Bluegrass around Fayette, Jessamine, Scott, and Woodford counties has especially rich soil.
The Knobs Region has shallow, poorly drained soils that are not as suitable for farming.
It is found in two Jarge coal fields that cover about 40 percent of the state.
Petroleum and natural gas are produced in the western, southcentral, and eastern portions of the state.
Other mined products found in the state include clays, lead, sand and gravel, and zinc.
Service industries account for the largest part of Kentucky's gross state product.
Most of the service industries are located in the state's metropolitan areas.
Kentucky's leading service industries are community, business, and personal services and wholesale and retail trade.
Both industry groups contribute an equal portion of the gross state product.
The wholesale trade of coal, food products, motor vehicles, petroleum products, and tobacco is important in Kentucky.
Leading types of retail businesses include automobile dealerships, gas stations, grocery stores, and restaurants.
Government ranks third among service industries in Kentucky in terms of the gross state product.
Government services include the operation of public schools and hospitals, and military bases.
The largest centers of civilian government services are Frankfort, Lexington, and Louisville.
Finance, insurance, and real estate is the fourth most important service industry in Kentucky.
Many major banks and insurance companies have large branch offices there.
Real estate is important in the state’s major cities because of the large sums of money involved in the buying and selling of homes and other property.
Transportation, communication, and utilities rank fifth in importance among service industries in Kentucky.
Many shipping and trucking companies have large operations in Louisville.
Telephone companies are the most important part of the communications sector.
More information about transportation and communication appears later in this section.
Goods manufactured in Kentucky have a value added by manufacture of approximately $40 billion annually.
Value added by manufacture is the increase in value of raw materials after they become finished goods.
The production of transportation equipment is Kentucky’s leading manufacturing activity in terms of value added by manufacture.
Motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts are the main kinds of transportation equipment made in the state.
Many Kentucky cities have plants that produce motor vehicle WORLD BOOK map parts.
Other transportation equipment made in Kentucky includes aircraft parts, boat trailers, and railroad cars.
Chemicals produced in the state include cleaning and pharmaceutical products, paints, and industrial chemicals.
Calvert City produces a variety of chemicals, including industrial gases.
Large chemical plants are also located in Brandenburg, Carrolton, Catlettsburg, and Paducah.
Plants in Louisville produce elevators, air filtration equipment, and conveyors.
Maysville and Glasgow factories make ball and roller bearings for machines.
Factories in Lexington manufacture heating and air-conditioning equipment, and typewriters and printers.
Other products manufactured in Kentucky include electrical equipment, fabricated metal products, primary metals, and rubber and plastics products.
The state’s fabricated metal products include sheet metal, hardware, springs, and wire.
Steel and aluminum are the leading primary metals manufactured in Kentucky.
Polystyrene foam and rubber tires and hoses are among Kentucky's leading plastics and rubber products.
Coal is mined in two widely separated fields in Kentucky—the Western Coal Field and the Appalachian Plateau, also called the Eastern Coal Field.
Hopkins, Union, and Webster counties are the chief coal-producing counties in the Western Coal Field.
Harlan, Martin, and Pike counties produce the most coal in the Appalachian Plateau.
The other mined products in Kentucky include natural gas, petroleum, and limestone.
E-C N ea..:.aaeEEEEaEET SS ee O_O — vx ee ee comes from the Appalachian Plateau.
Many parts of the state quarry limestone, which is used to make cement and roadbeds.
Livestock and livestock products account for about half of Kentucky's farm income.
The breeding and selling of thoroughbred horses are Kentucky's most valuable source of livestock income.
Most of the thoroughbred horses come from the bluegrass pastures that are located near Lexington.
Cattle are raised throughout the state except on the Appalachian Plateau.
Other important livestock products in Kentucky are milk, hogs, broilers , and eggs.
The most important livestock centers in the state are Bourbon, Fayette, Graves, Scott, and Woodford counties.
Kentucky leads the states in growing burley tobacco, and it ranks second only to North Carolina in total tobacco production.
Dark tobacco is grown in the southern and southwestern parts of Kentucky, in an area sometimes called the Black Patch.
The leading apple-growing areas are near Bowling Green, Liberty, Somerset, and Walton.
Important popcorn-producing areas include Calloway, Marshall, and McCracken counties.
Coal-burning plants produce about 95 percent of Kentucky's electric power.
Sources of hydroelectric power in the state include Barkley Dam, Kentucky Dam, Ohio Falls Station, and Wolf Creek Dam.
Plants that burn natural gas or petroleum generate only a small amount of the state's electric power.
Most early transportation routes in Kentucky were waterways and small trails.
A Kentucky tobacco farmer harvests tobacco plants that have been cut and left to dry in a field.
In 1815, the steamboat Enterprise traveled from New Orleans to Louisville.
It was the first steamboat to travel up the Mississippi and Ohio rivers.
Soon, steamboats were regularly carrying passengers and cargo along both rivers.
Kentucky's first railroad, the Lexington and Ohio, began operating in 1832.
It later became a part of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad, and it is now part of the CSX Railroad.
In 1914, the legislature approved a system of free roads throughout the state.
The Mississippi River, which forms Kentucky's western border, links the state with the Gulf of Mexico.
Many barges travel to and from the Mississippi River on the Ohio River, which forms Kentucky's northern border.
The Tennessee River, which flows through western Kentucky, is linked to the Gulf of Mexico by the TennesseeTombigbee Waterway and the Tombigbee and Mobile rivers.
The state's busiest airport is the Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport, located in Boone County near the Ohio border.
The Kentucky Gazette, Kentucky's first newspaper, was established in Lexington in 1787 by John Bradford.
The first successful newspaper in the * state was the Advertiser of Louisville.
The state's first radio station, WHAS, began broadcasting in Louisville in 1922.
The first Kentucky television station, WAVE-TV, began telecasting in Louisville in 1948.
Leading papers include The Courier-Journal of Louisville, the Lexington HeraldLeader, The Kentucky Post of Covington, the Owensboro Messenger-Inquirer, and the Paducah Sun.
Cable television systems and Internet providers serve many of Kentucky's communities. ape tae tet a ll Sees Seay acess Sheldan Photoworks, FPG A coal-fueled power plant operates in the Western Coal Field region of Kentucky.
Constitutional amendments may be proposed by the state legislature or by a constitutional convention.
An amendment must be approved by threefifths of the members of each house.
The amendment must then be approved ina general election by a majority of the people voting on the issue.
Before a constitutional convention can meet, it must be approved by a majority of each house of the legislature.
Finally, a constitutional convention must be approved by a majority of the people voting on the proposition.
The number of approving votes must equal at least a fourth of the number of voters who took part in the most recent general election.
The governor appoints the adjutant general, the secretaries of the 13 units called program cabinets, and the heads of departments within those cabinets.
Top elected officials include the attorney general, auditor of public accounts, commissioner of agriculture, secretary of state, and treasurer.
These elected officials and the program cabinet secretaries and department heads make up the governor's general cabinet.
It consists of a 38-member Senate and a 100member House of Representatives.
Voters in each of the state’s 38 senatorial districts elect one senator.
In even-numbered years, legislative sessions begin in January and last 60 working days or until April 15, whichever comes first.
The justices of each court select one judge to serve a four-year term as chief justice.
The number of circuit court judges in a circuit depends on the circuit's population.
The court system includes 59 district courts, which are also used as trial courts.
Democratic Martha Layne Collins Democratic Wallace G Wilkinson Democratic Brereton C Jones Democratic Paul E Patton Democratic 19,999 people.
The legislature determines the form of government Kentucky cities may have.
Secondthrough sixth-class cities may use the mayor-council, commission, or city-manager form.
More than a fifth of the revenue comes from federal grants and United States government programs.
Personal income tax and a general sales tax account for most of the tax revenue.
Taxes on corporate income, coal production, and motor fuels are also important.
Other sources of revenue include government services and a state lottery.
But Kentucky voters began electing an increasing number of Republicans to Congress and to the state legislature during the mid-1900's.
Democrats carried Kentucky in every presidential election from 1932 through 1952.
Since then, Republicans have won the state's electoral votes twice as often as Democrats have.
Kentucky's legislature consists of a House of Representatives and a Senate.
As long as 12,000 years ago, Indians probably lived in the forests of what is now western Kentucky.
Early European explorers found many different tribes in the Kentucky region.
Several English and French explorers probably visited the Kentucky region during the late 1600's and early 1700's.
Among the French explorers were Father Jacques Marquette, Louis Jolliet, and Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle.
In 1750, Thomas Walker, a pioneer scout, entered Kentucky through the Cumberland Gap and made the first thorough exploration of the eastern part of the region.
He came to Kentucky again in 1769 and then spent two years in the Bluegrass Region.
In 1773, Boone led a group of settlers into Kentucky, but Indians forced them to turn back.
In 1774, James Harrod led a group of colonists into Kentucky from Pennsylvania.
They established Harrodsburg, Kentucky's first permanent white settlement.
Boone led another group of settlers through the Cumberland Gap into Kentucky in 1775.
Boone settled along the Kentucky River and called his site Boonesborough.
Mountains and forests stood between the settlers and the protection of the American colonies.
After the Revolutionary War began in 1775, Indians friendly to the British made repeated attacks on Kentuckians.
Boone, Kenton, and George Rogers Clark successfully defended Kentucky against attacks by Indians.
Indians supplied with British weapons continued to attack the settlers.
In 1778, George Rogers Clark led a small band of men against three British-controlled settlements northwest of Kentucky.
Clark captured the settlements and cut off British supplies to the Indians.
In May 1792, Kentuckians adopted a constitution in preparation for statehood.
In 1798, Congress passed a series of acts known as the Alien and Sedition Acts.
These acts gave the president special powers against people born in other countries and people who tried to create discontent with the government.
Kentuckians opposed these acts, as did many other Americans including Vice President Thomas Jefferson and Virginia Representative James Madison.
Kentucky adopted strong resolutions, written by Jefferson, declaring the Alien and Sedition Acts unconstitutional.
Jefferson’s opposition to the acts helped him to be elected president of the United States.
After Kentucky became a state, its population increased and more areas of farmland were opened to settlement.
The Army created its fecarcaiea icccenboroan Daniel Boone led a group of colonists 1940.
The post was originally from North Carolina through the Cumestablished as Camp Knox in berland Gap and into Kentucky in 1775.
The Kentucky Dam, on the Tennessee River near GilThe Tobacco Wars took place in western and central Kentucky from 1904 to 1909.
Farmers unsuccessfully fought against low bertsville, was finished in prices, mounting debt, and the tobacco 1944.
Lake. . . important dates in Kentucky WORLD BOOK illustrations by Kevin Chadwick ; 1750 Thomas Walker made the first thorough exploration of the tobacco monopoly in the Tobacco Wars. what is now Kentucky.14 The state legislature authorized a statewide system of 1767 Daniel Boone made his first journey to Kentucky. roads.
The Confederates retreated into neighboring Tennessee, and Kentucky came under Union control.
The battlefield is now a state historic site. qualities of pastures in central Kentucky.
The use of steamboats in the early 1800's helped the state’s farms to prosper.
Farmers shipped huge cargoes of crops and livestock products to markets along the Ohio and Mississippi rivers.
A market for whiskey in New Orleans, down the Mississippi River, aided the growth of Kentucky agriculture and manufacturing.
Kentucky farmers raised corn, rye, and other grains used in manufacturing alcoholic beverages.
The use of slaves was central to Kentucky's agricultural economy, and slavery flourished in the Bluegrass Region.
The state had social, economic, and political ties with both the North and the South.
In September 1861, the state legislature created a military force to drive the Confederates out and preserve the state's neutrality.
About 75,000 Kentuckians fought for the Union, and about 35,000 fought for the Confederacy.
On Jan., 1862, Union troops won an important victory at Mill Springs in southern Kentucky.
Both sides suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Perryville in October 1862.
The Confederate troops finally retreated from Perryville into Tennessee.
After the Civil War ended in 1865, Kentucky became strongly sympathetic toward the South.
Soldiers remained in the state longer than the people thought necessary.
Kentuckians began to feel as though they had lost the war, rather than helped win it.
Kentucky was affected by the economic depression that hit the South after the Civil War.
Before the war, hemp had been used for bagging and ties for cotton bales and for cables and rigging of sailing vessels.
But the South's cotton production declined after the war, and steamships replaced most sailing ships in the 1860's.
A decrease in boat traffic along the Mississippi and Ohio rivers hurt Kentucky's smaller port cities.
Louisville, with access to both river and rail transport, became a major center for the exchange of goods between the North and the South.
An increased interest in horse racing after the Civil War encouraged Kentucky racing establishments to raise thoroughbred horses.
The development of burley tobacco in central and eastern Kentucky contributed to a tremendous increase in tobacco production.
But periodic depressions marked by falling tobacco prices resulted in many farm failures and a sharp rise in the number of tenant farmers.
By the 1890's, the railroad system had expanded so that the resources of eastern Kentucky could be developed.
Economic unrest contributed to a bitterly fought campaign for governor in 1899.
Republican William S Taylor won the election by a narrow margin over his Democratic opponent, William Goebel.
The next day, the Democratic-controlled legislature declared Goebel the winner of the election.
A special election for governor was held in November 1900, and Beckham won.
During the late 1800's and early 1900's, a group of tobacco firms held a monopoly of all tobacco-buying in Kentucky.
Farmers in western and central Kentucky fought this monopoly during the Tobacco Wars, which occurred from 1904 to 1909.
Night riders burned warehouses, barns, and fields of tobacco growers who had sold to the monopoly.
For the region's tobacco growers, prices remained low, and their desperation grew.
The United States Treasury established its gold vault at Fort Knox in 1936.
During World War II , farms and mines in Kentucky became productive again.
After the war, manufacturing grew and Kentucky began to shift from an agricultural to an industrial economy.
The state's coal industry prospered in the 1960's, and Kentucky rose to second place behind West Virginia in coal mining.
Tourism became a major industry, aided by new highways that made vacation spots easier to reach.
In 1964, the Tennessee Valley Authority opened the first facilities of the Land Between the Lakes recreation area in western Kentucky.
In 1969, the TVA completed its largest steam-generating plant, in Paradise.
The Lexington region experienced rapid industrial growth during the 1970's.
The state became the nation’s leading coal producer in the early 1970's.
In 1972, the state legislature passed Kentucky's first tax on coal production.
The coal-mining industry boomed during the mid-1970's, when an energy shortage hit the United States.
Increased production brought new revenue to coal-producing counties in Kentucky.
A 1980 state law helped these counties by returning to them half the revenue from the coal tax.
Strip mining, a method used to produce much of the state’s coal, came under attack in the early 1970's.
But rain washes away the loosened soil, causing soil erosion and water pollution.
In 1978, a federal law went into effect that requires strip mine owners to restore the land as nearly as possible to its original condition.
In the 1980's, several Kentucky school systems sued state officials, charging them with inadequate and unevenly distributed funding for public schools.
In 1989, Kentucky's Supreme Court ruled the state's public school system unconstitutional.
A statewide school reform plan was adopted with the passage of the Kentucky Education Reform Act in 1990.
The plan called for each school to be run by a committee made up of the principal, teachers, and parents.
Other provisions included the establishment of preschool classes for children from low-income families, more funding for special education, and a testing system to evaluate school improvement.
In 1988, Toyota Motor Corporation opened an automobile manufacturing plant in Georgetown.
With this plant and other automobile plants in Louisville and Bowling Green, Kentucky became one of the nation’s leaders in automobile production in the 1990's.
At the end of the 1900's, a decreasing number of jobs for miners left many workers unemployed in the coal fields of the state.
There, the levels of income, health, and education lagged behind the state’s urban areas and behind the nation as a whole.
He was the first Kentucky governor eligible to be elected to a second consecutive term since 1800.
Voters had approved a constitutional amendment in 1992 allowing reelection of state officers to a second consecutive term.
In 2000, voters approved a constitutional amendment to allow the legislature to meet every year.
Previously, the legislature had been holding sessions in even-numbered years.
Biographies Barkley, Alben W Boone, Daniel Breckinridge, John C Breckinridge, Sophonisba Buckner, Simon Bolivar Butler, William O Clark, George Rogers Clay, Henry Davis, Jefferson Ford, Wendell Hampton Harlan, John Marshall Johnson, Richard M LincoIn, Abraham Morgan, John H Taylor, Zachary Vinson, Frederick Moore Young, Whitney Moore, Jr.
Cities Covington Louisville Frankfort Owensboro Lexington History Civil War Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions Westward movement in America Physical features Mammoth Cave National Park Mississippi River Ohio River Appalachian Mountains Cumberland Gap Cumberland Mountains Kentucky Lake Tennessee River Other related articles Bluegrass Kentucky Derby Fort Knox Tennessee Valley Authority Outline I People A Population C Libraries B Schools D Museums Il.
Level il Blakey, George T Hard Times and the New Deal in Kentucky, 1929-1939.
It has colleges of agriculture, allied health professions, architecture, arts and sciences, business and economics, communications, dentistry, education, engineering, fine arts, home economics, law, library science, medicine, nursing, pharmacy, and social work.
The university's main library has a collection of more than 2 million volumes.
The university also operates community colleges in Lexington, Louisville, and 12 other Kentucky cities.
On all campuses, people 65 years old and older may take any regular course without charge.
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions were declarations passed by the Kentucky and Virginia state legislatures.
They protested against the Alien and Sedition Acts passed by Congress in 1798.
The resolutions were the first to claim that the states had the right to decide whether a law of Congress was unconstitutional.
James Madison drafted the Virginia Resolutions, which were adopted in 1798.
There were two sets of Kentucky Resolutions, one prepared by Thomas Jefferson and passed in 1798, and the other adopted in 1799.
Both states declared that the Alien and Sedition Acts violated the Constitution by giving the president judicial power, denying aliens the right to jury trial, and limiting freedom of speech and the press.
Copies of the resolutions were sent to other states, producing a largely unfavorable response.
Most Northern states said that the federal courts alone could declare an act of Congress unconstitutional.
Kentucky asserted that a state could nullify any act of Congress it believed to be unconstitutional.
Donna J Spindel See also Alien and Sedition Acts; Jefferson, Thomas ; Nullification.
During the 1700's, people who had settled in Kentucky used the seeds of this tree as a substitute for coffee beans.
Throughout this range, the trees exist only as scattered individuals in open woods and forests.
The leaves are doubly compound—that is, each leaf consists of a main stem with several side stems.
The Kentucky coffeetree is one of the first trees to lose its leaves in autumn and one of the last trees to open its buds in spring.
Those with female flowers produce dark brown seed pods 6 to 10 inches (15 to 25 centimeters) long.
The Kentucky coffeetree belongs to the pea family, Leguminoseae or Fabaceae.
This 1 5 -mile race for 3year-old horses is held annually on the first Saturday of May at Churchill Downs race track in Louisville, Kentucky.
About 10,000 spectators watched Aristides win the first Derby—and a purse of $2,850.
Since then, the Derby has become one of the most popular sports events in the United States.
The Derby, the Preakness, and the Belmont Stakes form the Triple Crown of United States horse racing.
Eleven horses have won the Triple Crown—Sir Barton in 1919, Gallant Fox in 1930, Omaha in 1935, War Admiral in 1937, Whirlaway in 1941, Count Fleet in 1943, Assault in Kentucky Derby winners Year Winner Jockey Time’ Year Winner Jockey Time* 1875 Aristides Oliver Lewis 2 min. +s.39 Johnstown James Stout 2 min. $s 1876 Vagrant Bobby Swim 2 min.
Typhoon Il Buttons Garner 2 min.5s 1961 Carry Back John Sellers 2 min.s.
Twenty Grand Charles Kurtsinger 2 min. 4s.95 Thunder Gulch Gary Stevens 2 min.s.
War Admiralt Charles Kurtsinger 2min.¢s.01 Monarchos Jorge Chavez 1 min..97 1938 ~Lawrin Eddie Arcaro 2min. $s.02 War Emblem Victor Espinoza 2 min.
Only three fillies—Regret in 1915, Genuine Risk in 1980, and Winning Colors in 1988—have ever won the Derby.
The leading Derby jockeys are Eddie Arcaro and Bill Hartack, each with five winners.
The track opened on May 17, 1875, and held the first Kentucky Derby on its opening program.
Clark modeled the race after the Epsom Derby, held every year in Epsom, England.
Kentucky Lake is an artificially created lake in western Kentucky and Tennessee.
It was formed by the Kentucky Dam, which was built across the Tennessee River.
The lake can hold more than 6 million acre-feet (7. billion cubic meters) of water, making it the largest Tennessee River reservoir.
Kentucky Dam lies in Kentucky, about 15 miles (24 kilometers) southeast of Paducah.
The gravity-type concrete dam has a hydroelectric power plant with a 160,000-kilowatt capacity.
The dam also has a lock that permits barges to move up and down the river.
A canal near the dam connects Kentucky Lake with Lake Barkley, a reservoir on the Cumberland River about 1 mile to the east.
Between the two lakes lies a recreation area called the Land Between the Lakes.
Beautiful sandy beaches, lagoons and swamps, and patches of rain forest line the coast.
Inland, a vast plains area stretches over about three-fourths of Kenya.
Its extremely dry climate and generally poor soil support only scattered plant life.
But a highland in the southwest receives enough rainfall and has enough fertile soil to support extensive farming.
This wildlife—which includes elephants, giraffes, lions, rhinoceroses, and zebras—attracts thousands of tourists to Kenya each year.
Most of Kenya's people live in rural areas and farm the land and raise livestock for a living.
But each year, many rural people move to Kenya‘ss cities and towns, which are growing rapidly.
Nairobi is Kenya's capiStephen K Commins, the contributor of this article, is Director of Policy and Planning for World Vision International, a nondenominational Christian humanitarian agency that provides food, medicine, and economic assistance to less developed countries.
The flag's black stripe represents the Kenyan people, the red stripe their struggle for independence, and the green stripe agriculture.
Mombasa, which lies on the coast, is its second largest city and chief port.
Britain ruled Kenya from 1895 until it became an independent nation in 1963.
During this period, the British influenced both the economic and cultural life of Kenya.
Since independence, the leaders of Kenya have emphasized the African heritage of the nation.
Its Constitution, adopted in 1963, grants the people such rights as freedom of speech and religion.
Kenya is headed by a president who is assisted by about 20 Cabinet ministers.
The president appoints 12 Assembly members and selects the vice president and the other Cabinet ministers.
Cabinet members are normally selected from among the members of the Assembly.
Candidates for the presidency must run for a seat in the National Assembly at the same time as they run for the office of president.
Kenya is divided into seven provinces and the district of Nairobi for purposes of local government.
A commissioner, who is responsible to the president, heads each province and district of Kenya.
A city commission carries out the operations of the government of the Nairobi district.
Councils help govern rural counties and cities and towns within Kenya's districts.
From 1982 to 1991, only one political party— the Kenya African National Union —was allowed The Kenyan countryside is the home of many kinds of wild animals.
The zebras shown here are feeding on grass near the country’s southern border.
Majestic Kilimanjaro, Africa's tallest mountain, rises above clouds in Tanzania, across the border.
Therefore, the candidates who won the party's primary elections were certain to be elected in the general elections.
It hears appeals from lower courts and cases involving the constitutionality of laws.
Kenya's lower courts include resident magistrate courts and district magistrate courts.
Armed forces of Kenya include an army, an air force, and a small navy and coastal patrol.
Agricu/ture—bananas, beef, cassava, coffee, corn, pineapples, pyrethrum, sisal, sugar cane, tea, wheat.
Manutacturing—cement, chemicals, light machinery, textiles, processed foods, petroleum products.
Other population groups, in order of size, are Asian Indians; Europeans, chiefly British; and Arabs.
The largest group, the Kikuyu , make up about 20 percent of Kenya's population.
Four other ethnic groups—the Kalenjin, Kamba, Luhya, and Luo—each make up between 10 and 15 percent of the population.
Kenya's ethnic groups are divided by separate languages or dialects, and, in many areas, by differing ways of life.
Differences in economic and social development have sometimes Jed to friction between groups.
But since independence, the Kenyan government has made progress toward overcoming ethnic divisions and giving the people a sense of national unity.
This building in Nairobi stands next to a vacant lot, where boys play soccer.
Most of Kenya's ethnic groups have their own local language or dialect.
However, large numbers of people know Swahili {also called Kiswahili), as well as their local language.
Swahili, Kenya's national language, is widely used for communication between people of different ethnic groups.
Most of Kenya's rural people live on small farm settlements, raising crops and livestock for a living.
Many of these rural farm families must struggle to produce enough food for their own use.
Some of them work as blacksmiths, carpenters, shoemakers, or tailors, or in other trades.
Others work part time on large farm estates—especially coffee and tea plantations—that are owned by wealthy landowners.
About 3 percent of Kenya's people are nomads who raise livestock for a living.
These people move from place to place in search of grazing land and water for their animals.
They rely on their animals for food, and they judge a person's wealth by the number of animals owned.
These tall, slender people are famous for their skill in the use of weapons and their strongly independent ways.
Although they must work hard to make a living, most rural Kenyans find time for regular social visits with their neighbors.
Most of the country’s urban people work in stores, factories, or business or government offices.
Kenyans who move to cities and large towns find they must adjust to the fast pace, regular work schedules, and impersonal relations that are typical of those urban areas.
But most urban Kenyans keep close ties with their rural friends and relatives through regular visits and letters.
Many Kenyan families have six or more children, and so the C oe. > ‘en GF 2 © Robert Frerck Rural settlements with thatch-roofed buildings dot Kenya’s countryside.
In addition, almost all women of Kenya's farm families take part in the planting and harvesting of crops.
The Kenyan government recognizes the equality of men and women, and it encourages women to become educated and achieve high-paying jobs.
But the vast majority are too busy with child care and farm work to advance to high positions.
Kenya's Arabs, Europeans, and Indians live chiefly along the coast and in Nairobi.
Most rural Kenyans live in small houses with thatched roofs, walls made of mud or bundles of branches, and dirt floors.
In the cities, however, these kinds of houses are crowded together in slum areas.
These dwellings range in style from simple, inexpensive units for working-class people to expensive, large houses and apartment buildings for the wealthy.
Some rural Kenyans, especially nomads, wrap a one-piece cloth around their bodies for clothing.
Kenyans often grind corn into a porridge and mix it with other vegetables to make stew.
City people attend movie theaters, and mobile motion-picture units bring films to rural areas on a regular schedule.
Children and adults throughout the country play the game for fun, and soccer matches between organized teams draw large crowds.
About two-thirds of the Christians are Protestants, and about one-third are Roman Catholics.
About 25 per cent of the people practice traditional African religions.
These faiths are based on the belief in one supreme being and many spirits that influence events.
But large numbers of Kenyan parents value education as a key to a better life for their children.
About 80 percent of the children receive at _ least an elementary education.
Since independence, Kenya's government has greatly increased the number of schools in response to demands for educational opportunities by the people.
In addition, groups of private citizens have set up schools in many places that have no government schools.
The students in high schools and all students in harambee schools must pay tuition.
Several private colleges and institutes of higher education also operate in Kenya.
Kenyans have created highly artistic dances that are performed during such ceremonies as birth celebrations, marriages, and funerals.
Such traditional dances are also part of national holiday celebrations, and various ethnic groups compete with one another in traditional dance contests.
These dancers, like many other Maasai people, wrap a one-piece cloth around their bodies for clothing.
The region has beautiful beaches, lagoons, mangrove swamps, cashew trees, coconut palms, and a few small rain forests.
Much of the soil near the coast is fertile enough for farming, especially in the south.
Mombasa, Kenya's second largest city and its chief port, lies along the coast.
The plains stretch inland from the coastal area and cover about three-fourths of Kenya.
The plains form a series of plateaus, rising from near sea level at the coast to about 4,000 feet inland.
A large northern region is desertlike, receiving less than 10 inches (25 centimeters) of rain a year.
Average temperatures vary with altitude, ranging from about 80 °F at low levels to about 60 °F at the highest levels.
Groups of nomads roam the region in search of grazing land and water for their livestock.
The soil and a good climate for agriculture make the highland Kenya's chief farming region.
The Great Rift Valley divides the highland into eastern and western sections.
Its fertile soil and good climate make it Kenya's chief farming region.
This man is working on a tea plantation in the highland. through much of eastern Africa from north to south, has some of the continent's most fertile soil.
Lake Victoria, Africa’s largest lake, lies at the western end of Kenya.
Most of the lake, known as Victoria Nyanza in Kenya, is within Tanzania and Uganda.
The lake covers 26,828 square miles , of which about 1,460 square miles fall within Kenya.
The country’s plains and—to a lesser extent—its highland are the home of large numbers of fascinating animals.
Antelope, buffaloes, cheetahs, elephants, giraffes, leopards, lions, rhinoceroses, and zebras roam open spaces.
Numerous large birds, such as eagles, ostriches, and storks, and dozens of species of small, brightly colored birds also live in Kenya.
Through the years, people have killed large numbers of wild animals in Kenya and have endangered some species.
Many of the animals were killed legally by people who had hunting licenses.
But most were victims of poachers . in the mid-1900's, Kenyas government established a number of national parks and game reserves to protect animals from poachers.
In 1977, the government outlawed hunting altogether to protect the animals.
Today, thousands of tourists visit the national parks and game reserves each year to see and photograph the wild animals that live there.
It accounts for about a third of Kenya's economic production and employs more people than any other activity.
Together, manufacturing and the construction industry account for about a fifth of the economic production.
Service industries, including finance, government, tourism, and wholesale and retail trade, account for most of the rest.
Agricultural activity in Kenya is divided about equally between the production of cash crops and subsistence crops.
Coffee and tea are Kenya's chief cash crops and its most important source of income.
Other cash crops include cashews; cotton; pineapples; sugar cane; pyrethrum, which is used to make insecticide; and sisal, used to make fiber.
Other subsistence crops include bananas, beans, cassava, potatoes, sweet potatoes, and wheat.
All the subsistence crops, as well as beef and milk, are also sold on a limited basis.
Most Kenyan farmers own the land they work or rent it from the government.
But Kenya has a number of large farm estates where cash crops—especially coffee and tea—are raised.
However, the use of modern equipment on Kenya's farms has been growing since the 1960's.
Kenya's chief manufactured products include cement, chemicals, household utensils, light machinery, motor vehicles, paper and paper products, and textiles.
A petroleum refinery at Mombasa refines oi] that has been produced in other countries.
Tourism contributes more income to Kenya's economy than any other single economic activity except the production and sale of coffee and tea.
More than 500,000 tourists visit Kenya annually to enjoy its scenic coastal area and, especially, to view and photograph its wildlife on safaris.
The money that is spent by tourists contributes more than $200 million annually to Kenya's economy.
Mining activity centers around the production of soda, fluorite, salt, and gemstones.
Kenya's chief trading partners are Germany, Great Britain, Japan, and the United States.
International a i ns — eee 8 3230s eee airports operate at Mombasa and Nairobi.
The Voice of Kenya, a government-owned network, _ broadcasts radio and television programs in local languages, Swahili, and English.
Three daily newspapers are published in Kenya—two in English and one in Swahili.
Scientists have found some of the earliest-known remains of human beings in the Great Rift Valley of eastern Africa, including parts of Kenya.
Studies conducted by the Leakeys—a family of anthropologists—and others have led scientists to believe that _ people may have first lived in the area about 2 million years ago.
Kenya's location along the Indian Ocean made it a stopping place for many early seafaring peoples, including Greeks, Romans, and Arabs.
They soon gained control of the coastal area, and they traded extensively with the people of Kenya.
In 1498, Vasco da Gama of Portugal reached the Kenyan coast after sailing around the Cape of Good Hope.
The Portuguese took control of the coastal area from the Arabs in the early 1500's.
But the Arabs defeated the Portuguese in the late 1600's and regained control of the area.
The Arabs and Portuguese had little influence over the people of the interior of Kenya.
In 1887, a private British business association leased a part of the Kenya coast that was controlled by the sultan of Zanzibar.
It received a charter © Robert Frerck A motorvehicle assembly plant near Nairobi, above, is one of many factories that have been established in Kenya since the 1960's.
Thousands of tourists visit the country each year to see and photograph these animals. from the British government as the Imperial British East Africa Company in 1888.
In 1901, Britain completed a railroad between Mombasa and Lake Victoria.
Britain encouraged British citizens and other Europeans to settle in Kenya.
Before long, many Europeans had established large farms in the country.
British officials ruled Kenya, and the Africans had no voice in the government.
The British also set up schools that were patterned after those in Britain.
The chief opposition came from Kikuyu people of central Kenya, many of whom lived in poverty under the British.
In 1944, the Kikuyu and other Kenyans formed a political party called the Kenya African Union to organize their opposition.
The movement sought greater unity among Kenya's Africans, and demanded new British policies designed to improve the lives of the Africans.
The British government took military action against the movement in 1952, after members, called nationalists, began committing terrorist acts.
In 1953, Kenyatta was convicted of leading the movement and was jailed in a remote part of Kenya.
More than 13,000 people, mostly nationalists, were killed in the fighting.
In the late 1950's, all of Kenya’s ethnic groups began demanding African rule.
Britain agreed to the demand, and, in February 1961, elections were held to choose Africans for a new parliament.
Kenyatta's political party, the Kenya African National Union , won the elections.
But the party refused to take office unless the British released Kenyatta.
As a result, KANU’s rival party, the Kenya African Democratic Union , formed a government.
In 1964, Kenya became a republic, and Kenyatta’s title was changed to president.
Following independence, Kenya moved rapidly to expand the public school system.
The government also replaced the British colonial economic and cultural systems.
It took over many farms and businesses owned by non-Africans, and sold or rented them to Africans.
Non-Africans who became Kenyan citizens were allowed to keep their property.
At the time of independence, most Kenyans had more loyalty to their ethnic group than to the national government.
Since independence, Kenya's government has made some progress in promoting national pride among the people and reducing disunity.
But President Kenyatta dissolved it in 1969, after accusing many of its leaders of antigovernment activities.
A border dispute led to fighting between Kenya and neighboring Somalia shortly after independence.
Also in 1967, Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda formed the East African Community.
This organization was created to promote trade among the three nations.
It provided for the common administration of such facilities as airports and railways.
However, strained relations among the member nations led to the end of the organization's operations in 1977.
Kenyatta died in August 1978, and Vice President Daniel T arap Moi succeeded him as president.
Although KANU had become Kenya's only political party in the 1960's, others were not banned by law.
But in 1982, Kenya’s leaders changed the Constitution to make KANU the only legal party.
In 1990, demonstrations and riots broke out in Nairobi and other cities in support of a return to the multiparty system.
In 1991, the Constitution was amended to allow for a multiparty system.
Multiparty elections for the president and National Assembly were held in 1992.
Mai won the presidential election, and KANU won the majority of seats in the Assembly.
In 1997, protesters calling for constitutional reforms to reduce the power of the presidency held many demonstrations.
Although Kenya has made much economic progress since independence, it still faces major problems.
Only about a fifth of its land is suitable for farming, and its population is growing at a rapid rate.
The need to find ways to feed the growing population is perhaps the country’s chief challenge.
Since independence, Kenya has greatly increased its industry and tourist trade to lessen its heavy economic reliance on agriculture.
Some of the capital for new industries has been provided by foreign investors.
Some Kenyans object to foreign investments because they believe the investments give outsiders too much influence in their country.
They also object to the emphasis on tourism, because tourism makes Kenya rely on spending by outsiders.
Some Kenyans compare the new economic trends to the colonialism of earlier days.
But others support the trends as ways of improving Kenya's economy and ending the reliance on agriculture.
In 1999, Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda agreed to reestablish the East Atrican Community.
The community, which aims to promote economic and political cooperation, was formally launched in 2001.
Nairobi Lake Turkana Maasai National park Lake Victoria Mau Mau Outline I Government A National government B Local government D Courts E Armed forces C Politics ll.
People A Population C Way of life G Recreation and ethnic D.Housing H Religion groups E Clothing I Education B Languages _ F Food and drink J The arts lll.
Kenyatta, kehn YAH tuh, Jomo, /OH moh (1890?1978), was the first president of Kenya.
He took office in 1964 when the country became a republic, and served until his death.
He was educated by Church of Scotland Kenya Government Information Services Jomo Kenyatta / missionaries.
He denied the charge, but he was imprisoned and then restricted to a remote area of Kenya until 1961.
In 1963, when Kenya gained its independence, Kenyatta became the nation’s first prime minister.
Carl G Rosberg Kepler, Johannes, yvoh HAHN uhs , a German astronomer and mathematician, discovered three laws of planetary motion.
Every planet follows an oval-shaped path, or orbit, around the sun, called an e/lipse.
An imaginary line from the center of the sun to the center of a planet sweeps out the same area in a given time.
The time taken by a planet to make one complete trip around the sun is its period.
The squares of the periods of two planets are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances from the sun.
But he left Graz rather than undergo compulsory conversion to Roman Catholicism.
While he was seeking another post, he formed an association with Tycho Brahe, which shaped the rest of his life.
Brahe, the greatest astronomical observer before the introduction of the telescope, needed an assistant, and Kepler joined him at his observatory in Prague, in what is now the Czech Republic.
After Brahe died, Rudolf II, the Holy Roman emperor, appointed Kepler to be Brahe’s successor as imperial mathematician.
Kepler made his most significant discoveries trying to find an orbit to fit all Brahe’s observations of the planet Mars.
Earlier astronomers thought a planet's orbit was a circle or a combination of circles.
However, Kepler could not find a circular arrangement to agree with Brahe’s observations.
He realized that the orbit could not be circular and resorted to an ellipse in his calculations.
The ellipse worked, and Kepler destroyed a belief that was more than 2,000 years old.
Kepler was the first astronomer to openly uphold the theories of the Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus.
Keratin, KEHR uh tihn, is a tough, insoluble protein found in the outer layer of the skin of human beings and many other animals.
The keratin in these cells makes the skin tough and almost completely waterproof.
In places where the skin is exposed to much rubbing and pressure—such as parts of the hands and feet—the number of cells containing keratin increases and a callus develops.
Cells that contain keratin are constantly being shed and replaced by new ones.
The condition known as dandruff results when the scalp sheds such cells.
In animals, such growths as horns, hoofs, claws, feathers, and scales consist mainly of keratin.
Keratin helps make these structures stronger and better suited to protect the body from the environment.
He gained fame as a lawyer defending people whom the czarist government had accused of revolutionary activities.
After the revolution that overthrew the czar in March 1917 , Kerensky was the only Socialist member of the first provisional government.
He became minister of justice, then minister of war, and finally prime minister.
Kerensky fled Russia, and he settled in the United States in the 1940's.
Kern, Jerome , an American composer, wrote the music for many musical comedies and motion pictures.
They were written for small casts and orchestras and had modern, everyday settings.
They introduced a realistic style into musicals, in contrast to the fantasy of the operettas that were popular at the time.
Kern's greatest success was Show Boat , for which Oscar Hammerstein II wrote the lyrics.
Show Boat was one of the first musicals in which the songs and dances were integrated into the plot.
Kern, John Worth , was the Democratic candidate for vice president of the United States in 1908.
He and presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan lost to Republicans William Howard Taft and James S Sherman.
Robert W Cherny Kerosene is an important petroleum product, used chiefly as fuel.
At one time, kerosene lamps were the chief source of artificial lighting.
Kerosene supplies lighting and cooking fuel for people far from sources of electric power.
Kerosene operates the electric generators that charge storage batteries on farms and in small villages.
Kerosene is a mixture of hydrocarbons, compounds containing the elements hydrogen and carbon.
Weedkillers and insecticides usually contain kerosene with a high aromatic hydrocarbon content.
But in kerosene used for lighting, a lower content is desirable because aromatic hydrocarbons provide a poor flame and much smoke.
Refiners then treat the kerosene to remove such impurities as sulfur compounds and some aromatic hydrocarbons.
Refiners use liquid sulfur dioxide or other solvents to dissolve impurities.
Refiners may also treat kerosene with hydrogen at high pressure to remove aromatic hydrocarbons.
Abraham Gesner, a Canadian doctor and geologist, patented a distilling process for refining oil in 1854.
He derived the name kerosene from the Greek word keros, which means wax.
Kerouac, KEHR oo Ak, Jack , was an American author and a leader of the beat movement of the 1950's and 1960's.
Most of the beats were young people who reacted against what they felt were the commercialism and conventional quality of American life.
Many describe his wanderings throughout the United States, Mexico, and Europe.
Like the works of other beat writers, Kerouac’ novels emphasized spiritual liberation through sex, drugs, and the Asian religion called Zen.
Kerouac’s most famous novel is On the Road , an account of several beat characters who travel across the United States seeking personal fulfillment.
By the mid-1950's, Kerouac had become a celebrity as a spokesman for the beat movement.
On its head it has a thick tuft, or forelock, which is usually combed between its eyes.
Critically reviewed by the American Kennel Club Kestrel, KEHS truhl, is the name of 13 species of small, brightly colored birds in the falcon fainily.
It is sometimes called the American sparrow hawk but is not a true hawk.
The /esser kestre/is found around the Mediterranean Sea and in central Europe.
The male American kestrel has a reddish-brown tail and grayishblue wings.
The male common kestrel has a gray tail, a reddish-brown inner wing, and a dark outer wing.
The male lesser kestrel has a gray tail, a grayish-blue inner wing, and a dark outer wing.
Most _ species are called windhovers because they fover (stay _in one place) in the air while they hunt.
They face into the wind and beat their wings while watching the _ ground for prey.
The American kestrel also feeds on mice, but it eats mostly insects when they are available.
In Europe and North and South America, kestrels sometimes nest in cities, usually on top of church towers or other tall structures.
Ketchikan, KEHCH uh kan , is often called Alaska’s First City or Gateway.
It is so called because it is _ the first city most tourists reach when they travel north by sea to Alaska.
Tourists visit Misty Fiords National Monument, near the city, and view totem poles in the area.
White settlers established Ketchikan as a permanent _ settlement in 1884.
The town grew in importance during the late 1890's as a supply base and port for miners during the gold rush to the Klondike of northwestern Canada.
In the 1930's, Ketchikan became the world’s leading producer of canned salmon, but it now has only a few canneries.
Ketchup is made from tomatoes, vinegar, sugar, salt, and various spices.
The United States Food and Drug Administration has established a “Standard of Identity” for ketchup.
Jane Ann Raymond Bowers Kettering, Charles Franklin , was an American engineer and inventor.
His first inventive position was with the National Cash Register Company in Dayton, Ohio.
He invented several accounting machines but resigned to work on an idea for an automobile ignition system.
The success of the resulting invention, the selfstarter, enabled him to organize the Charles F Kettering Laboratories.
The organization was made part of the General Motors Corporation in 1916 and soon became one of the most successful industrial research laboratories in the United States.
In 1947, he resigned to become a research consultant for General Motors.
During World War II , he was a military adviser and chairman of the National Inventors Council.
Key is a musical term used to tell the tonal system in which a musical composition is written.
The key includes all of the tones of a particular scale and all of the chords made from those tones.
The first note of a scale is called the keynote, or tonic, and the key gets its name from that first note.
The key of C, for example, has as its keynote C, which is the first note of the C scale.
The term keyalso means the small finger piece that opens and closes the sound holes on wind instruments.
Thomas W Tunks Key, Francis Scott , was a well-known Washington lawyer and amateur verse writer.
He became famous for writing the words of “The StarSpangled Banner,’ the national anthem of the United States.
When the British retreated from Washington in the war, they took Key's friend William Beanes with them.
President James Madison gave Key permission to intercede with the British for Beanes’s release.
From this vantage point, he witnessed the British fleet's bombardment of Fort McHenry in Baltimore Harbor throughout the night.
The next morning, he saw that “our flag was still there’ despite the ordeal.
To set it to music, Key borrowed the tune from a popular English drinking song, “To Anacreon in Heaven.
Congress adopted his song, “The Star-Spangled Banner, as the United States national anthem in 1931.
Key was born in Frederick County, Maryland, in an area that is now part of Carroll County.
Key’s law career included both private practice and public service positions.
He was district attorney of the District of Columbia from 1833 to 1841.
Also in 1833, President Andrew Jackson sent Key to settle a Jand dispute with Creek Indians in Alabama.
Key helped found the American Colonization Society, a group that tried to end slavery by sending blacks back to Africa.
Key West, Florida , is the southernmost city in the continental United States.
Before the United States took over Florida in the early 1800's, pirates and people who fished for a living inhabited the Key West area.
Many people from the Florida mainland and the Bahamas went there after 1823 and made fortunes salvaging ships wrecked on the coral reefs.
Key West became important in the 1870's for cigar making, fisheries, and food processing.
In 1912, a railroad, built on trestles over the water, linked Key West to the mainland.
The Overseas Highway replaced the railroad in 1938 and was modernized in the 1980's.
Peter O Muller Keyboard is a set of keys on a typewriter or on an input device used to enter information into a computer.
Most keyboards in English-speaking countries use a layout known as QWERTY, because the letters Q WER, T, and Yappear in succession near the upper left-hand corner of the keyboard.
Christopher Latham Sholes, one of the inventors of the earliest practical typewriter, helped develop this layout.
Four arrow keys, for example, enable the computer user to move an electronic marker called the cursor or insertion point up, down, left, or right on the computer screen.
A few keyboards have a built-in trackball, touch pad, or other device that can be used to control the insertion point.
A computer keyboard also has numerical keys grouped in a keypad to help users enter numbers quickly.
A user can hold down such special keys as command, control, or alt, and then press other keys to command the computer in a number of ways.
Computer users can reprogram the keys on many keyboards to produce other characters or to perform special functions.
Some keyboards include buttons for adjusting the volume of the computer's speaker, for playing an audio compact disc, or for launching programs.
Most computer keyboards have several status lights that indicate certain conditions.
For example, a caps lock light indicates that as letters are typed they will appear as capital letters.
Many ergonomic computer keyboards have key arrangements that are considered to be better-suited to the human hand than the QWERTY layout.
The keys on ergonomic keyboards are often divided into two or three groups, with each group mounted at a different angle to the bottom of the keyboard.
His General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money ranks among the most important books on economics.
It changed economic theory and policy and laid the foundations for modern theories of macroeconomics.
Macroeconomics deals with the economy as a whole, including total production, overall employment, and general price levels.
Keynes maintained that governments should use fiscal policy to stabilize the economy.
He said the overall level of economic activity depends on effective demand—that is, total spending by individuals, businesses, and government.
According to Keynes, major depressions, such as the Great Depression of the 1930's, occur as a result of a drop in effective demand.
He argued that in periods of depression the government should increase its spending, cut taxes, or do both to stimulate the economy. —) Je WORLD BOOK illustration A computer keyboard includes all the keys found on a typewriter, shown here in pale blue, along with other keys or groupings of keys.
On most computer keyboards, the other groupings of keys include function keys along the top row; a number pad at the right; and navigation keys, such as the arrow keys and the Home, End, Page Up, and Page Down keys.
Special keys along the bottom row, such as Alt and Ctrl , can be held down at the same time as other keys to give those keys extra functions.
But Keynes said the actions could lead to higher levels of investment and nongovernment spending and to full employment.
Keynes’s recommendation that government intervene in the economy was contrary to /aissez faire, the economic theory that says government should not interfere in the private market.
But numerous economists, especially those of the monetarist school, have challenged these ideas.
Monetarists question whether Keynesian policies can achieve full employment or stabilize the economy.
In particular, they blame such policies for the stagflation that the United States and other countries experienced in the 1970's.
The book attacks the reparations that the Allies demanded from the defeated Central Powers after World War | ended in 1918.
He became a government adviser in 1940 and a director of the Bank of England in 1941.
It also gathered political and military intelligence about other countries.
Such intelligence often involves a countrys national security, and governments keep much _ of it secret.
The KGB also provided bodyguards for Soviet officials and patrolled the borders.
In other countries, besides gathering intelligence, the KGB conducted various secret operations to aid governments or political organizations friendly to the Soviet Union.
In 1991, the head of the KGB took part with several _ other Communist officials in a failed attempt to take over the Soviet government.
In late 1991, the Soviet Union was replaced by a Com~ monwealth of Independent States.
The KGB developed from the Cheka, a secret-police force established in 1917.
In 1954, it received the name KGB, which stands for the Russian words meaning Committee for State Security.
Stuart D Goldman Khachaturian, «4H chuh TOOR ee uhn, Aram Illich, ah RAHM ihl YEECH , was an important Soviet composer.
His music successfully accommodates folk materials from the Caucasus Mountains region in Europe and Asia with conservative elements in Russian nationalist music of the late 1800's and early 1900's.
Its colorful score accompanies scenes from life in an Armenian village and contains the “Sabre Dance,” his best-known composition.
He also wrote three symphonies, three concertorhapsodies, a piano concerto, a violin concerto, motionpicture scores, and chamber music.
Edward V Williams Khalid ibn al-Walid , KAH /ihd ihb uhn al wah LFED, was an Arab general during the Muslim conquest of Syria and nearby areas in the 600s.
Khalid at first opposed Muhammad, but he later became a Muslim and helped Muhammad take control of the Arabian city of Mecca in 630.
After Muhammad died in 632, some Arabian tribes considered their allegiance to Islam to be ended.
Khalid, who became known as the “Sword of God,’ crushed rebellions among those tribes.
Later, after invading the area that is now Iraq, Khalid crossed the Syrian Desert.
He captured Damascus, then a major outpost of the Byzantine Empire, in 635.
The next year, he defeated the Byzantines and their allies in the Yarmuk River Valley, in what is now Jordan.
Kate Lang Khamenei, kah MAY nee or hah MEE nee, Ali, ah LEE , is the supreme leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Members of lran’s government selected him to succeed Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in this position, called the faqih, following Khomeini’s death in 1989.
He is considered a rigid political and religious leader who is unwilling to compromise on improving relations with Western countries.
Khamenei earned the religious title of ayatollah, the highest that can be held by a Shiite Muslim.
During the 1960's and 1970's, Khamenei became a prominent opponent of the secu/ar government of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.
In 1979, revolutionaries overthrew the shah’s government and replaced it with an Islamic republic.
Khamenei was named to the Revolutionary Council, which governed Iran after the revolution.
As a result, he had much influence in the shaping of the Islamic state.
Rudi Matthee Khan, ka/fn or kan, is the word now used for mister in Afghanistan and other parts of central Asia.
The city’s factories make machinery, tractors, locomotives, and electrical equipment.
It was the capital of Ukraine until 1934, when Kiev became the new capital.
Roman Szporluk Khartoum, Kahr TOOM (pop.6,218; met. area pop. 817,364), is the capital of Sudan.
Places of interest include the governor general's palace, churches, mosques, a zoo, and museums.
Khartoum is a trading and communications center ina 308b Khatami, Mohammad rich cotton-growing area.
Rail lines connect it with other parts of Sudan and with Egypt, and boats carry cargo between the main towns of the Blue and White Nile.
Egyptian leader Muhammad Ali conquered Sudan, and founded Khartoum in the 1820's.
Muhammad Ahmed, a Muslim leader called the Mahdi , destroyed much of the city in 1885 in his revolt against the Egyptians who ruled it.
Khatami, kah TAH mee, Mohammad, moh HAM mad , was elected president of Iran in 1997 and won reelection in 2001.
For example, Khatami supports individual rights and a more open society in Iran, including a free press.
He has also called for closer economic ties between Iran and Western nations.
As president, Khatami has less power than the nation’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who is known as the fagih.
Khatami's views have frequently brought him into conflict with Khamenei and other conservative members of Iran's ruling Islamic clergy.
He studied education, philosophy, and theology at schools in Isfahan, Qom, and Tehran and became an Islamic clergyman.
In 1980 and 1981, he served in the Iranian parliament and as a newspaper editor.
He was minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance from 1982 to 1992, when his tolerant position on freedom of the media led to his dismissal.
He was then appointed to the less important position of head of the National Library.
They are sometimes called Aottentots, but this name has become an insulting term meaning savage or barbarian.
Anthropologists prefer the word Khoikhoi, the people's own name for themselves.
The Khoikhoi once lived in South Africa, but today the only remaining Khoikhoi group, the Nama, live in Namibia.
The traditional language of the Khoikhoi included clicking sounds and was unrelated to other African languages.
The Khoikhoi in South Africa gradually disappeared as a separate people through warfare and intermarriage with other African groups and with the settlers called Boers, most of whom were of Dutch descent.
Khomeini, koh MAY nee or hoh MAY nee, Ruhollah , an Islamic religious leader, was the chief political figure of Iran from 1979 until his death in 1989.
Khomeini made Iran an Islamic Republic and put Islamic laws into effect.
These laws included many restricKenneth J Perkins tions on the activities of the people.
In October 1979, the shah—who had fled from Iran— was admitted to a hospital in the United States.
In November, Iranian revolutionaries took over the United States Embassy in Tehran, Iran.
They held as hostages a group of Americans, most of whom worked for the embassy.
Khomeini supported the revolutionaries, who said they would hold the hostages until the shah was returned to Iran for trial.
During Khomeini's rule, Iran fought a destructive war with neighboring Iraq over territorial and other disagreements.
After nearly eight years of war, the countries reached a cease-fire in 1988.
He was born in Khomein, a town south of Tehran, and changed his last name to Khomeini. [n the 1920's, Khomeini became a teacher of Islamic philosophy and law.
Khomeini earned the title ayato/lah, a Persian word meaning reflection of Allah.
This title is the highest that can be held by a member of the Shiite division of Islam.
Khomeini became the chief figure among the Shiites in Iran in the early 1960's.
Khomeini was exiled in 1964, but he continued to work for the overthrow of the shah.
Khrushchev, KROOSH chehf Nikita Sergeyevich, nth KEE tuh surh GAY uh vihch , was the leader of the Soviet Union from 1958 to 1964.
He tried to raise the Soviet standard of living and greatly expanded his country’s exploration of space.
Khrushchev had little pity for weaker nations and his political enemies.
But he sometimes showed a good-natured humor and the simple tastes of his peasant background.
Khrushchev strongly criticized the cruelty of the Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin, who ruled the Soviet Union mostly by terror from 1929 to 1953.
This policy helped cause a split between the Soviet Union and China and contributed to Khrushchev’ fall from power.
Khrushchev was born on April 17, 1894, in Kalinovka, near Kursk, in southwestern Russia.
In 1918, Nikita joined the Bo/sheviks (later called Communists), who had seized control of Russia in 1917.
By 1939, Khrushchev had become a member of Stalin's top executive group, called the Politburo.
In 1941, during World War Il, Germany invaded the Soviet Union and occupied Ukraine, which was then a republic of the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev helped organize troops to fight the Germans there Wide World Nikita S Khrushchev and headed the effort to get war-torn Ukrainian farms, coal mines, and steel mills back into production.
Nikolai Bulganin succeeded Malenkov as premier of the Soviet Union in 1955.
In February 1956, Khrushchev criticized Stalin for committing mass murder and other crimes against the Soviet people.
This attack began a program to dishonor Stalin that became known as destalinization.
The government destroyed statues and pictures of Stalin and re' named many of the places that had been named for the former dictator.
In 1956, revolts took place against the Communist governments of Poland and Hungary.
On March 27, 1958, Khrushchev replaced Bulganin as premier of the Soviet Union.
But he did not rule by terror, and he reduced the power of the country’s dreaded secret police.
He began programs to increase the production of grain, housing, and such consumer goods as clothes and furniture.
In 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first spacecraft to circle the earth.
In 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to orbit the earth.
Khrushchev's policy in dealing with Western nations was a mixture of both gestures of peace and threats.
His policy of peaceful coexistence with non-Communist countries caused bitter quarrels between the Soviet Union and China.
In 1962, Khrushchev threatened the United States by installing missiles in Cuba.
President John F Kennedy demanded the removal of the missiles, and Khrushchev withdrew them.
Withdrawal of the missiles and the split between the Soviet Union and China disturbed many Soviet leaders.
Further discontent with Khrushchev occurred during the early 1960's, when many of his attempts to raise farm production failed and the rate of industrial growth slowed.
Khrushchev spent his remaining years writing a book of memoirs called Khrushchev Remembers, which was published in English in 1970.
Bulganin, Nikolai A Molotov, Vyacheslav M Communism Politburo Cuban missile crisis Union of Soviet Socialist Malenkov, Georgi M Republics Additional resources Kallen, Stuart A The Khrushchev Era.
His tomb, the Great Pyramid at Giza (Al Jizah), near Cairo, ranked as one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.
Scholars know little about Khufu’s life, in part because his tomb was robbed of its contents during ancient times.
But Khufu established a vast cemetery at Giza, which indicates that he was a powerful ruler and capable organizer.
The tombs of his mother—Hetepheres—and other relatives lie near Khufu’s pyramid.
Khyber Pass, KY buhr, is a famous and strategic mountain pass that links Pakistan and Afghanistan.
The Khyber Pass cuts through the Safed Koh mountains, which are part of the Hindu Kush range.
A narrow asphalt road and an unpaved caravan path run the length of the pass.
The Afridi, a Pashtun tribe, has lived in the region of the pass for hundreds of years.
It lies along the easiest land route through the mountains and deserts that form a barrier between Southwest Asia and South Asia.
Over the centuries, many travelers, traders, and invaders have followed this route.
Many other invaders, including the central Asian leaders Timur in the A.D. 1300's and Babur in the 1500's, also crossed the Khyber on their way into south Asia.
During the 1800's, the pass played an important role in the struggle between the United Kingdom and Russia Leonard H Lesko Khyber Pass Tuskers The Khyber Pass is a strategic mountain pass that links PakAighaniston KHYBER “7, istan and Afghanistan.
It cuts ian area of detaitmop ie through the Safed Koh mounOar tains, which are part of the aX. is x"" Hindu Kush range.
At that time, forces from British India used the pass to enter Afghanistan.
During the Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919}, the Afghan and British armies fought in the pass.
Millions of Afghan refugees fled to Pakistan through the Khyber Pass when Afghanistan was torn by war during the 1980's, 1990's, and early 2000's.
Kibbutz, kih BOOTS , is a form of Jewish community in Israel based on the idea of social and economic equality.
Members of a kibbutz share ownership of all the kibbutzs means of income production, including land and businesses.
In most cases, members employed outside the kibbutz turn over their salaries to the kibbutz.
The kibbutz is responsible for providing education, health care, and housing to individuals and families.
Before the 1980's, all kibbutz members worked for the kibbutz and received goods and services for their labor instead of wages.
When kibbutzim were first established, the adults and children of some kibbutzim lived separately.
Children were raised in children’s houses, where they slept, played, and studied.
Since the 1970's, life has become more family-centered, and children are raised by their parents and live at home.
But in most kibbutzim, the highest authority rests in the general assembly, where each adult kibbutz member gets one vote.
In some kibbutzim, a representative body has replaced the general assembly.
Kibbutz ideals call for involvement in Israeli society and in Jewish communities worldwide.
Kibbutz representatives serve in Israeli political parties, governmental offices, the military, and labor organizations.
Kibbutzim also assign their young members to do community and educational work.
Jewish immigrants from Europe founded the first kibbutz in 1909 in the Jordan River Valley, south of the Sea of Galilee.
Kickapoo Indians are a tribe who lived in the Great Lakes region of the United States before white settlers arrived there.
One of the groups lives near Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and another is in southern Texas and northUriel Leviatan ern Mexico.
Until the 1800's, the Kickapoo inhabited woodland areas and hunted buffalo, deer, and other animals.
The first white people to have contact with the Kickapoo were French explorers, who encountered the tribe in the mid-1600's.
Most Kickapoo fiercely opposed sharing their lands with white settlers.
For this reason, the tribe fought against the colonists during the Revolutionary War in America and against the United States during the War of 1812.
Other tribe members remained in Illinois with a religious leader named Kennekuk, also called the Kickapoo Prophet.
In the 1830's, the United States government moved Kennekuk and his followers to a reservation in present-day Kansas.
Another Kickapoo reservation was established in 1883 in central Oklahoma.
In 1893, the government divided part of the Oklahoma reservation among members of the Kickapoo tribe and sold the rest of the land to white people.
Members of the three Kickapoo groups meet occasionally for tribal ceremonies.
R David Edmunds Kickboxing is a form of martial art in which competitors can use their elbows, feet, hands, knees and shins to deliver blows.
Unlike such martial arts as karate, however, kickboxing is a sport and not necessarily a type of self-defense.
Rules vary, but generally matches last from 3 to 12 rounds, with each round running 2 to 3 minutes.
In a technical knockout, the referee stops the bout if, for example, one fighter cannot defend himself or is seriously cut.
Under full contact rules, fighters may strike only above the waist. /nternational rules also allow kicks to the legs.
Kickboxing originated in Thailand and came to the United States during the late 1960's.
Privateers were commanders of privately owned armed vessels hired by a government to attack enemy ships.
Kidd's birthplace is not known for sure, but it was probably Greenock, Scotland.
As a young man, Kidd became a privateer for England in the West Indies.
On his way, he attacked merchant ships in the Red Sea and captured several on the east coast of India.
England was then at war with France and considered these ships prizes of war.
Most of Kidd's men deserted him when his ship landed in Madagascar, an island east of the African mainland.
There, he discovered that the English government had declared him a pirate.
Kidd claimed he had been forced to commit acts of piracy by his mutinous crew.
Robert C Ritchie Kidnapping is the act of seizing and holding a person against his or her will.
The word kidnap comes from the two slang words kid, or child, and nab, which means to steal, At one time kidnapping referred especially to stealing children.
But the word kidnapping has come to be used also in cases where adults are seized and held.
Fleeing criminals often kidnap one or more people and hold them as /Aostages to reduce the chance of being captured.
Kidnapping for ransom, or reward, became common in the United States during the 1920's and 1930s.
This law makes kidnapping a federal crime if the victim is taken out of the state.
In 1956, Congress changed the law to allow the Federal Bureau of Investigation to work on any kidnap case after 24 hours.
Under federal law, the maximum punishment for kidnapping is life imprisonment.
The two kidneys perform many vital functions, of which the most important is the production of urine.
If the kidneys fail to function, poisons build up in the body, eventually causing death.
The kidneys look like purplish-brown kidney beans and are about the size of an adult's fist.
The right kidney, located under the liver, is a little lower than the left one.
These layers are, in order, the cortex on the outside of the organ, the medulla, and the pelvis.
In the medulla and cortex, the renal artery branches into increasingly smaller arteries.
Each of these arteries ends in a blood filtration unit called a nephron.
Two healthy kidneys contain a total of about Medulla Kidneys Ureters Urinary bladder Uretha Pelvis Renal vein WORLD BOOK illustrations by Mary Ann Olson; Dr.
The urine flows through the ureters into the bladder and eventually leaves the body through the urethra.
In the medulla and cortex, the renal artery divides into increasingly smaller vessels, each of which ends ina filtering unit called a nephron.
Within each nephron, much of the blood’s fluid content filters through the glomerulus into the convoluted tubule.
A nephron consists of a network of tiny blood vessels, the glomerulus, surrounded by Bowman’ capsule, a two-layer membrane that opens into a convoluted tubule.
Pressure forces much of the b/ood plasma (fluid portion of the blood) through the glomerulus and into Bowman's capsule.
The resulting tubular fluid, which contains water and dissolved chemicals, then passes into the convoluted tubule.
The portion of the blood that remains in the glomerulus flows into small vessels called capi/laries, which surround the convoluted tubule.
As the tubular fluid flows through the tubule, substances needed by the body are absorbed by the cells of the tubule wall.
These substances, which include amino acids, glucose, and about 99 percent of the water, then rejoin the blood in the capillaries.
The capillaries return the blood to the heart by way of the renal vein.
Substances not absorbed in the tubule are wastes that the body cannot use.
Other wastes are secreted into the tubular fluid by the tubular cells of the kidney.
These various substances, which include ammonia, urea, uric acid, and excess water, make up urine.
The urine passes from the convoluted tubules into larger collecting tubules and then into the pelvis layer of the kidney.
A tube called the ureter carries urine from each kidney into the urinary bladder.
Urine collects in the bladder until it passes out of the body through another tube, the urethra.
Healthy kidneys produce from 1 to 2 quarts (0.95 to 1. liters) of urine daily.
In addition to producing urine, the kidneys secrete a hormone called erythropoietin, which controls the production of red blood cells.
If one kidney is lost in an accident or by disease, the other may enlarge and do the work of both.
But if both kidneys are damaged or lost, waste materials accumulate in the body, causing death.
Kidney infection, called pye/onephritis, ranks as the most common kidney disease.
Unless itis complicated by blockage of the urinary tract, pyelonephritis rarely leads to kidney failure.
The kidneys also can be damaged by antibodies produced to fight bacteria or viruses elsewhere in the body.
This type of inflammation is called g/omerulonephritis, formerly known as Bright's disease.
Long-term or severe high blood pressure can seriously damage the kidneys, as can diabetes.
The blocked urine can damage the kidneys by exerting pressure upon them, or it may lead to pyelonephritis.
Kidney disorders may also result from birth defects, injuries, or poisoning, or as a side effect of certain medications.
Many people who have lost their kidneys or have suffered kidney damage are kept alive by a dialysis machine.
Patients generally undergo this process, Called hemodialysis, for several hours, three times a week.
Some kidney patients can use ambulatory dialysis, a continuous procedure that does not involve being connected to a machine.
In this process, a container of dialysis solution is emptied into the patient's abdominal cavity through a permanently implanted tube.
The solution remains there for several hours, picking up wastes from the bloodstream.
The patient then drains the used solution and replaces it with a fresh supply.
Other kidney patients have their diseased kidneys replaced with healthy ones in a kidney transplant.
A replacement organ from a close relative is desirable because it closely matches the patient's tissues.
But most replacement organs come from unrelated individuals who have died in accidents or from other causes.
However, modern medicines are usually able to control the rejection process and protect the transplanted kidney.
Bladder Nephritis Elimination Transplant Gout Urea Human body Uremia Kidney stone Urine Kidney stone is a hard object that forms in the kidneys.
Kidney stones range in size from microscopic to about as large as a golf ball.
They occur primarily in men and can cause intense pain if they become stuck in the urinary tract.
Some people who develop kidney stones absorb an unusually high amount of calcium from their diet.
However, some of the calcium may crystallize before it leaves the body, forming a stone.
Most kidney stones pass out of the body with the urine, often accompanied by severe pain.
Doctors also may use a laser ora machine called a /ithotripter to treat kidney stones.
In laser treatment, an optical fiber—a thin thread of glass _ or plastic—is inserted into the ureter until it reaches the stones.
The laser then produces a beam of energy that _ travels through the fiber and breaks the stones into frag_ ments, which are eliminated with the urine.
A lithotripter focuses shock waves on the stones while the patient sits in a water bath.
Kiefer, KEEF uvhr, Anselm, AN sehim a German painter, is one of the most important artists to appear since the end of World War Il in 1945.
He is among a group of painters called neoexpressionists, who try to inject emotional and spiritual content into art.
Kiefer's large-scale paintings reflect the physical and psychological destruction of Germany during World War Il.
Rows drawn in the fields refer to the paths of marching soldiers rather than to plowing.
His art often includes images from German legends, expressing the strength of the German character and faith that Germany will be able to achieve its rebirth.
Many of his paintings contain photographic images and real objects, such as straw, sand, sheets of lead, and copper wires.
He was born on March 8, 1945, in Donaueschingen, near VillingenSchwenningen.
Deborah Leveton See also Painting , Kiel Canal, kee/, is a waterway that provides a short cut for ships sailing between the North Sea and the Baltic Sea.
It leads from Brunsbittelkoog at the mouth of the Elbe River to Holtenau near Kiel, the Baltic seaport after which it was named.
The Kiel Canal was begun by the German government in 1887 and completed in 1895.
Frank Ahnert Kierkegaard, KEER kuh gahrd or KIHR kuh gawr, Soren Aabye, SUR uhn AW boo , a Danish philosopher and religious thinker, is considered one of the founders of existentialism.
He has greatly influenced religious thought, philosophy, and literature.
More specifically, he was interested in the problem of what it means to be a true Christian.
He insisted on the absurdity or logical impossibility of the Christian belief that God, who is infinite and immortal, was born as Jesus Christ, who was finite and mortal.
He argued that God requires us to hold beliefs and perform actions that are ridiculous and immoral by rational standards.
Furthermore, the amount of objective evidence supporting a belief does not make the belief genuine or true.
Rather, true belief is measured by the sincerity and passion of the believer.
Kierkegaard bitterly criticized all attempts to make religion rational.
Kierkegaard became convinced that many people who were officially Christian and who considered them314 Kiev selves Christians did not possess the unconditional faith demanded by Christianity.
He often attacked the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Denmark, saying its membership no longer included any true Christians.
Kierkegaard was born on May 5, 1813, in Copenhagen, where he spent most of his life.
He was usually so busy with his writing that he rarely invited people to his house.
When he was 22, he learned that his father, as a poor youth, had once cursed God and that his father had seduced his mother before marrying her.
In 1840, Kierkegaard became engaged to a 17-year-old girl, Regina Olson, but he broke off the engagement after about a year.
Their affair continued to haunt Kierkegaard throughout his life, and in his writings he frequently attempted to explain and justify his behavior toward her.
In Fear and Trembling, he suggested that he had to sacrifice his beloved Regina for religious reasons, just as Abraham had to sacrifice his beloved Isaac because of God’s command.
The city is the political, economic, and cultural center of the country.
Sophia’s Cathedral and the Golden Gate of Yaroslav the Wise, both completed in 1037, during the Middle Ages.
The Monastery of the Caves, which has a network of catacombs (underground burial tunnels), also dates from the Middle Ages.
Andrew were built during the mid-1700's and are important examples of the architecture of that period.
Kiev is known for its attractive parks and famous main boulevard, Khreshchatyk Street.
The city has a number of colleges, universities, and research institutes.
Its chief products include chemicals, clothing, electronic products, footwear, and machinery.
The city is an important highway and railroad junction, an air transportation hub, and a busy river port.
Kiev was founded by Slavic people, possibly as early as the A.D. 400's.
By the 1000's, Kiev was one of Europe's greatest centers of commerce and culture.
In 1934, Kiev became the capital of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic of the Soviet Union, which had been formed under Russia's leadership in 1922.
From 1941 to 1943, during World War Il, the city was occupied by the German army and was badly damaged.
It ivan Soll © Sovioto Kiev has a hilly central area that includes many historic buildings.
Andrew, rising in the background on the right, dates from the mid-1700’s.
It was built under Russian rule. was rebuilt after the war and grew rapidly.
In 1991, following an upheaval in the Soviet Union, Ukraine and other Soviet republics declared their independence.
Traders from many parts of the country travel to Kigali to sell their goods.
Modern hotels and government and embassy buildings rise above the downtown area.
Through the years, many rural Rwandans have moved to Kigali in search of jobs.
However, employment opportunities and good low-cost housing in the city are limited.
Kigali developed as a trading center for caravans during the early 1900's.
Since then, Kigali has grown from a small administrative and commercial center to a crowded city.
René Lemarchand Kikuyu, kih KOO yoo, are the largest ethnic group in _ Kenya, a nation in East Africa.
The Kikuyu, also known as the Gikuyu, make up about a fifth of the population.
They speak a language called Kikuyu (which Africans call Kikikuyu), or Gikuyu.
Land was owned jointly by the members of groups called mbari, which consisted of related men.
Kikuyu life changed greatly under the influence of Western educational and economic systems.
In the 1950's, the Kikuyu led a movement called Mau Mau, which opposed British rule.
By 1956, when most violence had ended, about 11,500 Kikuyu had been killed.
The British jailed many so-called rebels, including Jomo Kenyatta, a Kikuyu leader.
Thousands of Kikuyu were put in detention camps, and their homes were destroyed.
After Kenya became independent in 1963, Kenyatta was elected prime minister.
Since Kenyatta’s death in 1978, however, the new government has worked to equalize power among the Kikuyu and other groups.
The volcano lies in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park on the eastern slope of a larger volcano, Mauna Loa.
In 1924, the lake sank out of sight and violent steam explosions took place.
Lyndon Wester Kilby, Jack , is one of the two inventors of the microchip, or integrated circuit.
Such chips are widely used in computers and other types of electronic equipment.
He shares credit for the invention with Robert Noyce, who developed a similar chip independently at the same time.
There, he worked to miniaturize electronic components, especially for use in hearing aids.
According to this concept, such circuit elements as resistors, capacitors, and transistors could be included on a single chip, if they were all made of the same semiconductor material.
Kilby developed the first such chip, which contained all of the circuit elements on a narrow sliver of silicon about half an inch long.
Kibo summit measures 19,331 feet high at Uhuru Peak, its highest point.
Kibo’s top is always covered by snow and ice even though it is near the equator.
The other summit, Mawensi, stands 16,890 feet high and has no snow or ice.
Kilimanjaro is a dormant volcano, one of a string of volcanic cones formed at the same time as the rift valleys of East Africa.
Rich soils and heavy rainfall make the slopes of Kilimanjaro good for agriculture.
Farmers channel water from the highlands to the fertile, drier lower slopes.
Killarney was a quiet market town until it became a center of tourism in the 1800's.
Many tourists stay in Killarney while enjoying the magnificent scenery.
One of Kilimanjaro’s summits, called Kibo, is always covered by snow and ice at the top.
Desmond A Gillmor Killdeer is a well-known p/over that ranges from southern Canada to South America.
The bird is about 10 inches (25 centimeters) long, with a grayish-brown back and a white breast marked with two black bands.
When a predator approaches a killdeer’s nest or its young, the bird often tries to distract the intruder by dragging one of its wings as if it were broken.
Killdeers eat many insects harmful to crops and are protected by game laws.
Killer whales have from 40 to 48 teeth, with 10 to 12 teeth on each side of each jaw.
They eat salmon and other fishes, and sometimes attack small dolphins, seals, and baleen whales.
Each pod communicates with its own distinctive set of underwater sounds, called a dia/ect.
The killer whale is found in all the oceans, but especially in cold regions.
It possesses a glossy black back, a white underside, and a white patch near each eye.
Some people have objected to the poem's sentimentality and mixed metaphors, but the poem has remained popular.
Alfred Joyce Kilmer was born on Dec., 1886, in New Brunswick, New Jersey.
He published two other collections of poetry and edited an anthology of Roman Catholic poets.
Kilogram is the base unit of mass in the International System of Units , the modern metric system.
The mass of an object is a measure of its inertia, its resistance to changes in its motion.
A bar of platinum stored at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures in France serves as the SI's standard for a mass equal to exactly 1 kilogram.
In commercial and everyday activities, the term weight is understood to mean mass, and people use the kilogram as a unit of weight.
In science and technology, weightis the gravitational force on an object.
Kilohertz, K/HL uh Hurrs, is a unit used to measure the frequency of many kinds of vibrations and waves, such as radio and sound waves.
The waves sent out by one radio or television station differ in frequency from those transmitted by others.
Thus, a tuner of a radio or TV may be adjusted to receive individual stations.
Kilometer, K/HL uh mee tuhror kuh LAHM uh tuhr, is 1 a Hugh D Young unit of distance in the metric system.
One kilometer equals 1,000 meters, a distance of about five-eighths of a mile.
Richard S Davis Kilowatt, A/HL uh wan, is a unit of power in the metric system of measurement.
All countries use the unit to measure electric power—even the United States, which does not customarily use the metric system.
One watt is the power defined by a current of 1 ampere flowing under an electrical pressure of 1 volt.
Kim I] Sung, kihm ih/l sung , headed the government of North Korea from 1948, when the country was established, until his death in 1994.
Kim led a strict dictatorship, exercising total control over North Korea's armed forces, economy, educational system, and other aspects of society.
In the 1930's and early 1940's, Kim led Korean guerrilla forces against the Japanese in Korea.
In the mid-1980's, Kim's government agreed to allow international inspection of North Korea's nuclear facilities.
In 1994, after Kim's death, North Korea reached an agreement with the United States about these nuclear facilities.
It was the first time the leaders of the two Koreas had met since the peninsula had been divided.
Kim I] Sung had, with Soviet support, established North Korea as a Communist state in 1948, and he was its first leader.
Kim Jong {I was born near Khabarovsk, in southeastern Russia, then part of the Soviet Union.
He gradually emerged as the chief interpreter of the party's principles and beliefs through his control of and support for North Korea’s arts, especially filmmaking.
He used these posts and his father’s support to develop and strengthen his leadership in both the party and the army, paving the way for becoming his father’s successor.
Carter J Eckert Kimberley, K/HM buhr /ee , a city in South Africa, is one of the world’s major diamond centers.
They spend several hours each day with a teacher who helps them learn through playing and other activities.
Kindergarten activities may involve art, music, language arts, science, and social studies.
Kindergarten activities Kindergartens provide activities designed to increase a child's confidence, to encourage learning and creative expression, and to develop the ability to work in groups.
Formal group activities offer organized, shared experiences for all the children in a class.
They also help children learn to adjust their own plans to those of others.
This period gives each child a chance to report interesting experiences to other children.
Taking turns and being quiet while others speak help children develop selfcontrol.
In many kindergartens, each child has a special daily assignment to do for the group.
In most classrooms, children participate in group reading of oversized books that feature illustrated stories, poems, or songs.
These books have an easy-to-read vocabulary and print that is large enough for a group of children to see.
Other group events help children understand numbers with such exercises as counting, measuring, and matching quantities.
Many group activities involve projects in which children explore their schools, neighborhoods, or communities.
Projects might include studying a nearby building under construction or visiting a post office, farm, zoo, or museum.
After the children return to school, they engage in classroom activities that deepen their understanding of their experience.
They may compose stories about their trip, make models of buildings or animals they saw, or dramatize events with puppets.
Other shared activities include a music time in which children sing, dance, or listen as a group.
Many days in© Victoria Beller-Smith from E.R Degginger Kindergarten children often work in small groups under the supervision of their teacher.
The youngsters shown here are listening to their teacher read during a storytelling session.
When the class is not involved in a formal group experience, kindergarten children are free to choose many of their activities.
Children learn to work in their own way and to recognize and appreciate their own abilities and those of others.
Most kindergartens permit children to talk freely and to share ideas and feelings during informal activities.
Kindergarten children differ from one another in their readiness to work in informal groups.
The best kindergartens provide activities and materials that engage and challenge all children.
The room and the equipment The kindergarten room should be big enough for children to move freely and not feel crowded.
A big room also provides an area for activities, such as building or pretending, that require a large space.
Such features as pets or plants make the room attractive and interesting and help children feel at home.
Most kindergartens have child-sized tables, chairs, washbasins, and toilets.
Many kindergarten rooms are on the ground floor of a school so the children can exit quickly in the event of a fire or other disaster.
Equipment in a kindergarten provides opportunities for play and creative expression.
Some equipment helps children develop skill in handling or manipulating materials.
Standard supplies include puzzles and other toys; blocks of different sizes, shapes, and colors; objects that can be arranged according to size or pattern; and alphabet and number games.
Most kindergartens also have miniature houses, cars, dolls, and animals.
Some schools may have a workbench with real tools, where carefully supervised children are taught to sand wood, use a saw, and hammer nails.
Art materials include paints and brushes, easels, fingerpaints, crayons, markers, colored pencils, and clay.
The room may include a center for imagining and pretending that provides clothing, equipment, and childsized models of appliances and furnishings.
Additional centers may resemble familiar areas outside the home, such as a grocery store or office.
Some rooms have a piano, and most have a cassette tape player or compact disc player.
Teachers read stories to the children and show them pictures from the books.
Later, the children may examine the books alone while they recite parts they have memorized during the teacher's presentation.
For many children, such recitation is a first step in learning to read.
Teachers can help make words familiar by writing on the board as they discuss assignments, activities, or events.
Some rooms have computers and software that enables kindergarteners to practice reading and writing.
A kindergarten may have its own outdoor play space with large climbing structures and other equipment.
Youngsters develop their physical skills and coordination by climbing, running, and taking part in other active play.
Kindergarteners also enjoy pretending that play structures are airplanes, cars, or spaceships.
The kindergarten teacher A good kindergarten teacher enjoys working with young children.
Such work requires great patience and the ability to understand children’s concerns and to talk with children on their own level.
Teachers help children meet the challenges of kindergarten by providing many — kinds of support and guidance.
Kindergarteners may need help playing and working in a group, putting on boots and jackets, or developing good health habits.
One of the most important ways in which teachers help kindergarteners is by encouraging independence.
At the same time, teachers help create close ties with children’s homes.
Teachers talk with parents about their child’s development throughout the year.
Sometimes, parents assist the kindergarten teacher by helping with activities in and out of the classroom.
In most states of the United States, kindergarten teachers need a four-year teaching degree.
In most Canadian provinces, they need a threeor four-year degree followed by an additional year leading to certification.
Many states now offer a specialized teaching license that qualifies a person to work with young children in nursery school through third grade.
Friedrich Frobel, the founder off the kindergarten movement, started his first kinder| garten in Blankenburg, Germany, in 1837.
But Frébel invented the term kindergarten, which | means garden of children in German.
Frébel believed that children’s minds and spirits grow naturally in the | proper environment, much as plants grow freely in a garden.
Frébel devoted much of his life to designing methods and materials that would encourage this natur-*_ al growth.
Many of the materials that he developed re__ mained standard kindergarten equipment for years.
Before Frdébel established his kindergarten, the social reformer Robert Owen had set up infant schools at New” Lanark, Scotland, and New Harmony, Indiana.
Owen be° lieved that teaching children good behavior and moral attitudes would help create an ideal society.
Margaretha Meyer Schurz, a student of Frébel’s in Germany, established the first kindergarten in the United States in 1856.
In her Watertown, Wisconsin, home, | she started a German-speaking school for her children and the children of her relatives.
Schurz expanded her kindergarten to include other children of the community and moved the class to a small vacant building.
Elizabeth P Peabody, a teacher and author, started an English-speaking kindergarten in Boston in 1860.
The first public kindergarten in Canada was established in Ontario in 1871.
The first kindergartens served children from both low-income and wealthy homes.
Many early public school kindergartens were privately funded by charities.
These kindergartens tried to provide good experiences for children as young as 3 years old.
Teachers spent almost half their time giving families the types of assistance that social workers today provide.
Such assistance might include advice about child care, health, or housing.
During the 1900's, more and more communities recognized the value of kindergarten programs.
As a result, the kindergarten movement continued to spread to smaller cities, towns, and rural areas.
Teacher-training schools gave increased attention to training kindergarten teachers.
The National Association for the Education of Young Children recommends that classes for 5-year-olds consist of no more than 15 students.
The association is the largest organization in the United States of teachers and directors of preschools, kindergartens, and elementary schools.
Budget limits, however, force many schools to place 25 or more students in each class.
Large classes make it hard for teachers to meet individual students’ needs.
Half the students in a school district attended in the morning, and the other half went to school in the afternoon.
But some communities do not have the resources to provide full-day kindergarten.
Such programs require twice as many teachers, classrooms, and materials as do half-day programs.
Many communities also debate how best to meet the needs of an increasingly diverse group of students.
Many 5-year-olds have some type of preschool education before they reach kindergarten.
Some people therefore feel that kindergarteners are ready for formal instruction in reading, arithmetic, and other subjects.
But such instruction may be premature for students who come to kindergarten with no preschool experience.
Because of immigration, many communities have students from a variety of countries and cultures.
Some of these students do not speak the local language and must learn it when they start school.
Such students would have difficulty understanding formal lessons given in a language they have not yet mastered.
Most experts feel that informal learning provides a better opportunity to meet the needs of all kindergarteners than does formal instruction.
Another debate concerns the best age for students to start kindergarten.
Many public schools determine eligibility for kindergarten by setting a date by which an entering student must reach 5 years of age.
Some parents feel children who are ready should attend kindergarten before they reach 5.
Other families want to postpone enrollment while a child matures physically or intellectually.
Some kindergartens are experimenting with flexible Kindergarten entrance dates and multiage groupings.
Such a grouping might include children ages 4 and 5 in the same classroom.
Kinesics, kih NEE sihks, is the scientific study of the body movements involved in communication, especially as they accompany speech.
These movements include gestures, facial expressions, eye behavior, and posture.
The movements studied by kinesic scientists are commonly called body /anguage or nonverbal behavior.
Kinesics was developed by the American anthropologist Ray L Birdwhistell.
He used slow-motion films of conversations to analyze speakers’ behavior.
He borrowed many terms and techniques from linguistics to identify the basic motions that made up meaningful gestures and other behavior.
In many eastern countries, the king or emperor was once considered to be the representative of a god or a divine family.
When the tribes were converted to Christianity, the king gained prestige.
The church crowned him and supported the idea that he was the source of justice in the realm as the vice regent of God.
However, the king was not all-powerful but was considered bound by his people's customary laws.
In the United Kingdom and other European countries, the monarch possesses little authority.
Coronation Emperor Royal household Crown Primogeniture of the United Divine right of Prince consort Kingdom kings Queen Sovereignty Viceroy King, B B. , is an American blues singer and guitarist.
With his electric guitar named “Lucille,” he developed the urban blues sound.
This style of playing features wide vibrato , loud and ringing notes, and solos filled with piercing feedback.
He has been a major influence on rock music, especially on British musicians who emerged in the 1960's, such as Eric Clapton, Mick Jagger, and John Mayall.
He heard and played the local variety of blues before moving to Memphis, Tennessee, a blues center, when he was 23.
In Memphis, King sang ona local radio station and on Beale Street, the site of many blues clubs.
King, Billie Jean , an American tennis star, became one of the greatest women players in history.
In 1972, she won the women’s singles title in three of the most important tennis tournaments—the United States Open, the All-England Championships, and the French National Championships.
She also won the United States National Championships in 1967 and was United States Open champion in 1971 and 1974.
King won a total of 20 Wimbledon championships in singles, in women’s doubles, and in mixed doubles, which set a record for that tennis tournament.
She enrolled in the city’s tennis program when she was 11 years old and quickly became one of the top young amateur tennis players in the United States.
King turned professional in 1968, the first year that major tournaments were open to professional tennis players.
She became an important force in making a success of women’s professional tennis.
In 1971, King won 19 tennis tournaments and became the first woman tennis player to earn $100,000 in a single year.
Arthur Ashe King, Coretta Scott , is an African American supporter of civil rights and the widow of civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr.
The center includes her husband's burial place near the church where King was pastor.
She graduated from Antioch College and studied concert singing at the New England Conservatory of Music.
King helped her husband in his civil rights work by giving speeches and recitals.
Much of King’s music was written for, or heavily influenced by, the circus.
His Barnum and Bailey's Favorite became the theme song of that circus and ranks as one of the most popular marches ever written.
Frank Tirro AP/Wide World Coretta Scott King Karl Lawrence King was born in Paintersville, Ohio, near Xenia.
He grew up in Canton, Cleveland, and Xenia, Ohio, and studied music with the local bandmaster in Canton.
For a time, he worked in a printer's shop during the day and composed at night.
King became a professional baritone player about 1910 and played with several circus bands.
In 1920, he began a 50-year career as director of the Fort Dodge Municipal Band.
Stewart L Ross King, Martin Luther, Jr. , an African American Baptist minister, was the main leader of the civil rights movement in the United States during the 1950's and 1960's.
He had a magnificent speaking ability, which enabled him to effectively express the demands of African Americans for social justice.
King’s eloquent pleas won the support of millions of people—blacks and whites—and made him internationally famous.
He won the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize for leading nonviolent civil rights demonstrations.
In spite of King’s stress on nonviolence, he often became the target of violence.
White racists threw rocks at him in Chicago and bombed his home in Montgomery, Alabama.
Finally, violence ended King’s life at the age of 39, when an assassin shot and killed him.
Some historians view King’s death as the end of the civil rights era that began in the mid-1950’s.
Under his leadership, the civil rights movement won wide support among whites, and laws that had barred integration in the Southern States were abolished.
King became only the second American whose birthday is observed as a national holiday.
He was the second oldest child of Alberta Williams King and Martin Luther King.
In high school, Martin did so well that he skipped both the 9th and 12th grades.
King became an admirer of Benjamin E Mays, Morehouse’s president and a well-known scholar of black religion.
He entered Crozer Theological Seminary in Chester, Pennsylvania, to earn a divinity degree.
In 1954, King became pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama.
King’s civil rights activities began with a protest of Montgomery's segregated bus system in 1955.
That year, a black passenger AP/Wide World King began his civil rights activities by leading a protest against the segregated bus system of Montgomery, Ala., in 1955.
King, center, insisted that the protest be nonviolent. named Rosa Parks was arrested for disobeying a city law requiring that blacks give up their seats on buses when white people wanted to sit in their seats or in the same row.
The leaders formed an organization to run the boycott, and asked King to serve as president.
Terrorists bombed King’s home, but King continued to insist on nonviolent protests.
In 1956, the United States Supreme Court ordered Montgomery to provide equal, integrated seating on public buses.
The boycott's King, Martin Luther, Jr. success won King national fame and identified him as a symbol of Southern blacks’ new efforts to fight racial injustice.
With other black ministers, King founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1957 to expand the nonviolent struggle against racism and discrimination.
At the time, widespread segregation existed throughout the South in public schools, and in transportation, recreation, and such public facilities as hotels and restaurants.
Many states also used various methods to deprive blacks of their voting rights.
In 1960, King moved from Montgomery to Atlanta to devote more effort to SCLC’s work.
In 1960, black college students across the South began sitting at lunch counters and entering other facilities that refused to serve blacks.
Civil rights protests expanded further, including major demonstrations in Albany, Ga.
Also in the early 1960's, King became increasingly unhappy that President John F Kennedy was doing little to advance civil rights.
Early in 1963, King and his SCLC associates launched massive demonstrations to protest racial discrimination in Birmingham, Ala., one of the South's most segregated cities.
Police used dogs and fire hoses to drive back peaceful protesters, including children.
Heavy news coverage of the violence produced a national outcry against segregation.
Soon afterward, Kennedy proposed a wideranging civil rights bill to Congress.
The event, called the March on Washington, was intended to highlight African-American unemployment and to urge Congress to pass Kennedy's bill.
On Aug., 1963, over 200,000 Americans, including many whites, gathered at the Lincoln Memorial in the capital.
The high point of the rally, King’s stirring ‘| Have a Dream” speech, eloquently defined the moral basis of the civil rights movement.
The movement won a major victory in 1964, when Congress passed the civil rights bill that Kennedy and his successor, President Lyndon B Johnson, had recommended.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited racial discrimination in public places and called for equal opEbony Magazine King led the 1963 March on Washington from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Memorial.
His stirring plea for racial equality and justice was a high point of the massive demonstration.
With this faith we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood.
This will be the day when all of God’s children will be able to sing with new meaning, “My country ‘tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee | sing.
Reprinted by arrangement with The Heirs to the Estate of Martin Luther King, Jr., c/o Writers House, Inc. as agent for the proprietor. portunity in employment and education.
The demonstrators protested against the efforts of white officials there to deny most black citizens the chance to register and vote.
Several hundred protesters attempted to march from Selma to Montgomery, the state capital, but police officers used tear gas and clubs to break up the group.
The bloody attack, broadcast nationwide on television news shows, shocked the public.
King immediately announced another attempt to march from Selma to Montgomery.
Johnson went before Congress to request a bill that would eliminate all barriers to Southern blacks’ right to vote.
By 1965, King had come to believe that civil rights leaders should pay more attention to the economic problems of blacks.
In 1966, he helped begin a major civil rights campaign in Chicago, his first big effort outside the South.
Leaders of the campaign tried to organize black inner-city residents who suffered from unemployment, bad housing, and poor schools.
The leaders also protested against real estate practices that kept blacks from living in many neighborhoods and suburbs.
King believed such practices played a major role in trapping poor blacks in urban ghettos.
King and the local leaders also organized marches through white neighborhoods.
But angry white people in these segregated communities threw bottles and rocks at the demonstrators.
Soon afterward, Chicago officials promised to encourage fair housing practices in the city if King would stop the protests.
That phrase troubled King and many white supporters of racial equality.
Many people thought the religious, nonviolent emphasis of the civil rights movement was changing.
King repeated his commitment to nonviolence, but disputes among civil rights groups over ‘Black Power’ suggested that King no longer spoke for the whole movement.
In 1967, King became more critical of American society than ever before.
He said that true social justice would require a redistribution of wealth from the rich to the —_ United Press Int.
King was arrested and jailed several times while protesting against injustice and discrimination.
Thus, King began to plan a Poor People’s Campaign that would unite poor people of all races ina struggle for economic opportunity.
The campaign would demand a federal guaranteed annual income for poor people, as well as other major antipoverty laws.
While organizing the Poor People's Campaign, King went to Memphis to support a black garbage workers strike.
James Earl Ray, a white escaped convict, pleaded guilty to the crime in March 1969 and was sentenced to 99 years in prison.
A few months later, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1968, which prohibited racial discrimination in the sale and rental of most housing in the nation.
Years after King’s death, some people still doubted that Ray had acted alone.
In 1978, a special committee of the United States House of Representatives reported the “likelihood’ that Ray was aided by others.
In 1974, Kings mother was shot and killed while playing the organ in Ebenezer Baptist Church.
The gunman, a member of a small religious cult that opposed black Christian ministers, received the death penalty.
In 1980, an area including King’s birthplace, church, and burial place became the Martin Luther King, Jr., National Historic Site.
In 1991, the National Civil Rights Museum opened at the site of King’s assassination in Memphis.
King’s son Martin Luther King II] was elected president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1997.
King, Rufus , was an American statesman and a signer of the Constitution of the United States.
He was noted for his early opposition to the expansion of slavery into the nation’s western territories.
While representing Massachusetts in the Congress of the Confederation from 1784 to 1786, King proposed that slavery be prohibited in the Northwest Territory.
In 1819 and 1820, King opposed admitting Missouri to the Union as a slave state.
King was born on March 24, 1755, in Scarboro, Maine, then part of Massachusetts.
King represented Massachusetts at the Constitutional Convention in 1787 and helped gain the state's approval of the Constitution.
He was ambassador to the United Kingdom from 1796 to 1803 and in 1825 and 1826.
He was the Federalist candidate for vice president in 1804 and 1808 and for president in 1816. james C Curtis King, Stephen , is a popular American author of horror fiction.
He skillfully introduces horrifying or suspenseful events into a recognizable everyday background.
Many of his stories show his ability to get inside the minds of children and adolescents.
For example, vampires appear in Sa/em’s Lot, and The Shining is set in a haunted hotel.
The Stand (1978, revised 1990) describes a battle between good and evil that takes place after a plague has wiped out most human beings.
Several of his supernatural novels are set in the small fictional Maine towns of Castle Rock and Derry.
Several King novels explore realistic suspense instead of the supernatural.
He was a teacher until the success of his first novel, Carrie , permitted him to write fulltime.
King, Thomas Starr , was a Unitarian minister, humanitarian, and orator.
His speeches played an important part in the state’s decision not to secede from the Union.
He raised money for the United States Sanitary Commission, which aided wounded soldiers and their families.
Mackenzie King Prime Minister of Canada 1921-1926 1926-1930 1935-1948 King 1921-1926 1920-1921 King, William Lyon Mackenzie , served as prime minister of Canada three times between 1921 and 1948.
He held the office a total of 21 years, longer than any other prime minister of Canada.
King guided Canada to independence and equality with other members of the Commonwealth of Nations.
He helped organize Canada’s Department of Labour in 1900 and became the first full-time minister of labour in 1909.
During his terms as prime minister, King also served as secretary of state for external affairs, except for his last two years in office.
His main goals in international relations were independence for Canada and improved cooperation with the governments of Britain and the United States.
Short, stocky, and shy, King did not look like the great statesman he was.
He wanted to be popular, but lacked the personality to inspire public affection.
Many Canadians thought King was stuffy and old-fashioned, but they greatly respected his political talents.
Mackenzie King was born in Berlin (now Kitchener), Ont., on Dec., 1874.
He was the first son, and the second of the four children, of John King and Isabel Grace Mackenzie King.
King was proud of his background and remained a loyal Presbyterian all his life.
He had deep affection for his brother, Macdougall, and his two sisters, Isabel and Janet.
When King was about 8 years old, the family moved to a large house called Woodside on the outskirts of town.
Both parents had a strong interest in current events and discussed them in front of the children.
King claimed he inherited devotion to the British monarch from one grandfather and devotion to the Canadian people from the other.
She was the dominant personality in the household and gave her son the ambition to clear Mackenzie's reputation.
His pals nicknamed him ‘Rex,’ and a few close friends called him that throughout his life.
During his senior year, King was one of the leaders in a student strike against school officials.
The students refused to attend classes partly to protest the dismissal of a professor who had criticized the administration.
While in college, King could not decide whether to become a lawyer or a minister.
King met Jane Ad_ dams, founder of Chicago's Hull House, when she visited Toronto in 1895.
After his graduation in 1895, Mackenzie King worked as a newspaper reporter for a year.
Jane Addams invited him to live at Hull House, and King eagerly accepted.
But he soon found the combination of school and social work too burdensome.
After he returned to Toronto in 1897, he investigated labor conditions there.
He indignantly reported this to William Mulock, the postmaster general of Canada.
King’s suggestions Jed to the Fair Wages Resolution passed by Parliament.
King went to London, where he again lived in a settlement house and continued to study social and Jabor problems.
The Canadian government wanted King to be the editor of its new Labour Gazette.
Postmaster General Mulock was given the added title of minister of labour.
To some extent, Canada's industrial relations laws are still based on the Industrial Disputes Investigation Act of 1907, which King drew up.
He won the Liberal nomination in the North Waterloo, Ont., district where he was born, then won the election.
In 1909, Liberal Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier appointed King the first full-time minister of labour.
The Liberal government was defeated in 1911, and King also lost his seat in Parliament.
In 1912, King organized the Liberal Information Office and became editor of the party publication, the Canadian Liberal Monthly.
King’s brother, a doctor, developed tuberculosis and had to give up his practice.
The Rockefeller Foundation asked him to direct its Department of Industrial Relations.
The book, which urges establishment of a welfare state, strengthened King’s reputation as a progressive thinker.
His brother Macdougall fought his illness bravely, and wrote two books before his death in 1922.
King was one of the few English-speaking Liberal former government ministers who stayed loyal to Laurier on the conscription issue, though he was troubled by it.
But King was defeated, as were most of Laurier’s other supporters outside Quebec.
King immediately set to work to reunite the English-speaking and French-speaking members of the party.
He was elected to Parliament from Prince County, P.E.I., shortly after his election as Liberal leader.
King became prime minister of Canada on Dec., 1921, succeeding Arthur Meighen, a Conservative.
Mackenzie important events during King's administrations The Balfour Report, adopted in 1926, declared that Britain and self-governing dominions of the British Commonwealth had equal status.
Canada declared war on Germany in 1939, the first time it declared war independently.
Parliament authorized a draft in 1942, and Canada began drafting men for active duty in 1944. the first time since 1913.
The government-owned Canadian National Railways, which had been losing money, showed a profit.
King's outstanding first-term achievement was the enhancement of Canadian self-government in international relations.
In 1922, he refused to support Great Britain in a possible war with Turkey.
In 1923, Canada for the first time signed a treaty alone with another country.
At the Imperial Conference of 1923, King successfully opposed British efforts to have a common foreign policy for the entire British Empire.
In the general election of 1925, the Liberals lost ground while the Conservatives gained.
But Parliament gave his government a vote of confidence, and he remained WORLD BOOK illustrations by Tak Murakami The first Canadian welfare program, old age pensions, was established in 1927.
In February 1926, King ran for Parliament in a by-election in Prince Albert, Sask., and won.
By June 1926, King saw that his government faced defeat in the House of Commons.
He advised Governor General Julian Byng to dissolve Parliament and call an election.
Second term as prime minister Mackenzie King again became prime minister on Sept., 1926.
He continued his fight for full Canadian self-government at the Imperial Conference of 1926.
The conference adopted a report which stated that the United Kingdom and all the self-governing dominions of the Commonwealth had equal status.
The first Canadian federal welfare program began in 1927 with the establishment of old-age pensions.
King also favored unemployment insurance but could not persuade the provinces to support it until 1940.
Unemployment became a major problem that Canada was unprepared to fight.
Unemployment became the main issue in the 1930 election, and King’s government was defeated.
The Conservatives, under Prime Minister Richard B Bennett, led Canada for the next five years.
In the election that year, the people probably voted more against Bennett than for King.
The Liberals won with the largest majority in Canadian history to that time.
Third term as prime minister On Oct., 1935, King began his greatest period as prime minister.
The government promoted freer trade to increase employment, and it negotiated major trade agreements with the United States and the United Kingdom.
King appointed a Royal Commission to find ways of rebuilding the finances of the provinces.
He reasoned that if the British became involved in it, English-speaking Canadians would insist on joining them, while French-speaking Canadians would prefer to stay out of the war.
King tried to follow a course to ensure Canadian unity if the nation went to war.
He was convinced that the decision must be made by Canadians in their own Parliament.
When World War II did come, Parliament almost unanimously supported the governments decision to participate.
Canada declared war on Germany on Sept., 1939; against Italy on June 10, 1940; and on Japan on Dec., 1941.
To maintain harmony between English Canadians and French Canadians, King side-stepped the issue as long as possible.
In 1942, Canadians voted to release the government from its pledges not to draft soldiers for service overseas.
Parliament authorized conscription that same year, but King did not put it into effect.
By late 1944, the Canadian units overseas, made up entirely of volunteers, badly needed replacements.
King then agreed to send draftees overseas, and Parliament supported him.
The policy succeeded because of Kings determination to maintain harmony between English Canadians and French Canadians, and the cooperation of most French-speaking representatives in the Canadian government.
In the 1945 election, King led the Liberals to victory by a narrow margin.
The victory was a tribute to King’s success in managing the war, helping increase Canadian industrialization, and preserving Canadian unity during wartime.
Welfare legislation and increased government spending stimulated the economy.
He also helped start secret negotiations that led to the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty in 1949.
King’s government also took steps toward making Newfoundland a province of Canada.
However, he remained a member of the Canadian Parliament until April 1949.
King spent the last year of his life at Kingsmere, his country home in the Gatineau Hills near Ottawa.
In his will, King left Kingsmere and his Ottawa home, Laurier House, to Canada.
King also believed in a spiritual world and often tried to speak with the dead, particularly his mother, through séances.
By special act of Congress, he was permitted to take his oath of inauguration before an American consul in Havana, Cuba, where he was trying to recover from the illness.
He died six weeks later, without ever performing the duties of vice president.
King served in the United States House of Representatives from 1811 to 1816 as a Democrat from North Carolina, and in the United States Senate as a Democrat from Alabama from 1819 to 1844, and from 1848 to 1852.
King-Horn is the most important character in the first known English romance in verse, also named KingHorn.
The poem describes the adventures of King-Horn, a child of the king and queen of the Isle of Man.
Bradford Washburn, an explorer, discovered it in 1935, King Philip’s War.
King Ranch is one of the largest privately owned ranches in the United States.
The huge ranch, which raises cattle and quarter horses, covers about 825,000 acres in southern Texas.
Kingbird, also called bee martin, is a type of bird in the flycatcher family.
The eastern kingbird is helpful to farmers because it eats so many insects.
It makes its home in all parts of the United States except the Southwest, and also lives in southern Canada.
The eastern kingbird has white-tipped tail feathers and white underparts.
This bird has a patch of bright orange-red feathers on top of its black head.
The kingbird gets its name from the way it attacks and drives off other birds, especially crows and hawks.
William Rufus King WORLD BOOK illustration by John Rignall, Linden Artists Ltd.
It aids farmers by feeding on insects that are harmful to crops. tacks them furiously in the air and makes them change course.
The kingbird does this mainly during the breeding season, to protect its nest, mate, and young.
However, scientists have found that the kingbird actually eats very few bees.
All living organisms belong to a kingdom, but no organism belongs to more than one.
Scientists group organisms in a kingdom because the organisms share certain basic characteristics.
Scientists do not classify viruses in any kingdom because these microbes are not considered living organisms.
Prokaryotae is made up of bacteria and blue-green algae, also known as cyanobacteria.
Prokaryotes are simple, one-celled organisms that can only be seen with a microscope.
Prokaryote cells lack specialized parts called organelles and thus differ from other living cells.
For example, in all other living cells, genetic material is concentrated in an organelle called the nucleus.
Prokaryote cells have genetic material, but they do not have a nucleus.
Protista consists chiefly of microscopic organisms, such as diatoms and protozoans, that often live in colonies.
All other living things are mu/ticellular—that is, they are made up of many cells.
Unlike the monerans, protists have a well-defined nucleus in their cells.
Many also have specialized body parts that they use to gather food and to move in their environment.
Scientists divide protists into groups based on how these organisms move about.
For example, ciliates move by heating hairlike structures called cilia.
Fungi are multicellular organisms that obtain their food from dead or living organic matter.
Fungi secrete certain proteins called enzymes into the plants, animals, and decaying organisms on which they live.
The enzymes help to break organic molecules into nutrients that the fungus can absorb.
Plantae is made up of such multicellular organisms as flowering plants, grasses, and trees.
However, some flowering plants live on other plants and absorb their food.
Plants are essential to the cycle of nature and provide food for animals and other organisms.
The cells of most animals are organized into tissues that perform special tasks.
The tissues form organs—such as the brain, heart, and stomach—that, in turn, make up organ systems.
These include two important food fishes of the mackerel family and several species of the drum family.
The king mackerel, or kingfish, belongs to the same family as the Spanish mackerel.
Like the Spanish mackerel, it has a sharp, V-shaped tail fin and a bluish back, but it is longer and heavier.
It is usually found around coral reefs, especially near the Florida Keys.
The northern kingfish, southern kingfish, and gulf Theodore J Crovello kingfish are found in shallow coastal waters of the Atlantic.
They are grayish brown above with silvery WORLD BOOK illustration by Joha F Eggert The king mackerel has a sharp, V-shaped tail fin and a bluish back.
This type of kingfish lives in the Atlantic Ocean and is an important food fish.
The world kingfish is also applied to a number of related species of fishes found off Australia, Southeast Asia and India, and California.
The king mackerel has been heavily fished along the Atlantic coast of the United States.
As a result, the government has imposed strict limits on commercial and recreational fishing of this species.
Kingfisher is the name of a large family of birds that have large heads and long, heavy, pointed bills.
The outer and middle toes of these birds are joined together by strong membranes.
The be/ted kingfisher, a water bird, is the only species commonly found in the United States.
Its upper parts and wings are colored deep blue, or bluishgray with white markings.
The underparts are white, and there is a broad collar of white around the neck.
The belted kingfisher may spend long hours sitting ona branch alongside a body of water watching for small fish that swim near the surface.
Then, sometimes hovering for a moment in midair, the bird dives after a fish.
Kingfishers usually seize their food, but they someMary Stouffer, Animals Animals Belted kingfishers nest in burrows in riverbanks or sandbanks.
Kingfishers also eat crayfishes, frogs, tadpoles, salamanders, and insects.
Belted kingfishers burrow in the steep walls of riverbanks or sandbanks.
They dig a tunnel from 4 to 15 feet long with a larger hollow at the end where the birds build a nest of fish bones and scales.
Kinglet is the name of several tiny songbirds found in the Northern Hemisphere.
They are olive-green, with a brightly colored patch on top of the head.
Two species, the WORLD BOOK illustration by Trevor Boyer, Linden Artists Ltd.
The golden-crowned kinglet is one of two species of kinglets that live in North America.
This small bird gets its name from the yellow patch on top of its head. golden-crowned kinglet and the ruby-crowned kinglet live in North America.
Most ruby-crowned kinglets fly to the southern part of the United States or to Central America until spring.
Some kings, such as Solomon, Ahab, Hezekiah, and Josiah, are discussed much more extensively than the other kings.
The books select and interpret events according to the idea that God demanded obedience and loyalty.
Kings Canyon National Park is a scenic wilderness in east-central California.
It has some of the highest peaks of the Sierra Nevada mountains, and some of the country’s oldest and largest giant sequoia trees.
The Grant Grove section of the park has trees that are 2,000 to 3,000 years old.
There, the south and middle forks of the winding Kings River carve out Tehipite Valley Canyon and Kings Canyon.
Park in California has snow-capped mountains dotted with ancient sequoia trees.
Visitors can hike along trails or fish in the rivers that run through the canyons. can be reached only by trail.
It is recognized as the oldest English-speaking university in the Commonwealth of Nations.
King’s divinity program is taught by the Atlantic School of Theology, the recognized School of Divinity for the Anglican Dioceses of Nova Scotia and Fredericton.
All degrees, except those from King’s School of Journalism and the Atlantic School of Theology, are granted through Dalhousie.
He preached “Christian Socialism, a religious and political philosophy that urged the Church of England to take an active part in easing social problems.
Kingsley’s first two novels, A/ton Locke and Yeast, are examples of the Christian Socialism philosophy.
Kingsley believed in developing a strong body along with a pious spirit.
The Water Babies, A Fairy Tale for a Land-Baby , written for his son, is a charming fantasy about a young chimney sweep who escapes from his dismal occupation into a marvelous underwater kingdom.
He became involved in a famous controversy with John Henry Cardinal Newman.
Kingsley wrote a pamphlet that questioned Newman's motives and sincerity.
Collins Kingsley, Mary Henrietta , was a British explorer, traveler, and pioneer social anthropologist.
Her two books on her travels to western Africa, Travels in West Africa and West African Studies , influenced later generations of anthropologists, historians, and policymakers.
She also wrote numerous magazine and newspaper articles and gave many lectures on African matters.
She supported British commercial interests in Africa, but she argued that African cultures should be respected.
She was raised in a middle-class family that believed the proper place for women was in the home caring for the family.
She wrote in favor of this belief, though she lived most of her adult life otherwise.
In 1895, she became the first European woman to climb Mount Cameroon, one of the highest peaks in Africa.
Cora Ann Presley Kingsley, Sidney , was an American dramatist who probed the complex problems of individuals interacting with social conditions.
The Patriots studies the significance of the conflicts between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton.
Detective Story and Darkness at Noon are Kingsley’s most complex studies of the individual conscience.
Frank R Cunningham Kingsnake is any one of a group of snakes, all of which prey on other snakes.
They are somewhat immune to snake venom and do not hesitate to attack and eat rattlesnakes.
Kingsnakes also eat bird and turtle eggs, and rodents and other small animals.
They may be marked with black, brown, white, red, or yellow bands or rings.
The city’s downtown area has many modern office buildings and luxurious hotels.
Kingston serves as the cultural, commercial, and industrial heart of Jamaica.
Principal industries include food processing, oil refining, and the production of cement and other building materials.
Kingston was founded in 1693, after an earthquake destroyed the city of Port Royal.
In the mid1700's, the British rulers of Jamaica declared Kingston a free porta place where ships of other countries could trade.
Kingston has suffered many disasters, including hurricanes in 1880, 1951, 1980, and 1988; a fire in 1882; and an earthquake in 1907.
Today, the sprawling Kingston metropolitan region covers an area larger than many Caribbean islands.
Kingstown’s harbor serves the import and export trade that is the basis of the city's economy.
The Botanic Garden, the oldest such garden in the Americas, dates to 1765.
Carib Indians lived in the Kingstown area, probably as early as the 1300's.
Kinkajou, K/HNG kuh joo, is a member of the raccoon family that can hang from tree branches by its long tail.
The kinkajou has a slim body and grows about 3 feet (91 centimeters) long, including the tail.
It can hang head-downward, with its tail grasping a limb. ly, yellow-brown fur.
They hide in tree holes during the day and feed at night on fruit and insects.
He was 41 years old when he was elected party leader in 1983, and became the youngest leader in the party's history.
He was a member of the party's left wing, which called for increased government ownership of businesses and unilateral nuclear disarmament.
Kinnock was born on March 28, 1942, in the village of Tredegar in southern Wales.
There, he became known for his dramatic style of speechmaking and his left-wing views.
As Labour leader, Kinnock promoted cooperation between the party's left wing and moderate wing.
He resigned as the party's leader after it lost parliamentary elections in 1992.
Richard Rose Kino, KFE noh, Eusebio, ay oo ZA byoh, Francisco , was a Roman Catholic priest and explorer who founded at least 24 missions in the area that is now southern Arizona and northern Mexico.
He joined the Society of Jesus , a Catholic order that did missionary work throughout the world.
He preached to the Indians he met and gave them foods and animals they never had seen, including grains, cattle, sheep, and mules.
He gained fame for a map that proved southern California was not an island, as most Europeans then believed.
San Xavier del Bac, a mission that Kino opened near present-day Tucson, Arizona, is still used as a church.
A statue of Kino represents Arizona in Statuary Hall in the United States Capitol.
John S Goff Kinsey, K/HN zee, Alfred Charles , an American biologist, was one of the first scientists to study human sexual behavior.
His research, which began in the late 1930's, contributed important insight into relationships among human beings.
While teaching a marriage course, he realized that scientists had little knowledge about human sexual practices.
Kinsey began to interview people about their sexual behavior and attitudes.
In 1947, Kinsey founded the Institute for Sexual Research at the university.
Kinsey and his colleagues interviewed thousands of men and women in the United States and Canada.
The two books became known as The Kinsey Report Both were best sellers, though they had been written for physicians, sociologists, and other professionals.
They created controversy because many people charged they were immoral and some scientists considered them unscientific.
He became known for his studies of gall wasps before entering sex research.
The city lies on the south bank of the Congo River, in the far western part of the country.
Kinshasa is the nation’s center of government, light industry, and transportation.
An area of older, low-income housing extends south from the river, and most of Kinshasa’‘s people live there.
Squatter zones, where Kinshasa's poorest people live in mudbrick dwellings, form an arc around the city.
This growth has caused a water shortage, poor sanitation and transportation, and other problems.
Economy of Kinshasa is based chiefly on the activities of Congoss national government, the city’s largest employer.
Industries include the production of beverages, processed foods, soap, textiles, and tires.
Many of Kinshasa's people earn their livings by selling items they make in their homes.
Trains and trucks carry cargo between Kinshasa and Matadi, Congo's chief Atlantic Ocean seaport.
By the late 1400's, settlements based on fishing and trade had developed in the area that is now Kinshasa.
In 1881, the British explorer Henry M Stanley set up an outpost there for King Leopold II of Belgium, his employer.
The settlement was named Léopoldville after the king, who ruled the area as a personal possession from 1885 to 1908.
Belgium took control in 1908 and made Léopoldville the capital in 1930.
Congo became independent in 1960, and the capital was renamed Kinshasa in 1966.
M Crawford Young Kiowa Indians, KY uh wuh, are a tribe who live largely in Oklahoma and elsewhere in the southwestern United States.
According to the 2000 United States census, there are about 8,600 Kiowa.
Most of them live in rural communities near Anadarko, Carnegie, and Mountain View, Oklahoma.
Other Kiowa live in urban areas and work in law, medicine, teaching, and other professions.
They were fierce warriors and raided many white and Mexican settlements, especially from 1850 to 1870.
According to tribal tradition, the Kiowa once lived as nomadic hunters in a region that was covered by snow much of the year.
They later moved to the Rocky Mountains near what is now Yellowstone National Park.
The Kiowa next migrated to the Black Hills of eastern Wyoming and southwestern South Dakota, and then to the southwestern plains.
In 1867, Kiowa chiefs agreed to settle on a reservation in the Indian Territory (now Oklahoma) with two other tribes, the Comanche and the Kiowa Apache.
In 1963, the KCA tribes abolished their constitution and, in 1970, the Kiowa adopted their own tribal constitution.
The tribe is governed by the Kiowa Indian Council, which consists of all members who are at least 18 years old.
The Kiowa Business Committee, an elected group, manages tribal programs in such fields as business, education, and health.
Everett R Rhoades Kipling, Rudyard, RUHD yuhrd , was a leading English short-story writer, poet, and novelist.
He is best known for his stories about India during the late 1800's, when India was a British colony.
He also wrote children’s sto© Marc Schlossman, Panos Pictures Kinshasa is the capital and largest city of the Democratic Republic of Congo. tn many parts of Kinshasa, automobiles and other vehicles and pedestrians often crowd the streets.
In 1907, Kipling was the first English writer to receive the Nobel Prize for literature.
His father, John Lockwood Kipling, had come to Bombay after being appointed to a teaching post at a Bombay school of art.
Indian servants took care of Rudyard and taught him the Hindi language of India.
When Kipling was 5 years old, his parents brought him to Southsea, England, near Portsmouth.
It was the custom of English parents living in India to remove their children from the heat and deadly diseases of the colony by sending their children to school in England.
At the age of 12, Kipling was enrolled at the United Services College, a school established to educate inexpensively the sons of Army officers.
Stal/ky & Co. , a collection of short stories, is a fictional record of his life there.
The stories emphasize adolescent brutality and practical joking but constitute a lively record of life in an English public school.
In 1882, he returned to India instead and joined the staff of the Civil and Milrtary Gazette, a newspaper in the northwestern city of Lahore.
The newspaper also printed some of his poems, later collected in Departmental Ditties and enlarged in later editions.
In 1887, Kipling joined the staff of the Pioneer, a newspaper in Allahabad.
Kipling’s first book of fiction, Plain Tales from the Hills , consists of 40 stories, 32 of them originally written for the Civil and Military Gazette.
Stories for the Pioneer soon were collected in six paperback books in the Indian Railway Library series.
These books, sold in railroad stations, were popular with travelers and spread Kipling’s fame outside India.
His Indian Railway Library stories were reprinted in the collections Soldiers Three and Wee Willie Winkie in 1890.
Kipling'’s first novel, The Light That Failed, was also published in 1890.
The novel about an artist going blind received mixed reviews, but Kipling by this time was the most talked about writer in both England and the United States.
These stories include Without Benefit of Clergy,” a powerful study of a doomed love affair Rudyard Kipling Brown Bros. between an Englishman and a young Indian woman.
Kipling’s popularity grew tremendously with his Barrack-Room Ballads, which were published individually in periodicals in the early 1890's and collected in book form in 1892.
Soon after his return to England, Kipling became friends with the American literary agent Wolcott Balestier.
In January 1892, Kipling married Balestier's sister, Carrie, in London.
These stories describe the adventures of Mowgli, an Indian child who gets lost in the jungle and is brought up by a family of wolves.
He wrote poems for the London Times that made bold political judgments and prophesied the direction of international events.
For example, “Recessional” warned the British of complacency in the face of rising militarism in Germany.
Kipling also urged the need for a slow transfer of power from colonial governments to native populations in parts of the British Empire.
The story tells of an Irish orphan who adopts early and completely to Indian ways.
The novel became a classic because of its rich rendering of the multiple cultures of India.
It offers portraits of unforgettable characters—especially native Indians.
Another book of children’s stories, the /ust So Stories, appeared in 1902.
It gives humorous explanations of such questions as how the leopard got its spots and how the elephant got its trunk.
In addition, Kipling’s concerns about his own health colored the fiction of his later years.
He suffered from a bleeding ulcer for years before it was finally diagnosed in 1933.
Kipling’s last three volumes of short stories, A Diversity of Creatures , Debits and Credits , and Limits and Renewals , stress the realities of pain and death.
An unfinished autobiography, Something of Myself, was published in 1937, after his death.
Kiribati, K/HR uh Bas, is a small country made up of 33 islands in the central Pacific Ocean.
These islands spread across about 2 million square miles of the Pacific Ocean.
The United Kingdom ruled much of what is now Kiribati from 1892 to 1979, when Kiribati became an independent nation.
The president is elected to a four-year term by the people from among candidates nominated by the Parliament.
The Parliament, the nation’s lawmaking body, consists of 36 members who are elected by the people to four-year terms; the country’s attorney general; and an appointed representative of Banaba.
Fishing and the making and sailing of canoes form an important part of their life.
The islanders used to wear soft, finely woven mats but now wear light cotton clothing.
But most of them also speak some English, which is used in official communications.
Kiribati has a tropical climate, with temperatures of about 80 °F the year around.
Most of the nation’s commerce goes through Tarawa, which has docks and an international airport.
Tarawa also has an earth station, which transmits and receives international communications through a satellite in space.
Kiribati’s government runs a radio station and publishes a weekly newspaper, both in Gilbertese and English.
The islands are believed to have been inhabited when Samoans settled there between the 1000's and the 1300's.
There is evidence that the I-Kiribati lived there long before the Samoans.
In the 1500's, Spanish explorers became the first Europeans to sight the islands.
In 1892, Britain gained control of the Gilbert Islands and the neighboring Ellice Islands to the south.
In 1916, the Brit336 Kirilenko, Andrei Pavlovich ish made these islands the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony.
Some of the Line Islands, and the Phoenix Islands, were later added to the colony.
The United States Marines invaded Tarawa in 1943 and defeated the Japanese in one of the bloodiest battles of the war.
The Ellice Islands separated from the colony in 1975 and became the independent nation of Tuvalu in 1978.
In 1962, he was made a member of the Politburo, the party’s policymaking body.
In 1982, Kirilenko resigned from the Politburo and the Secretariat, but he remained in the Central Committee until his death.
Stuart D Goldman Kiritimati Atoll, «ir uh sih MAHS, also called Christmas Island, is one of the largest islands formed by coral in the Pacific Ocean.
On Christmas Day, 1777, the British explorer James Cook became the first European to reach the island.
The island was annexed by Britain in 1888, and became part of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony in 1919.
Kirkland, Lane , served as president of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations from 1979 to 1995.
One of Kirkland’s goals as AFL-CIO president was to persuade nonmember unions to join the federation.
He graduated from the United States Merchant Marine Academy in 1942 and served in the Merchant Marine until] 1946.
James G Scoville Kirkpatrick, Jeane Jordan , served as United States ambassador to the United Nations from 1981 to 1985.
After resigning from the UN position in 1985, Kirkpatrick resumed her teaching career at Georgetown.
Although named to the UN post by a Republican, Kirkpatrick was a long-time Democrat.
In 1972, she and other leading Democratic scholars and officeholders formed the Coalition for a Democratic Majority, which worked to strengthen the party.
She became critical of United States foreign policy during the late 1970's, however, and she joined Reagan's group of advisers for the 1980 presidential campaign.
She also served as a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, a center for studies of government policy.
Lee Thornton Kirkwood, Samuel Jordan , a Republican, served as governor of lowa and as a United States senator from that state.
When the American Civil War started in 1861, he pledged his personal fortune and borrowed from friends to equip volunteers for the Union Army.
He served a second term as governor in 1876 and 1877 and became a senator again in 1877.
He joined President James Garfield's Cabinet as secretary of the interior in 1881.
Edward A Lukes-Lukaszewski Kirlian photography, K/HR /ee uh, is the process of creating an image of an object by exposing the object to an electromagnetic field.
The images may be captured with ordinary photographic methods or by more sophisticated techniques.
Some scientists once suggested that the images seen in Kirlian photographs resulted from the aura or bioplasma, a theoretical energy field said to surround living things.
It also Kendall johnson and Thelma Moss, UCLA A Kirlian photograph shows discharges of light surrounding an object in this Kirlian photograph of a human hand, the discharges appear as white and purple bands of light frees and accelerates electrons and positive ions from the object's surface.
The charged particles collide with neutral molecules and atoms, creating more electrons and ions.
After a sufficient amount of positive ions has built up, the electrons and ions recombine and emit red, violet, and ultraviolet light.
Kirlian photography can be used to monitor changes in the ions in living tissue.
Some scientists believe that such changes indicate physical or psychological changes in the organism.
Researchers also have used Kirlian techniques to detect and measure damaged regions in solid materials.
But many factors may affect the quality of a Kirlian image, including the temperature and moisture of the object and the surrounding gas.
The photographing of objects exposed to an electric field began in the 1890's.
The process was named for the Soviet scientists Semyon and Valentina Kirlian, who began to systematize the technique about 1940.
John G Michopoulos Kirstein, Lincoln Edward , was an important figure in the history of American ballet.
In 1933, Kirstein and choreographer George Balanchine helped found the School of American Ballet.
Kirstein served as general director of the dance company and as president of the school.
He wrote several books on dance, including Dance , the first important history of ballet written by an American.
By With To & From is a collection of his memoirs, criticism, and poetry.
Kissinger, Henry Alfred , served as secretary of state from 1973 to 1977.
He was appointed by President Richard M Nixon and kept the post after Gerald R Ford became president in 1974.
Kissinger also served as assistant to the president for national security affairs from 1969 to 1975.
Between 1969 and 1973, Kissinger conducted secret negotiations with North Vietnamese diplomats in an effort to end the Vietnam War.
Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, the chief North Vietnamese negotiator, won the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the cease-fire.
He went to Moscow in 1972 to prepare Nixon's meeting with Soviet leaders.
In 1974, Kissinger helped arrange agreements to separate the fighting forces of Israel from those of Egypt and Syria.
In 2000, Kissinger became chancellor of the College of William and Mary.
His family came to the United States in 1938 to escape Nazi persecution of Jews.
David S Broder Kitchen Cabinet was a nickname the enemies of President Andrew Jackson gave to a group of his political advisers.
Most of these advisers were not members of the president's official Cabinet.
During Jackson's first administration , he held few regular Cabinet meetings and consulted this unofficial cabinet instead.
Critics objected to the influence they believed these advisers had on Jackson.
Leading members of the Kitchen Cabinet included Secretary of State Martin Van Buren; Major William B Lewis, second auditor of the United States Treasury; Isaac Hill, United States senator and former editor of the New Hampshire Patriot; Amos Kendall, auditor of the Treasury; and Francis P Blair, Sr., editor of the Washington Globe.
It was the birthplace of W L Mackenzie King, who served three terms as prime minister of Canada.
Kitchener lies next to the city of Waterloo and is the center of the regional municipality of Waterloo.
Kitchener and Waterloo form a single community, but each has its own government.
The Kitchener Farmers Market attracts many tourists because of its famous German and Pennsylvania Dutch food and style of cooking.
Other points of interest include Woodside, King’s boyhood home; and Doon Pioneer Village, a reconstruction of a community as it may have appeared in the mid-1800’s.
Every fall, thousands of visitors come to Kitchener and Waterloo for the Oktoberfest.
This nine-day celebration is based on the famous beer festival of Munich, Germany.
Kitchener serves as the trading center for a rich agricultural area in the Great Lakes Lowland region of Ontario.
In 1805, Mennonites from Pennsylvania established the first permanent settlement in what is now the Kitchener-Waterloo area.
They chose the location because of the fertile land and named their community Sand Hills.
About 1830, the settlement was renamed Berlin, for the capital of Germany.
Berlin became the county seat of Waterloo County in 1876 and was incorporated as a city in 1912.
In 1916, during World War I, the voters renamed the city Kitchener to show their support of Canada and the United Kingdom.
Horatio H Kitchener was a famous British soldier who had drowned at sea a short time before.
Many new industries opened in Kitchener after World War II ended in 1945.
They created thousands of new jobs and helped the city’s population rise from 44,867 in 1951 to 74,485 in 1961.
In the early 1970's, Kitchener began to redevelop its downtown section.
In the late 1970's, Mackenzie King Square was completed near downtown Kitchener.
The complex includes an art gallery and a 2,000-seat theater called Center-in-the-Square.
In the early 1990's, the regional headquarters of Canada Trust and a Toronto-Dominion banking center opened in Kitchener.
Donald G Cartwright Kitchener, Horatio Herbert , was a distinguished British soldier.
As governor general of the Sudan and then commander of the Egyptian Army, he put new spirit into the army and broke the power of the dervishes, a fanatic religious group.
Kitchener went to South Africa in 1899 as second in command to General Frederick Sleigh Roberts in the Boer War.
When Roberts returned to England, Kitchener became commander of the South African army.
Then he served as commander in chief of the army in India and later advised the Australian and New Zealand governments on army reforms.
From 1911 to 1914, Kitchener served as head of the British administration in Egypt, and in June 1914 he was made Earl of Khartoum and of Broome.
In 1914, at the beginning of World War I, Kitchener was appointed secretary of state for war.
He raised a large British army, an important factor in the eventual success of the Allies.
He was drowned on June 5, 1916, when a ship on which he was a passenger hit a mine.
They live on all the continents and on the large islands in the southwestern Pacific.
Its head and underparts are white and its back, wings, and tail are black.
Adults have light gray on the back and wings and a large black patch on the shoulder.
The adult Mississippi kite has a gray body with light gray on the head and underparts.
The snail kite has broad wings, a white band at the base of the tail, and a slender, sharply hooked bill.
The female and young have streaks of brown on their light-colored underparts and orange legs.
The American swallow-tailed kite is Flanoides forficatus; the black-shouldered kite, F/anus caeruleus;the Mississippi kite, /ctinia mississippiensis; and the snail kite, Rostrhamus sociabilis.
Some kites consist of material such as paper or cloth mounted on a frame made of sticks, to which a line or lines are attached.
However, many kite builders use synthetic coverings, such as plastics or nylon, that are lighter and more durable than paper or cloth.
Kites have also been used for scientific research and for military purposes.
Kites carrying measuring devices into the sky helped develop the science of weather forecasting in the 1800's.
How kites fly A kite’s ability to fly in the wind depends on its construction and the way its lines are attached.
For example, the well-known diamond-shaped kite flies when its covered side is facing the wind.
The lines should pull the nose of the kite into the wind, creating the necessary angle against the wind.
This angle is called the ang/e of attack. \f the kite’s construction and angle of attack are correct, the kite will strike the air with greater pressure against its face than against its back.
The difference in air pressure between the face and back surfaces creates lift, which is the force that makes the kite rise.
The resistance of the air to the forward motion of the kite is called drag.
The forces of lift, drag, line tension, and gravity combine to keep the kite in the air.
The bridle consists of two or more short lines, called /egs, that attach the kite to the flying line.
The place of attachment, called the towing point, sets the kite’s angle of attack.
The bridle also distributes stresses on the kite to help the kite keep its shape and fly.
The kites come in a variety of styles and are designed to do precise maneuvers, such as sharp turns and loops.
A kite must be flown in such a way that its angle of attack provides enough lift to overcome its drag and gravity.
The angle of attack can be controlled by the placement of the bridle legs and the towing point.
WORLD BOOK diagram by Bill and Judie Anderson Towing point — Flying line BS in L Leg wind.
It can maintain this position in several ways, such as through a tail, a rudder, a keel, tassels, vents, or combinations of these.
Stunt kites look similar to other kites but are built to be more precisely controlled in flight.
Flat kites need tails to supply drag and keep the kite pointed toward the sky.
A kite should begin with a tail at least seven times its diagonal length.
The bowed kite is curved on its face to create an angle into the wind, called the dihedra/ angle.
A favorite bowed kite is the two-stick diamond-shaped kite patented in 1891 by an American named William A Eddy.
In India and other countries, fighter kites, which become bowed in the wind, are used in the sport of kite fighting.
When several are flown on one flying line or in a train, the pull can be great enough to lift a person off the ground.
Most delta kites have a flap of material, called a kee/, which is perpendicular to the surface.
Flexible kites, such as the parafoil, take their shape when filled with wind.
WORLD BOOK illustrations by Bensen Studios Delta kite Flat kite Bax kite The flexible kite is sewed or taped together in a design that takes shape when the kite is filled with wind.
An example is the parafoil, which is similar to a parachute and consists entirely of fabric.
A complicated bridle with many legs attaches the parafoil to the flying line.
The kite was invented by Domina C Jalbert of the United States in 1963.
Stunt kites resemble basic types of kites but can be operated with more precision to perform complex acrobatics.
Most stunt kites have two flying lines attached to the bridle and are called dual-line control kites.
Stunt kites can be manipulated to do such stunts as figure eights, sharp turns, or stops in the air, or flying backward.
Good locations include schoolyards, parks, farm fields, empty parking lots, and beaches.
Kites should not be flown on public streets and highways, in areas where kites would interfere with airplane traffic, on bumpy or rocky land, or near trees.
Never fly kites in stormy or wet weather because static electricity can travel down the flying line and injure—or even kill— the person holding the line.
Never fly a kite near electric lines or antennas, or use any metal in the kite lines.
By wearing gloves, kite fliers may prevent /ine burn, which is caused by the kite cord pulling too quickly through the fingers.
Before flying a kite, make sure that the kite has been properly assembled.
Also, take along extra supplies, such as tail materials, line, and a winder for the line.
Some kites need only a light breeze of 3 or 4 miles (5 or 6 kilometers) per hour to fly.
Two people—a launcher and a flier—provide the easiest way to fly a kite.
After pulling the flying line so there is no slack, the flier signals to the launcher to release the kite.
The flier should keep tension on the flying line but allow it to feed out smoothly.
If the wind drops, repeated hauling on the flying line will force the kite up into higher breezes, which are usually steadier.
If the kite begins to tumble, the flier should slacken the flying line.
This helps the kite regain stability and prevents it from diving and crashing to the ground.
When ready to bring the kite in, the flier should walk to the kite while pulling the flying line in, and then wrap the line on the winder.
During the Han dynasty , the Chinese military attached bamboo pipes to the kites.
As the kites flew over the enemy, wind passed through the pipes, causing a whistling sound.
In 1752, Benjamin Franklin conducted the most famous kite experiment in history.
Franklin flew a homemade kite during a thunderstorm, with a metal key attached to the flying line.
A bolt of lightning struck a pointed wire fastened to the kite and traveled down the wetted flying line to the key, causing a spark.
In 1847, a kite helped pull a cable across the Niagara River between the United States and Canada.
The results of these tests enabled the Wright brothers to make the first airplane in 1903.
Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone, also created kites.
From 1898 to 1933, the United States Weather Bureau (now the National Weather Service) operated kite stations.
Some kites are used to propel people in buggies or boats or on skates or skis.
Kite lovers worldwide form clubs and participate in festivals and other kite events.
Several books, newsletters, and a magazine called Kite Lines provide information about kites.
Kitimat, K/HT ih mat, British Columbia , is a community that was carved out of low, wooded land at the head of Douglas Channel on the North Pacific Coast.
In 1951, the Aluminum Company of Canada started building a huge new aluminum smelter and the community of Kitimat to house workers’ families.
It picked this site because of its harbor and the area’s abundance of water to provide inexpensive hydroelectric power.
A 10-mile tunnel through the Coast Mountains carries the water to the western side of the mountains.
There, the water drops to a power plant built inside the mountains at Kemano, 50 miles south of Kitimat.
In 1989 the company, now called Alcan Aluminium Limited, began to build another tunnel.
The residential area lies east of the channel head, and the industrial area lies southwest of the head.
Kittiwake, K/HT ih wayk, is a gull that gets its name from its mournful cry.
The black-legged kittiwake lives in the Arctic regions of Europe, Asia, and North America.
The red-legged kittiwake nests on islands near Alaska in the Bering Sea.
Adult kittiwakes measure from 16 to 18 inches (41 to 46 centimeters) long.
They are white with a bluish-gray back and black-tipped, bluish-gray wings.
The scientific name for the black-legged kittiwake is Rissa tridactyla.
Kiwanis International, kih WAH nihs, is an organization of local clubs of business and professional men and women who are interested in community service.
Hundreds of thousands of members form thousands of Kiwanis clubs worldwide.
Kiwanis members also support conservation and take part in community drives, including safety and fund-raising campaigns.
Kiwanis International sponsors three youth service organizations—Builders Club for junior high school students, Key Club International for high school students, and Circle K International for college students.
Ata majority of these meetings, an invited speaker gives a talk to the club.
Through these meetings, Kiwanis club members have an opportunity to enjoy fellowship and broaden their interests.
The name &7wanis comes from an old American Indian term meaning We make ourselves known.
Critically reviewed by Kiwanis International Kiwi, KEE wee, is a New Zealand bird that cannot fly.
The birds are shy, and they will usually run away when anyone comes near them.
The neck and legs of the kiwi are short, and its bill is long and flexible.
It has no tail, and its wings are tiny, consistKiwanis International The Kiwanis emblem WORLD BOOK illustration by Trevor Boyer, Linden Artists Ltd.
It has short legs and a long bill, and its body is covered with shaggy feathers. ing only of several stiff feathers.
The bird uses them to smell food in the thick, wet forests where it lives.
The female kiwi lays one or two very large white eggs in a hole ina bank.
It is also used for a member of an air service who is confined to ground duty.
Kiwi fruit, KEF wee, is a berry with a brown, fuzzy skin and is similar in size and shape to an egg.
Kiwi fruit has an emerald-green pulp surrounding a cluster of soft, black seeds.
The pulp has a pleasant, mixed-fruit flavor and is rich in vitamin C People eat kiwi fruit fresh, frozen, or canned and use it to make fruit salads, pies, ice cream, and wine.
Kiwi fruit is named after a New Zealand bird called the kiwi, WORLD BOOK illustration by James Teason The flowers and fruit of the kiwi vine which it resembles.
New Zealand ranks as the leading producer of kiwi fruit, followed in order by France, the United States, Italy, Spain, and Japan.
Kiwi fruit is native to southeastern China and is also known as the Chinese gooseberry.
Cultivation of the fruit spread to other parts of the world during the early 1900's.
Its economic activities include fishing, food processing, shipping, shipbuilding, and textile production.
Zvi Gitelman Klamath Indians, KLAM wfth, are a tribe of southwestern Oregon.
In earlier times, the Klamath made clothing and many other objects from cattail and tule, two marsh plants abundant in the area.
For example, they made fringed skirts, hats, and moccasins from tule and animal skins.
The Klamath built two types of houses, one for winter and one for summer.
For winter, they constructed an earthen lodge by first digging a pit in the ground.
They then built walls and a roof of wood and covered them with layers of earth and tule mats.
An opening in the roof served as both an entrance and a hole to let out smoke.
For summer, the Klamath built a shelter called a wickiup. \t consisted of a willow frame covered with tule mats.
They also built small sweat /odges, where they took ceremonial steam baths to purify themselves.
Individuals called shamans, believed to have contact with the spirits, cared for the sick.
In 1826, trappers for the Hudson's Bay Company became the first Europeans to meet the Klamath.
In 1864, the Klamath, the Modac, and a band of Paiute Indians signed a treaty with the United States government.
In 1954, Congress passed a law that abolished the reservation and ended federal services for the Klamath.
Most members of the tribe sold their reservation land to the United States government, which preserved much of it as Winema National Forest.
In addition, the tribe continues to elect tribal leaders and maintains a business office.
Klee, k/ay, Paul , ranks among the greatest and most original masters of modern painting.
Klee’s thousands of paintings, drawings, and prints are masterpieces of fantasy, wit, and invention.
His pictures are usually small and filled with childlike symbols and writing that hint at a mysterious inner vision of the world and its inhabitants.
Klee was born near Bern, Switzerland, but established himself as an artist after moving to Germany.
Some of his ideas on art have been published as the Pedagogical Sketchbook.
Deborah Emont Scott Klein, A M. , was a Canadian poet, novelist, short-story writer, and journalist.
The Hitleriad is a long poem that satirizes German dictator Adolf Hitler.
In The Rocking Chair , Klein portrayed French-Canadian life, with the rocking chair symbolizing movement without progression.
This book presents a mirror of Jewish events from 1917 to the founding of the state of Israel in 1948.
The narrator of the story finds a new identity with the people of Israel and recognizes the relationship between good and evil.
Abraham Moses Klein was born in Ukraine and grew up in Montreal, Canada.
Ronald B Hatch Klein, Calvin , is an American fashion designer famous for his stylish yet casual designs aimed at the active woman.
Klein's understated clothes, made of luxurious fabrics in soft earth tones, have relaxed and fluid lines.
They underscore the elegant informality Klein sees in the American life style.
Klein has become a celebrity as a designer, and his celebrity status has been a factor in his success.
With Barry K Schwartz, his partner, he started his own fashion business in 1968, manufacturing women’s coats and suits.
Early in his career, Klein designed collections of related separates—blouses, skirts, jackets, and other pieces that could be worn in various combinations.
Klein believed such designs met the desire of women for practical clothes.
During the 1970's and 1980s, Klein licensed the sale of cosmetics, jeans, menswear, and underwear under the Calvin Klein label.
Jean L Druesedow Klein, Lawrence Robert , an American economist, won the 1980 Nobel Prize in economics.
He received the award for pioneering the use of computers to forecast economic activity.
Klein put economic relationships into a mathematical form that could be analyzed by computer.
In one of his best-known projects, Klein developed a set of mathematical formulas, called a model, to describe the United States economy.
The model dealt with the relationships among such elements as income, prices, and unemployment.
Klein is also known for his work with Project LINK, an attempt to develop a model of the world economy.
He supervises an international team of economists who create economic models of their own countries.
By linking the models together, Klein hopes to discover how the economies of the world affect one another.
Klein was born in Omaha, Nebr., and received a Ph.D. degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Barry W Poulson Kleist, k/yst, Heinrich von, HYN rihkh fawn (17771811), was a German writer.
Kleist's short novel Michael Koh/haas is a story of extreme personal rebellion against public injustice.
He served as an Officer in the Prussian Army, but became dissatisfied with military life and resigned in 1799.
Finally, overcome by inner torment, Kleist shot and killed a woman friend and himself at the age of 34.
Jeffrey L Sammons Klemperer, KLEHM puhr uhr, Otto , was a famous conductor of opera and of symphony orchestras.
In his later years, he was respected, especially in England, as a link with the great romantic tradition of the 1800's.
The composer and conductor Gustav Mahler played a large role in determining Klemperer's approach to conducting.
Klemperer led the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra from 1933 to 1939.
After World War Il ended in 1945, Klemperer became one of the leading conductors in England.
Martin Bernheimer Kleptomania, «.eHP tuh MAY nee uh, is a recurrent failure to resist the impulse to steal things.
Kleptomaniacs experience an increasing sense of tension before stealing things and feel relieved while or after committing the act.
Psychiatrists consider kleptomania a symptom of mental illness, and it may be associated with other psychiatric disorders.
The word k/eptomania comes from two Greek words which mean fo stea/ and madness. \t was coined during the 1800's to describe what was then thought to be a form of insanity.
Like other art nouveau artists, he painted in a flat, richly patterned, and colorful style that emphasized curving and rhythmic lines.
Klimt's last major project was a group of mosaics in the Palais Stoclet in Brussels.
The mosaics are composed of glass, semiprecious gems, gold, and enamel.
Their human figures are alinost lost in the brilliantly patterned abstract design.
Pamela A Ivinski Kline, Franz , was an American abstract expressionist artist noted for his large, starkly simple, black-and-white paintings.
In these works, strong black forms seem to sweep across raw white surfaces with whirling speed.
His powerful compositions inspired many younger artists to experiment by using fewer colors and working with simple, giant symbols.
He later taught at Black Mountain College, Pratt Institute, and the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
Dore Ashfon Klondike is a region in the Yukon Territory of northwestern Canada, where one of the world’s greatest gold rushes took place.
On Aug., 1896, George W Carmack, his Indian wife Kate, and her relatives found a larye quantity of gold in the gravel of a creek he named the Bonanza.
Residents of the town of Dawson now celebrate this date as “Discovery Day,” and it is a territorial holiday.
An earlier prospector, Robert Henderson, had found some gold in Gold Bottom Creek, and had suggested that Carmack search for gold in the area.
When Carmack and the others recorded their claims at Forty Mile, a mining camp about 50 miles (80 kilometers) from Dawson, most of the miners there moved up to Bonanza Creek.
News of the rich strike did not reach the outside world until July 1897, when the steamship Portland arrived in Seattle, Wash., with a load of gold from the region.
It brought a stampede of prospectors to the Klondike in the fall of 1897, and an even greater one in 1898.
The Klondike gold rush in the late 1890's drew many prospectors to the Yukon Territory.
WORLD BOOK map Location of the Klondike duced in the region, mostly by individual placer mines.
Since then, dredges have produced millions of dollars worth of gold each year.
The growing season in the Klondike rarely permits the ripening of grain crops but allows hay farming.
Duane A Smith Knee is the joint where the thighbone meets the large bone of the lower leg.
The knee moves like a hinge, but it can also rotate and move a little from side to side.
The knee is more likely to be damaged than most other joints because it is subject to tremendous forces during vigorous activity.
Most of the knee injuries that occur in football and other sports result from twisting the joint.
The synovial capsule secretes a liquid called synovial fluid, which resembles raw egg white.
The synovial fluid nourishes the joint surfaces and reduces friction between them.
Smooth tissue called cartilage covers the ends of the leg bone and thigh bone.
Knife is a cutting instrument used as an eating utensil, a tool, or a weapon.
Knife blades are made from steel, and most handles are made from hardwood or plastic.
For example, surgeons make incisions with small, straight knives called sca/pels.
Many artists use flexible palette knives to paint rugged lines and broad splashes of color on their pictures.
Early human beings fashioned the first knives from flint or obsidian and used them to skin animals and cut meat.
Materials for making blades progressed to bronze, then iron, and steel.
During the Middle Ages, many people carried their own knives and forks and used them for eating.
The rounded table knife, still in use today, probably came into limited use in Europe during the 1400's.
Fixed-blade knives have a blade with a solid steel extension, called a tang, that fits into the handle.
The handle is attached to the tang by such materials as glue and rivets.
The Bowie knife, which was made popular by American frontiersman Jim Bowie, is a fixed-blade knife.
A spring holds the blade closed, and on some knives a lock holds it open.
Some folding knives have several blades hinged to both ends of the handle.
Blades differ according to their thickness, their depth (the average distance from their top to their edge), and the shape of their point.
The French chefs knife, a kitchen utensil, has a blade designed to slice food evenly.
This knife is known as “the master of cooking’ because it also carves and dices well.
Both the French chefs knife and the boning knife are fixed-blade knives.
The Aunting knife and the combat knife differ greatly from knives used as kitchen utensils.
The hunting knife has a thick, deep blade that narrows slowly to a point.
This sturdy knife can be used to skin an animal or slice vegetables for a stew.
The combat knife is made to be used as a camping tool and, if necessary, as a weapon.
The second is a thin, shallow, and sharply pointed blade for delicate cutting.
The third blade is a bottle opener and screwdriver, and the fourth is a can opener.
Knives can be dangerous, but observing the rules of knife safety can lessen the danger.
Never place loose knives in a drawer or a sink full of dishwater, where people may cut themselves accidentally.
Knight, Bob , ranks among the most successful coaches in college basketball history.
He became known for his ability to teach and motivate his players as well as for his controversial outbursts of temper.
Knight's Indiana teams won the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments in 1976, 1981, and 1987 and the 1979 National Invitational Tournament.
However, Lassie escapes and makes the difficult return journey to her original masters in England.
The character of Lassie has appeared in several movies and a long-running television series.
Eric Mowbray Knight was born on April 10, 1897, in Menston, West Yorkshire, near Bradford.
Knights of the Middle Ages banded themselves together in groups called orders.
They vowed loyalty to their king or lord and formed a military organization to defend his land against enemies.
During the Crusades, orders of knighthood fought the Muslims in the Holy Land.
The knights who joined these orders took religious vows to live as monks as well as loyal fighting brothers.
George — United Kingdom Order of the Bath (Civil badge)—United Kingdom _ orders were the Knights Hospitallers, the Knights Tem_ plars, and the Teutonic Knights.
Honorary orders of knighthood | were copied from the military orders of knighthood of _ the Middle Ages.
They were founded by a ruler or lawmaking body to honor achievement and give special favor.
In many countries, membership in these orders is given for achievement in the arts, the sciences, and | business, as well as for military distinction.
It has five different classes for men and women, two of which carry the honor of knighthood.
A _knight who does not belong to any special order is known as a knight bachelor.
In the United Kingdom, new knights are named on New Year's Day or in the spring.
A woman who is given the rank _ corresponding to knighthood is called Dame.
A person who is made a member of an order of knighthood receives a badge or jewe/at a ceremony _ called an investiture.
Women who enter orders of knighthood are called Dame. wears the star of the order on his or her chest.
The best known of these groups is the Knights of Columbus, a fraternal order of Roman Catholic men.
Another organization, the Knights of Labor, formed a major trade union movement.
A number of poems describe the adventures of Sir Perceval as he searched for the Grail.
This tapestry shows Sir Perceval, right kneeling before the Grail in the presence of three angels.
The word knight comes from the Ola English word cnight which means a household retainer.
English people used the word to describe French mounted soldiers who first came to England after the Norman conquest of 1066.
These knights were merely warriors equipped and trained to fight on horseback.
Knighthood carried no social distinction, and any man could be a knight.
Many lords had knights, who performed household duties in peacetime and fought in time of war.
Between 1100 and 1300, most knights became vassa/s and received some land.
As the cost of armor and a war horse increased, only wealthy men could equip themselves to fight as knights.
Thus the knights became a class divided from the rest of the community.
Any man could be made a knight, but most new knights had fathers who were knights or who belonged to the nobility.
The word chivalry comes from the Old French word chevalerie, meaning horse soldiery.
But the term came to mean the code of behavior and ethics that knights were to follow.
It lasted as long as wars were based on heavy cavalry and combat between individuals.
Knights became less important in warfare by the 1400's because of changing military tactics and the introduction of gunpowder.
In the United Kingdom, knighthood is now an honor bestowed on individuals by the king or queen in recognition for outstanding merit or service.
Training In the Middle Ages, a young boy in training to be a knight spent the first years of his life chiefly in the care of the women of his family.
When a boy reached the age of about 7, he left home to begin training for knighthood.
He also learned the code of courtesy and behavior expected of a knight.
He acted as a va/et, or personal servant, to the knight who was his master.
In battle, the squire wore silvered spurs to distinguish him from a knight, whose spurs were gilt.
Sometimes men were knighted on the field of battle, but the ceremony usually took place during times of peace.
A knight buckled on the armor of the squire and proclaimed him a knight.
The parrain struck the squire on the back of the neck with the palm of his hand.
This tap was called the accolade, from the French word co/, meaning neck.
Religious ceremonies became part of the knighting ceremony when the ideals of Christianity became more closely linked with knighthood.
He confessed, fasted, prayed, and pledged to use his weapons for sacred causes and ideals.
Feudal custom allowed an overlord to levy money from his vassals when his eldest son was knighted.
The code of chivalry grew with the songs of the minstrels in the 1000‘s and 1100's.
Their poems show that a true knight had faith and a deep love of the Christian religion.
Knights followed a code of behavior and ethics that became known as chivalry.
During this period, he learned to fight with swords and played chess and other games that taught skill and strategy.
A page also learned to serve his master and to hunt with falcons and hawks.
A squire acted chiefly as a servant to his master while training for knighthood.
A squire rode at his master’s side in battle and took charge of prisoners.
Some men were knighted on the battlefield if they had shown great bravery.
In a tournament, knights on horses galloped toward each other and tried to drive their lances through each other's armor.
A knight championed right against injustice and evil, and never surrendered or flinched in the face of the enemy.
In real life, a knight did not always resemble the ideal knight of the minstrels.
His code of honor and loyalty was sometimes applied only to members of his own class, and he often acted brutally toward people of low birth.
The violent life of the Middle Ages made it difficult to prevent violations of the code.
Even dedicated knights were also soldiers interested in conquest and plunder.
A knight who was proved guilty of cowardice or other serious misconduct was disgraced by having his sword and his spurs broken.
However, “serious misconduct’ usually meant violations against other knights and their families.
In the 1100's, a knight wore a sleeved under tunic of linen or wool, reaching below the knees.
Over this was a sleeveless tunic, open at the sides and fastened with a belt.
He had a cloak fastened at the shoulders, and wore long stockings and leather shoes.
In the 1200's, the under tunic reached to the ankles, and the knight also wore a fur-lined surcoat, which had long sleeves and a hood that covered his head.
The surcoat was pleated, edged with fur, and fastened at the waist with a belt.
Shoulder padding and stiffening over the chest created an exaggerated waistline.
Shoes became so pointed that the front was often curled up and fastened to the knee with a small chain.
From the 1200's to the 1400's, knights dressed colorfully and carefully followed changes in fashion.
The early knight wore a conical helmet with a projection to cover his nose.
He also wore a long garment of padded fabric or leather covered with interlaced metal rings, called mail.
In the 1300's, a stronger helmet covering the entire head of the wearer replaced the conical helmet.
Patches of plate armor were added to protect places the mail did not adequately defend.
Strips of plate were designed to protect the elbow, the arm, the knee, and the part of the leg between the knee and the ankle.
Plates of metal, called pau/drons, covered the opening in the armor at the junction between the arm and the body.
The shield became much smaller and could be shifted to protect the face and head.
The lance was the knight's principal weapon, but he also used a sword, mace, and battle-ax.
A mail collar covered the gap between the helmet and the top of the body armor.
The new armor, designed to protect against gunfire, was so heavy that the knight had to be lifted on his horse by a crane.
If he fell off during battle, he could not get up without help, and often lay at his enemy's mercy.
The coat of arms provided the only recognizable feature of a knight when his face was covered.
It was painted on his shield and on the surcoat that he wore over his armor.
Every knight's coat of arms was different, and knights became very good at identifying each other at a glance.
Tournaments Tournaments developed in the 1100's, probably in northern France.
Large numbers of knights gathered and split into two sides to fight each other.
These fights were much like real battles, and they provided valuable military training.
The defeated knights often had to pay ransoms to the winners to recover their freedom and possessions.
A tournament could last for several days and range over the countryside.
Kings opposed tournaments because such large gatherings of armed men could lead to rebellion, and because they were bloody and wasteful.
In the 1200's, warlike tournaments gave way to jousting, which was combat between two men.
Jousting took place with blunt weapons and was confined to an enclosed field.
Throughout the night, he knelt in front of a church altar, confessing his sins, fasting, and praying.
The Vigil , a detail of an oil painting by John Pettie; the Tate Gallery, London attended by ladies and common people.
In tilting, two knights on horseback charged at each other in the /ists, or narrow lanes, separated by rails to keep the horses apart.
The purpose of the tilt was to unseat the opponent with a blunt lance or pointless sword and win the honor of the day.
Knighthood in literature Knighthood and chivalry were favorite themes in medieval literature.
Poets and minstrels of Western Europe created stories of kings, heroes, and their ladies.
The stories centered on life in the castle, chivalry, and tournaments and jousts.
In the 1100's, French poet-musicians called troubadours began composing songs known as chansons de geste.
These songs idealized love and described the knights heroic adventures.
Some troubadours were knights and wrote exaggerated accounts of their own adventures.
Many European kings, such as Richard the Lion-Hearted of England and Alfonso X of Castile, also composed chansons.
The earliest detailed account of the King Arthur legend appeared about 1136 in the work of a Welsh chronicler, Geoffrey of Monmouth.
The Norman poet Wace used this legend in his work Le Roman de Brut This work was the inspiration of Chrétien de Troyes, who wrote verse romances between 1165 and 1181.
The Arthurian themes inspired Marie de France, author of the narrative poem Lanval, written about 1189.
Sir Thomas Malory published his version of the Arthurian legends, Le Morte Darthur, in 1485.
John of Jerusalem and as the Hospitallers and, later, as the Knights of Rhodes and as the Knights of Malta.
The order originated with a group of men who rana hospice for Christian pilgrims in Jerusalem during the late 1000's.
In 1113, while the group was under the leadership of a man named Gerard, Pope Paschal II recognized it as a religious order.
By the mid-1100's, the Hospitallers had also become a military order of Christian knighthood.
During the 1100's and 1200's, the order helped provide a permanent force for the defense of Christian territories in the Holy Land.
In 1291, the order was forced to leave the Holy Land and located on the island of Cyprus.
About 1309, it took the island of Rhodes from the Byzantine Empire and established itself there.
From its base on Rhodes, the order became a Mediterranean seafaring power.
For hundreds of years, it distinguished itself as a major Western European force against the Ottoman Empire.
But in 1522, the Ottoman ruler Siileyman | defeated the order, and the last knights left Rhodes on Jan., 1523.
In 1530, the order reestablished its headquarters, on the island of Malta.
From Malta, it defended European interests in the Mediterranean until the French general Napoleon Bonaparte took Malta in 1798.
The organization's purpose was to give moral support to Catholic families and to provide them with benefits they were unable to obtain through insurance companies of that time.
Today, the K of C also sponsors religious, welfare, and educational programs.
The K of C has about 1,500,000 members in more than 9,000 councils in the United States, Canada, Mexico, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, Panama, Guam, Guatemala, and the Dominican Republic.
The K of C also operates the Columbian Squires Department, an organization for Roman Catholic boys from 13 to 18 years old.
The Knights of Columbus started the Catholic Advertising Program in 1948.
Through this program, free printed information that explains various Roman Catholic beliefs has been distributed to non-Catholics to help promote interfaith understanding.
Knights of Columbus activities include camps and schools for underprivileged children; aid to orphans, sick people, and disabled people; and citizenship training programs.
The society has established a Knights of Columbus Vatican Film Library at St.
This library has microfilms of about 12 million pages from books and rare manuscripts in the Vatican Library.
The society has 65 state or provincial councils and an international board of directors.
The organization’s international headquarters are located in New Haven, Connecticut.
Critically reviewed by the Knights of Columbus Knights of Labor was one of the most important early labor organizations in America.
It was the first to organize all workers into a single union, rather than into separate trade unions.
Uriah S Stephens and other Philadelphia tailors founded the Knights in 1869 as a secret fraternal lodge.
Anyone except bankers, stockbrokers, professional gamblers, lawyers, and those who sold or manufactured liquor could become members.
The organization grew after Terence V Powderly became its Grand Master Workman in 1879.
It became powerful when a strike Knights of Columbus The K, of C emblem forced railroads owned by Jay Gould to meet its demands in 1885.
However, the Knights lost a second strike against Gould's railroads in 1886.
That defeat, and the antilabor feelings that followed the Haymarket Riot in Chicago, caused the group’s membership to decline.
Knights of Pythias, P/HTH ee uhs, is a fraternal order to which members of any religion may belong.
The organization performs charitable work and emphasizes high moral standards in its members.
It supports homes and retirement centers for the aged and children’s homes and summer camps.
Each United States state and Canadian province has local lodges and a district Grand Lodge.
Three organizations associated with the order help in its work—the Pythian Sisters, the Dramatic Order Knights of Khorassan, and the Junior Order Knights of Pythias.
Critically reviewed by the Knights of Pythias See also Fraternal organization.
The organization was originally called the Roman Catholic Union of the Knights of St.
John began as a semimilitary organization at a time when immigrant Roman Catholics were often subjected to discrimination and persecution.
It was founded to defend the faith, foster fraternity among its members, and support the families of members in need.
The organization takes its name and its inspiration from the Knights of St.
The Knights Hospitallers was founded in the 1100's to protect and aid pilgrims in Palestine, the Holy Land of the Bible.
Members of the organization have distinctive uniforms that they wear when serving as escorts at important church functions.
As Catholics came into the mainstream of American life, the organization's once semimilitary character became largely ceremonial.
The Knights are ruled by a central governing body called the supreme commandery.
This body is headed by the supreme secretary, who bears the title brigadier general.
Local commanderies are found throughout the Knights of Pythias The K of P emblem United States, Canada, Central America, the Caribbean Islands, and Africa.
Knights Templars were members of a religious military order of Christian knighthood.
The order was founded about 1119 in Jerusalem by the French knights Hugh des Payens and Godfrey of St.
The order was first called “the poor Fellow-Soldiers of Christ and the Temple of Solomon” because of their early state of poverty and the lodgings given them by King Baldwin II of Jerusalem.
The lodgings were in the compound of the kings palace known as the Temple of Solomon.
The original purpose of the Templars complemented that of the Knights Hospitallers.
The Knights Hospitallers aided pilgrims in the Holy Land while the Templars protected pilgrims on the way to and from the Holy Land.
The Templars organized under a ru/e (regulations for religious life) composed by Saint Bernard of Clairvaux.
They avoided extravagant ceremony and clothing, wearing the white mantle of the Cistercian order, with a red cross added.
At first the order included only knights, but gradually it admitted chap/ains—priests who ministered to the knights—and sergeants—wealthy members of the middle class.
The pope took the knights under his special protection, and the order added to its purpose the duty to fight all “infidels” who threatened Christianity.
The Templars thus played a key role in the Crusades and became a powertul military organization.
They grew rich with properties that were donated by grateful kings and princes.
The Templars entered the banking business, and Temples established throughout Europe drew deposits of massive wealth.
Princes and commoners alike banked with the Templars, and many states became indebted to them.
With the fall of the Holy Land to the Muslims in 1187, the order lost its founding purpose and became a target for unhappy and envious debtors.
Philip ordered all the Templars in France thrown into prison, where they were tortured until they confessed to accusations of heresy, unnatural practices, and dishonest business activities.
Templars in England, Germany, Spain, and Portugal also stood trial, but most were acquitted because they were beyond Philip's immediate control.
In 1312, Pope Clement V yielded to Philip's pressure and issued a bu// suppressing the Templars.
The pope, however, awarded the Templars’ property to several military orders in Spain and Portugal and its cash holdings to the Knights Hospitallers.
During the French trials, the Templars’ last grand master, Jacques de Molay, confessed to false charges.
He later withdrew the confession but was burned at the stake anyway in 1314.
David G Schultenover Knitting is a method of making fabric by looping yarns around each other using one or more knitting needles.
Much of the clothing we wear is made by knitting, including sweaters, stockings, scarfs, and hats.
Knitted clothes are popular because they can stretch and then return to their original shape.
A knitted fabric can be formed to create such items as wallhangings and stuffed fiber sculpture.
Knitting can also decorate other fiber forms made by crocheting, macramé, and weaving.
One end is pointed, and the other end has a knob to prevent the fabric from slipping off.
Today, knitting needles have smooth tips and are generally made of aluminum, wood, or plastic.
The thickness of the needles and the type of yarn can be varied according to the nature of the fabric desired.
Slender needles and lightweight yarn may be chosen for a delicate knit.
Wool has been the traditional yarn for knitting, but cotton, silk, and synthetics such as acrylic have also become popular.
Blended yarns of two First, cast on a row of stitches as described in this article.
Hold the needle with the cast-on stitches in the left hand and the other needle in the right hand.
Insert the tip of the right-hand needle into the top stitch on the left-hand needle.
Le \ | TRUST Guide the yarn forward around the tip of the righthand needle.
Pull the yarn through the top stitch, using the tip of the right-hand needle.
Three or four needles with points at both ends are used to create tubular pieces for socks and skirts.
The fabric is made by wrapping a series of looped threads around one needle in a required number.
The second needle is inserted into one or two loops at a time, and the yarn is wrapped around ina certain way.
The two basic stitches are the Anitand the purl There are many additional stitches, and hundreds of methods of combining the stitches to add variety to the fabric.
Another common decorative stitch is the cable stitch, Knitting with various colors and textures of yarns adds interest to the designs.
Most knitters follow written patterns that contain a standard vocabulary of abbreviations.
A pattern gives directions on the types of stitches used, the order in which they are used, and the size and shape of the finished piece of fabric.
The knitter usually makes a sample about 3 inches (8 centimeters) square to determine the gauge.
The gauge is the exact number of stitches and rows per inch produced by the needles, yarn, and type of stitch.
Knowing the gauge is essential when sizes are required for clothing because each persons hand-knitting differs in tension.
If the knitted sample does not match the pattern gauge, the knitter must either change the needle size or the thickness of the yarn.
If the gauge measure is too small, a larger needle or a thicker yarn needs to be used.
The origin of knitting is not known, but the craft has been practiced by many cultures for centuries.
As neighboring peoples traded with the Arabs, the technique gradually became known to much of the ancient world over the next few hundred years.
Peoples of the Middle East taught Europeans how to knit during the 600's.
Knitting guilds were soon formed throughout Europe, and for the rest of the Middle Ages, knitting was considered as much an industry as weaving.
Knitters had to serve as apprentices | for six years before they could enter a guild.
Knitters also had to prove their ability to knit stockings, berets, shirts, and after 1602, elaborately designed carpets.
The Spanish carried knitting to South America and Central America in the 1500's, but this art may have already been known by some people there.
In SpanishAmerican cultures, knitting became a popular and practical pastime for the peasants.
In cold climates, knitting has always been an essential way of creating warm clothing.
Some examples are the knitted hats of the Peruvians in the Andes Mountains and the fisherman's sweaters of Ireland.
Knitting machine is a device that makes fabric by forming loops in yarn and linking them to one another by means of needles.
Knitting machines use many needles and produce up to 12 million stitches per minute.
Fabrics produced by knitting machines range from delicate lace to heavy drapery and rugs.
Other common knitted-fabric products include hosiery, sweat shirts, and many other kinds of clothing.
There are two main types of knitting machines— weft knitting machines and warp knitting machines.
Weft machines knit crosswise loops using one continBurlington Industries, Inc.
The circular machine shown here has its needles arranged on a rotating cylinder.
It produces a tube-shaped fabric. uous yarn, and produce a fabric that stretches easily.
Most weft machines are circu/ar—that is, their needles are arranged ina circle on a rotating cylinder.
Warp machines knit lengthwise loops with many interlocking yarns, and produce a flat fabric that is less elastic than a weft-knit fabric.
Many design effects can be created on knitting machines by using different types of yarns and stitches.
Some machines can be programmed to drop and add stitches to produce fabric that is shaped according toa specific pattern.
William Lee, an English minister, invented the weft knitting machine in 1589.
Marc Isambard Brunel, an English engineer and inventor, patented a circular knitting machine in 1816.
In 1864, William Cotton, an English textile worker, patented the first successful machine that could knit full-fashioned fabric.
Knopf published the work of hundreds of the most important authors of the 1900's, including 16 winners of the Nobel Prize for literature.
Working closely with his wife, Blanche, he introduced many European, Latin-American, and Asian writers to American readers.
Knopf also gained respect for insisting on high-quality printing and design.
He was its president from 1918 to 1957, and chairman of the board from 1957 to 1972.
From 1972 until his death he was chairman emeritus but maintained an active interest in the company.
Knopf was also an amateur photographer, and he published many of his own informal portraits of authors he had known.
In 1900, Sir Arthur Evans, a British archaeologist, began the excavation of the palace at Knossos.
His work added much new information about the Aegean area's Bronze Age.
The international nautical mile equals one-sixtieth of one degree, or a minute of arc, of the earth's circumference.
Navigators use the nautical mile because of its simple relationship to the degrees and minutes by which latitude and longitude are measured.
The international nautical mile equals exactly 1.852 kilometers, or 6,076.115 international feet, or 1.151 statute miles.
The term knot came into use in the earlier days of sailing, when ships carried a speed-measuring device called a /og chip and line.
The chip, a piece of wood, was allowed to drag in the water behind the ship.
An interval of twenty-eight seconds is to one hour approximately what a distance of 47 feet 3 inches is to 6,076 feet.
Therefore, if the log had pulled out 5 intervals of line in 28 seconds, the sailors knew the ship was moving at 5 knots, or 5 nautical miles an hour.
Knots, hitches, and splices are methods used to tie ropes or to fasten them together.
But experts generally recognize a difference between knots, hitches, and splices.
A splice permanently joins the ends of two ropes, or forms a single rope into a permanent loop.
A fourth type of knot, the bend, is used to tie the ends of two ropes together.
For example, a square knot weakens a rope by 50 per cent, and a bowline weakens a rope by 40 per cent.
In general, hitches weaken a rope less than knots and bends do, and splices weaken a rope even less than hitches do.
Uses of knots In spite of the development of wire rope and mechanical fastenings, knots are still important to people in many occupations.
The ability to tie knots has always been one of the chief skills required of sailors, and remains important on ships and boats.
Sailors use knots to fasten ropes on objects to be lifted on or off vessels.
Sailboat owners must master the skill of tying knots in order to adjust the rigging—lines attached to the sails, booms, and masts.
Sports enthusiasts use knots to set up tents, to prepare fishing tackle, to build traps, and to do hundreds of other jobs.
For example, farmers have to be able to tie knots in the rope used to make halters for animals.
Knots, hitches, and splices resemble each other and are often called by the general term knot But a knot refers to a fastening made by tying together The sheet bend is used primarily to join two ropes of different sizes.
It is also called the weavers knot The overhand knot is the smallest, simplest, and most common knot It often serves as the beginning of other knots.
Other persons who make wide use of knots and rope include explorers, mountain climbers, builders, and weavers.
Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts learn the art of tying knots because of their use in camping and hiking.
Tying knots The language of knots was developed to name the various parts of a rope and the simple shapes into which they can be formed.
The simple shapes that can be made with rope form the basis for all knots.
A person forms a bight by placing the end of the rope alongside the standing part to form a loop.
In an overhand loop, the end of the rope is crossed over the standing part.
This knot is used on the end of a rope as a stopper to keep it from running through small openings.
However, most experts do two things to a rope before putting it to use.
Most new rope is stiff, so experts usually work the rope, or stretch, twist, and pull it to take the stiffness out.
The granny knot is often tied by mistake instead of a square knot It can be dangerous because it slips and jams.
The angler’s knot is a safe, strong knot used in fishing to tie a loop in a leader, which connects the hook with the line.
In one simple method, form a piece of light yarn into a loop and place it along the rope near the end to be whipped.
Then tightly wind the yarn around the loop and rope to bind them together.
Keep winding until the length of the whipping equals the rope’s diameter, but leave a small part of the yarn loop exposed.
When the winding is completed, draw the short end of the twine through the loop, and pull both ends until the loop is drawn beneath the winding.
They call it the pa/m and needle method because it involves the use of a needle similar to that used for sewing, and a leather glove, or palm.
Some of the most useful knots are described and illustrated with this article.
It serves to join the ends of two ropes, and has the advantage of strength and ease of tying and untying.
Two half hitches is the name of a knot used to temporarily but quickly fasten a line to a post, a hook, or a ring.
At the end of a rope, the bowline forms a strong loop that will not slip or jam if properly tied.
Its uses include fastening animals to objects and forming seats from which people may be suspended while painting, cleaning, or doing other jobs.
Two half hitches are used to fasten a rope temporarily to a post, hook, or ring.
Other useful hitches include the clove hitch for fastening rope to smooth timbers, and the timber hitch for dragging logs.
People used them to tie arrowheads to their shafts, and to tie bowstrings to bows.
Other early uses of knots included making clothes and fishing nets, and binding wood together to make a hut or other shelter.
The ancient Inca Indians of Peru used knots to keep records of sums and figures.
One of the most famous knots is the Gordian knot, mentioned in Greek mythology.
Knotweed is the name of a large group of weeds found in the northern United States and in Canada.
It is used to make a sling by joining two ropes or two ends of the same rope.
The clove hitch, or ratline hitch, is a quick and simple method of fastening a rope around a post or a stake.
The timber hitch is a strong knot used for lifting crates and bales and towing logs and other cylindrical objects.
It can be used to make a temporary noose or a lasso. knotweed has jointed stems that lie flat against the ground.
Know-Nothings were members of certain secret societies that flourished in the United States from 1852 to 1860.
They objected to immigration and the election or appointment of Roman Catholics and the foreign-born to official positions.
The Know-Nothings split over the slavery question in the election of 1856, and the party rapidly declined.
He ran for vice president of the United States with Alfred M Landon on the Republican ticket in 1936 but was defeated.
After the United States entered World War It in 1941, Knox selected the officers who planned the major United States naval campaigns.
He bought a controlling interest in the Chicago Daily News in 1931 and served as its publisher until 1940.
Alonzo L Hamby Knox, nahks, Henry , was an American Revolutionary War general and the nation’s first secretary of war.
He joined the Boston Grenadier Corps in 1772 and studied military science and engineering.
In 1775, he became a colonel in charge of the artillery of the Continental Army.
Knox directed Washington's troops when they crossed the Delaware River in December 1776 and then marched on Trenton, New Jersey.
Washington commended him publicly for his role in the campaign, and Knox was promoted to brigadier general.
Knox became secretary of war in 1785, before the adoption of the Constitution.
In 1790, Knox proposed that a national militia be organized, but Congress rejected the plan.
Paul David Nelson Knox, nahks, John , led the Protestant Reformation in Scotland.
His strong personality and fiery preaching made him one of the most powerful Scots of his day.
Under the leadership of Knox, the Church of Scotland adopted a declaration of faith, a form of government, and a liturgy.
The Church reflected the teachings of the reformer John Calvin, who greatly influenced Knox.
The church owned much of the wealth, and the kings and nobles controlled the church.
Politically, Scotland was merely one small part of the rivalry between France and England.
During Knox's early years, a few Scots tried to become Protestant reformers, though they had little hope for reform in either church or government.
In the early 1540's, Knox became a follower of the Protestant reformer George Wishart.
Early in 1546, Wishart was arrested on the orders of Cardinal Beaton of St.
In revenge, a group of Protestants assassinated the cardinal later that year and seized the castle of St.
Knox did not take part in the assassination, but he joined the Protestants in the castle.
Mary of Guise, the Roman Catholic pro-French regent of Scotland, asked for assistance from France.
Andrews in July 1547, and Knox and several others were taken to France as galley slaves.
Jn 1549, the English government obtained the release of Knox and his associates.
The government wanted them to build a pro-English Protestant party in Scotland.
However, the pro-French Catholics in Scotland were too strong, so Knox went to England as a minister.
He preached in Berwick for two years and became known as a radical Protestant reformer.
In 1553, Mary Tudor became queen of England and made Roman Catholicism the state religion again.
Knox was one of the Marian Exiles—Protestants who fled to the European continent as religious refugees.
Late in 1554, Knox became pastor of a church of English refugees in Frankfurt , Germany.
He was forced to leave Frankfurt after a conflict with moderate Protestants.
He returned to Geneva with most of the English radicals from Frankfurt, and founded a new refugee church.
In Geneva, Knox corresponded secretly with Protestants in England, Scotland, and France.
He also wrote pamphlets justifying the rights of persecuted people to rebel against tyrannical rulers.
Queen Mary died in 1558, and her successor, Queen Elizabeth, restored England's independent state religion.
The English government helped him and his associates establish Protestantism as Scotland's national religion.
Under Knox's leadership, the Scottish Parliament established a Reformed Protestant national church in 1560.
From 1560 until his death, Knox was Scotland's most powerful political and religious leader.
Giles’s Cathedral, which became the political and religious center of Scotland.
His unfinished History of the Reformation of Religion in the Realm of Scotland is a dramatic autobiographical account of the Scottish Reformation to about 1564.
Knoxville, NAHKS vih/ (pop.3,890; met. area pop. 687,249), is one of the largest cities in Tennessee.
Knoxville lies on the Tennessee River in the heart of the Appalachian Ridge and Valley Region of eastern Tennessee.
The Tennessee Valley Authority , a federal development agency, has its headquarters in Knoxville.
The city also serves as the gateway to Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
In 1786, the James White family of North Carolina became the first permanent settlers in the area of what is now Knoxville.
White, a trader and farmer, chose the site due to its location near the junction of three rivers used as travel routes.
In 1791, the site became part of the newly organized Territory of the United States South of the River Ohio.
White's settlement, named Knoxville to honor Secretary of War Henry Knox, became the new territory's capital.
The Knoxville Symphony Orchestra performs regularly throughout the year.
Blount House, built for Governor William Blount in 1792, is one of the oldest frame houses west of the Blue Ridge Mountains.
Manufacturing is a less significant part of the city’s economy than it once was.
The West Town Mall and Knoxville Center shopping complexes help make the city the major commercial center of eastern Tennessee.
Gatlinburg in the Great Smoky Mountains and Pigeon Forge, with its country-music theaters, outlet malls, and Dollywood theme park, attract many visitors.
City voters elect the mayor and nine city council members to four-year terms.
Cherokee Indians lived in the Knoxville area when the White family arrived in 1786.
During the American Civil War , Union troops led by Major General Ambrose E Burnside defeated Confederate forces under General James Longstreet in Knoxville.
TVA dams made the Tennessee River navigable to large vessels from New Orleans to Knoxville via the Mississippi and Ohio rivers.
Today, most of TVA’s electric power comes from nuclear and coal-burning plants.
In the last half of the 1900's, many old buildings near the center of Knoxville were torn down and replaced by new ones.
Redevelopment of an old industrial area along the Tennessee River began in the 1990's and continued into the 2000's.
The project included the construction of parks, condominiums, and restaurants.
Koala, koh AH /uh, is an Australian mammal that looks like a teddy bear.
It is sometimes called a koa/a bear or native bear, but the koala is not related to any kind of bear.
Koalas have soft, thick fur; a large, hairless nose; round ears; and no tail.
They spend nearly all their time in trees and come down only to move to another one.
The word koa/a comes from an Australian Aborigine word meaning no drink.
The young koala, known as a joey, is carried inside of a pouch on its mother's belly until it is more completely developed.
Unlike most other marsupials, the koala has a pouch that opens toward the rear of its body.
The joey spends its first seven months in the mother’s pouch and the next six riding on her back. pouch for about seven months, suckling on one of the mother's two nipples.
People have cut down eucalyptus forests for housing developments, resorts, and farmland.
Much of the koala population is also infected by chlamydia, a disease that can cause blindness, infertility in females, and pneumonia.
Australian and international conservation organizations are working to counteract the effects of the disease.
Kobe was built on a narrow, fan-shaped plain that stretches between the sea and a row of high mountains to the north.
Kobe has long rows of docks, and is an important center of heavy industry and shipbuilding.
Many people worship at the ancient Buddhist temple of Nofukuji, which houses a wooden statue carved about 794.
In 1956, construction of new buildings and repair of harbor facilities made Kobe the leading export and import center of Japan.
It caused over 6,000 deaths and enormous property destruction and damage.
Kenneth B Pyle Kobuk Valley National Park, KOH buk or koh BUK, is in northwestern Alaska.
The Great Kobuk Sand Dunes, soine of the few sand dunes in the Arctic region, lie near the center of the park.
The area became a national monument in 1978 and a national park in 1980.
Critically reviewed by the National Park Service Koch, kawhk or kohk, Robert , a German physician, played a key role in helping bacteriology develop as a science during the 1800's.
He introduced new techniques of staining and cu/turing bacteria, and he became the first scientist to show that specific bacteria cause certain diseases.
He received the Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine in 1905 for his work on tuberculosis.
He began to study anthrax, a disease that affects people and livestock.
Koch discovered that rodlike bacteria in the blood of diseased animals caused anthrax.
His research on the anthrax bacterium becanie a model for the study ot gernis that cause specific diseases.
Koch won fame in 1877, when he published an article describing a method to study bacteria.
The method included exarnining thin films of bacterial cultures on glass slides and photographing them to record their structure.
The same year, he published a book that described a series of steps to detertnine whether a certain germ Causes a particular disease.
These steps, now known as Kochss postulates, are still used by bacteriologists.
Also in the early 1880's, he developed bacterial cultures that he grew in gelatin, agar, and similar solid substances—a technique that revolutionized bacteriology.
Koch discovered the cause of cholera epidemics in Egypt and India in 1883 and 1884.
In 1891, Koch founded and becanie director of the Institute for Infectious Diseases in Berlin.
In 1897, he demonstrated the cause and cure for rinderpest, a disease killing cattle in what is now South Africa.
In 1905, he conducted important research on sleeping sickness in what is now Tanzania.
Kodaly, koh DYor koh DAH ee, Zoltan, ZAWL tahn , was a Hungarian cumposer, music historian, and educator.
Along with his friend, Hungarian composer Béla Bartok, Kodaly promoted modern music and collected and studied the folk music of Hungary and its surrounding regions.
His compositional style, like that of Bartok, is rooted in Hungarian folk idioms.
But Kodaly’s music is less intellectually complex than Bartok’s more advanced works.
Kodaly believed strongly in the expressive capabilities of the human voice, and his compositions are characterized by the beauty and inventiveness of their vocal lines.
Kodaly’s method of music education was based on the idea that choral singing is the easiest and most rewarding way for most people to learn about music.
The International Kodaly Society, based in Budapest, was founded in 1975.
Stewart L Ross Koestler, KEHST /uhr, Arthur , was a Hungarian-born novelist and essayist.
His most successful political novels, Darkness at Noon and Arrival and Departure , reject dictators and Communism.
Serving as a foreign correspondent in the Spanish Civil War , he was jailed by the fascists.
It was called the Kofun era because dead leaders were buried in large tombs called kofun.
It is sometimes called the Yamato period because the emperors began to rule from the Yamato area, around what is now the city of Nara.
Japan’s royal family traces its ancestry to the emperors of the Kofun era.
In the later part of the Kofun era, Chinese culture and Buddhism greatly influenced the development of Japanese art, literature, and government.
Buddhism became popular among rulers and leading families, but Shinto remained a chief religion.
In 646, the emperor began the Taika Reform, a program to establish a central government.
In 710, the central government was moved to Nara, and the Nara period began.
Tetsuo Najita Kohli, Helmut, HEHL moot, was chancellor of West Germany from 1982 to 1990, and chancellor of reunified Germany from 1990 to 1998.
From 1949 to 1990, Germany had been divided into two countries— West Germany and East Germany.
He supported close ties between West Germany and the United States and forged new links with the Soviet Union.
Neo-Nazis and other right-wing groups protested immigration and attacked foreigners.
Kohl served in the parliament of the West German state of RhinelandPalatinate from 1959 to 1976.
In 1976, he became a member of West Germany's lower house of parliament.
The upper house of parliament had voted to remove Helmut Schmidt from office and replace him with Kohl.
West Germany and East Germany were reunified into the nation of Germany on Oct., 1990, with Kohl as chancellor.
Kohl's coalition won a majority in the parliamentary elections of 1990 and 1994, but failed to win a majority in 1998.
Kohl stepped down both as chancellor of Germany and as chairman of the C.D.U. in 1998.
In 1999, Kohl admitted that the CD.U. had engaged in illegal fund-raising while he was chairman.
Melvin Croan Kohler, KUHL ur, Wolfgang , a psychologist, helped to develop Gestalt psychology.
Gestaltists argue that behavior is best understood when studied as an organized pattern rather than as separate parts.
Kenneth E Clark Kohirabi, koh/ RAH bee or KOHL rn bee, is a garden vegetable grown for its large, edible stem.
The top of the stem is shaped like a bulb and grows just above the ground.
The bulb looks and tastes like a turnip, but it is sweeter and more delicate.
Kohlrabi is a good source of vitamin C It grows best at temperatures between 60 and 65 °F and matures in 50 to WORLD BOOK illustration by Jill Coombs The kohlrabi plant has an edible, bulb-shaped stem.
Kokoschka, koh KAWSH kuh, Oskar , was an Austrian painter associated with the expressionist movement.
Kokoschka painted his best-known pictures ina restless, energetic style that reflects a feeling of anxiety and agitation.
His first paintings were portraits of friends and prominent individuals that skillfully capture the inner nature of the subject.
Kokoschka traveled through Europe from 1924 to 1931, painting dramatic views of major cities, usually from an elevated viewpoint.
From 1938 to 1948 he lived in London, where he painted many historical and mythological subjects as well as landscapes.
Kola nut, also spelled cola, is the seed of several types of evergreen trees that are native to West Africa.
They contain the chemicals caffeine and theobromine, which have a mild, stimulating effect.
Kola nut trees reach Pamela A Ivinski WORLD BOOK illustration by Stuart Lafford, Linden Artists Ltd.
Kola nuts Oil painting on canvas r 926); Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, N.Y., Room of Co Kokoschka’s View of the Thames was one of several panoramic views of cities that the artist painted between 1924 and 1931.
They have oblong, leathery leaves, yellow flowers, and star-shaped fruit.
Kola nuts are grown in Asia, South America, western Africa, and the West Indies.
The scientific name for an important commercial species is Cola acuminata.
The city has some of the worst living conditions in the world because of overcrowding, poverty, and starvation.
In 2001, the city’s official name was changed from Calcutta to Kolkata, the Bengali name for the city.
The city covers about 40 square miles (104 square kilometers) on the east bank of the Hooghly, a branch of the Ganges River.
Haora, the second largest city of the Kolkata metropolitan area, is on the west bank.
The Maidan, a large park, occupies 2 square miles (5 square kilometers) in the center of Kolkata.
Government buildings line the Esplanade, a wide street north of the Maidan.
The Victoria Memorial, an impressive building of white marble, houses a picture gallery and a historical museum.
The Indian Museum, built in 1875, features collections of cultural materials.
Most of Kolkata’s people speak one of three languages—Bengali, Hindi, or Urdu.
Hinduism is the principal religion, but Muslims make up about 15 percent of the population.
Wealthy Kolkatans live near the center of the city in pleasant neighborhoods with wide streets and modern houses.
Many bustee dwellings have no electricity or running water, and some have no sewage disposal.
These conditions, plus constant and widespread undernourishment, lead to frequent outbreaks of cholera and other diseases.
Since the 1960's, the government has worked to improve living conditions in the bustees.
It installed electricity, running water, and sewage facilities in many bustees.
Other Kolkata products include electric equipment, metal goods, paint, and shoes.
The city is the shipping outlet for the coal and iron mines in northeastern India.
The East India Company, an English trading firm, founded the city as Calcutta in 1690.
The settlement grew rapidly in size and importance, and many neighboring villages became part of it.
By 1900, Calcutta ranked second only to London as the largest city in the British Empire.
In 1912, India’s capital was moved to Delhi, which has a more central location.
When India gained independence in 1947, Calcutta became the capital of the new state of West Bengal.
Outbreaks of political and religious violence continued to occur frequently in the city.
The Weavers by Kathe Kollwitz was the artist's first important series of prints.
The series portrayed the tragic results of a strike by impoverished German weavers against factory owners in 1840.
This final print in the series shows dead weavers being returned to their homes after the violent end of the strike.
Kollwitz lived in the slums of Berlin, and she championed the cause of the poor in her art.
She became especially noted for powertul woodcuts that feature roughly cut black and white shapes.
They depict historical events in which the poor fought their oppressors.
Kollwitzs War, a series of seven wood-block prints, expressed a woman's reaction against the violence and destruction of war.
This giant lizard inhabits the tropical island of Komodo and a few other islands of Indonesia.
Komodo dragons have scaly bodies with long necks, strong claws, and sharp, sawlike teeth.
Their forked tongues have an organ of smell that helps them detect rotting animals several miles or kilometers away.
They use their speed and strength to overpower deer, wild pigs, and even water buffaloes.
Their saliva contains bacteria that can kill wounded prey in a few days.
Her eggs hatch in eight to nine months, and the young may take five years to mature.
Komodo dragons have become endangered because people destroyed their habitat or overhunted their prey.
People also trapped dragons to sell them as pets or killed them for their body parts.
Indonesia now protects dragons from poachers, and biologists are trying to save their habitat.
Komondor, KOH mahn daw, is a breed of dog that was raised for centuries to guard livestock on the Hungarian plains.
This large white dog is thought to have been brought to Hungary from central Asia by the Magyars in the 800’s.
A full-grown komondor is covered with a heavy coat that falls toward the ground in cords.
Komondors make excellent guard dogs, and many are kept as household pets.
They have been known to protect children as well as other pets in the family, Critically reviewed by the Komondor Club of America Kon-Tiki.
Kongo, KAHNG goh, was an African kingdom that lasted from the 1400's to the early 1700's.
Each district was ruled by a chief chosen by the king or the governor of the province in which the district was located.
By 1500, the Kongo was divided into six provinces, each ruled by a governor.
He had no army, so he needed a strong personality to keep the kingdom together.
They converted some Kongolese, including King Nzinga Nkuwu, to Christianity.
But beginning in the early 1500’s, the Portuguese enslaved many Kongolese and made them work in Portuguese colonies.
By the early 1600's, the slave trade had weakened the Kongo, and the kingdom was breaking apart.
The invaders defeated the king's forces and killed him and many members of the nobility.
Basil E Frankweiler and in 1997 for The View from Saturday. \n 2001, she was awarded the Regina Medal by the Catholic Library Association.
Virginia L Wolf Konoye, koh noh yeh, Prince Fumimaro (18911945), was premier of Japan from 1937 to 1939 and from 1940 to 1941.
Konoye was a leading moderate, but his willingness to compromise with the militarist extremists helped them accomplish their war aims.
But he gave way in 1941 to General Hideki Tojo’s Cabinet, which led Japan into World War Il.
Konoye was born into one of Japan’s most aristocratic families on Oct 12, 1891, in Tokyo.
Konoye helped bring about Japan's surrender in World War II in 1945, but he was named a war-criminal suspect and took poison.
Kookaburra, KUK uh Bur uh, is the name of a group of woodland kingfishers that live in Australia and New Guinea.
A kookaburra’'s call sounds like a loud laugh, and it is sometimes called the /aughing jackass.
They have large heads, long bills, and brown, black, or white feathers.
Kookaburras eat caterpillars, fish, frogs, insects, small mammals, snakes, worms, and even small birds.
The scientific name for the most familiar species, the laughing kookaburra, is Dacelo novaeguineae.
Koontz, Dean , is one of the most popular and productive American authors of suspense fiction.
His best thrillers combine elements of horror, suspense, and romance, and sometimes science fiction.
He worked as a high school English teacher from 1967 to 1969, when he became a full-time author.
Koontz earned widespread attention with Whispers , a story about a psychopath stalking a woman.
Strangers mixes mystery and the supernatural. /ntensity portrays the battle between a psychology student and a vicious killer.
Koontz also has written under a number of other names, including Deanna Dwyer, Brian Coffey, Leigh Nichols, and Owen West Kootenay Indians.
Koppel, Ted , an English-born newsman, ranks among the most respected journalists in American television.
On the nightly program, Koppel explores the major news stories of the day, often interviewing the most important people involved in the story.
Koppel has been praised for his intelligent, evenhanded, and informed interviewing style.
He moved to the United States with his family in 1953 and became a United States citizen in 1963.
In 1979, a group of Iranian revolutionaries invaded the United States Embassy in Tehran and took several Americans hostage.
WORLD BOOK illustration by Harry McNaught The kookaburra, or /aughing jackass, has a \arge head; a long, heavy bill; and brown, black, or white feathers.
It is North Korea’s largest city and its cultural, economic, and industrial center.
The other is the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea— commonly called North Korea.
In non-Communist South Korea, the people elect their national political leaders.
North and South Korea lie on the Korean Peninsula, which extends south from northeastern China.
North Korea covers the northern half of the peninsula, and South Korea occupies the southern half.
North Korea is slightly larger in area than South Korea, but the South has about twice as many people as the North.
Plains stretch along the western, northeastern, and southern coasts of Korea.
The majority of the Korean people live on the coastal plains or in river valleys.
Until the 1900's, Korea’s economy was based almost entirely on agriculture.
Today, industry is far more important than agriculture in both North and South Korea.
Scientists have evidence that people lived in what is now Korea at least 30,000 years ago.
Various Korean and foreign states ruled the Korean peninsula from ancient times to the 1900's.
Korea was a colony of Japan from 1910 until World War II ended in 1945.
It is South Korea’s largest city and also one of the largest cities in the world in population.
This action started the Korean War, which was part of the Cold War struggle between Communist and nonCommunist nations.
But neither side won a complete victory, and a permanent peace treaty has never been signed.
Since the war, small-scale fighting between South and North Korea has occasionally taken place.
In the 1970's and 1980's, representatives of the two states held discussions from time to time about reunifying Korea.
In 1991, South and North Korea signed an agreement not to use force against each other.
In 2000, the leaders of North and South Korea met for the first time since Korea was divided.
The Constitution calls for the election of national government leaders by the people.
The president of South Korea is both the head of state and the head of the government.
The president appoints a prime minister, who carries out the operations of the government.
In addition, the president appoints 15 to 30 State Council members, who head government departments.
The North's flag and coat of arms have ared star that represents Communism.
Rice and an electric power plant on the coat of arms stand for the importance of agriculture and industry to the North.
The country also has five cities—Inchon, Kwangju, Pusan, Taegu, and Taejon—that have the same status as provinces.
Each province is divided into two kinds of government units—cities and counties.
For many years, the president of South Korea appointed most local leaders.
In 1995, for the first time since the 1960s, elections were held for provincial governors, city mayors, and other city and county officials.
Since the 1980's, political parties in South Korea have frequently changed and reorganized.
The Supreme Court, which is South Korea’s highest court, consists of a chief justice and up to 13 other justices.
The president appoints the chief justice— and the other justices, who are recommended by the chief justice—with the approval of the National Assembly.
South Korea has a Constitution Court that rules on such questions as the constitutionality of laws.
Other courts include appeals courts, district courts, and a family court.
Manufacturing—cement, chemicals, iron and steel, machinery, metals, processed foods, textiles.
This ancient Asian symbol represents the balance in the universe between opposites—such as night and day, and life and death.
The Sea of Japan, known to Koreans as the East Sea, lies to the east and the Yellow Sea to the west.
Agricu/ture—apples, barley, Chinese cabbage, melons, onions, potatoes, rice, soybeans, sweet potatoes.
Manuftacturing—automobiles, chemicals, clothing, computer equipment, electric appliances, iron and steel, machinery, plywood, processed foods, rubber tires, ships, shoes, television sets, textiles.
The armies of both South and North political units include cities, counties, towns, villages, Korea are among the world’s largest.
South Korea also has a people's assembly that directs the local government. a navy of about 60,000 and an air force of about 50,000.
About 35 million people are —_ laws, chooses all candidates for elections, and approves members of a civilian defense corps. all people appointed to public office.
The North Korean Constitution gives Korea has a number of other political parties.
The Central Court is North Korea's highest rights as freedom of the press, religion, and speech.
Other The Communists maintain strict contro] over all aspects courts in North Korea include provincial courts and peoof life to ensure their dominance of the country. ple’s courts.
The chairman of the National Armed forces of North Korea consist of a1 millionDefense Commission is considered the head of state member army, an air force of about 85,000 members, and North Korea's most powerful official.
About 600,000 people serve People’s Committee is the most powerful policymaking in the army reserve and about 65,000 in the naval rebody. {t varies in size but usually has about 20 members. serve.
About 4 million people are members of local miliThese officials, who are all high-ranking members of the __ tia forces.
Members of the army must North Korea's legislature, called the Supreme Peoples serve 5 to 8 years.
The air force requires 3 to 4 years of Assembly, elects the chairman of the National Defense service, and the navy requires 5 to 10 years.
Women join Commission and the members of the Central People’s the armed forces on a volunteer basis.
But the legislature has little powsettled in what is now Korea by at least 30,000 years ago. er.
It meets only one or two weeks a year and functions They came from regions to the north and northwest.
They may have come from the sponsible for carrying out government policies.
It is north about 5,000 years ago. headed by a premier, who is appointed by the Supreme Population.
Seoul, the capital, is also the largest heads of government ministries and commissions, who South Korean city.
It has more than 10 million people. are appointed by the Central People’s Committee.
Koreans Four Special Cities—Kaesong, Najin Sonbong, Nampo, make up almost the entire population of Korea.
South Korea— 1990 census for largest cittes, 1975 census for all other places.
Scholars classify it in the same language family as Japanese, but Korean is unlike any other language.
It was developed by scholars at the court of King Sejong in the 1440's.
South Koreans use some Chinese symbols in addition to han gul in their writing.
Way of life Before the 1900's, Korea was an agricultural society built on strong family ties.
The oldest male served as head of the family, and all people were expected to obey their elders without question.
This way of life changed quickly after Japan seized control of Korea in 1910.
The Japanese brought industry to Korean cities and took much farmland away from the farmers.
The old way of life changed even more after Korea's division in the 1940's.
In the North, the Communists took steps to make the country an industrial society.
Following Communist ideas, they also tried to weaken the importance of the family.
In the South, economic and political ties with Western nations brought South Koreans under the influence of Western customs.
Changes in both North and South Korea since the 1950's have led to a rapid increase in the proportion of city dwellers.
South Koreans are attracted to cities because of the opportunities there.
The cities have colleges and universities, better health-care facilities, and a variety of entertainment.
Many high-rise apartment buildings and modern houses have been built in Seoul and other large South Korea’s housing styles include apartment buildings and traditional-style houses.
Many apartment buildings rise in Pyongyang, North Koreas capital, far /eft A traditionalstyle house in a South Korean suburb, /eft, has a tile roof.
But it has been difficult to meet the rapidly rising need for housing, and many people have been forced to live in distant suburbs.
The rise in population has also strained such public services as water, sewerage, and transportation.
In addition, as South Koreans become more prosperous, the number of automobiles continues to increase.
Traffic jams are frequent, and major cities suffer from a severe pollution problem.
The majority of them live in oneor two-room apartments built after Korea’s division.
Pyongyang is North Korea’s most modern city, with skyscrapers, broad boulevards, cultural centers, and sports stadiums.
Many South Koreans, including those in rural areas, live in houses made of bricks or concrete blocks, with roofs of cement tiles and slate.
Many houses are two or three stories, though such houses are less common in rural areas than in the cities.
Most houses have ondo/-floors of thick stone slabs covered by oiled papers or mats.
Traditionally, channels under the floors carried hot air from the kitchen or an indoor fireplace to heat the rooms.
In many homes today, pipes carry heated water under the floors to provide heat.
The South Korean government maintains a campaign to improve roads, irrigation, and living conditions in rural areas.
After the division of Korea, the Communists in the North built many apartments on co/lective farms in rural areas.
All North Korean farmers work on such farms, which are operated cooperatively by a large group of farmers.
Most farming is done with modern machinery, and virtually all homes have electric power.
However, many people wear traditional clothing for holidays and special occasions.
Traditional clothing for women consists of a long, full skirt and a tight-fitting jacket.
Other common foods include barley; fish; such fruits as apples, peaches, pears, and melons; and such vegetables as beans, potatoes, and sweet potatoes.
One of the most popular dishes other than rice is kimchi, a highly spiced mixture of Chinese cabbage, white radishes, and several other vegetables.
Adults drink soju, a distilled alcoholic beverage usually made from grain, as well as chongju, known in the West as sake or rice wine.
In the rural areas, a home-brewed drink known as makkol/i, made from rice, has also been popular.
Television and radio broadcasts of local and national athletic meets attract a wide audience.
In North Korea, the government operates gymnasiums and promotes participation in organized sports programs.
South Korean cities and towns have many theaters for motion pictures, plays, and concerts.
In North Korea, most forms of entertainment are supported and controlled by the state.
Drama groups travel throughout the country to perform for workers in rural areas.
Both North and South Koreans enjoy reading novels, short stories, and poems.
North Korea discourages the practice of religion. complete freedom of religion.
But the government discourages religion because it conflicts with the teachings of Communism.
Confucianism, which is more a philosophy than a religion, traditionally has been the most widely followed set of beliefs in Korea.
Today, most South Koreans— no matter what religion they follow—believe in at least some of the teachings of Confucianism.
For example, most families in the South follow the Confucian practice of honoring their ancestors in special ceremonies.
About 20 percent of South Koreans are Buddhists, about 18 percent are Protestants, and about 3 percent are Roman Catholics.
These South Korean musicians, members of the National Classical Music Institute, are playing copies of instruments used hundreds of years ago.
Since the late 1940's, South and North Korea have made special efforts to improve their educaKorea terrain map tional systems.
South Korean law requires that all children complete elementary school, which in that country goes through grade 6.
Nevertheless, the vast majority of children aged 12 to 17 attend secondary school.
Technical training, which prepares students for industrial jobs, beLand region boundary } ¢ | City or town + 7 L 7 Musu Point Pe gins in the middle schools and continues through all Deg f\ Su “eB sani tadee eencnaak higher levels of education.
More than 1 million students attend universities, coe Ry UE sey) aes colleges, and junior colleges in South Korea.
PUN a ao iy (Seaot Jaga North Korea requires children to attend school for 11 Us “ih a fee Changadae Pt. years, including a year of preschool.
Those who continue attend a two-year high ti ee, ie Ps fea ly school, a two-year general vocational school, or a three© ere 2 7 SF Rg KOre or four-year technical school that provides training for engineering and scientific jobs.
Students who finish high school or technical school may go to college immediately.
Vocational school graduates must complete a year of special study before they enter college.
Early Korean art developed under the influCheju ae ence of both Chinese art and the teachings of Buddhism Chet germ spelu Ld AP and Confucianism.
The i aad hae most widely practiced art forms included music, poetry, pottery, sculpture, and painting.
In South Korea, artists work with tradifone iand) LUE 1 SapungReservoir 0.
BT tional themes and with various forms of Western art. eee a ee Jaedong het a ae Western art has influenced all forms of South Korean ae pers ee ee aa TongiOsan Baye og.-es ame | art.
More than 3,000 islands, which are part of Korea, lie off the southern and western coasts of the peninsula.
The East Sea, also called the Sea of Japan, lies east of the peninsula.
The Yellow Sea lies west of Korea, and the Korea Strait lies to the south.
The Northwestern Plain stretches along the entire western coast of North Korea.
The Northwestern Plain has most of North Korea's farmland and its major industrial area, including Pyongyang.
The Northern Mountains region, east of the Northwestern Plain, covers almost all of central North Korea.
These mountains are an important source of valuable minerals and forest products.
Almost a fourth of North Korea's people live in the Northern Mountains region.
The Eastern Coastal Lowland covers almost all of North Korea’s east coast.
This strip of land between the Northern Mountains region and the East Sea consists of a series of narrow plains separated by low hills.
The plains of the Eastern Coastal Lowland provide much farmland, and the sea makes fishing important in the region.
Like many of Korea's coastal areas, it consists of rolling hills and plains that make fertile farmland. live in this small but heavily populated region.
The Central Mountains region extends throughout most of central and eastern South Korea and into a small part of southern North Korea.
Forested mountains cover most of the region, including much of the seacoast.
River valleys, hillsides, and some land along the coast are used for farming.
More than a fourth of the South Korean people live in the Central Mountains region.
This important agricultural region consists of a series of plains separated by low hills.
Pusan, South Korea's second largest city and an important industrial center, is located in the region.
This rugged land is an important source of minerals and forest products.
It flows through the Southern Plain from mountains in the north to the Korea Strait.
Almost a fourth of the South Korean people live in the Southern Plain region.
The Southwestern Plain extends along almost the entire western coast of South Korea.
Like much of the rest of coastal Korea, this region consists of rolling hills and plains and is a farming center.
The Han River flows through the region from mountains in the east to the Yellow Sea.
The South's major industrial area is located around Seoul, which is the South’s largest city.
Cheju Island, about 50 miles south of the peninsula, is the largest island.
South Korea's highest mountain, Halla-san , rises 6,398 feet on Cheju Island.
Climate Seasonal winds called monsoons affect Korea's weather throughout the year.
A monsoon blows in from the south and southeast during the summer, bringing hot, humid weather.
A cold, dry monsoon blows in from the north and northwest during the winter, bringing cold weather.
Korea's massive mountains protect the peninsula's east coast from the winter monsoon.
As a result, the east coast generally has warmer winters than does the rest of Korea.
Average January temperatures range from about 35 °F in southeastern Korea to about —5 °F in parts of the Northern Mountains region.
Precipitation averages from 30 to 60 inches a year in most of North Korea.
Heavy rainfall from June through August accounts for about half of Korea‘s yearly precipitation.
In most years, one or two typhoons hit the peninsula during July and August.
Economy After the Korean War ended in 1953, the economies of South and North Korea grew rapidly.
Before the war, the economies of both parts of Korea had depended chiefly on agriculture, though North Korea had some heavy industry and South Korea had some light industry.
After the war, industrial production, especially manufacturing, gained much importance in both economies.
In addition, such service activities as communication, government, trade, and transportation grew in importance, particularly in South Korea.
The value of goods and services produced each year in South Korea totals about $485 billion.
Service industries account for about 51 percent of South Korea's GNP, and industrial production accounts for about 43 percent.
Agriculture employs about 12 percent of all South Korean workers, industry about 28 percent, and service activities about 60 percent.
Service industries are economic activities that provide services, rather than produce goods.
Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, and restaurants make up the main service industry group of South Korea.
This service industry group benefits heavily from tourist activities, and it employs more than 25 percent of all workers.
Government services and such community, social, and personal services as education and health care also employ many people.
Other service industry groups are becoming increasingly important in South Korea.
They include finance, insurance, and real estate; transportation and communication; and utilities.
Manufacturing accounts for about 60 percent of the South's industrial production.
The manufacture of clothing, shoes, and textiles employs more of the people of South Korea than does any other industry.
After the Korean War, South Korea developed heavy industry, and it now ranks as a major producer of chemicals, fertilizers, iron and steel, machinery, and ships.
In the 1970's and 1980's, South Korea expanded its production of automobiles, computer equipment and parts, electric appliances, optical goods, and television sets.
Other manufactured products include paper, plywood, porcelain, and rubber tires.
South Korea's change from an agricultural economy to a modern industrial economy spurred a boom in construction.
Laffont, Sygma Manufacturing has helped make South Korea one of the world’s fastest-growing economies.
The production of clothing, shoes, and textiles provides jobs for many people, such as these workers in a Seoul garment factory. highways, and water and sewerage systems have been built throughout the nation.
Construction accounts for about 23 percent of industrial production, and mining accounts for about 2 percent.
South Korean farms also produce apples, barley, Chinese cabbage, melons, onions, potatoes, soybeans, sweet potatoes, hogs, and chickens.
The South's major agricultural areas lie along the western and southern coasts.
A large orange crop is harvested on Cheju Island, off the southern coast.
South Korea's chief trading partners are China, Japan, and the United States.
The South's main exports include automobiles, clothing, electrical equipment, electronics, fish, ships, shoes, steel, and textiles.
Its main imports include chemicals, crude oil and other industrial raw materials, and machinery.
Coal-, gas-, and petroleum-burning plants together provide about 60 percent of South Korea’s electric power.
South Korea has an excellent government-owned railroad system and a highway network that includes expressways between the principal cities.
South Korea has an average of about 1 automobile for every 6 people, and most city dwellers own a car.
Korean Air and Asiana Airlines, two privately owned airlines, provide international flights and service between major South Korean cities.
Private and government-owned radio and television networks broadcast throughout South Korea.
South Korea has an average of about 1 TV set for every 3 people and 1 radio per person.
The largest ones— Choson Ilbo, Dong-A IIbo, Hankook Ilbo, and Joong-ang I/bo—are all privately owned, published in Seoul, and sold throughout the country.
North Korea releases little information about its economy, and so the statistics in this section are estimates.
Agriculture employs about 30 percent of North Korea’s workers, industry about 30 percent, and service activities about 40 percent.
Until 1950, North Korea was the chief industrial region of the peninsula.
North Korea has rivers suitable for producing electric power, as well as some of the richest mineral deposits in eastern Asia.
Community, government, and personal services form North Korea's leading service industry group.
This group includes such activities as education, health care, government, and the military.
The North's chief manufactured products are cement, chemicals, iron and steel, machinery, metals, processed foods, and textiles.
The government owns nearly all North Korean factories, and it tightly controls all industry.
North Korean mines yield coal, graphite, iron ore, lead, magnesium, phosphates, salt, silver, tungsten, and zinc.
Workers on these farms receive a share of the products and some cash payment.
A few farms, called state farms, are owned and managed completely by the government.
North Korea's chief trading partners are China, Japan, and Russia and the other former republics of the Soviet Union.
North Korea's leading exports are mined products, chiefly iron ore, lead, tungsten, and zinc.
Its major imports are grain, machinery, petroleum, and transportation equipment.
About three-fourths of North Korea's energy is produced by coal-burning plants.
The rest of the North's energy comes from petroleum-burning plants and water power.
Railroads carry most of North Korea’s long-distance freight and passenger traffic.
Almost all cars are government-owned and are intended for official business use.
The government controls all broadcasting, publishing, and other means of communication in North Korea.
It runs the country’s radio and TV networks and its broadcasting stations in the provinces.
North Korea has an average of about 1 radio for every 6 people and 1 television set for every 20 people.
Scientists have found evidence that people lived in the southwestern part of the Korean Peninsula about 30,000 years ago.
In 2333 B.C, according to tradition, the first Korean state developed along the Taedong River, near presentday Pyongyang.
The other territory, called Nangnang in Korean and Lelang in Chinese, remained under Chinese control.
During the last century B.C., several Korean tribes united and formed the state of Koguryo in the northeastern part of the peninsula.
Two other Korean states— Paekche in the southwest and Silla in the southeast— were formed at about the same time.
In 313, Koguryo conquered Nangnang and took control of the northern half of Korea.
Buddhism, which the Koreans had learned about from the Chinese, became the chief religion of the Three Kingdoms in the 300's and 400's.
In the 500’s and 600's, wars raged among the Three Kingdoms for control of Korea.
With the help of the Chinese Tang dynasty, Silla conquered Paekche and Koguryo in the 660's and took control of most of the peninsula.
Confucianism, introduced from China, became a strong influence on Korean thought and behavior.
In the 800's, Silla broke apart as the kingdom lost control over former Koguryo and Paekche territories to rebel leaders.
The government of Koryo built schools and encouraged the development of printing to make more books available.
Mongol tribes from the north repeatedly attacked Koryo from the early 1230's until they conquered it in 1259.
Koryo regained its freedom in 1368 when the Ming dynasty rose to power in China.
Two groups, one allied with the Mongols, the other with the Ming dynasty, fought for control of Koryo.
General Yi became king of Koryo in 1392 and renamed the country Choson.
King Sejong’s court scholars created the Korean alphabet. 1590's Japanese forces invaded Korea but were driven out. 1630’s_ Manchu armies invaded Korea and forced it to acknowledge the Manchu as feudal lords.
Yi ended the governments official support of Buddhism, which had existed since the 700’s.
Buddhism declined in importance and did not become popular in Korea again until the 1900's.
Yi and the rulers who followed him reunited Korea, reorganized the government, and promoted the arts.
In the 1400's, they regained lost territory and established the present northern boundaries of the country.
But during the 1500's, government officials and wealthy landowners began to struggle for political power.
Japanese forces invaded Korea in the 1590's but were driven out with the assistance of Chinese forces.
The Manchus forced Koreans to submit tributes , but members of the Yi family continued as kings.
In the 1600's, Korea's rulers closed the country to all foreigners except Chinese and Japanese.
But Korean authorities persecuted the missionaries and killed thousands of Koreans who had become Catholics.
Soon thereafter, the United States, Russia, and several European nations signed commercial treaties with Korea.
Japan defeated China in the Chinese-Japanese War of 1894-1895, and Japanss influence in Korea became stronger than China's.
Japan's victory over Russia in the Russo-Japanese War forced Russia to recognize Japan's superior influence in Korea.
The Japanese governed Korea as a colony to benefit their own interests.
During the 1930's, the Japanese built heavy industries in Korea to supply Japan with chemicals, iron and steel, machinery, and other goods.
In the 1940's, the Japanese forced the Koreans to take Japanese-style names, and they banned the use of the Korean language.
Some Korean women were forced to work as prostitutes for the Japanese armed forces.
Korea remained under Japanese control until 1945, when Japan was defeated in World War Il.
After Japan's defeat, United States troops occupied the southern half of Korea, and Soviet forces occupied the northern half.
The United States and the Soviet Union tried to develop a plan for reuniting Korea.
They failed, and the United States submitted the problem to the United Nations in 1947.
The United Nations wanted to supervise elections to choose one government for Korea.
But the Soviet Union refused to allow UN representatives into the North.
In the South, in 1948, UN representatives supervised an election of representatives to a National Assembly.
In July 1948, the Assembly elected Syngman Rhee president of the Republic of Korea, which was formed on August 15.
In northern Korea, the Communists announced formation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on September 9. . a ii Both governments claimed to represent all of Korea.
In December 1948, the Soviet Union announced that all its troops had left North Korea.
The United States withdrew its last troops from South Korea in mid-1949.
North Korean troops invaded the South in June 1950, and the Korean War began.
The war involved not only the two Koreas, but also the most powerful Communist and nonCommunist nations.
But members of the National Assembly had become increasingly critical of Rhee, and he feared the legislators would not reelect him.
He pushed through the Assembly a constitutional amendment that turned over election of the president to the people.
In 1955, Rhee again had the Constitution amended to permit him to serve more than two terms.
But an increasing number of South Koreans strongly opposed Rhee’s undemocratic methods for keeping control of the government.
He was unopposed because his opponent died one month before the election.
In March and April, students led widespread demonstrations against the government.
Rhee saw that he was rapidly losing political and military support, and he resigned in April.
But South Korea's economic difficulties continued, and the new government weakened as rival groups fought for political power.
In May 1961, a group of military officers led by General Park Chung Hee overthrew the government.
His government concentrated on developing industries and increasing foreign trade.
In 1972, Park forced through a new constitution that gave him almost unlimited powers.
It also provided that the president might serve an unlimited number of terms.
Park was reelected by the country’s electoral college—whose members had been chosen by his supporters—in a special election held that year.
Park frequently used his power to suppress opposition to his government.
Freedom of speech and of the press were limited, and many South Koreans who opposed Park were jailed.
During the Korean War, United States troops had fought on the side of South Korea.
After the war, thousands of United States troops were stationed in South Korea.
But the United States government then said it would postpone further withdrawals until relations between North and South Korea improved.
In 1981, President Ronald Reagan announced that no more United States troops would be withdrawn.
In December, Prime Minister Choi Kyu Hah was elected president by the electoral college.
Chois government ended some of the restrictions on freedom of expression that Park had imposed.
But the government delayed a promised constitutional revision that would allow the people to elect the president directly.
In May 1980, military leaders declared martial law and reestablished the restrictions on freedom of expression.
Choi remained president, but the military, led by Lieutenant General Chun Doo Hwan, dominated the government.
Violent clashes broke out between demonstrators and the military in the city of Kwangju.
Hundreds of demonstrators were killed in what came to be known as the Kwangju Massacre.
In August 1980, Choi resigned and the electoral college elected Chun president.
Chun’s government stabilized prices and increased exports, but scandals involving Chun’s relatives lessened its popularity.
Many students demonstrated against Chun and demanded a more democratic constitution.
A new constitution. |n June 1987, Chun pledged to allow direct election of the president by the people rather than by the electoral college.
In October 1987, a new democratic constitution was adopted by a referendum of all the voters.
Since its adoption, students have demonstrated in large numbers demanding correction of many social problems.
Laborers have staged frequent strikes for higher wages and better working conditions.
The political and economic turmoil have interfered with South Korea's economic growth.
Kim I] Sung became North Korea’s leader when the government was established in 1948.
In 1946, when North Korea was still under Soviet occupation, the Communist government took farmland from wealthy landowners and gave it to poor farmers.
From 1953 to 1956, Kim's government organized all farmland into collective farms.
In 1954, it announced the first of a series of plans for economic development, all emphasizing heavy industry.
After the Korean War ended in 1953, the two sides remained hostile and suspicious of each other.
In 1967, North Korean forces began making attacks in the demilitarized zone between the North and the South and into South Korea.
In 1971, representatives of the South and the North began formal reunification discussions for the first time since the Korean War.
North Korea refused to participate after its request to be named co-host was denied.
In 1991, the two governments agreed to accept each other's existence, and North and South Korea joined the UN as separate states.
Also in 1991, talks resulted in several agreements, including a pact in which the two Koreas agreed not to use force against each other.
As part of the pact, the two governments also agreed to increase trade and communication—which had been restricted— between them.
Another accord prohibited North and South Korea from using or possessing nuclear weapons.
In 2000, for the first time since Korea was divided, the leaders of North and South Korea met face-to-face to discuss relations.
Kim Dae Jung, a strong advocate of democracy, was elected president in 1997.
He was the first politician from an opposition party—a party that does not have a majority of seats in parliament—to hold South Korea‘s presidency.
AP/Wide World The leaders of North and South Korea met in 2000 for the first time since Korea was divided.
North Korea's leader, Kim Jong Il, left, greets South Korea’s president, Kim Dae Jung, right Much of Asia experienced severe economic problems in the late 1990's.
The value of South Korea’‘s currency fell, and its stock market plunged.
A crisis threatened to develop in 1994, when North Korea refused to allow international inspections of its nuclear sites.
But North Korea signed a broad agreement with the United States promising to halt all nuclear weaponsrelated activities in return for energy assistance.
North Korea began experiencing severe food shortages during the mid-1990's.
Experts estimated that hundreds of thousands of North Koreans starved to death.
Donations of food from around the world began arriving during the late 1990's.
It then decreed that the head of the National Defense Commission would act as the country’s highest living official.
Kim Il Sung’s son, Kim Jong II, held this position and thus became North Korea's leader.
Army Panmunjom Asia Park Chung Hee Chinese-Japanese wars Pusan Clothing (picture: Traditional Pyongyang costumes) Russo-Japanese War Inchon Sculpture Kim I] Sung Seoul Kim Jong Il Tae kwon do Martial arts Taegu October Yalu River Outline I Government ll.
The land D The Central Mountains E The Southern Plain A The Northwestern Plain B The Northern Mountains F The Southwestern Plain C The Eastern Coastal G Islands Lowland V Climate Vi.
Korean War was the first war in which a world organization, the United Nations , played a military role.
The Korean War was a major challenge for the United Nations, which had been formed only five years earlier.
The Korean War began on June 25, 1950, when troops from Communist-ruled North Korea invaded South Korea.
The UN called the invasion a violation of international peace and demanded that the Communists withdraw from South Korea.
After the Communists kept fighting, the UN asked its member nations to give military aid to South Korea.
Sixteen UN countries sent troops to help the South Koreans, and 41 countries sent military equipment or food and other supplies.
The United States provided about 90 percent of the troops, military equipment, and supplies that were sent to South Korea.
China fought on the side of North Korea, and the Soviet Union gave military equipment to the North Koreans.
The Korean War ended on July 27, 1953, when the UN and North Korea signed an armistice agreement.
A permanent peace treaty between South Korea and North Korea has never been signed.
However, United States military forces remain in South Korea to discourage a resumption of hostilities between the two parts of Korea.
About a million South Korean civilians were killed, and several million were made homeless.
Causes of the war The Japanese gained control of Korea in 1895 and made it part of Japan in 1910.
The Allies defeated Japan in World War II , and United States and Soviet forces moved into Korea.
After the war, Soviet troops occupied Korea north of the 38th parallel of north latitude, an imaginary line that cuts the country about in half.
In 1947, the UN General Assembly declared that elections should be held throughout Korea to choose one government for the entire country.
The Soviet Union opposed this idea and would not permit elections in North Korea.
On May 10, 1948, the people of South Korea elected a legislature, the National Assembly.
On September 9, North Korean Communists established the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Both North and South Korea claimed the entire country, and their troops clashed near the border several times from 1948 to 1950.
The United States removed its last troops from Korea in 1949 and indicated early in 1950 that Korea lay outside the main United States defense line in Asia.
When North Korea invaded South Korea, the North Korean Army had about 135,000 soldiers.
Many of the soldiers had fought for China and the Soviet Union during World War Il.
The South Korean Army had about 95,000 soldiers, few planes or heavy guns, and no tanks.
At first, the South Korean Army put up little resistance to the enemy attack.
United Nations troops from 16 countries fought Communist troops during the Korean War.
North Korean invasion June to September 1950 The Korean War These maps show four stages of the Korean War.
The first map shows the farthest extent of the North Korean invasion—to the Pusan Perimeter in September 1950.
The second map shows the site of the Inchon landing by the United Nations forces.
Following this surprise move, the UN troops advanced as far north as the Yalu River by October 1950.
The third map shows the extent of the retreat by the UN forces after China entered the war in October 1950.
The fourth map shows the territory held by the two sides when they signed an armistice agreement on July 27, Yellow Sea Area occupied by communist forces 1953.
About 39,000 came from Australia, Belgium, Canada, Colombia, Ethiopia, France, Great Britain, Greece, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey.
On the day the war began, the UN Security Council issued a resolution demanding that the Communists stop fighting and retreat to the 38th parallel.
The Soviet Union, a member of the 11-nation Council, could have vetoed the resolution.
But the Soviet Union was boycotting Council meetings to protest Nationalist China's membership on the Council, and the Soviet delegate November 1950 to January 1951 2.
UN advance and armistice January 1951 to July 1953 UN TROOP VACUATIONS \ ARMISTICE oo LINE Parailel Yellow Sea was absent when the vote on Korea was taken.
North Korea ignored the UN demand, and on June 27 its troops reached the outskirts of Seoul, the South Korean capital.
That same day, both President Harry S Truman and the UN took action to try to halt the Communist advance.
Truman ordered United States air and naval forces to South Korea and the UN asked its members to aid South Korea.
Congress supported Truman's actions and the UN’s policy, but did not formally declare war against North Korea.
On July 1, part of the United States Army 24th Infantry Division flew from Japan to Pusan at the southern tip of Korea.
The next day, these troops began to move into battle positions near Taejon, about 75 miles south of Seoul.
Troops from other UN nations began arriving in Korea shortly after the Americans.
On July 8, with the approval of the UN Security Council, Truman named General Douglas MacArthur commander in chief of the United Nations Command.
The command had authority over all the Allies—South Koreans, Americans, and the troops from other UN countries.
MacArthur directed Allied operations from his headquarters in Tokyo, Japan.
On july 13, Lieutenant General Walton H Walker, head of the United States Eighth Army, became field commander of the Allied ground forces in Korea.
Units of the United States Army 1st Cavalry Division and 25th Infantry Division landed in Korea on July 19 to aid the outnumbered soldiers of the 24th Division.
The United States 1st Marine Provisional Brigade and the 2nd Infantry Division of the Army arrived in South Korea in late July.
The Pusan Perimeter was a battle line in the southeast corner of South Korea.
It extended roughly from the city of Pohang on the southeast coast, west around Taegu, and south and southeast nearly to Pusan.
The North Koreans lost about 58,000 soldiers and much equipment while advancing to the area.
The rapid growth of American military strength gave General Walker flexibility in the use of his troops.
North Korea tried to break through the perimeter by making scattered attacks along it.
Walker reacted by using reserves to meet each enemy thrust, keeping his main defense line intact.
Overhead, United States planes provided air support and fired at the long enemy supply lines.
More American tanks and artillery arrived at Pusan to strengthen the defense of the perimeter.
The North Koreans saw that the Allies were gaining military superiority.
They mounted a major attack and succeeded in crossing the Naktong River on August 6.
But United States marines and Army forces counterattacked and prevented a general breakthrough.
The North Koreans advanced to within shelling distance of Taegu, but major losses of troops and equipment forced them to pull back on August 25.
They captured Pohang three days later, but the Allies halted the enemy advance on September 8.
The Inchon landing was a surprise move that changed the course of the war.
In mid-September 1950, soldiers of the United States X Corps, accompanied by United States marines, sailed from Japan to Inchon, on the northwest coast of South Korea.
Each boat had to land at high tide because any boat near the shore when the tide dropped would be trapped in mud.
The troops who landed at Inchon cut off the North Koreans in the Pusan Perimeter area from those north of Inchon.
Commanded by Major General Edward M Almond, the X Corps moved toward Seoul, 24 miles (39 kilometers) northeast of Inchon.
After the landing, he and his aides inspected the area near Inchon and Seoul, shown here. announced the capture of Seoul on September 26.
Meanwhile, General Walker's troops fought their way out of the Pusan Perimeter, inflicting heavy losses on the enemy.
MacArthur broadcast a demand for surrender, but North Korea rejected it.
South Korean troops crossed into North Korea on October 1 and captured the coastal cities of Wonsan, Hungnam, and Hamhung.
The Eighth Army troops reached North Korea on October 8 and drove the North Koreans toward Pyongyang, the capital.
They captured Pyongyang on October 19, and the Communists retreated farther north.
From Pyongyang, the Eighth Army marched through northwestern Korea toward the Yalu River, the border between North Korea and China.
But General MacArthur, hoping to end the war before winter set in, ordered the Allies to press on.
United States and Chinese troops first clashed on October 25, near the Changjin Reservoir and at Onjong, near Pukchin.
MacArthur and his sources of information underestimated the size of the Chinese armies.
More than 300,000 Chinese troops crossed into North Korea in October and November.
MacArthur believed the Allied forces outnumbered the Chinese and that the Chinese would be used for defense only.
He also thought that Allied air power could prevent additional Chinese troops from entering North Korea.
Political leaders in Washington and most of the Allied commanders shared MacArthur's confidence that the war would be over by Christmas.
China sent a huge force against the Allies on November 26 and 27 and forced them to retreat.
By the end of November, the Communists had driven a wedge between Eighth Army troops in the west and the X Corps in the east.
Four days later, 20,000 United States marines and infantrymen, surrounded by Chinese, started a historic retreat from the Changjin Reservoir to the port of Hungnam.
By Christmas Eve, 105,000 United States and Korean troops, 91,000 refugees, and 17,500 vehicles had been evacuated by sea from Hungnam.
In the west, the Communists crossed into South Korea and captured Korangpo, 28 miles from Seoul.
General Walker was killed in a jeep accident, and Lieutenant General Matthew B Ridgway took command of the Eighth Army on December 27.
The Communists began to attack Seoul on New Year's Eve, and they occupied the city on Jan., 1951.
The Allies dug in about 25 miles south on January 10, and their retreat ended.
Ridgway quickly restored the confidence of the Allied troops, and they soon inflicted heavy losses on the enemy.
Ridgway used a new tactic calling for slower advances that would wipe out all enemy forces instead of by-passing some.
The two sides dug in and began fighting along a battle line north of the 38th parallel.
Neither side made important advances, but they fought many bitter battles for strategic positions.
Battlefields included Bloody Ridge, Finger Ridge, Heartbreak Ridge, Old Baldy, and Pork Chop Hill.
One of the most controversial events of the war took place on April 11, 1951, when President Truman removed General MacArthur from command and replaced him with Ridgway.
The presidents action resulted from a continuing dispute between MacArthur and defense leaders in Washington as to how the Allies should conduct the war.
From the outset, MacArthur had issued public statements that there was no substitute for total victory.
Now he wanted to bomb bases in Manchuria, a part of China, and use other “all-out measures.
Truman and his advisers feared such actions might lead to a third world war.
Truman decided he could no longer accept MacArthur's open disagreement with national policy.
Ridgway went to Tokyo to replace MacArthur, and Lieutenant General James A Van Fleet became commander of the Eighth Army.
Early in the conflict, Allied bombers and fighter planes based in Japan, Okinawa, and South Korea roared over North Korea unopposed.
They supported Allied troops, killed enemy troops, and damaged Communist bases.
The Soviet Union soon began to supply North Korea with MiG-15 jets, and dogfights became an important part of the war.
All the dogfights occurred over North Korea because Allied planes were not permitted to cross the Yalu River, and the MiG-15's never flew south of the 38th parallel.
Most of the battles took place in “MiG Alley,” an area between the Yalu and Pyongyang.
The Allies used helicopters to carry wounded soldiers from battle zones to hospitals.
Helicopter pilots made daring rescues of Allied fliers who had been shot down.
The United States Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps lost more than 2,000 planes during the war.
Navy and Marine fliers killed about 100,000 Communist troops, and Air Force fliers killed about 184,800.
The Allied naval forces included 80 destroyers, 16 aircraft carriers, 8 cruisers, and 4 battleships.
The United States Navy helped troops land by firing shells at enemy targets on shore.
Wonsan, a Communist oil refining and industrial city, was under naval siege for more than two years.
Hopes for peace increased when Jacob Malik, the Soviet delegate to the UN, proposed a cease-fire on June 23, 1951.
On June 30, Ridgway, acting on instructions from Washington, suggested a meeting between Allied and Communist military officers to discuss a truce.
The truce talks began July 10 at Kaesong and were moved to Panmunjom on October 25.
A settlement seemed near on November 27, when both sides agreed that the existing battle line would be the final dividing line between North and South Korea if a truce were reached within 30 days.
This agreement had the effect of limiting combat, because neither side had much to gain by winning ground it might later have to surrender.
Several issues, especially voluntary repatriation of prisoners, prevented a settlement within the 30-day period.
The UN Command had insisted that prisoners of both sides be allowed to choose whether or not they would return to their homelands.
Many Chinese prisoners of the Allies had fought against the Communists during the Chinese civil war.
They staged a violent protest against a forced return to life under Communism.
The Communists could not agree to the UN demand without admitting that Communism had thus far failed to secure the loyalty of all its citizens.
By late April 1952, the truce talks were firmly deadlocked over voluntary repatriation.
On October 8, the UN Command Korean War armistice line The armistice line between North Korea and South Korea was established by the armistice of July 27, 1953.
A buffer zone, 2 } miles wide, was created along the final battle line.
It said the talks would resume when the Communists were ready to offer a helpful suggestion for settling the one remaining issue—voluntary repatriation.
General Mark W Clark replaced Ridgway as commander in chief of the United Nations Command in May 1952.
Dwight D Eisenhower became president of the United States in January 1953.
After Stalin’s death, Soviet leaders began talking of the need to settle disputes peacefully.
On March 28, the Communists accepted an earlier offer by the UN Command for an exchange of sick and wounded prisoners.
The truce talks were resumed on April 26, and the Communists accepted voluntary repatriation.
They agreed to let prisoners indicate their choice to the Neutral Nations’ Repatriation Commission, which consisted of representatives of Czechoslovakia, India, Poland, Sweden, and Switzerland.
An armistice agreement was signed on July 27, 1953, and the fighting ended.
South Korea gained about 1,500 square miles (3,880 square kilometers) of territory.
A Military Armistice Commission, with representatives from both sides, was set up to enforce the armistice terms.
The armistice also provided for a political conference to work out a final settlement.
After the armistice was signed, each side charged the other with torture and starvation of prisoners, and other war crimes.
The UN General Assembly adopted a general resolution condemning such acts.
About 1 million civilians were killed in South Korea, and property damage was estimated at more than $1 billion.
Statistics were not given for civilian deaths and damage in North Korea.
The UN Command and the Communists completed an exchange of 88,559 prisoners in September 1953.
The Neutral Nations’ Repatriation Commission took custody of prisoners who refused to return to their homelands.
The armistice provided that delegates from the various countries could visit these prisoners and try to persuade them to go home.
In 1954, Soviet officials and representatives of countries that had fought in Korea met in Geneva, Switzerland.
But in 1991, North Korea began to boycott the Military Armistice Commission, and China withdrew from the commission in 1994.
Air force (Air forces in limited Panmunjom wars) Ridgway, Matthew B Clark, Mark W Truman, Harry S (The Korean Korea War) Korean War Veterans United Nations (The Korean Memorial War) MacArthur, Douglas Outline I Causes of the war ll.
The memorial includes 19 large statues of American combat troops in the Korean War, a circular Pool of Remembrance, and a commemorative mural wall.
The statues, sculptured by Frank C Gaylord I] and made of stainless steel, stand from 7 } to 7 5 feet (2. to 2. meters) tall.
They wear rain gear, symbolizing the Korean climate; and are trudging uphill on a bed of evergreen shrubs, for the rugged Korean terrain.
Their symbolic destination is an American flag on a flagpole in the distance.
The wall, designed by Louis Nelson and made of black granite, stands to the right of the statues.
Pictures of about 2,500 United States military people who supported the combat troops in Korea are etched into the wall.
The images include chaplains, clerks, doctors and nurses, engineers, and helicopter pilots.
Kosciuszko, Kans ee UHS koh or kawsh CHOOSH kaw, Tadeusz, tah DEH oosh , was a Polish patriot who fought for the independence of the United States and Poland.
He went to America in the summer of 1776, during the Revolutionary War in America.
He offered his services to the Continental Congress and was appointed engineer with the rank of colonel.
He built fortifications near Saratoga and strengthened American defenses along the Hudson River, including those at West Point.
After the war ended in 1783, Congress made Kosciuszko a brigadier general.
In this struggle, he combined Poland's fight for independence with the people's struggle for social justice.
The defeat of the insurrection led to the third partition of Poland by Russia, Prussia, and Austria.
Kosher, KOH shuhr, also spelled kasher, is a Hebrew word that means fit or proper.
The word usually refers to food, but it may apply to anything considered ritually correct or acceptable according to Jewish law.
For example, a witness in a trial conducted under Jewish law may be called a kosher witness.
These laws are based on passages from the Biblical books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy.
For example, the laws specify that bread is kosher if it contains no forbidden fat and was not baked on the Sabbath.
In addition, only certain parts of such acceptable animals as cattle and sheep may be eaten.
The preparation of food according to Jewish dietary laws is called koshering.
This method is designed to kill animals as quickly and painlessly as possible.
Before the meat is cooked, it must be drained of blood by being soaked in cold water and then salted.
Jews who keep a kosher home must have one set of dishes and cooking utensils for meat meals and another set for meals that include dairy products.
It in_ cludes the Gothic cathedral of St Elizabeth, begun in the 1300's.
Since World War 11 ended in 1945, sprawling industrial areas have sprung up around the old part of _ KoSice.
Construction of a huge steel-manufacturing plant attracted many rural people seeking jobs.
Large blocks of apartment buildings were constructed to house the work force.
KoSice also has food-processing and textile industries and fertilizer plants.
In 1241, King Béla IV of Hungary chartered a settle_ ment that then existed at KoSice.
The city was chiefly controlled by Hungary until the end of World War | in 1918.
In 1993, the Czech Republic and Slovakia were created to replace Czechoslovakia.
Vojtech Mastny Kosovo, KOH soh vol, also spelled Kosova, is a province in southern Serbia, one of the republics of Yugoslavia.
In the late 1990's and early 2000's, Kosovo was torn by ethnic conflict.
Kosovo's natural resources include coal, lead, zinc, and many other minerals.
The Ottoman Empire ruled Kosovo from the mid1400's until 1912, when the Serbian army took control.
In 1918, it was made part of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, which later became Yugoslavia.
The government limited the rights of the Albanians of Kosovo and drove thousands from their homes.
By the end of World War II in 1945, Yugoslavia had come under Communist control.
Kosovo was first a self-governing region and later a self-governing province of Serbia.
In 1989 and 1990, Serbia ended Kosovo's self-rule and deprived the Albanians of many rights.
In 1992, Serbia and Montenegro formed a new Yugoslavia after the other four republics declared independence.
In 1997, the Kosovo Liberation Army , a rebel group seeking independence for Kosovo, attacked Serbian police units.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization tried to organize a cease-fire, but fighting continued.
In December, Serbian forces launched a campaign against Kosovo's Albanians, driving many from their homes.
In early 1999, NATO-sponsored peace talks led to a peace plan that representatives of Kosovo's Albanians approved but Serbian delegates rejected.
In March, NATO began air strikes against military targets in Yugoslavia to force the government to accept the peace plan.
NATO stopped the bombing and sent an international peacekeeping force to Kosovo.
Many refugees returned, but tensions ran high between Serbs and Albanians in the province.
Despite the presence of peacekeepers, the tension frequently erupted into violence.
In 2000, Serbs boycotted the first local elections since the end of the war, and the Yugoslav government refused to recognize the results.
Kossuth, KAHS ooth or KAW shut, Lajos, LAH yawsh , a Hungarian national hero, led the unsuccessful Hungarian rebellion of 1848-1849.
In 1825, Kossuth entered parliament, where he led a movement for liberal government reform.
When uprisings broke out in the Austrian Empire in 1848, the Hungarians, led by Kossuth, also revolted.
But Kossuth refused to grant independence to minority groups in the Hungarian part of the empire.
Afterwards, Kossuth toured the United States, where he was hailed as the Hungarian George Washington.
Burks Kosygin, kah SEE gihn, Aleksei Nikolaevich, ah lehk SAY nih kah LAH yuh vihch , was premier of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1980.
He fought on the Communist side in the civil war that broke out in Russia in 1918.
After the war ended in 1945, Kosygin held a variety of government posts and earned a reputation as an excellent administrator.
He served directly under Nikita S Khrushchev, the party chief and premier.
By the early 1970's, however, Brezhnev had become the country's most powerful leader.
The two men continued to work together despite Kosygin’s loss of power.
In 1965, he began a program to give factory managers greater control over their plants.
His efforts met with resistance from the Communist establishment and were eventually stopped.
Koufax, KOH faks, Sandy , became one of the greatest pitchers in the history of baseball.
A lefthander, Koufax pitched four no-hit games, a major league record until Nolan Ryan pitched his fifth no-hitter in 1981.
Koufax was voted the most valuable player in the National League in 1963 and the best pitcher in baseball in 1963, 1965, and 1966.
He retired from baseball after the 1966 season due to arthritis in his pitching arm.
He joined the Brooklyn Dodgers (now WORLD BOOK illustration by John D Dawson The kouprey is a rare animal found in Southeast Asia. the Los Angeles Dodgers) in 1955.
Dave Nightingale Kouprey, KOO pray, is a type of wild cattle that lives in Cambodia, in Southeast Asia.
The kouprey has small narrow ears, a large dewlap , long slender legs and hoofs, and a long tail.
Koussevitzky, xoo suh VIHT skee, Serge, sairzh , was a Russian-born symphony orchestra conductor.
From 1924 to 1949, Koussevitzky served as conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
From 1936 to 1950, Koussevitzky was conductor and director of the Tanglewood Music Festival in Lenox, Massachusetts.
In 1940, he helped found the Berkshire Music Center in Lenox, where he trained many conductors.
After graduating from the Moscow Philharmonic Music School, he began a successful career as a double bass soloist.
In 1909, he formed his own orchestra, which popularized the works of young Russian composers, such as Sergei Prokofiev, Sergei Rachmaninoff, and Igor Stravinsky.
In 1922, Koussevitzky commissioned French composer Maurice Ravel to make his famous orchestration of the piano composition Pictures at an Exhibition by the Russian composer Modest Mussorgsky.
John H Baron Krakatau, krah kuh TOW, is a volcano that lies in the Sunda Strait of Indonesia, between the islands of Sumatra and Java.
It is also called Krakatoa (pronounced krah kuh TOH uh} Much of the volcano is underwater.
But some of it projects above the water in the form of the islands Krakatau, Anak Krakatau, Lang, and Verlaten.
These waves, called tsunamis, washed ashore and caused most of the deaths.
Other people were killed by scalding ash and other material shot out of the volcano.
Volcanic dust in the atmosphere caused spectacular red sunsets over the next three years in the Northern Hemisphere.
The volcanic dust may also have caused a worldwide drop in temperature that lasted five years.
Eruptions from 1927 to 1930 created Anak Krakatau in the caldera’s center.
Katharine V Cashman Krakow, KRAK ow, KRAHK ow, or KRAY koh (pop. 751,300), is a city that lies on the Vistula River in southcentral Poland.
Krak6éw also has many historic buildings and museums, including the Royal Castle.
The Royal Castle, once the home of Poland's kings, has important collections of paintings and tapestries.
Poland's largest steel mill, the Nowa Huta plant, is located near Krakéw.
The city manufactures chemicals, drugs, leather, textiles, and processed foods.
Krakéw had become an important crossroads of trade between Asia and Europe by the 700's.
The city became self-governing in 1815, but Austria seized it again in 1848.
Krebs, Sir Hans Adolf , a German biochemist working in England, shared the 1953 Nobel Prize for physiology or medicine.
In this cycle, called the Krebs cycle, tissues use carbohydrates, fat, and protein to produce energy.
In 1932, Krebs announced the discovery of how another cyclic process forms the compound urea in the liver.
Eric Howard Christianson Kreisler, KRYS /uhr, Fritz , ranks as one of the best-loved violinists of all time.
His expressiveness created an intimacy between himself and his audience that was unique among performing musicians.
Kreisler wrote many short compositions, including Caprice Viennois, Tambourin Chinois, Liebesfreud, Liebesleid, and Schén Rosmarin.
Many other pieces were first published as the work of earlier composers.
Later, Kreisler admitted that he had written the music “in the style” of those composers and had modestly denied authorship.
Three years later, he entered the Paris Conservatory and studied there under Joseph Massart and Léo Delibes.
In 1939, after Germany annexed Austria, Kreisler became a French citizen.
Later, he settled in the United States and became a United States citizen in 1943.
Stephen Clapp Kremlin, KREHM Iuhn, is a fortified enclosure within a Russian city.
Beginning in the 1100's, when Moscow was the center of one of many Russian states, its princes ruled from the Kremlin.
The Kremlin was the center of czarist rule from the mid-1500's until 1712, when Peter the Great moved the Russian capital to St.
The Kremlin remained the seat after the Communists formed the Soviet Union in 1922.
With the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991, the Kremlin became the seat of government of an independent Russia.
The Kremlin is a triangular enclosure extending almost 1 3 miles around.
Especially impressive are its gilded domes, its tapered gate towers, and the contrast between the threatening boundary wall and the richness and intricacy of the interior.
The variety of styles and lavish decoration give an impression of powerful magnificence.
The Kremlin's treasures include paintings, jewels, and crowns worn by Russia's czars.
The present Kremlin walls have stood since the late 1400's, when Moscow became the most powerful Russian city.
During the 1600's, the Kremlin’s towers and buildings were enlarged and redecorated.
In the 1700's and 1800's, construction continued but in the baroque and later neoclassical styles.
The great hall of the Palace of Congresses houses government meetings and performances of ballets and operas.
William J Hennessey Kreps, Juanita Morris , a labor economist, was secretary of commerce from 1977 to 1979 under President Jimmy Carter.
She was the first economist and first woman to head the Department of Commerce.
Kreps then taught at Duke until 1977 and also served as university vice president from 1973 to 1977.
In 1979, she returned to Duke as professor emerita and vice president emerita.
Kreps is known for her outspokenness and her dedication to women’s rights.
Krill are small, shrimplike animals that live in oceans throughout the world.
Blue, fin, and humpback whales eat vast amounts of krill and other planktonic organisms daily.
Many species of krill are surface dwellers, and others live at deeper levels or migrate up or down in the water.
Animals that eat krill, including whales, seals, fish, and squids, follow along.
Young krill hatch from eggs as /arvae, immature animals that do not resemble the adults.
Krill larvae may go through as many as 10 molts before reaching adulthood.
However, various problems must be overcome before krill can provide a source of protein-rich food for people.
For example, efficient harvesting methods must be developed to make large-scale krill fishing economically profitable.
Krishna is one of the most popular Hindu gods, worshiped throughout India.
He is often shown with a flute in his hand and his consort, the milkmaid Radha, standing at his side.
They believe Krishna was born to rid the world of evil and to give delight to his many friends and lovers.
Krishna's story is told in many Indian writings, most notably in the epic the Mahabharata and in the Bhagavad-Purana, a story collection.
In a portion of the Mahabharata called the Bhagavad-Gita, Krishna appears in human form as the wise chariot driver of the warrior hero Arjuna.
Krishna reveals his divine nature and teaches Arjuna the way to achieve freedom while remaining active in the ordinary world.
The stories tell how Krishna grew up in a forest near Mathura, India; rid the earth of many demons; and then lived as a prince in what is now the western Indian city of Dwarka.
Kristallnacht, KR/HS tah/ nahkt is a name given to the night of Nov.-10, 1938, when Nazis attacked Jews and destroyed Jewish businesses and synagogues throughout Germany and Austria.
Krista//nacht is a German word meaning Crystal Night \n English, the event is called the Jonathan Green Night of Broken Glass because the Nazis shattered the windows of many Jewish-owned stores.
Adolf Hitler had made anti-Semitism (prejudice against Jews) a government policy when he came to power in Germany in 1933.
On Nov., 1938, a young Polish Jew whose parents recently had been deported from Germany shot a German diplomat in Paris.
That evening, Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels made an anti-Semitic speech.
The violence of Kristallnacht began after the speech and lasted for about 24 hours, destroying thousands of businesses and many synagogues in Germany and Austria.
Aaron T Kornblum Kruger, KROO guhr, Paulus , was a South African statesman and soldier.
He was a frontiersman, uneducated and simple in his ways, and deeply religious.
Kruger was born Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger in the British Cape Colony.
His family moved in the Great Trek, when many Dutch Boers traveled north into the interior of Africa to escape British rule.
Kruger's family helped organize the Transvaal, the new Dutch state in South Africa.
After much internal feuding and opposition from the British, the Transvaal obtained its freedom in 1881.
But the discovery of gold brought thousands of Ujitlanders , mostly British, to the republic.
Bruce Fetter Kruger National Park in South Africa is one of the largest national parks in the world.
It covers an area of 7,500 square miles along the borders of Zimbabwe and Mozambique.
The landscape in Kruger National Park varies from fairly flat to gently rolling and includes scattered trees, dense brush, open grasslands, rocky areas, and six rivers.
The park supports over 1,000 kinds of plants and a wide diversity of animals.
Thousands of large plant-eating mammals, including antelopes, African buffaloes, elephants, giraffes, rhinoceroses, wildebeests, and zebras, roam the grounds.
The park is also home to cheetahs, hyenas, leopards, lions, and other large meat-eaters, as well as a number of kinds of snakes.
The government of South Africa made the reserve a national park in 1926.
It is named after Paulus Kruger, the last president of the South African Republic.
The South African Republic covered the northern part of what is now South Africa and included the area that now makes up the park.
Krupa, KROO puh, Gene , was the first jazz musician to popularize the drum as a solo instrument.
He became a symbol of the excitement and enthusiasm of the swing era in jazz while playing with the Benny Goodman band from 1934 to 1938.
Krupa was famous for his exceptional drum technique and for the image he presented to the public—his shock of black hair flying, his face and body in continuous motion.
In the 1920's, he played in dance bands but also worked in small jazz groups with Eddie Condon and other pioneers of early Chicago jazz.
Frank Tirro Krupp was the name of one of Germany's leading industrial families.
The Krupp firm became one of the world’s major manufacturers of steel, machinery, and weapons.
The firm struggled at first and faced competition from British products.
But under Friedrich’s son, Alfred, it slowly found a market for high-quality steel rolls, steel railway tires, and axles.
The superior quality of Krupp steel made possible the production of outstanding artillery.
This in turn led to the firm’s close association with Prussia, the most powerful German state.
Krupp cannons helped Prussia defeat Austria in 1866 and France in 1870, establishing the firm's reputation as the leading arms maker in Europe.
Alfred Krupp expanded the factories in Essen, bought companies overseas, and introduced a welfare plan for workers.
Her husband, Gustav, who took the Krupp name, became head of the firm in 1906.
After Germany's defeat in World War I, the Krupp works were dismantled.
He secretly produced new arms, even though Germany had been forbidden to rearm.
They were married in 1898 in Siberia, where both had been exiled for various revolutionary activities.
Krupskaya helped Lenin lead the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, in which the Communists seized control of the Russian government.
Krupskaya became people's commissioner of education in the new government and helped form the Soviet system of public education.
But she had little influence on Joseph Stalin, who headed the government.
Krypton, KR/HP tahn, is a chemical element that makes up only about one-millionth of the earth's atmosphere.
The British chemists Sir William Ramsay and Morris W Travers discovered it in 1898.
Krypton is also used in certain electronic tubes, and in luminous sign tubes where a greenish-yellow color is desired.
Ku Klux Klan, KOO kiunks KLAN, is a group of white secret societies who oppose the advancement of blacks, Jews, and other minority groups.
The Ku Klux Klan, also called the KKK or the Klan, is active in the United States and in Canada.
Klan members wear robes and hoads, and burn crosses at their outdoor meetings.
The KKK was formed as a social club by a group of Confederate Army veterans in Pulaski, Tenn., in 1865 or 1866.
Nathan Bedford Forrest, a former Confederate general, was the Klan’s first leader, called the Grand Wizard.
The group took its name from the Greek word kyk/os, meaning circle, and the English word clan.
Klan members, who believed in the superiority of whites, soon began to terrorize blacks to keep them from voting or exercising the other rights they had gained during Reconstruction, the period following the end of the American Civil War in 1865.
The Klan threatened, beat, and murdered many blacks and their white sympathizers in the South.
To hide their identity, Klan terrorists wore robes and hoods, draped sheets over their horses, and rode at night.
The KKK spread rapidly throughout the Southern United States and became known as the Invisible Empire.
In 1871, Congress passed the Force Bill, which gave the President the authority to use federal troops against the Klan.
The Klan directed its activities against groups it considered un-American, including blacks, immigrants, Jews, and particularly Roman Catholics.
The KKK grew rapidly and by the mid-1920's had more than 2 million members throughout the country.
Some Klan members burned crosses and whipped, tortured, and murdered people whose activities angered them, but most relied on peaceful means.
By electing public officials, the Klan became a powerful political force throughout the South and also in many Northern and Western states, including Colorado, Indiana, Kansas, Maine, Ohio, and Oregon.
However, public criticism of Klan violence and quarrels among Klan leaders weakened the organization.
Green died in 1949, and the Klan then split into many competing groups.
Increased civil rights activities during the 1960's brought a new wave of Klan violence.
Klan members were involved in many terrorist attacks, including the killing of three civil rights workers in Mississippi, and the bombing of a Birmingham, Alabama, church in which four black girls were killed.
President Lyndon B Johnson used the Federal Bureau of Investigation to probe the Klan.
Some members were sent to prison, and membership fell to about 5,000 by the early 1970's.
Beginning in the mid-1970's, new leaders tried to give a more respectable image to competing Klan groups.
The KKK especially appealed to whites who resented both special programs designed to help blacks and job competition from blacks and recent immigrants.
The KKK still attracted people with extreme views who often used violence.
In 1979, Klan members and their supporters killed five anti-Klan demonstrators in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Since then, declining interest in the Klan and some prosecutions for illegal activities have reduced KKK membership to about 6,000.
Kuala Lumpur, KWAH /uh loom POOR (pop. 1,145,342), is the capital and largest city of Malaysia.
Kuala Lumpur spreads out from the junction of the Klang and Gombak rivers, and lies along both banks of the rivers.
The high-rise buildings include the Petronas Towers, the world’s tallest skyscrapers.
The area west of the rivers includes modern government buildings, the National Museum, and the National Mosque.
Most of Kuala Lumpur's oldest buildings were constructed after a fire destroyed the city in the 1880's.
This style, which developed in northern Africa, features arches, domes, towers, and spiral staircases.
The points represent the 13 states of Malaysia and the 5 Pillars of Islam.
Other sites include Lake Gardens, which combines tropical forests and planned gardens; and Parliament House, where the national legislature meets.
Near the city are the National Zoological Park, which is one of the most beautiful zoos in Southeast Asia; and Batu Caves, which feature huge caverns.
Malays and people of Chinese ancestry make up a majority of Kuala Lumpur's population.
The Malaysian national government employs many of Kuala Lumpur's people.
The city is a center of banking, trade, and other commercial activities.
Its industries include rubber, tin, and food processing; and the production of textiles and electronic products.
International — —_ — eee airports in nearby Subang and Sepang serve Kuala Lumpur.
Kuala Lumpur was established in the late 1850's, after rich tin mines were discovered nearby.
People from southern China and elsewhere moved there to work in the tin mines.
Many of the Chinese later established businesses and gained great wealth there.
In 1957, Kuala Lumpur became capital of the independent nation of Malaya.
Malaya and nearby states united in 1963 and formed the nation of Malaysia.
Kublai Khan, KOO bly KAHN or KOO bluh KAHN , the grandson of Genghis Khan, founded the Mongol, or Yuan, dynasty that ruled China from 1279 to 1368.
Kublai was the son of Tolui and brother of the fourth Great-Khan, Mangu.
Kublai conquered Yunnan and Annam, and when Mangu died in 1259, Kublai became Great-Khan and ruler of the Mongol Empire.
They disregarded Genghis Khan's warning to his heirs to remain united under one Great-Khan, and the unity of the All-Mongolia Empire soon ended.
For the first time in history, a “barbarian” people had conquered all of China.
Burma , Cambodia, and other countries of Southeast Asia were forced to recognize the Yuan dynasty as their rulers.
He also failed to gain control over the western half of the Mongol Empire.
Under Kublai's rule, art and science flourished, trade expanded, and cultural relations were established with countries throughout the world.
Richard L Davis See also Genghis Khan; Mongol Empire (Later empire); Polo, Marco.
How | Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb , a bitter but comic treatment of how the Soviet Union and the United States accidentally start a nuclear war.
Robert Sklar Kuchma, KOOCH muh, Leonid Danylovich, LAY oh nihd dah NEE loh vihch, was elected president of Ukraine in 1994.
He defeated Leonid M Kravchuk, who had become president in 1991, after Ukraine declared its independence from the Soviet Union.
From October 1992 to September 1993, Kuchma was prime minister in Kravchuk’s Cabinet.
He resigned that position after his efforts to introduce economic reforms were blocked by the parliament and received little support from Kravchuk.
During the presidential campaign, Kuchma called for reestablishing the close economic ties that had existed between Ukraine and other former Soviet republics—especially Russia—as a way of improving the ailing Ukrainian economy.
He held various positions in the Soviet aerospace industry until becoming director of the country's largest missile factory in 1986.
Two kinds of kudus live in the grassy regions of southern and eastern Africa south of the Sahara.
Kudzu, KOOD zoo, is a fast-growing climbing vine common in the southern United States.
Kudzu originated in Asia, where people eat its thick, starchy roots and make the stems into a fiber called kKohemp.
For many years, it was grown as an ornamental porch vine and for livestock feed.
In the 1930's, farmers in the South began to plant kudzu as ground cover to prevent soil erosion.
Bacteria that live on the roots take nitrogen from the air and help enrich the soil.
But many farmers, foresters, and property owners consider kudzu a weed because it spreads rapidly and is difficult to control.
Kuiper belt, KY pur, is a band of objects in the outer regions of our solar system.
Scientists believe that KBO’s are “building blocks” left over from the formation of the planets, which occurred about 4. billion years ago.
Sometimes, a KBO strays so close to Neptune that Neptune’s gravity hurls it toward the sun.
The KBO may turn into a comet by absorbing enough heat to vaporize some of its ice.
The Kuiper belt is also called the Edgeworth-Kuiper belt or the trans-Neptunian disk.
An Irish scientist named Kenneth E Edgeworth suggested in 1943 that the belt existed.
The Dutch-born American astronomer Gerard P Kuiper described it in more detail in 1951.
The fruit is frequently eaten whole, or is candied and made into preserves, marmalade, and jelly.
Their homeland extends mainly over parts of Armenia, Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Turkey.
The number of Kurds in the area has been estimated at about 25 million.
Other Kurds live in cities such as Mahabad, Sanandaj, and Bakhtaran in Iran; Arbil, Kirkuk, and As Sulaymaniyah in Iraq; and Diyarbakir and Van in Turkey.
Since the late 1900's, many Kurds have migrated to large cities outside the Kurdish homeland, such as Istanbul and Ankara in Turkey.
Historically, the name Kurdistan (a Persian word meaning the Land of the Kurds)has been used for the area where the Kurds live.
But today, only a small province in Iran is officially named Kurdistan.
Efforts to establish self-government were crushed by the Turks during World War 1 (19141918), by the Iraqis in the 1970's and 1980's, and by the Iranian government after the Iranian revolution of 1979.
It has been estimated that several thousand Kurds were killed in 1988 when Iraq attacked Kurdish villages with bombs containing poison chemicals.
Since 1984, Kurdish rebels in southeastern Turkey have waged a guerrilla military campaign against the Turkish government.
Kurds in Iraq also rebelled in March 1991, soon after Iraq's military forces were defeated in the Persian Gulf War.
The islands are part of Russia, but Japan claims several of them, including Iturup, Kunashir, Shikotan, and the Hanobi Islands.
The chain includes 36 large islands, 20 smaller islands, and many large rocks.
Most of the Kurils were formed by volcanoes built up from the ocean floor.
Many otters and seals once lived on the Kurils, but have become scarce due to hunting.
The Kurils came under Japanese rule in 1875, when Japan traded the southern half of Sakhalin Island to Russia for the Kurils.
When the Soviet Union broke up in 1991, Russia gained control of the islands.
But Japan still claims several islands in the southern part of the chain.
The dispute over ownership has strained relations between Japan and Russia since 1945.
Craig ZumBrunnen Kurosawa, koo roh sah wah, Akira, ah kee rah(19101998), became the first Japanese motion-picture director to gain worldwide fame.
This film tells the story of a crime seen from four points of view. /kiru (To Live, 1952) movingly illustrates the Christian maxim, “He who will lose his life shall find it.” in contrast, Stray Dogs is a tough crime melodrama.
Many of these movies seem to say that by the time people are wise enough to understand where their true interests lie, they are caught in a tangle of events created by their own passions.
Gene D Phillips Kuroshio is a warm, dark-colored current in the western Pacific Ocean.
Kuroshio is Japanese for black current The Kuroshio is also called the Japan Current.
It begins in the Philippine Sea, where it separates from the North Equatorial Current.
The Kuroshio resembles the Gulf Stream, a current in the Atlantic Ocean.
Mark A Cane Kush, also known as Meroe, was a kingdom along the Nile River in what is now northern Sudan.
Kush developed after 1000 B.C, at the end of a period of Egyptian control in Nubia.
Kush, shown in yellow, occupied an area along the Nile River in what is now northern Sudan.
WORLD BOOK map Arabian Desert KINGDOM OF AKSUM we op tian forces opposed to Kushite rule.
However, Kush continued to prosper as an independent state south of Egypt.
The Kushites built pyramids centuries after the Egyptian pyramids were constructed.
Kushite pyramids were smaller than those in Egypt and were also shaped differently.
Most Kushites spoke their own language, which was different from Egyptian.
They also developed their own alphabet based on Egyptian writing and symbols.
Kushites worshiped Nubian gods as well as ones borrowed from the Egyptians.
Today, many of Kush’s pyramids and temples, as well as the ruins of settlements, still stand.
The region had iron, copper, and gold mines, and items made from these metals were exported.
Kush also gathered such goods as ivory, ebony, and animal skins from other African states for trade to Egypt and other parts of the ancient world.
In return, Kushites received glassware, fine metalwork, jewelry, and other manufactured goods.
Kushan Empire, ku SHAHN, flourished in what is now Pakistan, Afghanistan, and northern India from about A.D. 50 to the mid-200's.
The Kushan were a central Asian people, originally from northwest of China, who had settled in five kingdoms in what is now Afghanistan.
His successors extended the Kushan Empire into the Indus and Ganges valleys.
The Kushan Empire linked central Asian, Chinese, Indian, and Persian cultures and trade.
Kushan emperors opened and protected the Silk Road, a major trade route for caravans carrying silk and other luxury goods from China to India and the Middle East.
Cloth, spices, and medicines left Indian ports in ships bound for the Roman Empire.
Buddhist missionaries spread this religion, which started in India, throughout much of Asia.
The first stone images of Buddha were created by sculptors in the towns of Gandhara and Mathura.
The Gandhara artists created their Buddhas by combining Greek, Roman, and Asian art forms.
Michael H Fisher Kutenai Indians, KOO tuh nay, also spelled Kootenai, formed a tribe in what is now southeastern British Columbia, northwestern Montana, and northern tdaho.
Their way of life somewhat resembled that of the Plains Indians, though they lived in a mountainous region and are considered mountain Indians.
Kutenai bands, each made up of a few families, existed by hunting, fishing, and collecting wild plants.
They built shelters of skins and rushes, and traveled in dugouts and bark canoes.
But the shamans (medicine men and women) once exercised great power and leadership within the tribe.
They acquired horses and took up farming, lumbering, and cattle raising.
The Kutenai Indians now live on reservations in Montana, Idaho, and British Columbia.
The name comes from a Turkish word that means armed guard of the nobility.
The kuvasz has a broad, muscular body but walks with a light-footed gait.
The dog's pure-white coat grows long on the neck and the backs of the hind legs.
A poor country until 1946, Kuwait is now one of the richest countries in the world.
The amazing change that has taken place there results almost entirely from one thing—oil.
With wealth gained by selling oil, Kuwait's rulers turned desert wilderness into a prosperous welfare state.
Kuwait is one of the world’s wealthiest nations in terms of national income per person.
It has free primary and secondary education, free health and social services, and no income tax.
Horizontal green, white, and red stripes join a black, vertical stripe at the flagstaff.
Kuwait's population has grown rapidly since the discovery of oil beneath the desert of Kuwait in the 1930's.
Other major non-Kuwaiti groups in Kuwait include Egyptians, Asian Indians, and Iranians.
Relatively few Kuwaiti children attended school until the 1950's, when oil wealth enabled the government to begin building many schools.
Today, more than 85 percent of school-age children in Kuwait attend school.
Special schools provide education for disabled individuals, and for adults who want to learn to read and write.
Until the mid-1900's, few Kuwaiti women held a job outside the home or received much education.
Today, increasing numbers of women work in business offices and earn college degrees.
Faylakah, the most important island, lies about 12 miles (19 kilometers) off the coast.
The city of Kuwait lies on the southern side of Kuwait Bay, which is an excellent harbor.
Before 1950, it had few known sources of fresh water apart from the scanty rainfall.
In 1950, engineers began making fresh water by distilling seawater and mixing it with well water.
A large underground source of fresh water discovered in 1960 also increased the freshwater supply.
But the climate is not extremely unpleasant until August and September, when the humidity is relatively high.
Some grass grows from October to March, when an average of 2 to 6 inches of rain falls.
The sale of oil to other nations by the government created most of Kuwait's wealth.
But the high cost of the Iraqi invasion and Kuwait's recovery after the Persian Gulf War severely reduced the country’s financial reserves.
Natural gas, produced in conjunction with oil, is Kuwait's second most important product.
The relatively few farms raise camels, goats, and sheep, and grow dates, tomatoes, and a few other crops.
The government uses much of its income from oil to support Kuwait's welfare system and modernize the country.
Kuwait is trying to provide more jobs by promoting the growth of economic activities other than oil production.
Government plans call for the development of new © Stephane Compoint, Sygma The city of Kuwait, the nation’s capital, lay shrouded in smoke from oil well fires after the Persian Gulf War ended in 1991.
Iraqis set fire to hundreds of wells in Kuwait during the war. industries that manufacture products from petroleum.
The government also plans to build more houses, oil refineries, ships for transporting oil, electric power stations, and distillation plants.
It is working to increase agriculture by turning part of the desert into fertile land through irrigation.
Scientists are also attempting to produce crops by Aydroponic farming. \nstead of using fertile soil, they are trying to grow crops in trays of sand fed with water and plant foods.
Many Kuwaitis lack the education and skills needed to perform available jobs, and they depend on welfare for a living.
The Kuwaiti government believes that its emphasis on education and job training will enable more Kuwaitis to handle jobs in the future.
About 1710, some members of the Arab Anaza tribal confederation settled on the southern shore of Kuwait Bay, where they found fresh water.
Between 1756 and 1762, the group elected the head of the AlSabah family to rule them as Sabah 1.
In 1775, the British made Kuwait the starting point of their desert mail service to Aleppo, Syria.
This route formed part of a system that carried goods and messages from India to England.
In 1934, Kuwait's ruler granted a concession to allow the Kuwait Oil Company, a joint American-British enterprise, to drill for oil.
Kuwait became a major petroleum exporter after World War II ended in 1945.
It soon changed from a poor land to a wealthy one as a result of oil sales.
Kuwait sent troops to Egypt during the Middle East Crisis in June 1967.
For about two months, Kuwait cut off its oil shipments to the United States and other Western countries.
Kuwait also agreed to pay Egypt and Jordan a total of $132 million annually to help their economies recover after the war.
A small number of Kuwaiti troops took part in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
In October 1973, Kuwait and other Arab oil-exporting nations stopped shipments of oil to the United States and the Netherlands.
In 1976, Kuwait's prime minister denounced the National Assembly for blocking legislation.
A new National Assembly was elected in 1981, but the emir dissolved it and suspended the constitution in 1986.
In the 1980's, much fighting in a war between Iran and Jraq centered in the Persian Gulf area.
In 1986, Iran began attacks on Kuwaiti oil tankers because of Kuwait's financial aid to, and other support for, Iraq.
In 1987, Kuwait asked the Soviet Union and the United States to help provide safety for its shipping.
Several Kuwaiti ships were reregistered as United States vessels and flew United States flags.
United States warships began escorting these vessels in the Persian Gulf to protect them from attacks.
Hussein claimed that Kuwait was legally a part of Iraq, and he announced that his country had annexed it as an Iraqi province.
The Iraqi forces in Kuwait killed and tortured many people and stole or destroyed much property.
The United Nations Security Council declared lraq’s annexation of Kuwait null and void.
Some people believed that Iraq would next invade oil-rich Saudi Arabia.
The United States and many other © Delanaye, Sipa Press Kuwaiti citizens celebrated the liberation of their country after Allied forces drove Iraqi forces from Kuwait in February 1991.
The Iraqis had invaded and occupied Kuwait in August 1990. nations sent forces to defend Saudi Arabia.
These nations, and Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, formed an allied _ military coalition.
In November 1990, the United Nations _ approved the use of military force to remove Iraqi forces from Kuwait if they had not left by Jan., 1991.
Iraq refused to leave, and war broke out between the allied forces and Iraq.
Most of the Iraqis who were not killed or | taken prisoner fled from Kuwait.
Malcolm C Peck See also Arab League; Gulf Cooperation Council; Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Kuwait, koo WYT or koo WAYT , is the capital and chief port of the country of Kuwait.
Kuwait is the center of a large urban area that has about two-thirds of the country's people.
It is a modern city whose economy is supported by the country’s enormous petroleum wealth.
Residential areas lie between ringlike roads that form a grid around the city center.
Many of the city’s Kuwaiti citizens live in attractive, villa-style homes.
Modern Kuwait was founded in the 1700's by the Utub , a branch of the Anaza tribal confederation of north-central Arabia.
After World War Il ended in 1945, the country of Kuwait became an important producer of petroleum.
Wealth earned from petroleum led to the growth and modernization of the city.
From August 1990 to February 1991, troops from Iraq occupied the city and the rest of Kuwait.
Kuznets, Simon , was an American economist who won the 1971 Nobel Prize in economics.
He did important studies of national income, economic cycles, and modern economic growth.
Kuznets laid the foundation for modern national income accounting in his National Income and Its Composition, 1919-1938 and other works.
He also found evidence of recurring cycles of economic growth that are 15 to 20 years long.
Kuznets also studied capital formation, population change, industrial structure, and how invention, innovation, and scientific advancement lead to economic growth.
He also identified a pattern called the inverted U hypothesis or Kuznets hypothesis.
This pattern consists of a trend away from, and then toward, equal distribution of income over the course of economic growth.
Kuznets was born in Kharkov, Ukraine (then part of the Russian Empire), but spent all of his adult life in the United States.
Barry W Poulson Kwakiutl Indians, «wav kee OO tuhl live on the northwest coast of North America.
The Kwakiutl hold these ceremonies to celebrate weddings and other social events.
Chiefs sponsor potlatches, at which huge quantities of valuable property are displayed, given away to guests, and occasionally destroyed.
Acceptance of the gifts symbolizes recognition of the prestige and social rank of the sponsoring chief and the chiefs family.
Traditionally, the Kwakiutl made their living by fishing, by hunting, and by gathering clams, berries, seaweed, and other foods.
They lived in villages of plank houses along beaches on what are now Vancouver Island and the mainland of British Columbia in Canada.
Many family groups placed totem poles in front of their homes and elsewhere to signify their ancestry and social rank.
Today, over 6,000 Kwakiutl live mainly on small reserves in their traditional homeland or nearby in Canadian and US. cities.
Robert S Grumet Kwanzaa, KWAHN zuh, is an Afro-American holiday based on the traditional African festival of the harvest of the first crops.
The word Kwanzaa, sometimes spelled Kwanza, comes from a phrase which means first fruits in Swahili, an East African language.
The holiday was developed in 1966 in the United States by Maulana Karenga, a professor of Pan-African studies and black cultural leader.
It combines traditional African practices with Afro-American aspirations and ideals.
The holiday centers around the Nguzo Saba, seven principles of black culture that were developed by Karenga.
Near the end of the holiday, the community gathers for a feast called karamu.
A typical karamu features traditional African food, ceremonies honoring the ancestors, assessments of the old year and commitments for the new, performances, music, and dancing.
Maulana Karenga Kwashiorkor, KWAH shee awe kawr, is a disease caused by a severe lack of complete protein.
But only complete protein has the nine amino acids that the body either cannot make, or cannot make in sufficient amounts.
Kwashiorkor occurs mostly in developing nations whose people lack foods high enough in complete protein.
It generally strikes children from 1 to 3 years old, and it can be fatal.
Young children need large amounts of complete protein for growth and various body functions.
Many mothers continue breast-feeding their babies for two years in addition to feeding them solid foods.
But the amount is generally small and protects against deficiency only if the basic diet is reasonably adequate.
In many cases, the child then eats only starchy, low-protein foods and kwashiorkor is likely to occur.
In severe cases, the muscles waste away, and the skin swells with body fluids.
The child becomes extremely listless and resents any kind of disturbance, even feeding.
As the disease progresses, the skin loses its natural color and may develop dark patches.
Kwashiorkor also damages the liver and the small intestine, and it may cause black hair to turn reddish-brown.
Treatment generally consists of supplementing the diet with dried skim milk and other high-protein foods.
Antibiotics are often given because kwashiorkor lowers a child’s resistance to infection.
Many children who survive kwashiorkor do not reach their potential physical growth.
It occurs as long flat bands of crystals, and its surface varies in hardness.
Kyanite is found in Australia, East Africa, India, and the United States.
Kyanite is used as an insulating substance because it is heat resistant.
Some ovens used to manufacture glass and ceramics are lined with kyanite.
John C Butler Kyd, kihd, Thomas , was an English playwright who greatly influenced the development of Elizabethan drama.
In The Spanish Tragedy, Kyd created a new style of drama by blending elements of classical Roman tragedy with the lively but crude popular drama of his day.
He based this form on that of the revenge play, which was developed by Seneca, a Roman philosopher and dramatist.
The Spanish Tragedy is the story of a nobleman’s revenge for his murdered son.
In the drama, Kyd also used such classical elements as a ghost, much bloodshed and violence, and formal poetic language.
Kyoto is an important religious center, with many Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines housing priceless works of art.
One of the most beautiful sights, the Golden Pavilion, was built in 1397 and rebuilt in the 1950's.
Deputies of the Tokugawa shoguns lived in Nijo Castle from the 1600's to the 1800's.
Workers in small factories produce exquisite textile, ceramic, lacquer, and cloisonné goods.
Many Japanese called it Miyako, meaning imperial city, or Kyoto, meaning capital city.
Kyrgyzstan, kihr guh STAHN or KIHR guh sTAnn, is a mountainous country in central Asia.
The official language is Kyrgyz Kyrgyzstan became an independent country in 1991, after about 70 years as part of the Soviet Union.
A president serves as head of state and is Kyrgyzstan’s most powerful government official.
A prime minister and a cabinet of ministers run the daily operations of the government.
The president appoints the prime minister, who then appoints the cabinet of ministers.
It consists of the Legislative Assembly, which has 35 members, and the Assembly of People’s Representation, which has 70 members.
Slightly more than half of Kyrgyzstan’s people belong to the Kyrgyz ethnic group.
Most of the ethnic Kyrgyz live in rural areas and live by herding and farming.
They speak Russian, live mainly in urban areas, and hold most of the country’s industrial and technical jobs.
Most of Other city or town Elevation above sea level WORLD BOOK maps the people of other ethnic groups are Christians.
Among the ethnic Kyrgyz, tribal organizations and large kinship units called c/ans play important roles in social customs.
A Kyrgyz clan includes all people who are descended from a common ancestor through their father’s side of the family.
Traditionally, tribal leaders have been the most respected members of Kyrgyz society.
They hold most of the country’s regional and national government offices.
The household might include parents, children, married sons and their children, and other relatives.
Most urban dwellers live in concrete apartment buildings or stucco houses.
Most of the rural people live in mud-brick houses in villages and are involved in farming.
But some people raise livestock in a nomadic (wandering) lifestyle at least part of the year.
These people live in portable, tentlike yurts, made of a round wooden frame covered with felt.
Lowest—Naryn river at the western border, 1,640 ft (500 m) above sea level.
Agricu/ture—cattle, cotton, eggs, fruit, goats, grain, milk, vegetables, wool.
Manufacturing—construction materials, food products, machinery, metals, textiles.
The sun bears a yellow disk with two intersecting sets of three curved red bands.
Traditional clothing for men includes a padded or a sheepskin coat, boots, and a white felt hat with black flaps.
One of their most famous epics is the Manas, a poem describing Kyrgyz history.
About three-quarters of the country lies at an altitude of more than 4,950 feet (1,500 meters) above sea level.
Peak Pobedy, the highest mountain, rises 24,406 feet in the Tian Shan along the border with China.
Only about 15 percent of Kyrgyzstan is below 3,000 feet above sea level.
Summers are very warm and dry in the valleys and plains, and cool in the mountains.
July temperatures average 60 to 75 °F in the valleys and plains and about 41 °F in the mountains.
Winters are chilly in the lowlands, but extremely cold in the mountains.
January temperatures average 7 to 23 °F in the lowlands and —18 °F in the mountains.
Agriculture accounts for about two-fifths of the value of Kyrgyzstan’s economic production.
Chief agricultural products include cotton, eggs, fruit, grain, milk, vegetables, and wool.
Livestock raising is Kyrgyzstan’s chief agricultural activity, and sheep are the nation’s most important kind of livestock. struction materials, food products, machinery, metals, and textiles.
Mines in Kyrgyzstan yield a number of minerals, including antimony, coal, gold, lead, mercury, petroleum, uranium, and zinc.
Nomads who raised livestock were the first people to live in what is now Kyrgyzstan.
Beginning in about the 700’s, Turkic tribes began to move into the region.
The Mongols established regions called khanates, which were ruled by chieftains.
Some of the country’s people are descended from the Turkic and Mongol tribes.
In the 1600’s, Islamic missionaries called sufis brought Islam, the Muslim religion, to the region.
Kyrgyzstan remained primarily under the domination of Mongol peoples until 1758, when China gained control.
The Chinese maintained loose rule over the Kyrgyz until the 1830's, when the oppressive Khanate of Quqon conquered the Kyrgyz people.
The Russian Empire began to expand into central Asia in the mid-1800’s.
It defeated the Khanate of Qugon in 1876 and made the region a Russian province.
The Russian government took control of vast areas of land and encouraged Russian, Ukrainian, and other Slavic peasants to settle there.
The settlement restricted grazing land and lowered the Kyrgyz standard of living.
In 1916, the Kyrgyz staged an unsuccessful rebellion against the Russians.
Thousands were killed on both sides, and as many as 150,000 Kyrgyz people fled to China.
Soviet rule. \n 1917, revolutionaries known as Bolsheviks seized control of the Russian government.
The Soviet Union was formed in 1922 under Russian Communist leadership.
In 1924, the Soviets made Kyrgyzstan an autonomous oblast (selfgoverning region) of the Soviet Union called the KaraKyrgyz Autonomous Oblast.
In 1936, the region became a republic called the Kyrgyz Soviet Socialist Republic.
The Soviet Union established a powerful Communist government and took control of all industry and land in the country.
For hundreds of years, large numbers of rural Kyrgyz had been nomadic herders who raised livestock in mountain valleys in the summer and moved them to the foothills in the winter.
In the 1930s, the Soviet Union set up government farms and forced the herders to live on them.
In addition, Soviet law forbade certain traditional cultural practices, such as religious instruction.
However, the Soviet government helped develop agriculture and industry in Kyrgyzstan.
The Soviet government maintained strict control of all aspects of life until the late 1980’s.
In 1990, Kyrgyzstan declared that its laws overruled those of the Soviet Union.
In August 1991, conservative Communist officials failed in an attempt to overthrow Soviet Union President Mikhail S Gorbachev.
During the upheaval that followed, Kyrgyzstan and several other republics declared their independence.
In December, Kyrgyzstan joined other republics in a loose association called the Commonwealth of Independent States.
After declaring independence, Kyrgyzstan began moving toward creating a free enterprise economy.
The government introduced a new currency and began selling farmland and businesses to private owners.
Problems facing the new nation included tensions between ethnic groups.
In 1990, conflicts between the Kyrgyz and the Uzbeks over territorial claims and other disputes led to violence.
Larry V Clark See also Bishkek; Commonwealth of Independent States; Tian Shan.
Kyzylkum, kuh Z/HL KOOM, is a desert that lies in southern Kazakhstan and northern Uzbekistan in central Asia.
It covers about 88,000 square miles between the Syr Darya and Amu Darya rivers, and is southeast of the Aral Sea.
Other sections, such as the northern Syr Darya River plains and the eastern upland fringes, have been irrigated so that farmers can raise crops.
