April 1961 Kennedy supplied arms, equipment and transport for 1400 anti-Castro exiles to invade Cuba Exiles landed in the Bay of Pigs + met by 20,000 Cuban troops armed with tanks and weapons.
For: USA can still destroy the USSR so the USSR would never use these missiles.
USSR had lied about Cuban missiles to do nothing would be another weakness Surgical Air Attack: Immediate attack to destroy nuclear bases For: Would destroy the missiles before they're ready to use Against: Destruction of sites cant be guaranteed.
Attack would inevitably kill Soviet soldiers and to attack without advance warning was seen as immoral.
All out invasion by air and sea For: Would get rid of the missiles AND Castro Against: Would guarantee an equivalent Soviet response 3 of 15 October Crisis Diplomatic Pressure: To get the UN or other body to intervene and negotiate.
It would avoid conflict Against: If the USA was forced to back down, it would be a weakness Blockade: A ban on the Soviet Union bringing in any further military supplies to Cuba, enforced by the United States navy who would stop and search Soviet ships For: Would show the United States is serious but not a direct act of war.
If he had missiles on Cuba, he could agree to remove them in return for some American concessions.
Designed to see how strong the Americans really were whether they could back off or face up.
Krushchev was concerned about missile gap between the USSR and the USA that he would seize any opportunity he could to cose it.
Missiles were genuinely meant to defend Cuba • To trap the USA: Missiles were a trap and Khrushchev wanted the Americans to find them and be drawn into a nuclear war. 5 of 15 Outcome • Cuba stayed Communist and highly armed but the nuclear missiles were withdrawn under the UN supervision.
However the Cuban crisis highlighted the weakness of their case because such intervention wasnt worth the high risk.
A Communist Cuba was an inconvenience to the USA but a nuclear war would be the end of civilization. 6 of 15 Origins of the Conflict Ho Chi Minh was a communist supported by China.
In 1960, he set up the National Liberation Front in South Vietnam which started a guerrila war to take over South Vietnam from Diem and his American supporters.
The Americans called the NLF guerrillas the Vietcong and supported Diem with military advisers and money.
Diem's government was corrupt and unpopular by 1963 most of South Vietnam's rural areas were under Vietcong control the ARVN couldn't defeat them In 1963, the United States supported a military coup which murdered Diem and put a military government in South Vietnam.
In August 1964 sailors on the United States warship USS Maddox in the Gulf of Tonkin claimed they had been attacked by N.Vietnamese torpedo boats.
The Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin resolution allowing President Johnson to take direct military action in retaliation.
Containment China had fallen to Communism and America had fought in Korea to contain the spread of Communism.
Vietnamese could not resist communist infiltration by the Vietcong without help They were ill-equipped local militia who more often than not were killed asleep in their defensive positions.
Operation Rolling Thunder massive bombing campaign against N.Vietnam.0,000 United States troops sent to fight in Vietnam.
General William lured the NVA to attack a force of American troops at Ia Drang 1968: CIA started Operation Phoenix, arresting, interrogating and killing suspected Vietcong activists.
NVA launched the Tet Offensive capturing a number of towns in S.Vietnam.
North Vietnamese lost 45,000 men including many officers + their morale was damaged.
America won the Tet Offensive, but realized that they would never defeat the Vietcong. 9 of 15 Vietcong Tactics • Fought a guerrilla war, ambushing United States patrols • Setting booby traps and landmines and planting bombs in towns.
Forced peasants to leave Vietcong-controlled areas and made them live in defended strategic hamlets in loyal areas.
This created immense opposition and allowed Vietcong infiltrators into loyal areas.
American troops sent on patrols then supported by air and artillery when attacked.
This demoralized the soldiers, who realized they were being used just as bait.
Johnson ordered an end to American bombing of North Vietnam Increasing public opposition to the war in America Richard Nixon began Vietnamisation pulling United States troops out but giving financial support to the ARVN On occasion the United States escalated the war launching attacks into Cambodia and Laos to pursue the Vietcong hiding there.
Henry Kissinger worked out a peace agreement with the N Vietnamese President of South Vietnam refused to sign so the N Vietnamese pulled out of the talks.
Richard Nixon mounted huge bombing raids on N Vietnam until the N Vietnamese were forced to sign.
He told the President of South Vietnam had had to make peace whether he agreed with it or not.
Extensive media coverage brought all the failures and horrors of the war into United States homes Atrocities such as the massacre at My Lai undermined the moral authority of the United States to continue the war.
Cost of the war meant Johnson had to cancel his Great Society programme of reform.
War was opposed by Martin Luther King and by America's black community because wealthier white men could avoid the draft by going to university or to Canada, and young black men were twice as likely to be killed. 14 of 15 Results of the War Americans left Vietnam in 1973 but continued to support the S Vietnamese army with financial and military aid.
Vietnamese had to fight wars against Cambodia and China before their independence was secured.
