F Robert van der Linden Curator of Air Transportation and Special Purpose Aircraft, National Air and Space Museum; Dr.
Without limiting the rights under the copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the copyright owner.
AMERICA DRAWN INTO VIETNAM MAR 1959-DEC 1964 46 Introduction 48 Timeline 28 The Cold War America's opposition to spread of communism.
A FRENCH AIRCRAFT DOWNED AT DIEN BIEN PHU i 52 The Viet Cong Roots and organization of the guerrilla movement.
Role of soldiers from Australia, South Korea, New Zealand, Philippines, and Thailand.
Attacks on United States combat bases at Con Thien, Dak To, and Khe Sanh.
Contentious critical coverage of the United States war effort by media.
United States aims to help South Vietnam achieve self-defense, self-government, and self-development.
Decline in morale and discipline in sections of United States Army and Marines.
North Vietnamese ports are blocked with mines laid by the United States Navy.
United States Congress turns against providing financial support for the war.
While America prospered and its influence spread around the globe, it faced a daunting challenge.
Despite suffering massive human and economic losses, the Soviet Union also sought to use its newly found power to extend its influence and to spread its contrasting tenets of communism abroad in a direct challenge to the United States.
In 1949, communist forces seized control of China while the Soviets exploded their first atomic bomb, ending America's nuclear monopoly.
Fearful of mutually assured nuclear annihilation, both east and west settled into an uneasy Cold War.
Throughout the latter half of the 20th century the Cold War frequently erupted into indirect military combat, through the use of proxies.
While the United States, communist China, and the Soviet Union parried to an uneasy truce in Korea in the early 1950s, revolutionaries in Indochina fought successfully for their independence from France.
The peace was short-lived as Vietnam was divided between the communist north and the capitalist south.
Tensions rose until open conflict once again broke out in the early 1960s, this time with the United States entering the fray to counter Soviet influence in the region.
America's involvement increased just as long-brewing social revolution erupted in the United States.
As more advisers and then combat troops were sent to support South Vietnam, many American citizens began to openly question the nation's involvement in a foreign war when so many pressing social issues needed to take precedent.
This tumultuous internal conflict was openly expressed as protests, all set against the backdrop of an increasingly unpopular war.
Searing images of death and destruction filled television screens during the evening news, further fanning unrest and seismic social upheaval within America's diverse society.
This book takes the reader on a carefully crafted journey through the maze of events that became the war in Vietnam.
Remarkably thorough, and extraordinarily well-illustrated, this engaging book provides a wellwritten analysis through an American lens but does not hesitate to tell the story, no matter how difficult or painful.
It is an excellent and highly readable synopsis of a very complicated era and a very complicated war.
Curator of Aeronautics Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum A purple smoke flare marks the landing spot for an incoming medevac helicopter after a battle in A Shau Valley.
The First Indochina War would win Vietnam its freedom from colonial oppression, but also lead to a dangerous rift between North and South.
Soldiers of the Third Regiment of the French Foreign Legion stand to attention outside their headquarters in Lang Son in 1950.
A decisive Viet Minh victory at the Battle of Route Coloniale 4—a highway to the French base at Cao Bang—saw French units abandon Lang Son later that year.
THE BACKGROUND BEFORE MARCH 1959 n the 19th century, France conquered Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, creating the colony of French Indochina.
Repressing nationalist revolts, the French maintained colonial rule in Vietnam until World War II, when Indochina was occupied by the Japanese.
At the war's end, the communist-led Viet Minh declared Vietnam independent, but France strove to retake control of its colony.
After prolonged fighting, Viet Minh guerrillas defeated the French in the First Indochina War, inflicting a final humiliation at the battle of Dien Bien Phu.
North Vietnam was under communist rule, while South Vietnam was backed by the United States.
LD The 12th-century temple complex of Angkor Wat in Cambodia displays the splendor of the medieval Khmer Empire.
French soldiers keep watch during the siege of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, which brought French rule in Indochina to an end.
FEBRUARY 1930 Vietnamese troops opposed to French rule mutiny at Yen Bai, but the uprising is swiftly crushed.
L90D2 1835 Vietnamese Catholics and French Catholic missionaries are persecuted for their participation in a revolt against Emperor Minh Mang.
DECEMBER 1883 A French expeditionary force invading Tonkin (northern Vietnam) defeats Chinese ""Black Flag"" irregulars at the Battle of Son Tay.
MAY 1916 Emperor Duy Tan is deposed and exiled by the French after he attempts to lead an anticolonial revolt in Vietnam.
Determined to resist foreign influence, he persecutes Vietnamese Catholics.
A Battle of Son Tay, 1883 1885 After battling Vietnamese and Chinese forces, the French establish a protectorate over Tonkin and Annam (central Vietnam), which is ratified by the Treaty of Tientsin.
SEPTEMBER 1940 With France having been defeated by Nazi Germany in Europe, the French allow Japanese troops to use bases in northern Vietnam for their war against China.
S French troops land in Indochina, 1945 MAY 19, 1941 Flo Chi Minh and his colleagues found the Viet Minh movement to fight against the French colonialists and the Japanese occupation of Vietnam.
MARCH 9, 1945 Japanese troops take over Indochina from the French, declaring Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos independent.
DECEMBER 19, 1946 After French warships shell Viet Minh forces in Plaiphong , the Viet Minh attack Flanoi, starting the First Indochina War.
FEBRUARY 1950 Armed by Communist China, the Viet Minh take the offensive, attacking French outposts on Vietnam's northern border.
HO CHI MINH, IN A SPEECH IN BA DINH SQUARE, HANOI, SEPTEMBER 2, 1945 1951-54 1955-59 JANUARY-JUNE 1951 The Viet Minh launch an offensive against French defenses in the Red River Delta, which is defeated with heavy losses.
JULY 21, 1954 The Geneva Accords divide Vietnam at the 17th parallel, with the Viet Minh controlling the North and the State of Vietnam controlling the South.
MARCH 3,1955 In Cambodia, King Norodom Sihanouk abdicates his throne to stand for election as prime minister.
OCTOBER 27, 1955 After defeating Bao Dai in a referendum, Diem proclaims South Vietnam to be the Republic of Vietnam, and names himself as its president.
MAY 9, 1957 President Diem addresses the United States Congress during a state visit to the United States.
OCTOBER-NOV 1952 France carries out an in-depth assault on Viet Minh-held areas of northern Vietnam in Operation Lorraine.
APRIL-MAY 1955 Prime Minister Diem crushes the powerful Binh Xuyen criminal organization in Saigon.
OCTOBER 1953 Cambodia and Laos are declared fully independent of French rule. ft Indochina War Medal, first awarded in 1953 NOVEMBER 20, 1953 French airborne troops establish a base at Dien Bien Phu, near the border of Vietnam and Laos.
MAY 7, 1954 Dien Bien Phu falls to the Viet Minh after eight weeks of fighting—a shattering blow to French morale.
JULY 1956 The deadline for nationwide elections to reunify Vietnam, one of the terms of the Geneva Accords, passes with no elections held.
JUNE 16, 1954 Ngo Dinh Diem becomes prime minister of Vietnam, under the presidency of former emperor Bao Dai. ft Ho Chi Minh, leader of North Vietnam AUGUST 1956 North Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh admits serious errors were made in a communist land reform program that provoked rural uprisings.
MARCH 13, 1954 The garrison at Dien Bien Phu comes under attack from Viet Minh infantry and artillery surrounding the base.
JANUARY 1958 United States officials in South Vietnam express concern about the repressive nature of Diem's regime and mounting opposition to the government in the countryside.
APRIL 24, 1954 The Geneva Conference opens with the goal of creating peace in Korea and Indochina. ft Refugees during Operation Passage to Freedom, 1954-55 MARCH 1959 The North Vietnamese politburo decides to support and promote a guerrilla uprising in South Vietnam.
MAY 18, 1955 The movement of about one million refugees—many of them Catholics—from North to South Vietnam is completed.
Further wars enabled the Vietnamese to expand southward and by the start of the 19th century, they occupied much the same territory as modern-day Vietnam.
Indochina Colonized In the 19th century, at the height of European imperialism, France seized control of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia to create French Indochina.
However, the Vietnamese had a history of resistance to foreign domination and France found its rule fiercely contested.
Flowever, the emperor's successors turned against the Catholics, and wanted to limit French involvement.
In 1858, the persecution of Catholics gave a pretext for the French to invade Cochin China, an area of Vietnam that included Saigon and the Mekong Delta.
The major European powers, utterly convinced of their cultural supremacy, carved up the world between them, taking advantage of their military and technological superiority.
Once the French established themselves in Cochin China—officially declared a French colony in 1864—it was only a matter of time before France extended its ""protection"" over the entire region.
The nearby kingdom of Cambodia was weak, and accepted French control in exchange for defense against its neighbor, Siam , as did Laos.
Vietnam alone resisted French pressure for further concessions, eventually calling on China for aid.
Assault on Tonkin In 1883, France launched a sea and land offensive in Tonkin, the northern heartland of Vietnam, to force the Vietnamese imperial government to accept a French protectorate.
Assisted by Chinese irregulars known as the Black Flags, as well as by Chinese regular troops, the Vietnamese inflicted heavy losses on the French Expeditionary Force.
In 1885, however, China made peace with France at Tientsin, and although armed resistance continued in some parts of Tonkin, the Vietnamese government had no choice but to acknowledge French control. 1887—was a union of Tonkin, Annam , Cochin China, and Cambodia, with Laos added in 1893.
Vietnam, as it had been prior to the French takeover, was split into three.
Imposed in order to make the territory easier for the French to control, this division of Vietnam also had historic justifications.
Cochin China had only been settled by Vietnamese peasants relatively recently and had not come under the rule of a Vietnamese emperor until the 19th century.
Nonetheless, the Vietnamese people had a strong sense of national identity, and many were unhappy with these divisions.
Administration of Indochina was headed by a governor-general who reported to the Colonial Office in Paris.
Meanwhile, traditional rulers retained their thrones, yet had little real power and were readily dismissed if the French found them insufficiently subservient.
The Vietnamese emperor still had his court at Hue and his mandarins (high-level bureaucrats) exercised some authority in Annam, but even there the French ran the show.
Rubber economy In line with their ""civilizing mission,"" the French opened schools to educate the children of the Vietnamese elite in French culture, introduced new medical treatments, built roads and railroads, extended irrigation systems, and introduced new crops.
However, the main function of the Vietnamese in the French imperial system was to work as exploited laborers on Frenchowned rubber plantations or in mines.
The colonial system paid for itself through customs duties and heavy taxes on salt, alcohol, and opium— the Vietnamese were specifically encouraged to use opium, which was a key source of revenue.
After 50 years of colonial rule, the French population of Indochina numbered only 40,000, some 80 percent of whom were soldiers or officials.
This minority governed an area with a population of 23 million, who were mostly peasants.
Even the small number of educated Vietnamese were left in no doubt of their second-class status.
When a crisis came, the French found they had very few allies in Indochina.
Stamp of approval France introduced postage for Indochina from the 1890s.
This stamp, issued in 1904, is inspired by France, but later stamps often depicted local scenes and people in traditional dress.
NATIONALISTS IN WAITING Vietnamese opposition to French rule showed itself in sporadic revolts through the early 20th century.
The ruthless oppression by the French colonial police forced most nationalists to operate in exile, including the young revolutionary Ho Chi Minh.
POWER VACUUM Nazi Germany took control of France in June 1940, thereby drastically transforming the situation in French Indochina.
The colonial administration there was cut off from support or reinforcement from Paris.
The last emperor Bao Dai was crowned ruler of Annam (central Vietnam) in 1932.
The French saw him, like all traditional rulers, as a figurehead for French colonial power, but Bao Dai harbored his own aspirations to lead Vietnam to independence.
Colonial attitudes The French had little contact with local people, except as servants.
Despite living in Indochina, they maintained strictly Western lifestyles and customs—as shown by this photograph of officials and their wives from around 1900.
AFTER France ruled its Asian colonies with an iron fist, quickly quashing any nascent signs of nationalism.
VIEtNAMESE SCHOLAR NGUYEN TRAI, PROCLAMAtlON OF VICTORY, 1427 17 THE BACKGROUND BEFORE MARCH 1959 Revolt and Resistance Vietnamese nationalists strove time and again to organize uprisings in the face of French oppression.
After the Japanese occupied French Indochina in 1941, the communist-led Viet Minh seized the chance to create a nationwide movement for independence.
BEFORE ~\ Formerly an independent country, Vietnam was colonized by France in the 1880s.
Resistance to this foreign domination was initially organized by Vietnam's traditional governing elite.
Flowever, the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty in China and its replacement by a republic in 1912 led many nationalists to abandon monarchism.
The Russian Revolution of 1917 and the founding of the Moscow-based Communist International to encourage revolution worldwide brought a radical element to Vietnamese anticolonialism.
Rebels of Yen Bai Vietnamese soldiers in the French colonial army staged a fruitless uprising at Yen Bai in February 1930.
VIETNAMESE NATIONALIST PHAN BOI CHAU, 1931 Ho takes the lead The Vietnamese communist movement, headed by Nguyen Ai Quoc, later known as Ho Chi Minh, was also based in China until the Chinese Kuomintang government turned against the communists in 1927.
The party patiently extended its clandestine influence among Vietnamese workers and peasants, but it was a small movement, in no position to challenge the French regime.
The German occupation of France in June 1940 shattered French prestige and left French Indochina exposed to pressure from Japan, which had been fighting a war in China since 1937.
In September 1940, Japanese troops invaded French Indochina, based nationalist movement that would attract support from all strata of Vietnamese society.
Their declared objectives were the defeat of the ""fascist Japanese"" and their ""French accomplices"" and, most importantly, the independence of a democratic, progressive Vietnam.
Rival Vietnamese nationalist groups enjoyed more support from the Kuomintang, but it was the Viet Minh that built a network of clandestine cells in Vietnam.
On March 9, 1945, fearing an Allied invasion of Indochina, the Japanese carried out a coup against the French authorities.
Easily overcoming the French army, they announced an end to the colonial era.
Cambodia and Laos were declared independent under their Revolutionary comrades Vietnamese nationalists Vo Nguyen Giap and Ho Chi Minh were leading figures in the founding of the Viet Minh independence movement in 1941.
They were both dedicated communists, loyal to the Soviet-run Comintern.
The defeat of Japan by the Allies in August 1945 left a power vacuum in Indochina, enabling the Viet Minh to occupy Hanoi.
His government enjoyed widespread support in Vietnam, but the French were determined to reestablish their rule in Indochina.
F rench authorities imposed severe restrictions on their Vietnamese subjects, denying them freedom of speech and the right to form political parties or trade unions.
With little scope for political action, nationalists such as future South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem expressed their desire for independence through movements whose leaders were based abroad.
In the 1920s, Nguyen Thai Hoc founded the Vietnamese nationalist party Vietnam Quoc Dan Dang in China.
VNQDD was a republican movement modeled on China's own nationalist party, the Kuomintang.
In February 1930, the VNQDD encouraged colonial army troops at Yen Bai, in northern Vietnam, to mutiny against their French officers.
French repression was swift, and Nguyen Thai Hoc was among the rebels executed.
New occupants During World War II, the Japanese sent troops into Indochina—like these men, carrying Japan's ""Rising Sun"" flag.
The occupying forces left Vietnam's colonial system in place, including its army and police. the Japanese effecting a military occupation of Vietnam that was barely resisted by France.
Nationalist strategy The humiliation of the French, and of other Europeans in Asia at this time, encouraged Vietnamese nationalism.
By offering to attack the Japanese in Indochina, nationalists could pitch for the backing of the Allies at war with Japan, including Kuomintang China and the United States.
In 1941, in a remote area on the border with southern China, Ho Chi Minh and his communist colleagues founded the Viet Minh Doc Lap Dong Minh (League for the Independence of Vietnam), shortened to Viet Minh.
Their intention was to create a broadmonarchs, as were Annam and Tonkin under Vietnamese emperor Bao Dai.
In the absence of French troops, Giap's Viet Minh guerrillas were now able to operate in the Viet Bac region, north of Hanoi.
Wary of the Japanese, however, the Viet Minh bided their time, and made few raids upon the occupying forces.
They eagerly anticipated a Japanese defeat, which would at last mean the possibility of Vietnam achieving genuine independence.
Many details of his career are obscure, both because he lived the clandestine existence of a revolutionary activist for many years and because his actions have been mythologized for the purposes of propaganda.
Yet there is no doubt that he deserves to be recognized as the father of modern Vietnam.
His family lived in Annam, the area of central Vietnam where the Vietnamese emperor still exercised nominal authority under French protection.
Like most members of Vietnam's traditional Confucian scholarmandarin elite, his father deeply resented foreign domination.
Ho attended the Quoc Hoc lycee in Hue, which was designed to educate select Vietnamese children in French culture and civilization.
Instead of joining the colonial administration as expected, at around the age of 21, Ho set off to see the world.
Working his passage on ships as a kitchen hand and taking on casual menial jobs to support himself, he spent time in the US, Britain, and France.
After World War I, he became politically active, joining a group of Vietnamese nationalists in Paris as they unsuccessfully petitioned the statesmen at the Versailles peace conference to apply their principles of self-determination and democracy to Vietnam.
Marxist training The establishment of the world's first communist state in Russia split the international socialist movement.
Left-wing activists everywhere faced a choice between social democracy and communism.
Ho's commitment to political struggle was absolute, with the only evidence for a personal life being his Revolutionary hero Sometimes known as ""Uncle Ho,"" Ho Chi Minh led the Vietnamese struggle for independence from French colonial rule in the First Indochina War.
By the time of America's war in Vietnam, weakened by age and illness, he had become largely a figurehead.
He frequently changed the name of the party organization in order to obscure his unswerving communist affiliation. brief marriage to a Chinese woman in the mid-1920s.
This name represented % a deliberate decision to present himself as a national leader in the Vietnamese Confucian tradition, embodying the virtues of age and wisdom.
The move bore fruit after Ho's opportunistic declaration of Vietnamese independence in 1945.
The majority of the Vietnamese people readily accepted Ho as their legitimate leader, while the French were confused by his apparent moderation when he traveled to France for negotiations.
His alliances with noncommunist nationalists always ended in their exclusion from power and often their summary execution.
Police state As leader of North Vietnam from 1955, Ho presided over a state that left no room for individual freedom and ruthlessly imposed its system on a reluctant peasantry.
He was still leader in 1959, when the North Vietnamese politburo took the decision to resume war to achieve the goal of a united communist Vietnam, but was superseded by Le Duan in 1960.
Ho continued to have some influence on the conduct of the war until 1965, after which he was largely a figurehead, though he played a part in advising North Vietnam's peace negotiators.
The simplicity of his personal habits and his absolute lack of corruption sustained an image of purity and dignity that won respect among his people.
HO CHI MINH IN FROM COLONIALISM TO COMMUNISM BY VAN CHI HOANG, 1964 Shrine to Ho The Ho Chi Minh Museum at Kim Lien, near Ho's birthplace, celebrates the Vietnamese leader's life.
May, 1890 Born in the village of Hoang Tru in Nghe An, central Vietnam, son of an official at the imperial court.
II 1911 Leaves Vietnam for France, later traveling worldwide on merchant ships.
II 1919 In Paris, he takes the name Nguyen Ai Quoc and publishes an appeal for Vietnamese rights.
HO CHI MINH’S HOUSE IN HANOI, WHERE HE LIVED FROM 1958 UNTIL HIS DEATH 11 1941 Returns to Vietnam and founds the Viet Minh independence movement.
Ho Chi Minh in Paris The Vietnamese leader visits the French capital in summer 1946 for talks on his country's independence.
The French agreed on a path to limited self-government, but this was not enough to satisfy nationalist aspirations.
CHANGING STATUS From Independence to War In March 1945, Japanese troops occupying Indochina declared Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia independent.
Then, in August 1945, Japan was defeated by the Allies, including the United States, Britain, China, and France.
JAPAN SIGNS THE INSTRUMENT OF SURRENDER, 1945 In September 1945, Viet Minh leader Ho Chi Minh declared Vietnam independent, establishing a government with popular support.
However, the French were not prepared to accept the loss of their colony and declared war on the Viet Minh.
B y the time Japanese forces occupied Vietnam in March 1945, the Viet Minh movement was already solidly embedded in the Vietnamese population, with a network of cells in towns and villages.
No longer threatened by the French colonial army, the Viet Minh's guerrilla force had increased its strength in the Viet Bac region north of Hanoi, aided by agents of the American OSS (Office of Strategic Services), the forerunner of the CIA, who had seen the Viet Minh as a useful ally in America's war against Japan.
But Viet Minh commander Vo Nguyen Giap mostly avoided fighting the Japanese occupiers, keeping Rallying symbol The Viet Minh adopted the red flag with a gold star as its banner in 1940.
It became the official flag of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam when Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the country's independence in 1945. his limited forces intact for a future bid for power.
VO NGUYEN GIAP, CALL TO ARMS, DECEMBER 19, 1946 atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki had left Vietnam without any effective authority in place.
The Viet Minh took advantage of this power vacuum, raising its flag from one end of the country to the other in a general insurrection.
Declaring independence On September 2, 1945, Ho Chi Minh declared the independent Democratic Republic of Vietnam in Hanoi's Ba Dinh Square.
Emperor Bao Dai, Vietnam's traditional ruler, bowed to the evident will of the people and abdicated, giving his blessing to the new government.
French bombarded the city from sea and air, forcing the Viet Minh to withdraw from the port.
Responsibility for the final breakdown of peace is disputed, but on December 19, on the orders of General Giap, the Viet Minh launched an attack on the French garrison in Hanoi.
When this failed, Ho Chi Minh's government withdrew from the city to fight a guerrilla campaign.
AFTER The French were at first able to restrict the Viet Minh guerrillas to remote border areas, but the communist victory in China in 1949 gave the Viet Minh the support of a powerful neighbor.
At the same time, the Viet Minh leadership openly aligned itself with the communist side in the global Cold War.
United States INTERVENTION In June 1949, the French installed former emperor Bao Dai as head of the state of Vietnam, which was given a degree of independence within the French Union.
V_ Ho was accepted as the country's legitimate ruler by virtually all social groups, including the Catholic Church.
His government immediately began organizing an administration and set about tackling starvation, which was rife in the countryside.
Searching for allies The Viet Minh knew that the key to the future lay in the attitude of the wartime Allies.
Ho Chi Minh modeled his independence declaration upon the American Declaration of Independence of 1776 in the hope of winning the backing of the United States.
The American government, although opposed to colonialism, was anxious to maintain good relations with France and declined to intervene on behalf of the Viet Minh.
The Allies decided that, in order to accept the surrender of Japanese troops in Vietnam, the British army would occupy the country south of the 16th parallel and China would occupy the area to the north.
No friends to French colonialism, the Chinese allowed Ho Chi Minh's government to remain in place; the British, however, saw it as their duty to facilitate the restoration of French rule.
Aided by the British, French administrators and troops returned to southern Vietnam in October 1945.
Quashing Viet Minh resistance, they regained control of Saigon and other major towns, although guerrillas continued to dominate the countryside.
After lengthy negotiations, the Chinese agreed to allow the French to return north of the 16th parallel.
The French return French legionnaires land in Indochina in October 1945.
After the defeat of Japan in World War II, the French expected to reestablish their prewar colonial role in Indochina, regardless of the rise of the Viet Minh. and the first troops under General Philippe Leclerc landed at Haiphong in March 1946.
Ho's government, lacking international support, decided to compromise with France, which was proposing self-government within a Frenchruled Indochina Federation.
Ho Chi Minh traveled to France for negotiations at the Fontainebleau Conference in July 1946, in an attempt to seek an agreement, despite French determination to block full independence for a united Vietnam.
Tension between the French and Vietnamese in northern Vietnam broke into open conflict in November 1946.
After violent incidents in Haiphong, the (j"" yirA MILLION The value 4) H"") of the military aid provided by the United States to the French in Indochina in 1951, rising to $785 million by 1953.
I n revolutionary guerrilla warfare, irregular forces use guerrilla tactics—ambushes, raids, hit-and-run attacks, concealment, and mobility—in pursuit of the goals of political and social revolution.
When the Viet Minh embarked on a guerrilla war against the French in 1946, they were following a path already laid out in theory and practice by Mao Zedong's communists in China.
The Marxist theory, to which communists subscribed, had originally anticipated a revolution based on a revolt by industrial workers in urban areas.
TRIED AND TESTED The first description of guerrilla strategy was written by the Chinese general Sun Tzu more than 2,500 years ago.
During the American Revolution, militias employed guerrilla warfare against the British in South Carolina.
In 19th-century Europe, Italian nationalist Giuseppe Garibaldi and his Redshirts also fought a guerrilla campaign to unify Italy.
WORLD WAR II Resistance fighters in Nazi-occupied Europe employed guerrilla tactics against occupying forces with the support of Britain and the United States. _ envisaged a communist revolution resulting from a guerrilla war based in the countryside.
According to Mao's theory, guerrillas would establish themselves in remote areas and use propaganda to win popular support among the peasantry.
Their military tactics would progress from scattered raids, ambushes, and sabotage by small-scale forces to larger-scale operations exploiting the mobility of guerrilla forces.
Finally, full-scale military operations with heavy weaponry would allow them to defeat the enemy in the field.
This scenario was broadly enacted in the process that brought Mao to power in China in 1949.
Although Vo Nguyen Giap, the key organizer of the Viet Minh military rebellion, was reluctant to acknowledge his debt to the Chinese example, his conduct of the war against France and later against the United States clearly showed Mao's influence.
The Viet Minh's strategic concept of dan tranh envisaged a long-term conflict in which military and political pressure would combine to wear down the enemy.
Giap's strategy The Viet Minh organized guerrilla forces at three levels.
Village militia comprised part-time soldiers— peasants who used improvised weapons in clandestine attacks on enemy soldiers or officials in their locality.
The main-force guerrillas trained with the best available arms at remote bases in mountain and jungle areas, ready to be deployed for major operations.
The point of a guerrilla strategy was to allow a weaker military force to triumph over a stronger enemy by avoiding a direct trial of strength until conditions were advantageous.
The Viet Minh always tried to ensure that their own troops understood the reasons for fighting. mistakes, Giap mostly chose his occasions for battle wisely, attacking exposed outposts or ambushing forces on the move.
The great strength of the Viet Minh lay in its understanding of the importance of morale and political commitment in war.
They aimed to demoralize the French and win the support of the Vietnamese people.
This was relatively easy, as the vast majority of the population hated French rule.
Viet Minh propaganda always stressed nationalism, with no mention of communism, of which most Vietnamese had no knowledge.
By the early 1950s, the Viet Minh had control of large areas of Vietnam, where they collected Planning an operation General Vo Nguyen Giap briefs his officers on the details of a planned engagement at Dien Bien Phu in 1954.
Despite an apparently relaxed style of command suitable to guerrilla forces, Giap demanded absolute discipline and obedience to orders.
NEW CAUSES Left-wing groups such as the Red Brigades in Italy, the Baader-Meinhof gang in Germany, and the Tupamaros in Uruguay identified themselves as urban guerrillas, conducting armed campaigns in cities.
In the 1980s, the link between guerrilla tactics of all kinds and left-wing ideology was broken.
The United States backed Contras using guerrilla tactics against the left-wing Sandinista government in Nicaragua, and also armed and trained Muslim Mujahideen fighting the Soviet Union in Afghanistan.
In the 21st century, guerrilla warfare has been primarily associated with Islamic jihadists operating in Iraq MUJAH | DE en and Afghanistan. fighter guerrilla insurgencies. onn nnn Thea pp r ° ximate JUUjUU v number of Viet Minh guerrillas in 1952.
QO nnn T ^ e number of Z/ U | U U f French troops operating in Vietnam that year. taxes and rice.
Even in areas supposedly under French control, the Viet Minh often operated freely at night, carrying out terror attacks against officials and soldiers.
Inspiration The success of the Viet Minh campaign, culminating in the humiliation of French troops at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, encouraged other would-be revolutionaries to take up arms.
Just as they were admitting defeat in Vietnam, the French faced a fresh guerrilla campaign mounted by nationalists in Algeria, which would lead to Algerian independence in 1962.
In Cuba, Fidel Castro's guerrillas overthrew President y Fulgencio Batista in 1959, an achievement quickly followed by the resumption of guerrilla warfare in South Vietnam, this time against the regime of Ngo Dinh Diem.
By 1965, Castro's erstwhile companion Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara had launched a call for further guerrilla uprisings as part of a worldwide campaign against American imperialism.
The Viet Minh and their successors, the Viet Cong, had helped a military strategy turn into a hazy project for revolution across the world.
MAO ZEDONG, PROBLEMS OF WAR AND STRATEGY, 1938 Revolution in Cuba Fidel Castro led a successful guerrilla campaign to take power in Cuba in 1959.
His adoption of the communist side in the Cold War convinced the United States of the urgent need to combat revolutionary HE BACKGROUND BEFORE MARCH 1959 The First Indochina War The war fought between the French Expeditionary Force and Viet Minh guerrillas from 1946 to 1954 was a brutal attritional struggle.
The French were able to hold the major cities but suffered heavy losses defending outposts in territory dominated by the guerrillas.
I n the immediate aftermath of the fighting in Hanoi that opened the war in December 1946, French generals believed the Viet Minh could be eliminated in a single punitive action.
Taking the offensive in 1947, they forced the guerrillas to take refuge in the remote northern border region, but failed to destroy them.
Until 1949, the Viet Minh remained a manageable problem for the French, but the communist victory in China that year changed the situation.
In September and October 1950, General Vo Nguyen Giap ordered offensives against French fortified bases along the Chinese border, from Cao Bang to Lang Son.
All the outposts were overrun or abandoned and the French withdrawal turned into a rout.
Attacks step up Overconfident in the wake of this stunning victory, in the following year, Giap launched offensives in the Red River Delta, threatening Hanoi and Haiphong.
Commanded by General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, the French repulsed the attacks with artillery and air bombardment, including the use of napalm—an incendiary bomb.
GENERAL DE LAttRE DEtASSIGNY, REPORtON INDOCHINA SITUATION, SEPTEMBER 1951 E F O R E After World War II, the French hoped to reassert their great power status.
However, after the war, France sought to regain its colonies, rebranding its empire as the French Union.
They wanted to keep overall control while granting limited self-government.
French column on the move A An American-supplied tank leads motorized infantry along a dike in the Red River Delta.
Restricted to roads, French columns— Groupements Mobiles —were vulnerable to ambush by more flexible Viet Minh infantry.
Indochina War medal This was awarded to members of the French Expeditionary Force that served in Indochina, 75,000 of whom died.
The force included French Legionnaires and colonial units in addition to regular troops. killed.
However, a series of French operations in 1952 showed their inability to inflict serious damage on Viet Minh areas.
They could not block supply routes from China or stop the guerrillas from invading neighboring Laos.
United States support On the whole, the French Expeditionary Force fought well.
It was a multinational army of professional soldiers in which the Foreign Legion and troops from France's African colonies figured prominently.
From 1950 onward, the French received increasing military aid from the United States, which had identified the Viet Minh as a communist threat.
They also expanded the Vietnamese National Army, serving the notionally independent state headed by Bao Dai.
In some areas, militias controlled by Catholic bishops or by the Cao Dai and Hoa Hao religious sects held off the Viet Minh.
Even in government-controlled areas guerrillas carried out terrorist attacks.
With no prospect of victory, the French began to search for a way to withdraw from Indochina.
AFTER The Geneva Conference, intended to negotiate peace in Korea and Indochina, opened in April 1954.
By then, French troops were already under siege by the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu.
Vanquishing the French A naive Viet Minh poster of 1946 shows a Frenchman laid low by the Viet Minh and the French tricolor replaced by the flag of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, The majority of Vietnamese people supported the Viet Minh.
THE BACKGROUND BEFORE MARCH 1959 E F O R E The Russian Revolution of 1917 created the Soviet Union, a communist state committed to fomenting world revolution.
RISE OF THE SUPERPOWERS In World War II, the Soviet Union fought as an ally of the United States and Britain against Nazi Germany.
After the war, relations between the Soviet government and its former allies deteriorated rapidly.
Lines to mark zones of occupation by Soviet and Western forces became fortified borders between communist and anti-communist blocs.
J Nuclear deterrent A Soviet nuclear device is tested in Novaya Zemlya on October 30, 1961.
Fear of the destructive power of nuclear weapons forced America and the Soviet Union to avoid full-scale conflict with one another.
The Cold War From the late 1940s, the United States set out to block the spread of communism worldwide.
In this Cold War context, the struggle between the French and the Viet Minh was transformed from a local colonial conflict into part of a global confrontation.
The aim was to prevent the spread of communism and Soviet influence, which were seen as a direct threat to American national security.
The ""Truman Doctrine"" was followed by a series of events—including the communist seizure of power in Czechoslovakia and the Soviet blockade of Berlin in 1948-49—that brought the United States into the openly hostile confrontation with the Soviet Union known as the Cold War.
The explosion of the first Soviet atom bomb, in a remote area of Kazakhstan in August 1949, made this a confrontation between nuclear-armed powers.
China embraces communism A poster from 1950 shows the Chinese people welcoming the installation of a communist government in Beijing.
China's membership of the communist bloc was a major setback for America in the Cold War. fearing a similar response from the Chinese.
Korea taught American strategists the principle of ""limited war""—restricting operations in order to prevent the conflict widening into a world war.
The United States did not use nuclear weapons and did not attack China, even though American and Chinese soldiers were fighting in Korea.
Weapons and training The communist victories in China and the Korean War had an immediate impact upon American policy toward Indochina.
Once Mao was in power in Beijing, an open connection was established between the Viet Minh in Vietnam and the communist DECISIVE MOMENTS MALAYAN EMERGENCY In 1948, ethnically Chinese communist insurgents launched a guerrilla campaign against British and Commonwealth troops in the British colony of Malaya.
However, the Malayan communists lacked popular support and had no friendly neighbor to supply them with arms.
Although the communist campaign continued until 1960, it was eventually defeated by counterinsurgency tactics—a strategy that the United States later used, with less success, in Vietnam.
The Korean War While American fears about communism were turning into full-blown paranoia, Mao Zedong led the communists to victory in the Chinese Civil War.
This dramatic development shifted the focus of American attention from Europe to Asia.
At the end of World War II, China's neighbor Korea had been divided into Soviet and American zones of occupation.
The Soviet zone had become communist North Korea, while a pro-American dictator ruled South Korea.
When North Korean forces invaded the South in June 1950, the United States led a large-scale military intervention under the banner of the United Nations, repulsing the North Korean invaders.
The Korean War was to have an enduring effect on America's approach to the later Vietnam War.
In Korea, after the defeat of the North Korean invasion, American General Douglas MacArthur ordered his troops to advance into North Korea.
China responded by sending its army into Korea, massively escalating the conflict and driving the UN forces back again.
During the Vietnam War, the Americans would always rule out an invasion of North Vietnam, contribution to the containment of communism in Asia.
While other allies of the United States sent troops to fight in the Korean War, the French were allowed to concentrate upon their own anticommunist struggle.
America, however, could never be wholly comfortable with supporting a European colonial power trying to maintain its empire.
It set up the Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam, officially to observe French use of United States military equipment, but in practice beginning a creeping United States engagement in the country.
By the early 1950s, commitment to the Cold War had begun inexorably to draw the Americans into Vietnam.
SOVIET LEADER NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV TO SIR WILLIAM HAYTER, JUNE 1956 powers, with weapons and training for the guerrillas coming from the Soviet Union and China.
American troops in Korea A guard of honor welcomes United States troops to South Korea during the Korean War, fought at the same time as First Indochina War between the French and the Viet Minh.
More than 35,000 United States soldiers died in the Korean War. military support from the United States.
The first deliveries of American military equipment to the French in Indochina arrived in June 1950, shortly after the start of the Korean War.
In American eyes, the war in Indochina came to be seen as France's AFTER The Geneva Conference in 1954 tried to secure peace deals for Korea and Indochina.
The United States backed Ngo Dinh Diem as ruler of South Vietnam while North Vietnam became a communist state under Ho Chi Minh.
V THE BACKGROUND BEFORE MARCH 1959 E F O R E After six years of fighting in the First Indochina War, the French realized that they could not defeat the Viet Minh.
TRUTH DAWNS By 1953, the French government began to look for an honorable way of withdrawing from Indochina.
General Henri Navarre, appointed French commander in Indochina in May 1953, had orders to preserve his forces rather than pursue a military victory.
J French Defeat at Dien Bien Phu Committed to a major set-piece battle under unfavorable circumstances, French forces besieged at Dien Bien Phu fought with outstanding courage but could not avoid defeat at the hands of a superior enemy.
I n the fall of 1953, French General Henri Navarre made the fateful decision to establish a base at remote Dien Bien Phu, inside Viet Minh-controlled territory, near Vietnam's Laotian border.
His objective was to disrupt Viet Minh supply lines to their forces in Laos.
On November 20, three French parachute battalions dropped into Dien Bien Phu and secured the area after some sharp fighting.
Eager to escalate from guerrilla operations to full-scale battle, Viet Minh commander Vo Nguyen Giap ordered substantial infantry forces with artillery to move toward Dien Bien Phu.
Instead of withdrawing, Parachute drop In November 1953, the French parachuted troops into Dien Bien Phu to establish a fortified base.
Called Operation Castor, the attack overwhelmed Viet Minh soldiers on the ground.
Foreign Legionnaires, colonial soldiers from North Africa, and elements of the Vietnamese National Army.
Facing them were 50,000 Viet Minh supported by 105mm and 155mm artillery.
The first Viet Minh attacks rapidly overran two French forward positions, codenamed Beatrice and Gabrielle.
The intensity of the Viet Minh artillery barrage astonished the defenders, whose counterfire proved ineffectual.
By March 17, the airstrip was unusable and resupply had to be by parachute.
Besieged on all sides Desperate to avoid disaster, the French government sought United States assistance.
A plan was devised for a fleet of 60 United States B-29 bombers to attack Viet Minh positions.
The only Americans to take part were civilians flying transport aircraft.
The besieged garrison continued its heroic resistance, unable to evacuate its wounded and The Viet Minh advance On March 13,1954, the Viet Minh opened the fighting at Dien Bien Phu by capturing a key French hilltop outpost, codenamed Beatrice.
Viet Minh infantry overwhelmed the French defenses. increasingly short of munitions.
Fresh reinforcements parachuted in, but antiaircraft fire rendered air operations perilous, as did the onset of the monsoon.
In a classic siege technique, the Viet Minh dug trench systems toward the French perimeter, until close enough to overcome the defenses by infantry assault.
On May 7, the shattered remains of the French fortified camp fell to the Viet Minh in hand-to-hand combat.
In eight weeks of fighting, about 2,000 soldiers on the French side had been killed.
The battle had been even costlier for the Viet Minh, with an estimated 8,000 killed and twice that number wounded.
But Giap had inflicted such a humiliating defeat upon France that any continuation of its colonial rule in Indochina was unthinkable. he poured thousands of troops into the Dien Bien Phu base, hoping to inflict a major defeat on the Viet Minh if they chose to attack.
Navarre assumed the Viet Minh would have their own supply problems, but Giap had a vast army of laborers to move supplies across country.
While the French dug trenches and built strongpoints to defend their vital airstrip, the Viet Minh occupied the high 4 A AAA The number I UjUUU of soldiers on the French side who were taken prisoner at Dien Bien Phu.
COLONEL CHRISTIAN DE CASTRIES, MESSAGE FROM DIEN BIEN PHU, MAY 7, 1954 ground, installing Chinese-supplied artillery and antiaircraft guns.
By February 1954, French aircraft flying in and out of the base were coming under heavy fire.
By then, France had 11,000 troops in Dien Bien Phu, led by Colonel Christian de Castries.
A well-oiled supply chain The Viet Minh forces at Dien Bien Phu were supplied by some 15,000 porters who carried food and munitions over hundreds of miles of inhospitable terrain on bicycles or on their backs. after On the day after the fall of Dien Bien Phu, political leaders at the Geneva Conference tried to solve the Indochina question.
An independent Vietnam would be divided at the 17th parallel, with a communist government established in Hanoi in the northern portion.
Fearful of another Dien Bien Phu, the United States deployed much greater airpower.
The conditions within the besieged base, where shallow trenches provided little protection against constant enemy artillery fire, demanded exceptional powers of endurance.
French doctor Major Paul-Henri Grauwin, head of the mobile surgical unit at Dien Bien Phu, tended to the injured and dying during the final week of the siege.
In his account he describes the relentless harassment of the French Expeditionary Force by the Viet Minh artillery—one attack following another, almost without stopping.
The Viet Minh were taking hold of trenches in the north, one yard at a time, and the French were waiting for the final onslaught to take place.
During the final week of the siege, it rained all day with no respite and the passages were full of stretchers the entire time.
Meanwhile, more wounded soldiers waited outside, under fire, in the pouring rain and the mud.
The Viet Minh suddenly increased their numbers tenfold until they were everywhere.
Rising out of the mud and water, they infiltrated passages, trenches, and shell holes.
V MAJOR PAUL-HENRI GRAUWIN, IN HIS MEMOIRS, DOCTOR AT DIEN-BIEN-PHU, 1955 French soldiers at Dien Bien Phu Newly arrived paratroopers take up position in the trenches.
About 4,000 airdropped volunteers reinforced the defenses during the siege, almost all of them eventually either killed or taken prisoner by the Viet Minh.
Negotiations ended the war between France and the Viet Minh, but divided Vietnam and left its future to be settled by a later, more destructive conflict.
BEFORE Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin's death in March 1953 led to a temporary thaw in the Cold War.
PEACE WINDOW Improved relations between Soviet leaders and the United States and its allies led to an armistice that halted the fighting in the Korean War in July 1953.
Joseph stalin lying in state A t a meeting held in Berlin in January and February 1954, representatives of the Soviet Union, Britain, the United States, and France agreed to convene an international conference in Geneva to negotiate peace settlements in Korea and Indochina.
The United States consented to communist China's invitation to the conference, although they refused to recognize the legitimacy of Mao Zedong's regime.
The State of Vietnam, set up by France in 1949, was represented, as was Ho Chi Minh's Democratic Republic of Vietnam, although it was not recognized as legitimate by the Western powers.
Negotiations on Korea achieved nothing, with the result that it continued to be regulated by the terms of the ceasefire agreed the previous year.
The Accords were completed in the early hours of July 21, but the clocks had been stopped to give the impression that it was still July 20—the deadline given by French prime minister Pierre Mendes-France.
France either had to find a peace deal or escalate the war by drafting high numbers of conscripted troops into Vietnam.
On June 18, Pierre Mendes-France, a politician who had long advocated a negotiated settlement with the Viet Minh, was appointed prime minister of France.
External pressures Despite their military successes, the Viet Minh were also under pressure to reach an agreement.
The Soviet Union and China wanted an easing of relations with the West.
The Chinese communists in particular needed a period of peace to consolidate their revolution and recover from their Interested parties A plenary session of the Geneva Conference assembles representatives of all the states with an interest in the Korean or Indochinese Wars.
Jhe most effective negotiations were those between France and the Viet Minh. losses in the Korean War.
Fearing American military intervention in Vietnam that might prolong the conflict indefinitely, China urged Ho Chi Minh to seek a compromise and postpone total victory.
British Foreign Secretary Sir Anthony Eden also put his weight behind a compromise deal, having envisaged the division of Vietnam into North and South from an early stage. secure a withdrawal of French forces resulted in fundamental issues being evaded or postponed.
Dividing line The Geneva Accords, issued on July 21, 1954, separated the warring forces.
All Viet Minh troops were to regroup north of the 17th parallel—an arbitrary line agreed to after much haggling— while the French withdrew to its south.
The final declaration of the conference insisted that the 17th parallel was not to be seen as a political border.
Elections were to be held within two years to unify Vietnam under a democratic government.
NORTH AND SOUTH Old allies Conference delegates included British Foreign Secretary Sir Anthony Eden, United States Under Secretary of State Walter Bedell Smith, and French Foreign Minister Georges Bidault.
The South became the American-backed Republic of Vietnam under Ngo Dinh Diem, who became president in 1955 after defeating Bao Dai in a governmentcontrolled referendum.
The nationwide elections called for by the Geneva Accords and intended to create a democratic unified Vietnam never took place.
FINAL GENEVA DECLARATION, ON THE DIVISION OF VIETNAM, JULY 1954 The United States might have been expected to take a leading part in the negotiations, but it did not.
The American Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, more or less boycotted the conference because of his fierce dislike of communists.
Dulles's deputy, Walter Bedell Smith, did take part, but to no great effect.
In the end, an agreement was reached through direct talks between Mendes-France and the Viet Minh representative Pham Van Dong.
The French insisted on Cambodia and Laos becoming independent on French terms, which sidelined revolutionary movements allied to the Viet Minh.
In Vietnam, the focus on an immediate deal to end the fighting and However, the United States was not a signatory of the Accords; nor was the State of Vietnam, where the nationalist Ngo Dinh Diem had just been appointed prime minister.
Vietnam Divided By 1955, Vietnam had won its independence, but was divided.
In South Vietnam, the Catholic nationalist Ngo Dinh Diem emerged as ruler with the backing of the United States, while in North Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh's regime imposed a communist system.
Around a million Vietnamese moved from North Vietnam to the South, primarily Catholics who feared the consequences of communist rule.
Such qualms were encouraged by propaganda promulgated by the CIA, and justified by the hardline attitude of the communist authorities.
About 90,000 people moved in the opposite direction, to the North—chiefly Viet Minh guerrillas who had fought against the French.
Flowever, many Viet Minh activists covertly remained in the South after partition.
American support The United States, committed to opposing the spread of communist influence worldwide, began to assert its presence in the South well before the French completed their withdrawal.
Although the E F O R E In 1954, France, facing defeat by Viet Minh guerrillas in the First Indochina War, signed the Geneva Accords.
PEACE TERMS The French officially declared Vietnam independent under former emperor Bo Dai.
Americans did not consider their chances of saving South Vietnam from communism to be high, they took on the task of advising the South Vietnamese government and army.
To their surprise, they found that the main politician they were backing, Ngo Dinh Diem, was capable of asserting his authority effectively.
As prime minister under President Bao Dai, Diem had crushed the Binh Xuyen, a mafia-like organization with the status of an independent army, and cracked down on the militias of the Cao Dai and Hoa Flao religious sects.
These militias played an important role in politics and had long defied government control, although some members joined remnants of the Viet Minh.
No election In October 1955, Diem staged a referendum in which he defeated Bao Dai, making himself president of the Republic of Vietnam.
Diem had no intention of allowing the nationwide elections provided for in the Geneva Accords to take place—neither he nor the United States had ratified the accords.
The United States was happy to supply money and equipment to a man who had shown he could use it effectively, to suppress troublesome factions and keep communism at bay.
Consolidating power Diem's successful creation of a US-backed police state in the South was an uncomfortable surprise to Ho Chi Minh and his colleagues.
They had counted on the weakness of South Vietnam to allow the Mailing propaganda A South Vietnamese postage stamp issued in 1955 shows refugees fleeing North Vietnam.
The decision of many thousands of Vietnamese to move south rather than live under communism inspired anticommunist propaganda. unification of Vietnam under communist rule, with or without elections being held.
At first, Ho Chi Minh was preoccupied with establishing a monopoly of power in North Vietnam.
Noncommunist nationalists who had fought under the banner of the Viet Minh were North Vietnamese communists sought to take advantage of growing discontent in rural South Vietnam.
The number of United States advisers in Vietnam exceeded 3,000 by early 1962. executed or sent to labor camps, and the communist party line was drilled into the entire population through propaganda and the use of terror against those who disagreed.
In the countryside, revolt triggered by the introduction of a land reform program was crushed by force, leading to hundreds of thousands of deaths.
Yet the North Vietnamese government had the advantage of being perceived as a Vietnamese regime.
GENERAL LAWTON COLLINS, United States SPECIAL REPRESENtAtIVE IN VIEtNAM, 1955 KEY CONCEPT RELIGION IN VIETNAM Confucianism and Buddhism were the main belief systems in Vietnam, but Catholics constituted a large minority of about two million.
The Hoa Hao, who followed their own strand of Buddhism, and the Cao Dai , who practiced a syncretist religion established in the 1920s, had their own militias, both suppressed by Diem in 1955.
AMERICAN GENERAL MAXWELL D.TAYLOR, TV INTERVIEW, 1979 A controversial figure in his lifetime and since, Ngo Dinh Diem became the prime minister of South Vietnam in the wake of the 1954 partition of the country.
Supported by the United States, Diem was a Vietnamese nationalist with a staunchly anticommunist and pro-Catholic worldview.
While his regime saw myriad challenges and instability, the United States would ultimately regret its decision to orchestrate his downfall in 1963.
Like his adversary Ho Chi Minh, Diem was born into the traditional mandarin elite of Annam in central Vietnam.
The Ngo family combined Confucianism with Catholicism, a minority belief in Vietnam.
Diem followed the path of chastity as if he were a Catholic priest—but instead of entering the Church he pursued a bureaucratic career under Bao Dai, the Vietnamese emperor, who ruled in Annam under French control.
Diem achieved recognition for his outstanding First president In 1955, Ngo Dinh Diem founded the Republic of Vietnam and became its first president.
A fiercely independent nationalist, Diem used United States money and arms to build up and defend South Vietnam, but steadfastly resisted his allies' influence in matters of policy. abilities, and he rose quickly through the ranks of the imperial civil service.
Despite Diem's position, he was a committed opponent of French colonialism.
In 1933—when Emperor Bao Dai appointed him minister of the interior in the Annamese government—Diem proposed the introduction of a representative assembly, which would be a significant step toward self-government.
Diem remained a key figure in nationalist politics over the next two decades and was recognized as a potential future leader.
In 1945 and 1949, he turned down invitations to become prime minister under Bao Dai, in regimes that were compromised by association with the Japanese or the French.
He also refused Ho Chi Minh's invitation to join the government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in 1946.
Diem had personal reasons to distrust the Viet Minh, its activists had killed one of his brothers and once held Diem himself under duress.
After the outbreak of the First Indochina War, Diem sought to lead a ""third force"" in Vietnamese politics, made up of nationalists who also rejected communism.
The South Vietnamese leader was greeted with enthusiasm as the man who had saved his country from communism.
Threatened with assassination by the Viet Minh, Diem soon found that the French authorities were unwilling to provide him with protection.
In 1950, he sought safety abroad, first in Europe and then in the United States.
I believe in duty above all.” wife—South Vietnam's de facto ""First Lady""—joined Diem in the presidential palace.
Another of his brothers, Ngo Dinh Thuc—the archbishop of Hue—also proved a powerful ally.
Diem also cultivated the support of the Catholic minority, swelled by refugees from the North.
Overthrow Officers in the South Vietnamese forces loathed the rule of Diem's family and his secret police.
He was lucky to survive an air attack on the presidential palace by his own air force in 1962.
Diem's favoritism toward Catholics further destablized his regime, while the Buddhist Crisis had a catastrophic effect on United States opinion— especially when Madame Nhu spoke out to mock the martyrdom of Buddhist protester Thich Quang Due.
The United States had hoped that Diem would be a bulwark against communism.
Diem and his brother Nhu were assassinated on November 2—bayoneted and shot in the back of an armored vehicle.
NGO DINH DIEM'S LASt PHONE CALL TO United States AMBASSADOR HENRY CABOt LODGE, NOVEMBER 1, 1963 Nepotistic leader When the French declared Vietnam independent in June 1954, Diem was able to dictate his own terms for accepting the post of prime minister from Bao Dai.
Backed by the Can Lao party and its secret police—run by his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu—Diem was quick to oust Bao Dai and stamp his own authority on South Vietnam.
The United States provided plentiful support to a man who seemed capable of saving the South from communism, but their influence over his behavior was limited.
Proclaiming an ideology of ""personalism,"" Diem built his regime around family loyalty.
His brother Ngo Dinh Nhu and Nhu's Religious protest Buddhist monks at a pagoda in Saigon lead a hunger strike to demonstrate against Diem in 1963.
During the gathering— a celebration of Buddha's birthday—nine Buddhists were killed by the police.
Resigns after three months when his proposals for reforms are rejected.
November 1960 Survives an attempted coup by South Vietnamese army officers.
In the 1950s, Cambodia maintained a precarious measure of stability, but Laos was sucked into the First Indochina War and quickly descended into chaos.
FORMER GLORIES Whereas Vietnam was shaped by Chinese Confucianism, Cambodia and Laos belonged to the Indian Hindu-Buddhist cultural sphere.
Cambodia had been the site of the Khmer empire in medieval times, but all that remained of such glories by the 19th century were the ruins of Angkor Wat.
Preyed upon by its more powerful neighbors Vietnam and Siam , Cambodia welcomed a French protectorate in 1863.
CAMBODIA'S ANGKOR WAT EMBATTLED LAOS By 1779, Laos was split between rival kingdoms that were dependencies of Siam.
During the 19th century, Vietnam and Siam fought for control of the region.
The French established a protectorate in Laos in 1893 and integrated it into French Indochina in 1898, although a Laotian king remained on the throne in the north at Luang Prabang.
J I n the spring of 1945, during their wartime occupation of French Indochina, the Japanese gave nominal independence to Cambodia and Laos under their traditional rulers.
King Norodom Sihanouk declared Cambodia's independence from France in March 1945 and King Sisavang Vong followed suit in Laos in April.
Moves by nationalists In October 1945, French troops, aided by the British, reoccupied the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, and arrested the proindependence prime minister.
Meanwhile, in Laos, the anticolonial Lao Issara (Free Laos) movement, headed by Prince Phetsarath, carried out a coup against King Sisavang Vong.
It was not until April 1946 that French forces recovered control of Laos, forcing Prince Phetsarath to take refuge in Thailand.
In both countries, France pursued a policy of political modernization, turning their traditional rulers into constitutional monarchs with governments answerable to elected assemblies.
In 1949, France, struggling to recover the base they had in Indochina prior to the war, granted the two countries greater self-government but continued to control defense and security.
Thailand provided a safe base both for the Lao Issara and for the Cambodian pro-independence groups of the Khmer Issarak movement.
Although not strong enough to seize power, these The three princes Princes Boun Oum, Souvanna Phouma, and Souphanouvong celebrate an agreement at Geneva in 1962 that made Laos a neutral state under a coalition government.
The smiles were shortlived, as the country's civil war and political chaos continued unabated. organizations established a threatening armed presence in areas of Cambodia and Laos.
The Lao Issara mutated into the pro-communist Pathet Lao, led by a member of the Lao royal family.
The Pathet Lao leader's halfbrother, Prince Souvanna Phouma was also originally a member of Lao Issara, but in 1951 took the post of prime minister in the royal Lao government.
The Viet Minh wades in In 1953, the Viet Minh launched a major offensive in Laos in alliance with the Pathet Lao.
It was partly in response to this that the French mounted their ill-fated operation at Dien Bien Phu in northwestern Vietnam.
King KING OF CAMBODIA NORODOM SIHANOUK Sihanouk became Cambodia's king in 1941, aged 18.
He abdicated after independence but continued to lead the country as prime minister and later as head of state.
Observing strict neutrality during the Vietnam War, he was overthrown in a US-backed coup in 1970.
Through the subsequent civil war he experienced arrest and exile, before returning to restore national unity in 1991.
In 1993, the monarchy was revived and Sihanouk became king for a second time.
Menaced by Viet Minh-backed Issarak guerrillas and by nationalist politicians opposed to his rule, he abandoned his palace in order to launch a campaign for full independence from France, successfully placing himself at the head of a popular anticolonial movement.
France bows out By the end of 1953, France had ceded effective independence to the royal governments in Laos and Cambodia.
Cambodia entered a period of fragile peace and mild prosperity, but Laos was not so fortunate.
The Pathet Lao, backed by newly independent North Vietnam, were able to control large areas of the country, engaging in a civil war with the government.
The government armed Hmong mountain tribesmen as guerrillas to fight the Pathet Lao and received increasing military support from the United States.
THE HO CHI MINH TRAIL By 1960, Laos was in the frontline of the Cold War.
It also supported the insurgency by Laotian communist Pathet Lao guerrillas.
A second Geneva Conference in 1961-62 declared Laos neutral but had no lasting effect.
The United States Air Force subjected eastern Laos, site of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, to the most sustained bombing campaign in history.
RISE OF THE KHMER ROUGE In Cambodia, Norodom Sihanouk strove to maintain his country's neutrality, refusing American military aid.
However, he could not stop Vietnamese communist forces from occupying base areas along the border with South Vietnam.
The United States poured in arms to the new government and bombed Cambodian border regions.
The country became a battlefield, with Cambodian communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas dominating extensive areas.
FRENCH GENERAL PAUL GIROD DE LANGLADE ON CAMBODIAN KING NORODOM SIHANOUK, 1953 V Hmong fighters The United States trained and armed Hmong mountain tribesmen in remote areas of Laos to fight against the North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao guerrillas.
AMERICA DRAWN INTO VIETNAM March 1959-December 1964 Communist attacks on South Vietnam threaten its stability, prompting the United States to send in Special Forces advisers to help.
United States support for President Diem's regime dwindles as it becomes obvious that he has alienated much of the South Vietnamese population.
The United States Special Forces were sent to small towns and hamlets to recruit and train Montagnard tribesmen for the South Vietnamese Army. advisers, including the Green Berets.
In 1963, with Diem's regime losing the guerrilla war and facing protests by Vietnamese Buddhists and chaos on the streets, America backed a military coup in which Diem was killed.
The following year, the Tonkin Gulf Incident, a naval clash off North Vietnam, won United States Congressional authorization for an open-ended escalation of United States military involvement in Vietnam.
H rom 1959, the North Vietnamese leadership decided to back a guerrilla uprising among the rural population of South Vietnam, who resented the rule of President Ngo Dinh Diem.
The Ho Chi Minh Trail was created to carry military supplies from the North to guerrillas in the South.
JANUARY 20 John F Kennedy is inaugurated as 35th president of the United States.
JUNE 4 At a summit meeting in Vienna, President Kennedy and Soviet Leader Nikita Khrushchev approve a plan for a neutralist Laos.
JANUARY 28 Kennedy increases funding for South Vietnam to support a counterinsurgency strategy.
JANUARY 26 The South Vietnamese 32nd regiment is defeated in an attack by Viet Cong guerrillas at the village of Trang Sup, northeast of Saigon.
Laos increasingly becomes a focus of Cold War tension between the United States and the Soviet Union.
DECEMBER 12 With the backing of the North Vietnamese politburo, the National Liberation Front is formed as the political wing of the antigovernment insurgency in South Vietnam. ft Green Beret headgear NOVEMBER 22 Kennedy authorizes a major escalation of American involvement in South Vietnam, including the dispatch of military helicopters and aircrew to fly them into combat.
JULY 8 The first American soldiers are killed in South Vietnam in a guerrilla raid on their living quarters at Bien Hoa, near Saigon.
AUGUST 20 The first load of arms and other aid from North Vietnam is delivered to the Viet Cong.
NOVEMBER 8 Democrat candidate John F Kennedy, with Lyndon B Johnson as his running mate, narrowly defeats Republican Richard Nixon in the United States presidential election.
Five American soldiers have been killed there during the course of the year.
DECEMBER 31 At the year's end, there are 3,200 United States military personnel in South Vietnam.
PRESIDENT JOHN F KENNEDY, INAUGURATION SPEECH, JANUARY 20, 1961 1962 1963 1964 ^ JFK assassination headline JANUARY 12 Operation Ranch Hand begins.
American aircraft spray large areas of rural South Vietnam with herbicides, chiefly Agent Orange, to destroy vegetation and deprive guerrillas of cover and food.
JANUARY 2 Viet Cong ambush South Vietnamese infantry and their American advisers at Ap Bac.
It is the first major Viet Cong victory over American-supported troops.
JANUARY 20 The North Vietnamese leadership decides in favor of an all-out war to defeat the South Vietnamese government and its American allies.
AUGUST 2 In the Tonkin Gulf Incident, the destroyer USS Maddox, on a signals intelligence mission, is engaged by North Vietnamese torpedo boats.
MAY 8 South Vietnamese forces shoot nine unarmed Buddhist demonstrators in Hue, leading to widespread anti-Diem protests by Buddhists.
JANUARY 30 General Nguyen Khanh overthrows General Minh in a bloodless coup and takes power in South Vietnam.
AUGUST 4 The United States Navy mistakenly reports a second naval encounter in the Gulf of Tonkin.
AUGUSTS United States aircraft strike targets in North Vietnam in retaliation for the alleged attacks in the Gulf of Tonkin.
JUNE 20 General William Westmoreland is appointed commander of American forces in Vietnam.
JUNE 11 In protest at Diem's policies, Buddhist monk Thich Quang Due burns himself to death in central Saigon.
DECEMBER 31 At the year's end there are 16,300 American military personnel in Vietnam.
JULY 1 General Maxwell Taylor is appointed United States Ambassador to South Vietnam.
A The Strategic Hamlets program, implemented in 1962 NOVEMBER 2 President Diem is assassinated in the course of a military coup approved by the United States.
NOVEMBER 1 The Viet Cong launch an attack on America's Bien Hoa airbase outside Saigon, killing four United States personnel.
MARCH 19 The South Vietnamese government launches its Strategic Hamlets Program, intended to defeat the rural insurgency by protecting peasants from communist influence.
NOVEMBER 3 Johnson is reelected United States president with a landslide victory over Barry Goldwater.
FEBRUARY 8 The United States sets up the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam to support South Vietnam against the Viet Cong.
DECEMBER 31 By the year's end, the number of United States military personnel in Vietnam is 11,300.
DECEMBER 31 At the year's end, there are 23,300 United States troops in Vietnam The American death toll for the year totals 216.
When it looked as though the Viet Cong guerrillas and North Vietnamese Army could become a serious threat, United States presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy poured aid into South Vietnam to prop up the faltering regime.
A t the end of the 1950s, South Vietnam appeared to be prosperous and stable— thanks to more than $200 million dollars worth of military and economic assistance from the United States each year.
By 1960, such aid made up as much as 70 percent of the country's total budget, and BEFORE History showed how committed guerrilla fighters could beat a well-trained professional army.
BAS-RELIEF OF HO CHI MINH WITH VICTORIOUS VIET MINH IN QUANG TRI THE TIME IS RIGHT As President Diem hunted down insurgents in South Vietnam, the Central Committee in the North weighed its options.
Little, if anything, was being done to improve conditions in the villages where 90 percent of the population lived.
Use of force As America poured resources into propping up the Diem regime in South Vietnam, Le Duan, a former activist in South Vietnam, who had taken refuge in the North, pressed fellow members of North Vietnam's politburo to provide greater support for the insurgents in the South.
As a result, in January 1959, the committee sanctioned the use of force in South Vietnam.
While not wishing to provoke their opponents, especially the Americans, by an outright invasion, it sought to build an effective guerrilla army in the South and supply it with weapons.
AFTER _ J Unpopular policies and corrupt practices aided recruitment to the Viet Cong.
This alienated the rural population, driving them into the arms of the Viet Cong.
Summoned by bells The province of Ben Tre, in the southern Mekong Delta, was the scene for one of the first uprisings.
As evening fell on January 17, 1960, gongs and bells summoned the locals to rise up against the ruling Diem regime and take control of their villages from the rapacious landlords and corrupt local officials.
During the same month at Trang Sup, a village northeast of Saigon, insurgents fought their way into a South Vietnamese Army headquarters and made off with large numbers of weapons.
That October, three crack paratroop battalions, hitherto presumed to be among the most loyal of the South Vietnamese units, surrounded Diem's presidential palace.
The attempted coup was only narrowly thwarted by forces still faithful to the president.
The insurgents targeted local officials who had the power to imprison for life or put to death any communist opponent of the regime.
By the end of 1960, more than 1,400 government officials had been assassinated.
A new culture This guide to Vietnam was issued to United States personnel serving in South Vietnam in 1962.
Its aim was to lessen culture shock and help individuals win the hearts and minds of the Vietnamese people.
A military art An American military adviser shows South Vietnamese troops how to kill a communist guerrilla with a bayonet.
The ARVN had to match their opponents' tactics and learn new combat skills.
Enter the Viet Cong In December 1960, the National Liberation Front —or the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam —was founded at a conference in Tay Ninh province in South Vietnam.
The United States viewed the NLF as an arm of North Vietnam and called its military wing the Viet Cong—short for Vietnam communists.
By then, insurgents dominated large areas of the Mekong Delta, the Central Highlands, and the coastal plains.
Their fighting strength had risen to an estimated 25,000 guerrillas, while the NLF's political wing had as many as 200,000 active sympathizers.
Washington responded by sending in more weapons, training, and aid to support Diem.
KNOW YOUR ENEMY, ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, 1966 Transporting the troops South Vietnamese soldiers wait to be picked up by United States helicopters in 1962.
VIET CONG SOLDIER DU LIC, IN HIS DIARY, DECEMBER 1961 Weapon of choice Pistol grip Soviet-manufactured AK-47 rifles—and Chinese variants, such as this Type 56—replaced the carbines with which the Viet Cong were first equipped.
The AK-47, often called peasants' rifles, were reliable weapons and produced a tremendous amount of automatic firepower.
The Viet Cong Single short automatic selector switch Ejection port The National Liberation Front—known as the Viet Cong—aimed to overthrow the South Vietnamese regime and reunify North and South Vietnam.
Despite its unconventional guerrilla tactics, it was a structured fighting force that amassed plenty of support.
Resistance to the new regime in South Vietnam was inextricably linked to the previous resistance to French imperialism. into battalions, regiments, and, from 1965, divisions, which had an operational strength of 7,350 men.
There were also full-time regional forces under provincial command and part-time guerrilla units, which were used primarily for village defense.
What the Viet Cong termed cadres were another key element in the insurgents' political and military setup.
More often than not, they were veterans of the war against the French with years of guerrilla experience behind them.
At the start of the insurgency, the majority of cadres were so-called regroupees—South Vietnamese people who had moved to North Vietnam in 1954 and, following intensive military training and political indoctrination, moved back to the South.
Former Viet Minh members who had remained in South Vietnam often became active Viet Cong organizers as well, operating in small cells for greater security.
He started off as a propagandist for the Viet Minh before quitting the movement to become a farmer in the Mekong Delta.
He rejoined his former comrades some years later after Diem's troops had tried, but failed, to arrest him.
After the partition of the country in 1954, cells of Viet Minh stayed in South Vietnam, in particular in the Mekong Delta and along the Cambodian and Laotian borders.
I t was the Diem regime that christened the forces of the National Liberation Front Viet Cong—short for ""Vietnam Cong-san,"" meaning Vietnamese communists.
Early growth The Viet Cong were divided into three operational forces—the main one being made up of full-time regulars.
This was divided 52 Lying in wait A 1960s' Viet Cong poster boasts that United States patrols, however well-armed, stand little chance of surviving ambush in the dense jungle.
The propagandists targeted United States ground forces in particular, hoping to lower morale. him formed the nucleus of the National Liberation Front when it was founded in 1960.
By late 1962, the NLF had around 300,000 active members and one million passive supporters in South Vietnam.
The Viet Cong controlled at least a quarter of the villages in the Mekong Delta.
Initially, most new recruits were persuaded to join the Viet Cong voluntarily by the recruiting cadres who regularly visited rural hamlets.
One of their arguments was that, once they turned 18, boys would be drafted into the South Vietnamese Army anyway.
However, as time went on, and recruiting cadres were required to meet provincial targets, compulsion replaced persuasion and young men were pitchforked into joining. with well-concealed staging areas from which to launch hit-and-run attacks.
Following the example set by Chinese communists in guerrilla campaigns against Japan, these sanctuaries also served as training grounds and headquarters.
THE VIET CONG i AFTER MjU As the Viet Cong grew in strength, the United States steadily increased its support for the Diem regime.
MULTIFACETED THREAT On January 12, 1962, helicopters flown by United States Army pilots ferried 1,000 ARVN troops to attack a Viet Cong stronghold near Saigon in Operation Chopper.
HIDDEN NO MORE United States tacticians believed they could make it harder for the guerrillas to conceal themselves by clearing the jungle.
CD RPG-2 A Soviet-designed, shoulder-fired grenade launcher, this was effective against armored vehicles and helicopters.
E RPD machine gun and ammunition drum This Soviet weapon with distinctive drum magazines was used to lay down fire during assaults and to cover retreats.
E Homemade machine gun Based on the easily produced British Sten gun, this model is notable for its double-set triggers.
E Machete Viet Cong forces used machetes to clear paths through dense jungle and for hand-tohand combat when necessary.
DD Homemade rifle These weapons were extremely crude, highly inaccurate, and prone to fall apart after just a few shots.
E Punji sticks Simple booby traps, these were made of bamboo or wood sharpened into spikes.
CD Stick grenade Viet Cong guerrillas were capable of producing their own grenades, although many were killed assembling such weapons.
E RKG-3 antitank grenade Easily held and thrown, this stick grenade could be conveniently transported in bundles.
E Floppy hat Usually made of lightweight cotton, this style of hat has a camouflage pattern.
ED Rice carrier This would have been filled with dry rice, tied at the ends, and carried across the back or shoulder.
Bamboo and other foliage would have been pulled through the ring to provide camouflage.
ED Sandals Made from recycled rubber sourced from tire treads, these were dubbed Ho Chi Minh sandals by United States troops.
E STICK GRENADE E HOMEMADE MACHINE GUN E HOMEMADE RIFLE E RKG-3 ANTITANK GRENADE E MACHETE E PUNJI STICKS E RPG-2 E RPD MACHINE GUN AND AMMUNITION DRUM 54 VIET CONG GEAR AND WEAPONRY GO FLOPPY HAT go] TUNIC [H AMMUNITION BELT gH RICE CARRIER gs] BACKPACK gn PANTS g5] SANDALS 55 1 AMERICA DRAWN INTO VIETNAM MARCH 1959-DECEMBER 1964 BEFORE Mu___ The men and women who built and used the Ho Chi Minh Trail followed in the footsteps of tribal hunters and the Viet Minh.
Creating the Ho Chi Minh Trail The North Vietnamese decided to create the Ho Chi Minh Trail as a means of infiltrating South Vietnam.
During the course of the war more than one million Viet Cong and North Vietnamese soldiers used its network of tracks.
Mekong Valley, to join Viet Cong detachments at jungle staging posts south of Khe Sanh.
When the South Vietnamese Army , which regularly patrolled Route Nine, realized what was going on, it C olonel Vo Bam, a logistics expert working in the Ministry of Defense in Hanoi, masterminded the creation of the supply route known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
His initial plan was for North Vietnamese infiltrators to make their way stealthily through the narrow demilitarized zone between North and South Vietnam, and then follow Route Nine, the road ✓ sent reinforcements to Khe Sanh and began clearing the area.
He concluded that the DMZ could be avoided by rerouting the trail down the western side of the Truong Son mountains and through lower Laos.
Both Hanoi and the Pathet Lao, the communist insurgents in Laos, approved the new route.
Shouldering the load South Vietnamese volunteers carry ammunition for the Viet Cong on the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
Armies of women helped distribute ammunition and weapons shipped to Hanoi from the Soviet Union and China.
Less well-known than the Ho Chi Minh Trail, it proved crucial to supplying Viet Cong insurgents in the far south of the country.
Life on the trail In the early days of the war, the trail was rudimentary.
A North Vietnamese colonel called Biu Tin, traveling the trail in December 1961, recorded a trek lasting three months, during which he had to hack or crawl through the jungle.
On a later trek, he recorded that some soldiers had lost their way and died of starvation.
Travelers also faced venomous snakes, leeches, and dysentery As the war escalated, the demands made on the Ho Chi Minh Trail increased.
In late 1963, Vo Barn's Group 559, which had been running the trail since its inception, investigated the feasibility of making it fit to transport large numbers of troops into South Vietnam.
Five months later, Hanoi took the decision to transform the Trail into a sophisticated logistical network and put Colonel Dong Si Nguyen in charge of construction.
Still underway a decade later, the trail became a spider's web of crisscrossing and intersecting tracks.
Thousands of engineers toiled ceaselessly to widen and TRUONG SON TRAIL The name given to the trail by the North Vietnamese, after the mountain range running through Central Vietnam.
Equipped with modern Soviet and Chinese machinery, they carved out roads and built bridges that could handle heavy trucks and tanks.
Convoys of vehicles, operating in relay, mostly at night, were soon transporting hundreds of tons of supplies southward.
Defending the trail Battalions of North Vietnamese regulars were assigned to defend the trail's flanks against possible ground attack.
To protect it from bombing, elaborate antiaircraft defenses were set up at key points along the trail.
Underground barracks, workshops, hospitals, fuel dumps, and storage facilities were also constructed.
The number of infiltrators rose, reaching an average of 4,500 soldiers a month by 1966 and 6,000 a month the year after that.
As even the United States government reluctantly came to realize, what the North Vietnamese had created was one of the great military engineering achievements of the 20th century.
Transport on the trail The Viet Cong transported supplies by any means possible, including by bicycle.
After each attack, hordes of Viet Cong soldiers and volunteers raced to repair the damage.
A MARINE OFFICER'S SECOND TOUR IN VIETNAM, 1968-1970 1 AMERICA DRAWN INTO VIETNAM MARCH 1959-DECEMBER 1964 Democratic team A campaign button for the 1961 election campaign advertises the original dream ticket, combining the youthful energy of Kennedy and the experience of running mate Lyndon Johnson.
CHANGE OF HEART As a young senator, John F Kennedy told the Senate in April 1954 that no amount of military assistance in Indochina could conquer an enemy that had the sympathy and covert support of the people.
In particular, he was determined to counter Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's pledge to support communists across the globe in their wars of national liberation.
It would pay any price and oppose any foe to stop the spread of communism.
J The Kennedy Administration Convinced that countries such as South Vietnam were key arenas in an ideological war between communism and freedom, John F Kennedy was determined to support Diem's regime in its fight against the Viet Cong.
J ohn F Kennedy won the United States presidency in 1960 partly on the strength of pledges to wage the Cold War more vigorously than Eisenhower, his Republican predecessor.
This meant developing United States capabilities to fight small-scale conflicts, known as brushfire wars, including the one in Vietnam.
Robert McNamara, the former president of Ford Motor Company, as secretary of defense; Dean Rusk, president of the Rockefeller Foundation, as the secretary of state; foreign policy expert McGeorge Bundy as Kennedy's national security adviser; and economist Walt Whitman Rostow, who became Bundy's deputy.
At the suggestion of Kennedy's brother Robert, the recently retired General Maxwell Taylor became Kennedy's personal military aide.
Taylor was a military maverick, preferring ""flexible response"" to traditional United States strategy that relied on overwhelming retaliation.
In his view, retaining a strong and flexible infantry was as important as possessing nuclear missiles.
A new kind of conflict Improving America's ability to wage conventional war was only part of Kennedy's plan.
He wanted specific initiatives devised to deal with guerrilla activity, insurgency, and subversion.
Kennedy believed the Army needed to come up with a new strategy, a wholly different kind of force, and a new kind of military training to meet what he considered to be the preeminent threat of the day.
Test case South Vietnam was to be the proving ground for the new strategy.
Having seen a clandestine attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro end in disaster at the Bay of Pigs and having backed down from confronting communism in Laos in the interests of US-Soviet cooperation, Kennedy decided that he had to make a stand in Vietnam.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson Lay of the land In September 1963, General Maxwell Taylor went to Vietnam to assess the war effort.
He met with MACV commander General Paul Harkins , whose reports had painted a favorable picture of United States progress.
President Eisenhower referred to the theory as his rationale for intervening in Vietnam, while Presidents Kennedy and Johnson later used it to justify increasing United States involvement in the conflict.
JOHN F KENNEDY, SPEECH AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON, NOVEMBER 16,1961 concurred.
Project Beef Up Although Kennedy balked at sending United States ground forces into action—a course urged by the Joint Chiefs of Staff—he authorized the implementation of Project Beef Up, which more than doubled American military assistance and economic support to the South Vietnamese.
The dispatch of United States helicopters and Special Forces contingents to support the training of the South Vietnamese Army turned the tide for a while, at least according to the reports reaching Washington.
Hopes dashed Believing that the United States was well on its way to achieving stability in South Vietnam, in the fall of 1962 Kennedy instructed McNamara to prepare to wind down the number of United States military advisers there to 1,500 by the end of 1965.
With the resurgence of the Viet Cong in 1963 and the growth of popular protest against President Ngo Dinh Diem, Kennedy's response was to increase United States military assistance.
By the end of 1963, there were 16,000 United States personnel in Vietnam.
AFTER _ Kennedy and his advisers came to believe that the authoritarianism of President Diem was part of the problem, not the solution, in South Vietnam.
KENNEDY, SPEECH AT AMERICAN UNIVERSITY, JUNE 10, 1963 T aking office in 1961, John Fitzgerald Kennedy presented himself as the leader of a new generation inspired by idealism and infused with optimism.
To this day, his image endures as a symbol of hope for a better world, and his assassination in 1963 is often seen as the moment when America lost its innocence.
His murder in the back of an open-top car during a visit to Dallas was the first step toward the bitter disillusionment that reached full flood during the Vietnam War.
INTEGRATED f SCHOOLS **pj C ENT NOH'/ HOUSING (gs ifCHri NO#/ On the home front In August 1963, African Americans marched on Washington, D.C., and demanded an end to discrimination.
Kennedy advanced cautiously on civil rights but laid the foundation for legislative changes that took place after his death.
Personal charisma Age 43 at his inauguration, John F Kennedy was the youngest person to win election to the presidency.
He projected an image of youthful optimism and energy at a time of Cold War tension and social conflict.
Political ambition Kennedy was born into an IrishCatholic family in Brookline, Massachusetts.
His father, Joseph, an ambitious businessman and diplomat, intended that his eldest son, Joe Kennedy Jr., would translate the family's wealth into political power.
A Harvard graduate and a hero of the naval war in the Pacific, Kennedy entered Congress as a Democrat in 1946 and became a senator at the age of 35 His marriage to the glamorous Jacqueline Bouvier confirmed the image of unstoppable success.
However, the young senator had severe back pain and a hormonal disorder known as Addison's disease.
The state of his health, which required operations and treatment -/ t h A yf jSKinHRSflr JOHN F KENNEDY with steroids, was successfully kept secret from the public, as were his extramarital affairs.
World view Kennedy's narrow victory over the far more experienced Republican candidate Richard Nixon in the 1960 presidential election was a triumph of image over substance.
However, Kennedy's performance as president in troubled times earned him enduring respect.
As well as facing pressing domestic issues, notably the Civil Rights Movement and the activities of organized crime, Kennedy confronted challenges on the world stage.
Having criticized the previous Republican administration for allowing the Soviet Union to gain the advantage in the Cold War, he was committed to taking a tough line on the containment of communism.
On the other hand, he understood the risks of nuclear war and hoped to combat communism in the Third World by counterinsurgency support for anticommunist regimes.
The Bay of Pigs fiasco, a CIAbacked invasion of Cuba planned by the previous administration, was a major setback.
Sensing that the new president was inexperienced and irresolute, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev took the offensive, building the Berlin Wall in summer 1961 and then agreeing to Cuban president Fidel Castro's request to station nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Resisting pressure for an attack on Cuba, he negotiated the withdrawal of Soviet weaponry, a diplomatic victory that led to progress in reducing nuclear tensions between the superpowers.
Policy in Vietnam In Southeast Asia, Kennedy backed a counterinsurgency strategy spearheaded by the Green Berets, a policy that expressed his desire to halt the spread of communism Funeral of a president President Kennedy's flag-draped casket lies in state in the central rotunda of the United States Capitol on November 25, 1963.
His burial plot in Arlington National Cemetery became a place of pilgrimage for Americans. while also avoiding outright warfare.
He was initially in favor of fellow Catholic Ngo Dinh Diem's presidency of South Vietnam, but became disillusioned with Diem's failure to win the hearts and minds of his people.
His hesitations were evident by the time of the US-backed assassination of Diem.
Whether the war in Vietnam would have been radically different but for Kennedy's own assassination cannot be known.
PRESIDENT JOHN F KENNEDY, SPEECH IN WEST BERLIN, JUNE 26, 1963 TIMELINE May 29, 1917 Born in Brookline, Massachusetts, son of Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy and Joseph Patrick Kennedy.
August 2,1943 Japanese sink PT-109, the Motor Torpedo Boat commanded by Kennedy; he is later decorated for bravery.
August 12, 1944 Elder brother Joe Kennedy Jr. is killed on a flying mission.
II November 27, 1957 Birth of daughter Caroline; son John Jr. born November 25, 1960; son Patrick born August 7, 1963, but dies two days later.
II June 1961 Agrees to a ceasefire in Laos with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
Both the United States and North Vietnam intervened—North Vietnam to access the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and the United States to build a secret army to fight the communist Pathet Lao.
T he United States had been pumping resources into Vietnam's neighbor, Laos, in an attempt to establish a pro-Western government, but the country was a political quagmire.
Eisenhower's response was to send in small GOLD FRIEZE COMMEMORATING LAOTIAN INDEPENDENCE Laos gained independence from France in 1953, leading to an internal power struggle.
Laos soon learned that freedom from the French did not mean freedom from Western intervention.
BROTHERS AT ODDS Since gaining its independence, Laos had been torn by internal divisions exacerbated by outside interference.
To United States President Eisenhower, keeping Laos out of communist hands was even more important than supporting the Diem regime in Vietnam, but providing United States financial assistance had done nothing to stabilize the situation.
The first of them, initially posing as contract civilian specialists, arrived in July 1959, just as the rainy season started.
The teams were drawn from the Seventh Special Forces Group stationed at Fort Bragg in North Carolina.
There were 12 of them, plus a control team, which was posted to Vientiane, the Laotian capital.
Each team consisted of a team leader and his assistant, two light weapons specialists, a medical expert and an aidman, a radio operator, and a motor maintenance engineer.
Special Forces in action Initially, the teams were restricted to working simply as instructors, but in August 1960 they found themselves caught up in the civil war between neutralists—who backed a neutral foreign policy— and pro-Westerners, with the communist Pathet Lao waiting in the wings.
That November, Special Forces detachments went into action as combat advisers to pro-Western General Phoumi Nosavan's forces as they advanced on Vientiane, which the neutralists had seized in a coup d'etat led by Captain Kong Le.
Phoumi's men occupied Vientiane, causing Kong Le to enter into a new alliance.
In early 1961, the coalition of Kong Le's neutralists, Pathet Lao, and North Vietnamese troops fought Phoumi and the Special Forces at the Plain of Jars, a strategically critical area of grassy hills.
In subsequent fighting, the Special Forces suffered their first casualties.
Sergeant First Class John Bischoff 9,000 Number of hill tribesmen in the CIA's Armee Clandestine by summer 1961. and Sergeant Gerald Biber, members of Captain Walter Moon's four-man-strong Field Tracking Team, were killed in action on April 22.
Moon himself was taken prisoner—as was Sergeant Orville Ballenger a week later.
Kennedy seeks neutrality Deciding what to do about Laos was the first foreign policy dilemma that President Kennedy would face.
Eisenhower had advised the new president that the Passing the torch Kennedy discusses matters of state with Eisenhower on January 19, 1973, the day before his inauguration.
This was an informal meeting to discuss continuing problems, especially the situation in Indochina.
The guerrillas were trained by Special Forces advisers and Thai Police Aerial Reinforcement Unit teams.
PRESIDENT JOHN F KENNEDY, TELEVISION ADDRESS TO THE NATION, MARCH 23,1961 AFTER Laos continued to be a target during the Vietnam War as a result of North Vietnamese incursions there. situation in Laos was so grave that it might be necessary to deploy ground forces.
If it fell to communism, then South Vietnam, Cambodia, Burma, and Thailand would follow.
In April, he concluded that a negotiated settlement was the best he could hope for and agreed to participate in a peace conference.
In July 1962, an agreement was finally made to establish a neutral and independent Laos.
Operation Momentum In spite of this, Laos remained divided by factions determined to continue the battle for power.
The North Vietnamese needed to control the eastern corridor that formed an integral part of the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
Meanwhile, the United States was determined to block the North Vietnamese incursions.
It was a task Kennedy gave to the CIA, which had already set its own secret plan in motion.
Operation Momentum, as it was codenamed, recruited a Hmong guerrilla army—the Armee Clandestine — to fight for the CIA by proxy.
The ""Secret War,"" which lasted for more than 13 years, was the largest paramilitary operation the CIA had ever undertaken.
This made Laos the most heavily bombed place in the history of the Earth.
Regimental badge with the motto ""de oppresso liber""—to free the oppressed C ounterinsurgency was a key policy for the Kennedy administration, and the expansion of United States Special Forces to implement the strategy became a top military priority.
At the time of Kennedy's inauguration in January 1961, there were three Special Forces groups in existence—the « \ President Kennedy valued the Green Berets for the flexibility of their response.
SMALL BEGINNINGS The elite fighting force known as the Green Berets developed from the Tenth Special Forces Group established in June 1952.
NEW TYPES OF CONFLICT Kennedy's belief in the efficacy of Special Forces predated his presidency.
He believed Eisenhower had focused too heavily on nuclear arms, leaving the United States ill-equipped to fight conventional conflicts of the kind Kennedy expected to face in Asia.
F KENNEDY, MEMORANDUM TO THE United States NAVY, APRIL 11, 1962 Tenth, the Seventh, and the First.
These were joined by the Fifth, activated in September 1961, and the Eighth and the Third in 1963.
In addition to satisfying tough physical demands and being qualified parachutists, potential recruits had to show they were independent thinkers with the potential to fight and survive in harsh combat conditions.
The first phase of the assessment and selection procedure lasted 24 days and included a week-long field training exercise.
Round-the-clock land navigation exercises, reconnaissance patrols, ambushes, raids, and an escape and evasion exercise pushed the recruits to the limits of their physical and mental endurance.
In the second phase of the training, recruits received instruction in one of five specialty areas—operations and intelligence, weapons, engineering, medicine, and communications.
Captain Ron Shackleton and half of Detachment A-113 were tasked with setting up the Civil Irregular Defense Group program designed to protect the Montagnards, the mountain tribespeople, from infiltration by the Viet Cong.
Kennedy also authorized the launch of a clandestine campaign against North Vietnam by South Vietnamese troops trained and directed by Special Forces advisers.
The Special Forces presence expanded rapidly, commanded from the fall of 1962 by Colonel George C Morton.
In January 1963, the border surveillance camp at Plei Mrong became the first Special Forces camp to be assaulted by the Viet Cong.
By October 1964, there were 44 Special Forces Operational Detachments Alpha, also known as A-Teams, in South Vietnam, of which 28 were deployed on border surveillance, with the aim of preventing Viet From 1968, the CIA enlisted the support of the Green Berets in counterterrorism operations.
PHOENIX PROGRAM The Green Berets gradually relinquished their role in the CIDG program to the ARVN and became more involved in reconnaissance and intelligence gathering, particularly for the CIA's V_ Badge of pride This beret was worn by a member of the Seventh Special Forces Group Airborne, which trained the South Vietnamese army.
Most infiltrators sought alternative routes, or simply avoided the Special Forces' patrols.
In addition, the camps were hard to maintain and mostly only accessible by air.
Ninety percent of the troops assigned to them had to be flown in or dropped by parachute, along with their supplies.
The American hope was that these would prevent infiltration by the Viet Cong across the Central Highlands.
Special Forces ceased all operations in Vietnam in March 1971, though continued to perform an advisory role.
NEW INSURGENCIES The Green Berets have operated in many war zones since Vietnam, including Iraq, Somalia, Bosnia, Afghanistan, and Syria.
The Green Berets were not the only United States special operations forces in Vietnam.
EYEWITNESS September 19, 1964 The Green Berets in Vietnam The Green Berets spent their early days in Vietnam dissuading the Montagnards from joining the communist cause.
It often took a while for Americans to win the trust of the mountain people.
Keeping that trust was also difficult—as 31-year-old Special Forces Captain Vernon Gillespie Jr. found in 1964, when five of the six Montagnard camps in his region staged a mutiny.
The Green Berets brought these people back to a camp at Buon Brieng to deprive the Viet Cong of this labor source.
Tension had been building among the Montagnards at Buon Brieng in late July and early August 1964.
On the night before September 19, a rebellion broke out in the camp and the Green Berets were prepared for it.
However, the next morning, they discovered rebellion was occurring over a far wider area.
Green Beret Captain Vernon Gillespie Jr. told the Montagnards battalion commander that he was taking command of the camp, which meant the Vietnamese Special Forces in the camp were under United States protection.
GREEN BERET CAPTAIN VERNON GILLESPIE JR., FROM WAR STORIES OF THE GREEN BERETS BY HANS HALBERSTADT, ZENITH PRESS, 1994 Bringing them in Gillespie questions two Viet Cong captured at Buon Brieng.
He convinced the younger boy—a Montagnard in a Vietnamese copy of a United States Army cap—to defect and betray the location of the guerrillas' jungle camp.
HISTORICAL ENMITY Mountain People Both the United States and North Vietnam tried to enlist the support of the Montagnards, the indigenous people of South Vietnam's rugged highlands.
The Green Berets spent the early part of the war wooing, training, and arming the tribesmen, whom they nicknamed Yards.
I t was the CIA, not the Diem government, that came up with the idea of enlisting the Montagnards as allies in the fight against the Viet Cong.
In late 1961, Colonel Gilbert B Layton, a Marine officer on loan to the CIA in Saigon, and David Nuttle, an International Voluntary Services official working with the Rhade tribe in the Central Highlands, jointly conceived what they called the Civilian Irregular Defense Group program as a means of blocking Viet Cong infiltration.
Pilot project They chose Buon Enao, just to the northeast of Buon Ma Thuot, in the heart of Rhade country, to test fc -• AFTER c -The war devastated the lives and villages of the Montagnards, forcing many into exile.
SIEGE OF KHESANH Around a quarter of the prewar population of one million Montagnards died during the war.
In September 1964, some 3,000 Montagnards in five Special Forces camps in the Central Flighlands killed 80 South Vietnamese troops and took 20 Americans hostage.
Eventually, Special Forces officers persuaded the rebels to lay down their arms.
The FULRO militants and their main supporters fled over the border to Cambodia.
Green Beret advisers Members of the Green Berets show Montagnard tribesmen how to operate a 57 mm recoilless rifle so that they can defend their village against Viet Cong attack.
Trigger the plan, and in November 1961, Nuttle, a CIA officer, and a Special Forces medical specialist visited the village to confer with the local elders.
FIFTH SPECIAL FORCES STAFF SERGEANT GEORGE CLARK, THE YEAR IN Montagnard crossbow Usually used for hunting, crossbows were also employed as weapons during the war.
They were carved from tropical timber and fired bamboo arrows. than two weeks of negotiations, the elders agreed to collaborate with the Americans, and in February 1962, a Green Beret team arrived in Buon Enao to train the village defenders.
They planned to extend their operations to neighboring villages once a secure base had been established.
By the summer, five Green Beret A-Detachments were operating in the Rhade tribal area.
Camps were established to serve as bases for the so-called trail watchers—specially formed and trained groups of Montagnards Cong shot down Captain Terry D Cordell's aircraft in full view of the CIDG strike force he was advising in Buon Enao, the Rhade were so enraged by his loss that they turned on the Viet Cong and drove them off in disorder.
With help from the United States Navy's Seabees, the Green Berets constructed dams, roads, bridges, and schools for the Montagnards.
By December 1963, some 19,000 Montagnards had enrolled in part-time village militias, while 6,000 more were serving in CIDG strike forces, which stood ready to be airlifted to trouble spots.
Organized rebellion Not all Montagnards supported the United States against the communists.
The relationship was complicated by the Montagnards' hatred of the SPECIAL OPERATIONS, 2009 tasked with reconnaissance on South Vietnam's jungle frontier, including along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
Khe Sanh, in the Bru tribal area, became operational in July 1962, and Dak To and Dak Pek, both in the Sedang tribal area, were set up in August.
The Special Forces therefore spent a large proportion of their time in the early days winning the Montagnards' trust and dissuading them from defecting to the Viet Cong.
When the military junta that replaced Diem in 1963 pursued Special qualities The Green Berets established good relationships with their new allies.
The collaboration became a bright spot in what was often a confusing and frustrating war.
In June 1962, for example, village defenders in the Sedang tribal area repelled a Viet Cong attack armed only with knives and bows and arrows.
That October, when Viet Friendly visit A Green Beret laughs with Montagnards in the Central Highlands.
Special Forces visited villages to forge relationships— drinking rice wine and learning about the tribes' music, traditions, and weapons.
These usually consisted of trenches strewn with traps and mines and mounted by barbed wire.
Strategic Hamlets After two years of growing insurrection in the South Vietnamese countryside, pressure mounted on Diem to devise an effective counterinsurgency strategy.
BEFORE The Viet Cong's influence in rural areas had long been a problem for the Diem regime.
THE AGROVILLES As early as 1959, Diem began moving South Vietnam's rural population from their ancestral homes to fortified villages, called agrovilles, to isolate them from the influence of communists and protect them from attack.
The villagers resented the move, especially since the regime forced them to buy the land.
No more than 20 agrovilles were ever completed and the South Vietnamese government had abandoned the scheme by 1961.
T he idea of moving villagers to specially fortified hamlets to protect them from the Viet Cong was promoted by Sir Robert Thompson, the leader of a British advisory mission to Vietnam.
The British had contained a rebellion in their colony, Malaya, by employing a similar scheme.
In Vietnam, it was envisaged that ARVN troops would provide protection for the hamlets until locally trained self-defense militias could take over.
At the same time, economic and social reforms would also help to win the villagers' trust.
In Malaya, the majority of insurgents were of Chinese origin, not Malayan.
The Vietnamese were being asked to take up arms against their fellow countrymen.
Furthermore, in Malaya, the British had fortified existing villages, not constructed new ones.
The Vietnamese version of the plan entailed a large-scale displacement of villagers that only added to the prevailing discontent with Diem's government.
This North Vietnamese scroll, entitled Nong , from 1960, depicts an idealized scene of farming under communism.
First settlements Operation Sunrise, the program's pilot project, launched in Binh Duong province, north of Saigon, in March 1962.
The plan, administered by Diem's brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, was to construct five fortified settlements in the Ben Cat district, an area with a strong Viet Cong presence.
In addition, people were unwilling to take up arms to defend their new homes.
Myths and realities In September 1962, the regime announced that 4,322,034 people—33.39 percent of South Department's intelligence director, initially described the scheme as an effective strategic concept.
Defense Secretary Robert McNamara believed the program showed that Diem was at last making progress in countering subversion.
Many villagers bitterly resented being forced to labor unpaid, digging defensive moats, implanting bamboo stakes, and erecting fences to protect themselves against people who were not threatening them directly.
The ones who agreed to join local self-defense groups became embittered when the modern weapons promised by the government failed to arrive in any quantity.
Even Hilsman grew disillusioned when he visited South Vietnam on a fact-finding mission in 1963.
Corruption was endemic among the officials appointed to administer the program.
United States STATE DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE ROGER HILSMAN, 1963 Vietnam's population—were living in fortified settlements.
By the end of the year, more than 6,000 such settlements were said to be in operation, with hundreds more under construction.
Some Americans high up in the Kennedy administration swallowed what Diem and Nhu were telling them.
Roger Hilsman, the State fertilizer, and pay for irrigation schemes, schools, and medical care among the communities, they frequently embezzled it.
Viet Cong response For their part, though initially alarmed by the program, the Viet Cong soon became fully aware of its shortcomings.
Their response was to launch a systematic campaign that targeted the most important hamlets.
Specially trained Viet Cong units were organized to destroy them, either by direct attack or infiltration.
At Hoa Phu, in the Long An province in the Mekong Delta, an area particularly resistant to the program, villagers urged on by Viet Cong guerrillas who had infiltrated the settlement, tore down its defenses and returned to their native villages.
Photo opportunity Madame Ngo Dinh Nhu, South Vietnam's ""First Lady,"" inspects the defenses of a hamlet with her husband Ngo Dinh Nhu , who administered the program.
AFTER MJL By the beginning of 1964, the Strategic Hamlets Program was in chaos.
SPY REVELATIONS After the Vietnam War ended, it was revealed that Nhu's chief lieutenant, Colonel Pham Ngoc Thao, was a communist agent.
He had sabotaged the Strategic Hamlets Program by deliberately implementing it so quickly that it drove the alienated villagers into the camp of the Viet Cong.
When government troops opened fire on a crowd of Buddhist protesters in Hue on May 8,1963, the incident precipitated a nationwide crisis. the victims, and punish the officials responsible for the killings.
Diem claimed instead that the deaths had been caused by a Viet Cong agent throwing a hand grenade into the crowd, and rejected the Buddhists' demands even as demonstrations in Hue against the regime became an almost daily occurrence.
When news of the initial incident at Hue reached Washington, Dean Rusk, the secretary of state, was quick to respond.
In a telegram to the United States embassy in Saigon, he told The Buddhist Crisis Addressing the crowd A Buddhist leader speaks from atop a car on June 16, 1963.
Diem's pro-Catholic policies only continued the discrimination that South Vietnam's 10. million Buddhists had endured under French colonial rule.
HISTORY OF RESILIENCE Buddhism had been practiced in Vietnam since at least the second century, occasionally falling out of favor with royal rulers and their courts.
Seeing Buddhism as a threat, they passed laws to prevent its spread and growth.
This favoritism, however, caused deepening resentment among the nation's Buddhists, who made up more than 70 percent of the population.
Buddhist hostility to the regime remained latent until an incident in Hue propelled them into open opposition to the Diem regime.
Buddhist protest Hue was the spiritual center of South Vietnamese Buddhism.
On May 8, 1963, thousands assembled there to celebrate the Buddha's 2,587th birthday.
The local administration, however, forbade the flying of the Buddhist flag to commemorate the occasion.
Many Buddhists gathered outside the radio station in protest, to listen to a speech by Buddhist leader Thich Tri Quang.
Claiming that the speech had not been authorized by the censors, the station director refused to allow Quang to broadcast.
He also summoned Major Dang Xi, a Catholic and the deputy province chief, to the scene.
Xi ordered the crowd to disperse and, when the Buddhists failed to do so, told his men to open fire.
As the crowd stampeded, 14 people, two of whom were children, were shot or trampled to death.
Diem grudgingly assured him that the repression would cease, but it soon became clear that he had no intention of keeping his word.
He and his brother, Nhu, stalled for time, hoping to ride out the crisis. protest was forcibly dispersed by Diem's security police.
Then, on June 11, Thich Quang Due, a 73-year-old monk, publicly burned himself to death at a major city intersection.
The protests gathered momentum, with high school and university students taking a leading role.
Four days later another Mr <v« _ soldiers, surrounded the Xa Loi Pagoda, Saigon's principal Buddhist shrine.
In Hue, monks barricaded themselves inside the Dieude Temple for eight hours before surrendering.
Henry Cabot Lodge, who arrived in Saigon to take over from Nolting, was convinced that Diem had to go.
Tri Quang had already secretly met with United States Embassy officials and encouraged the United States to take action, noting that they were partly responsible for the situation in South Vietnam.
Mass protest Protesters try to tear down a barbed wire barricade with their bare hands as they are confronted by the police at Giac Minh pagoda on July 17, 1963.
Hundreds of monks, nuns, and laypeople were kicked, punched, and clubbed by police in the Cholon district of Saigon.
AFTER ►X The Buddhist crisis—and Nhu's violent response to it—erased the last shred of confidence that United States leaders had in Diem's regime in South Vietnam.
Kennedy authorized Lodge to let the generals know that, while the United States would not assist them in mounting a coup, it would support them afterward.
Despite the generals' hopes, Diem's removal did not bring order to South Vietnam.
The Viet Cong continued to make inroads in South Vietnam, eager to take advantage of this political instability. 73 i „■ Buddhist martyr Thich Quang Due sits silent and still as he is engulfed by flames.
The monk set himself on fire in protest in June 1963, leading other Buddhists to follow suit.
Provoking worldwide horror, his action was a catalyst in the fall of Diem's regime.
INTO VIETNAM MARCH 1959-DECEMBER 1964 Diem Assassinated As 1963 dawned, the situation in South Vietnam was rapidly worsening, and it was not helped by the ARVN's performance near Ap Bac.
As popular discontent with Diem and his despotic regime mounted, his generals began plotting his overthrow.
A s 1962 drew to a close, the opinion in both Saigon and Washington was that United States military aid to South Vietnam was starting to tip the scales against the The number of factions Viet Cong.
What plotting to kill Diem the United States military during the lead-up to advisers wanted * his assassination. was a chance to demonstrate how the ARVN, with United States weaponry, could defeat the guerrillas.
South Vietnamese intelligence had reported that three companies of Viet Cong—plus local auxiliaries— were concentrating near Ap Bac, a village in the Mekong Delta.
Lieutenant Colonel John Paul Vann, the top United States adviser with the E F O R E Diem was on shaky ground, but had survived two previous attempts to overthrow him.
In November 1960, Lieutenant Colonel Vuong Van Dong led an attempted military coup but failed to overthrow the president.
Diem and his family just managed to escape death when two renegade air force fighter pilots bombed and strafed the presidential palace.
ARVN Seventh Division, urged its commander Colonel Biu Dinh Dam to attack.
One infantry regiment, landed by helicopters, would move in from the north.
Two battalions of troops would advance from the south, and a rifle squadron on board armored personnel carriers would approach from the west.
They patiently waited until the first three waves of helicopters had dropped troops, then, as the fourth wave came in to land, opened fire.
By noon, five United States helicopters had been forced down and their crews were in If New VgSLKi PRICES SHOT danger.
It took Vann three hours to persuade the South Vietnamese to make a rescue attempt.
When he did, the vehicles advanced so slowly that they became sitting ducks.
The two battalions supposed to advance from the south refused to move forward.
Finally, the South Vietnamese deployed the paratroopers Vann had proposed to block a Viet Cong retreat—but deployed them to the west, not in the east as Vann had requested.
In the deepening twilight, they were mistaken for Viet Cong by their own side.
The Strategic Hamlets Program was proving a failure and the Buddhists called for political reform.
On August 23, just two days after Nhu's security police had raided Buddhist temples in Saigon and Hue, ARVN Chief of Staff Tran Van Don told Lucien Conein, a veteran CIA officer operating The Assassination of JFK When news of Diem's assassination reached President Kennedy, he was profoundly shocked.
Three weeks later, on November 22, Kennedy himself was shot in Dallas, Texas, when Lee Harvey Oswald opened fire on the presidential limousine.
They received holy communion before their capture and murder. * under cover, that a coup d'etat was being planned.
Opinion in the White House was divided, but on August 26, Kennedy acted.
The new United States ambassador in Saigon, Henry Cabot Lodge, was authorized to inform the generals that, while the United States would not actively help them to mount their coup, it would support a new government, once formed.
The generals pounce This was not the unequivocal pledge the South Vietnamese had been seeking from the US, but on November 1, the generals took action.
Airborne and army troops backed up by some 40 tanks surrounded the presidential palace.
Despite promises of safe passage, they were brutally killed in the back of an armored car on November 2.
Diem and Nhu were buried in unmarked graves in Saigon's main Catholic cemetery. 76 <l4SQf I*. :i I"" '■-v 1 w ■ , I _ Celebrating the fall Two South Vietnamese boys jump on the dismembered head of a statue in Saigon on November 5, 1963.
Symbolic of Diem's fallen regime, the head bore the face of Diem's powerful and much-hated sister-in-law, Madame Nhu.
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE ROGER HILSMAN IN THE ""HILSMAN CABLE,"" AUGUST 24, 1963 AFTER Diem's assassination left South Vietnam's future more uncertain.
REVOLVING DOOR Between 1963 and 1965, there were 12 different governments in the South as coup followed coup.
In June 1965, ARVN General Nguyen Van Thieu became president of South Vietnam and remained so for the next 10 years.
DETERMINED LEADER Lyndon B Johnson took over as President of the United States.
He told a group of his closest advisers that he was not going to lose Vietnam and would not be the president who saw Southeast Asia go the same way as China.
In November 1964, North Vietnamese regulars began infiltrating South Vietnam along the Ho Chi Minh Trail to support the Viet Cong.
BEFORE The assassinations of South Vietnam's President Diem and President Kennedy three weeks later changed the situation in Vietnam and the United States response to it.
He and his advisers expected that Diem's removal would dramatically improve the situation in South Vietnam, but this proved to be misguided.
United States VICE PRESIDENT LYNDON B JOHNSON IS SWORN IN AS PRESIDENT W hile President Johnson was busy reaffirming United States commitments to South Vietnam, the news from the country kept getting worse.
In the view of United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, the 12 army officers who formed the Military Revolutionary Council governing the country were so preoccupied with political affairs that they were failing to give their troops or government officials outside Saigon any direction.
Nor were they supported by the various other factions who had opposed Diem.
The key question for President Johnson was not whether, but how, to prop up South Vietnam.
Although opinion polls showed him to have a huge lead over Senator Barry Goldwater, his chief Republican challenger in the 1964 election, Johnson worried about his prospects.
Verge of anarchy In South Vietnam, the situation continued to deteriorate.
On January 30, 1964, another coup, led by General Nguyen Khanh, overthrew the divided junta.
Johnson believed Khanh's promise to step up the South Vietnamese war effort, but, as McNamara noted after a March 1964 visit, ARVN losses and GENERAL WILLIAM WESTMORELAND, MARCH 1964 desertions were high and increasing while the Viet Cong was recruiting energetically.
On February 3, fighters mounted an attack on the United States advisory compound in Kontum as part of a major offensive against the South Vietnamese in the Tay Ninh province and the Mekong Delta.
Three days later, they exploded a bomb in Saigon's crowded Capital Kinh Do Theater, killing three Americans and wounding 50 more.
In early April, the Viet Cong captured Kien Long, a district capital in the Mekong Delta.
North Vietnamese commandos from the Jungle attack South Vietnamese forces and American soldiers come under attack by Viet Cong guerrillas while unloading supplies sent by the United States in 1964.
At this point in the war, American casualties numbered a few hundred. 65th Special Operations Group sank the aircraft carrier USNS Card in Saigon harbor.
Although salvage crews managed to raise the stricken ship 17 days later, the attack was a major blow to United States prestige.
So, too, was a Viet Cong assault on the United States Special Forces camp at Nam Dong in the Northern Highlands on July 4.
The Viet Cong overran the camp's defenses, killing 50 South Vietnamese and two United States military advisers before withdrawing.
Yet he still shrunk from sending United States combat troops into action.
Nor would he authorize the bombing of North Vietnam as advocated by Air Force General Curtis LeMay.
Christmas in Saigon At approximately 6m. on Christmas Eve 1964, an explosion in the parking area of the Brinks Hotel on Hai Ba Trung Street in Saigon tore a hole through two floors of the building, killing one man and injuring more than 70 others.
Strategy in the North While Johnson and his advisers debated what to do, the North Vietnamese leadership was also making major policy decisions.
They concluded that Johnson had no intention of abandoning the United States commitment to South Vietnam or of negotiating a settlement that would be acceptable to them.
Accordingly, they decided to escalate the war by building up the insurgent forces in South Vietnam until they were strong enough to annihilate ARVN regulars.
In November 1964, North Vietnamese troops started infiltrating South Vietnam via the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
A r\ PERCENT of the South Vietnamese population was estimated to be under the control or predominant influence of the Viet Cong in March 1964.
Johnson's reluctance to escalate the war evaporated after direct attacks on United States interests.
TONKIN RESOLUTION In the summer of 1964, the Viet Cong launched attacks on two United States destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin.
It was attacked by 66-ft T4 TP boats, each armed with two torpedo tubes.
In August 1964, the war escalated dramatically when North Vietnamese PT boats attacked two United States destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin.
The first attack went unpunished, but claims of a second attack sparked the first United States bombing of North Vietnam.
BEFORE Tensions in the Gulf of Tonkin mounted after the United States authorized covert naval operations against North Vietnam.
GULF MISSIONS In 1961, a reconnaissance and sabotage operation codenamed OPLAN 34-A was implemented by South Vietnamese commandos in high-speed patrol boats based at Da Nang.
Meanwhile, the DeSoto patrols— secret missions carried out by United States destroyers—began in 1962.
They gathered intelligence on new Soviet radar and antiaircraft missile systems in the Tonkin Gulf.
J T he Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered Admiral Ulysses Grant Sharp Jr„ United States naval commander in the Pacific, to reactivate the DeSoto patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin in July 1964.
The USS Maddox, commanded by Captain John J Herrick, was the first destroyer to be assigned to the task.
One of its major objectives was to learn more about North Vietnam's coastal defenses.
Johnson promised that repeated attacks on United States armed forces would lead to retaliation, but sought to reassure the nation that he was not calling for a wider war.
Stevenson to Appeal tor Action by United Nations on ■Open Aggression b|p _ _ _ _ ■""Hjysr-s^arsi ^^sw B ~ Yes 80 from the North Vietnamese mainland and 4 miles from Hon Me, one of the larger islands off the coast.
The first attack The Maddox was not the only vessel active in the Gulf.
Two days before its arrival, four South Vietnamese patrol boats sailed from Da Nang on a covert mission to raid the assistance.
Four jet fighters arrived overhead just as the PT boats launched their torpedoes.
Herrick's gunners badly damaged one of the PT boats, while the jets sank the second and damaged the third.
The Maddox and the USS Turner Joy, another destroyer, were ordered to resume patrolling the Gulf and to attack any force that attacked them.
The following evening, Maddox intercepted North Vietnamese radio messages, which gave Herrick the impression that Soviet radar installations on two of the islands in the Gulf.
Two of them shelled Hon Me on July 30 before withdrawing, while the others bombarded Hon Ngu.
He also picked up North Vietnamese radio traffic indicating that their naval forces were being put on high alert.
By mid-morning on August 2, the Maddox was nearing the mouth of the Red River Delta when Herrick observed three North Vietnamese patrol torpedo boats headed straight for the destroyer.
Once they got to within 10,000 yards, Herrick ordered his gun crews to open fire.
He also radioed the aircraft carrier USS Ticonderoga for another attack was imminent.
He called for air support, but in the darkness neither the pilots nor the ships' crews could spot any enemy craft.
Both destroyers opened fire in the direction of the sonar contacts, but were firing blind.
Swift retaliation Johnson lost no time in declaring that the two destroyers had been subjected to unprovoked attacks.
He sanctioned retaliatory air strikes on four North Vietnamese patrol boat bases and a major oil storage depot.
Operation Pierce Arrow, as it was codenamed, sunk eight North Vietnamese PT boats and severely damaged 21 more.
Lieutenant Everett Alvarez Jr., became the first United States airman taken as a prisoner of war by North Vietnam.
Tonkin Gulf Resolution On August 5, a special session of the Senate debated the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, giving Johnson the authority to ""take all necessary measures, including the use of armed force"" against any aggressor.
It took less than two hours to pass the resolution, with only two senators, Ernest Gruening and Wayne Morse , voting against.
The allegation that the North Vietnamese had ’ attacked the destroyers a second time was less convincing upon closer examination.
He later said that neither destroyer had made any ""actual visual sightings"" of PT boats.
Commander James Stockdale, who led the jets from the Ticonderoga, was certain that no North Vietnamese vessels had been present.
Such doubts were discounted by Johnson and his advisers, even though the Signing the resolution President Johnson signs the Tonkin Gulf Resolution—the ""Joint resolution to promote the maintenance of international peace and security in Southeast Asia""—on August 10, 1964, in the White House East Room.
AFTER ~ / M Johnson would use the authority of the Tonkin Gulf Resolution to increase United States involvement in Vietnam.
BOMBS AT THE READY Contingency planning for a bombing campaign in North Vietnam was already underway, but it took another Viet Cong attack to precipitate further United States reprisal.
The resolution gave him what he wanted—a free hand to take whatever actions he deemed necessary in Vietnam.
SQUADRON COMMANDER JAMES STOCKDALE, IN THE CHICAGO TRIBUNE, 1990 81 United States PRESIDENT Born 1908 Died 1973 Lyndon B Johnson “I will do my best; that is all I can do.
LYNDON B JOHNSON, STATEMENT AFTER THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN F KENNEDY, NOVEMBER 22, 1963 L yndon Baines Johnson rose to the presidency in the wake of President Kennedy's death in 1963, and was confirmed in power by a landslide election victory the following year.
In office, Johnson initiated an idealistic program of domestic reforms designed to tackle poverty and racial injustice.
However, mounting involvement in Vietnam and violence on the streets of American cities undermined support for his presidency—ranked, by the end, as one of the most unpopular in United States history.
His father, a farmer and businessman, had sat in the Texas state legislature.
Johnson embarked on a career in politics, rising through a combination of hard work and a talent for ruthless political maneuvering.
Aged 28, he entered Congress as a New Deal Democrat and 10 years later was elected a Senator, albeit amid accusations of vote rigging.
The Senate provided an ideal arena for his talents as a political fixer; he was an outstandingly successful leader of the Democratic majority from 1955, driving controversial legislation through Congress.
Texan president A boisterous career politician committed to improving the lives of disadvantaged Americans, Johnson had his reputation destroyed by the Vietnam War, which he could neither win nor bring to an honorably peaceful conclusion.
LYNDON B JOHNSON Johnson on civil rights President Johnson meets civil rights leaders at the White House on August 6,1965, the day the Voting Rights Act, prohibiting racial discrimination in voting, was signed into law.
His ability to induce politicians to change their votes—by a mixture of brow-beating, arm-twisting, and favors—became legendary.
Johnson aspired to be the Democratic presidential candidate in 1960, but his hopes were flattened by the tidal wave of support for John F Kennedy.
Although the sophisticates of the Kennedy camp were inclined to disparage Johnson, with his blunt Texan manner and his reputation for unscrupulous wheelerdealing, he was nonetheless invited to run as vicepresident to secure the Southern vote.
Once in office, however, the Kennedy inner circle was reluctant to allow Johnson any significant role.
Instead, he carved out areas in which his drive could express itself, notably civil rights and the fledgling space program.
LYNDON B JOHNSON, NEWS CONFERENCE, JULY 28, 1965 appointment of the Warren Commission—a week after the event—to investigate Kennedy's assassination was a strong political maneuver, designed to hold the lid firmly down on a dangerous issue.
In domestic affairs, Johnson committed himself even more firmly than Kennedy to the cause of civil rights.
Johnson's utopian vision of the ""Great Society""—upon which Vietnamese nightmare Foreign affairs were not Johnson's forte.
He had none of Kennedy's background in diplomacy or broad international outlook.
Faced with the worsening crisis in Vietnam, Johnson was heavily dependent on advisers inherited from Kennedy's administration.
More pugnacious than his predecessor, Johnson treated the North Vietnamese politburo like recalcitrant congressmen, who might be bullied or bribed into doing what he wished.
Far from wanting a war in Vietnam, he loathed it as a distraction from his real concerns and a nightmare from which he could not escape.
His vision of the Great Society had proved a mirage as black rioters took to the streets and the cost of war undermined federal finances.
His decision not to seek the Democratic nomination for a second term in 1968 was based on the knowledge that he could not have secured it.
Johnson lived only four years after leaving office— he died one day before the signing of the peace deal that ended America's Vietnam War. his 1964 election campaign was based—ushered in antipoverty and antidiscrimination programs, designed to defend America's least privileged citizens.
Taking the reins Johnson was two cars behind Kennedy in Dallas when the president was shot.
Sworn in aboard Air Force One that afternoon, he assumed the reins of power with confidence and dignity.
Johnson's swift Antiwar protests Protesters prepare an unfriendly welcome for President Johnson on a visit to Sydney, Australia, in October 1966.
Johnson was plagued by similarly hostile demonstrations wherever he traveled, whether in the United States or abroad.
TIMELINE August 27, 1908 Born on a farm at Stonewall, Texas, the son of Sam and Rebekah Baines Johnson.
December 1941-July 1942 On active service in the United States Naval Reserve; flew one combat mission.
January 20, 1961 Takes office as vice president under President Kennedy.
November 22, 1963 Sworn in as United States President after Kennedy is assassinated.
August 7, 1964 Gulf of Tonkin resolution authorizes Johnson to escalate military operations in Vietnam.
April 1965 Authorizes use of ground troops in combat operations in Vietnam.
March 31, 1968 Halts bombing in Vietnam north of the 20th parallel and announces he will not seek reelection.
JOHNSON'S CAMPAIGN FOR PRESIDENCY 83 AMERICA GOES TO WAR January 1965-September 1967 By 1965, Viet Cong guerrillas are making inroads in South Vietnam.
America responds by expanding its role in the war, sending the first United States ground troops there in March.
The Seventh Marines wiped out the First Viet Cong Regiment, which had retreated to the peninsula, during Operation Piranha.
AMERICA GOES TO WAR JANUARY 1965—SEPTEMBER 1967 H rom early 1965, American military involvement in Vietnam responsibility on ground troops.
Yet sustained bombing failed to rapidly escalated with the launch of Operation Rolling dent North Vietnam's will to fight and it proved frustratingly Thunder, a bombing campaign against North Vietnam and the Ho difficult to demonstrate that any decisive advantage had been Chi Minh Trail, and the large-scale engagement of combat troops gained from the strategy of attrition in the South.
Under General William Westmoreland, the United States Army casualties increased at an alarming rate and rising troop levels and Marines employed a combination of firepower and mobility to reguired the extension of the draft, an initially small antiwar find and destroy insurgents, a strategy that placed a heavy movement in the United States gathered momentum.
ED The United States Navy patrolled the Mekong Delta in search of insurgents.
Vietnamese beach resorts provided respite from combat for American troops and their allies.
AMERICA GOES TO WAR JANUARY 1 96 5-SEPTEMBER 1967 TIMELINE JAN 1965—SEP1967 Allied operations ■ Elections in South Vietnam ■ Protests in the United States ■ Operation Rolling Thunder ■ First battle for United States ground troops ■ Helicopters and aircraft ■ Search-and-destroy tactics ■ The Iron Triangle ■ Pacification in South Vietnam 1965 1966 SUPPORT OUR BOYS IN' v VIETNAM FEBRUARY 7 In response to an attack by the Viet Cong on the United States base at Pleiku, air strikes are launched against targets in North Vietnam in Operation Flaming Dart.
MARCH 8 United States Marines go ashore at Da Nang, the first American combat troops to enter Vietnam.
JUNE 14 General Nguyen Van Thieu is elected president of South Vietnam.
APRIL 4 Two United States F-105 Thunderchiefs are shot down by North Vietnamese MiG-17 fighters over North Vietnam.
JULY 28 President Johnson announces that 50,000 more ground troops are to be sent to Vietnam—requiring an increase in the draft to 35,000 per month.
NOVEMBER 2 American Quaker Norman Morrison burns himself to death in front of the Pentagon in protest of the Vietnam War.
JAN 28-MAR 6 US, Korean, and ARVN troops carry out a ""search-anddestroy"" operation in Binh Dinh province.
A battalion of the Cavalry is ambushed by the NVA at landing zone X-Ray.
JANUARY 31 United States bombing of North Vietnam in Operation Rolling Thunder resumes after a 37-day pause.
JULY 15-AUGUST 3 In Operation Hastings, United States Marines repel a substantial incursion by NVA troops across the DMZ into Quang Tri province.
V Bush hat adopted by United States pilots based in Thailand MARCH 2 The sustained bombing of North Vietnam by United States Air Force and Navy aircraft begins, in Operation Rolling Thunder , launched mainly from bases in Thailand.
APRIL 17 Student antiwar protesters demonstrate outside the White House.
DEFENSE SECRETARY ROBERT MCNAMARA, MEMORANDUM, OCTOBER 14, 1966 AUGUST 18 Australian troops fight the Viet Cong in the Battle of Long Tan, the most famous Australian engagement of the war.
OCTOBER 14 United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara makes a damningly pessimistic assessment of lack of progress toward winning the war.
JANUARY 6-15 United States and South Vietnamese Marines carry out a major amphibious operation in the Mekong Delta.
AUG 1966-MAR 1967 United States Third Marine Division repels NVA attempts to cross the DMZ into Quang Tri province during Operation Prairie.
OCTOBER 24—25 President Johnson meets Asian leaders, including President Thieu, at the Manila Conference, where they discuss a way to end the war in Vietnam.
JANUARY 8-26 in Operation Cedar Falls, the United States carries out a large-scale search-and-destroy action to clear the Viet Cong from their ""Iron Triangle"" stronghold north of Saigon.
MAY 9 The United States launches the Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support program to coordinate efforts to pacify the South Vietnamese, countryside.
DECEMBER 31 At the year end there are 389,000 United States troops in Vietnam.
FEBRUARY 22 Operation Junction City, the largest United States military offensive of the war, is launched.
APRIL 24-MAY 11 United States Marines repulse North Vietnamese troops in a series of actions around the Marine combat base at Khe Sanh.
President Johnson committed United States forces to combat in Southeast Asia in the hope of preserving an independent, noncommunist South Vietnam. invested heavily in military and logistical infrastructure for South Vietnam.
When economic aid, diplomatic measures, and military advising failed to quell support for the insurgency, Johnson embraced a more aggressive, military approach.
First, though, he needed public support to escalate a conflict he had promised the American people he would not ask their sons to fight.
A convenient pretext On February 7, 1965, a Viet Cong attack on Camp Holloway, a United States base near the city of Pleiku, in the Central Highlands, gave Johnson a valid pretext for just such an escalation.
With eight Americans killed, dozens more wounded, and several helicopters destroyed, the Johnson administration used the attack to garner public support for deeper involvement.
In response, on the same day President Johnson authorized Operation Flaming Dart, a campaign of reprisal airstrikes.
Initially, 49 sorties were flown by United States and South Vietnamese pilots.
Significantly, the targets for ROBERT McNAMARA Defense secretary from 1960 until 1968 for presidents Kennedy and Johnson, Robert McNamara had previously been president of the Ford Motor Company and had served in World War II in the United States Army Air Forces.
As defense secretary, McNamara used statistics such as body counts to measure the success of combat operations.
They were greeted with flowers by crowds of local people who gathered on the beach.
P resident Johnson's decision to scale up American military involvement coalesced over time.
Plans for massive troop increases were laid in the early 1960s, as the United States BEFORE ■ their attack included Viet Cong strongholds near the demilitarized zone on the border of the two countries, and also struck North Vietnamese military installations, hinting at the air war to come.
Following Viet Cong reprisals, United States fighterbombers, launched from United States aircraft carriers in the Gulf of Tonkin, undertook further strikes against North Vietnamese and Viet Cong targets.
On March 2, in a massive further commitment to the conflict, the United States launched Operation Rolling Thunder.
This sustained bombing campaign was intended to drive North Vietnam out of the war entirely.
Landing at Da Nang The escalation of the air war required more American military personnel on the ground in South Vietnam for security and support.
On March 8, 1965, elements of the Ninth Marine Expeditionary Brigade landed near the city of Da Nang, where they were met on the beach by city officials and a welcoming crowd.
Charged with securing American bases to free up South Vietnamese soldiers for When he became president, Johnson inherited a volatile situation in South Vietnam.
WINNING A MANDATE Johnson ran for the presidency in 1964 as a peace candidate.
VIET CONG BADGE 90 DECISION FOR WAR combat operations, these Marines were the first official American combat troops in South Vietnam.
By the end of the year, more than 180,000 American service personnel were stationed in bases throughout South Vietnam.
Meeting of allies From left to right, Henry Cabot Lodge, reappointed in 1965 as ambassador to South Vietnam, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, South Vietnam's president Nguyen Van Thieu, and prime minister Nguyen Cao Ky at a meeting in Saigon, in July 1965.
LYNDON JOHNSON ON THE United States COMMITMENT TO SOUTH VIETNAM, OCTOBER 1967 From defense to offense Over the summer of 1965, the defensive mission of United States forces morphed into an offensive one, as ground patrols near United States bases ventured further and further afield in active search of the enemy.
The shift took place without public debate or even any significant announcement, leaving the vast majority of Americans unaware that a war was coming until it was already well underway.
Johnson administration officials were divided on the issue of escalation, with most arguing that only military force could achieve political results.
Others urged caution, saying that President Johnson could choose to ""ride the tiger"" by going to war against a determined Vietnamese foe, but he could not be certain of being able to choose the place to dismount.
Ultimately, the tenacity of the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong would be a deciding factor in the war's outcome.
AFTER By the fall of 1965, the United States was fully engaged in a ground war in South Vietnam and an air war over North Vietnam.
POLITICAL STABILITY The deepening involvement of United States forces provided a measure of political stability in the South, as it finally elected a president —Nguyen Van Thieu, an ARVN general who had supported the overthrow of Diem.
EFFECTS ON THE POPULATION The United States presence also dramatically altered life for the South Vietnamese people as the war engulfed ever-increasing areas of the country.
Moreover, the war failed to stem growing communist insurgency or to counter North Vietnam's continuing attempts to claim South Vietnam.
GENERAL WILLIAM C WESTMORELAND IN HIS MEMOIR, A SOLDIER REPORTS, 1976 A n honored colonel in World War II, General William C Westmoreland came to the Vietnam War on the personal recommendation of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
However, Westmoreland's decision to wage a war of attrition on the communist forces of North Vietnam led to him being recalled from Vietnam to serve as Army chief of staff and left him with an ambiguous reputation.
Westmoreland was born in South Carolina to Eugenia and James Westmoreland, who was a textile mill manager.
The Westmoreland family had an illustrious military history that stretched back to the Revolutionary War, a legacy that he would uphold.
An Eagle Scout in high school, Westmoreland showed self-discipline and military bearing in his studies.
In 1932, after a year at the Citadel, the military college of South Carolina, he was appointed to the United States Military Academy at West Point.
He graduated in 1936 with the highest cadet rank, and received the Pershing Sword in recognition of his skills.
Battle experience Westmoreland served with distinction in World War H as a battalion commander for military operations in Tunisia, before being moved to Europe to fight in Sicily.
His success led to his appointment as chief of staff of the Ninth Infantry Military decorations This 1969 portrait of Westmoreland shows him proudly wearing decorations and awards he received from both United States and foreign militaries— including the French Legion d'Honneur, the Korean 1st Class Order of Military Merit, and the Philippine Order of Sikatuna.
WILLIAM C WESTMORELAND Division in the final assault on Germany, and later as commander of a postwar occupation regiment.
Over the next decades, he distinguished himself in several important positions, including commanding officer of the 101st Airborne Division.
He progressed quickly through the officer ranks to lieutenant general by 1963, with seemingly limitless career potential.
Search and destroy Westmoreland arrived skeptical about the war and the chance of United States victory.
Although his public stance was invariably positive, in private he was candid in his view that without the ability to go into Laos, the war would be long, difficult, and problematic.
The successful defense of Vietnam's Central Highlands led Time magazine to name Westmoreland its Man of the Year in 1965.
However, this good Serious message Westmoreland's engraved lighters, presented to select soldiers and visitors to his Pentagon office, show the pride Westmoreland took in military order—a stark contrast to the darkly humorous lighters that circulated among troops. fortune would soon change.
Limited by political and resource constraints, Westmoreland's war strategy settled on attrition.
The NVA and Viet Cong were able to sustain a high body count, which meant that the number of United States troops sent to fight them rose to more than 500,000.
Wanting to start removing United States forces from Vietnam, President Johnson moved Westmoreland back to the United States to become the Army's chief of staff.
GENERAL WILLIAM C WEStMORELAND, REFLECtING ONTHEVIEtNAM WAR, 1976 interpreted it as a repudiation of Westmoreland's leadership.
For the next four years, he focused on global army readiness, tackling racism in the Army, and creating an allvolunteer military.
His campaign for the Republican nomination for governor of South Carolina in 1974 was unsuccessful.
In January 1982, CBS aired a documentary that accused Westmoreland and his staff of manipulating enemy counts to gain support for attrition.
The long case brought renewed attention to the ethics of Westmoreland's leadership, and was eventualy settled out of court.
Westmoreland devoted his retirement years to speaking opportunities and supporting veterans until Alzheimer's brought an end to his public life.
Liked by his men Westmoreland inspects the First Infantry Division in 1966.
He was liked by troops, and aimed to be ""respected"" but not ""loved” as he performed his duty of care.
In retirement, he tried to ensure that veterans were not criticized for their service in Vietnam.
Graduates from the United States Military Academy and is commissioned as a second lieutenant.
II 1985 Pursues a libel suit against a damning 1982 CBS documentary, which is settled out of court.
ATTENDING A VETERANS' PARADE 93 AMERICA GOES TO WAR JANUARY 1965-SEPTEMBER 1967 E F O R E When Lyndon Johnson took office in November 1963, his national security advisers explained the conflict in Vietnam as a war of aggression rather than a civil war.
Bombing North Vietnam In the spring of 1965, the United States Navy and Air Force shifted their efforts from narrowly focused, reprisal air strikes to the sustained bombing of military and civilian targets in North Vietnam in Operation Rolling Thunder.
O peration Rolling Thunder, the heavy bombing of North Vietnam by the United States Air Force and Navy and the ARVN Air Force, lasted from March 2, 1965, until November 1968.
The bombing gradually increased in intensity, focusing first on military targets, then on transportation systems, petroleum storage, and industrial targets, as well as the civilian population centers of Hanoi and Haiphong.
The United States strategists hoped that sustained bombing of North Vietnam might precipitate its forces' withdrawal from the South, thereby causing the Viet Cong insurgency to collapse and the South Vietnamese government to stabilize.
Political interference Several factors limited the effectiveness of Rolling Thunder.
Johnson was legitimately concerned about the risk of triggering war with China or the Soviet Union if their supply lines into North Vietnam and advisers on the ground were targeted.
Strict rules of engagement prevented American aircraft from Ready to strike A United States Navy F-4 Phantom aboard the USS Independence aircraft carrier is readied for an air strike against North Vietnam on July 18, 1965, Life saver The United States Navy Mark 2 pneumatic life vest was standard issue for naval aviators and aircrews throughout the Vietnam War.
It is not known how many United States pilots shot down over water owe their lives to this kit.
Rolling Thunder failed to damage North Vietnam sufficiently to trigger meaningful negotiations. pursuing fleeing North Vietnamese fighter aircraft or flying into airspace near the Chinese border.
Furthermore, Johnson's involvement in the selection of bombing targets prevented longrange planning, while also disrupting the ability to respond with air strikes to actionable intelligence in a timely fashion.
Johnson's micromanagement engendered frustration within the United States military, leading to persistent accusations that civilian leadership had undermined an American victory.
Johnson also periodically implemented ""bombing pauses,"" designed to incentivize diplomatic talks in an attempt to appease the American antiwar movement.
Northern resilience Traffic along the Ho Chi Minh Trail proved an elusive target.
Indeed, North Vietnamese infiltration of South Vietnam accelerated in spite of the bombing.
The people of North Vietnam, a largely nonindustrialized country, simply found ways of adapting to the destruction that surrounded them.
North Vietnamese air defenses consisted of Soviet-made fighter aircraft, radar, antiaircraft artillery, and surface-to-air missile sites, but also a highly organized civil defense program.
With air raid sirens, frequent drills, and extensive underground shelters.
North Vietnamese civilians soon learned to clear busy streets and squares in a matter of seconds, further limiting the human cost of the bombing.
The strategy failed to win the election, which went to the Republican candidate.
PRESIDENT JOHNSON TO HIS ADVISERS, FEBRUARY 1965 a thousand American airmen killed, captured, or wounded.
Despite civilian casualties in excess of 1,000 per month, North Vietnam's morale held and its claim on the South never wavered.
Soviet SAM SA-2 surface-to-air missiles were supplied to the North Vietnamese.
The USSR also provided technicians and trainers to operate these advanced missile systems, which were highly effective against enemy aircraft. fit 95 □ CESSNA 0-2B SKYMASTER □ LOCKHEED SR-71 BLACKBIRD □ ENGLISH ELECTRIC CANBERRA 0 REPUBLIC F-105D THUNDERCHIEF □ LOCKHEED F-104 STARFIGHTER Aircraft The United States Air Force and Marines deployed the very latest aircraft, built using state-of-the-art materials and technology.
North Vietnam's pilots flew modern fighter jets supplied by their Chinese and Soviet allies.
E Republic F-105D Thunderchief A versatile fighter-bomber, the Thunderchief was used extensively in the early years of the conflict.
E F-100 Super Sabre The Super Sabre was the longest-serving United States jet fighter-bomber in Vietnam.
E MiG-19 (North Vietnam) This Soviet-designed fighter jet saw combat in the Linebacker operations of 1972.
E MiG-21 The North Vietnamese Air Force claimed 56 aerial combat victories with this speedy interceptor.
E LTV A-7 Corsair II These bombers were used to destroy the Thanh Hoa Bridge in 1972.
EChanceVought RF-8G Crusader Designed to take off from ships, this aircraft was used in air-to-air combat.
E Grumman HU16C Albatross This flying boat undertook search-and-rescue operations.
With Soviet and Chinese assistance, however, it quickly developed air defenses capable of challenging United States air attacks.
Eye of the storm This sequence from gun camera footage shows United States Major Ralph L Kluster shooting down a MiG-17 over North Vietnam from his F-105D Thunderchief in June 1968.
This accounted for about 80 percent of the United States planes downed over North Vietnam.
Although Soviet-supplied surface-to-air missiles struck their targets just 2 percent of the time, they were a threat to high-altitude missions, such as B-52 sorties.
Although United States flights could bomb « United States and Soviet jet aircraft entered into aerial combat for the first time during the Korean War.
BATTLE OVER KOREA The United States F-86 Sabre and the Soviet MiG-15 went toe to toe in aerial dogfights during the Korean War.
The United States also used helicopters in Korea, especially for search-and-rescue of pilots downed behind enemy lines.
After United States air raids on North Vietnam in August 1964, the People's Republic of China provided Hanoi with a small number of MiG-15 and MiG-17 fighter jets.
J 98 I* AAA and SAM sites and counter that part of North Vietnam's defenses, it could not destroy its fleet of MiGs other than through air-to-air combat.
Hanoi stationed its MiGs at airfields in southern China, which was beyond the area of combat permitted by Washington.
Phantoms and Thunderchiefs The United States answer to the MiG-21 was the F-4 Phantom, the USAF's most successful interceptor and the Navy's main fleet-defense fighter.
It was also a ground attack jet, although the F-105 Thunderchief was the primary plane used in I * ) Q The number of MiGs LO destroyed by Sidewinder missiles from F-4 Phantoms between 1965 and 1968.
Designed to deliver nuclear weapons into the Soviet Union, the F-105 was also an effective Morale patch This aviator patch, from 1964, shows a bird holding a bomb or shell.
Fun patches like this one, known as morale patches, were designed by artistic service personnel, who had them made in tailor shops in Saigon.
Thunderchiefs from the rear, forcing them to dump their ordnance before reaching their target.
Against F-4s, the MiG pilots would delay their attack until late in the bombing run, when the Americans' fuel was low.
To counter these hit-and-run guerrilla tactics, the Seventh Air Force designed a ruse known as Operation Bolo.
A flight of F-4s armed with Sidewinder missiles “The MiGs reacted as we hoped.
Its performance at low altitude made it ideal for going ""Downtown,"" as pilots called the heavily defended airspace around Hanoi.
The principal air-to-air weapon of the F-4 and the F-105 was the AIM-9 Sidewinder infrared-guided or heat-seeking missile.
Developed in the 1950s, the sidewinder saw its first extended use in Vietnam.
Air duels North Vietnamese commanders hesitated to risk MiG-2 Is against the F-4s in air-to-air combat.
They preferred to take on the slower Thunderchiefs and would often use ground-control radar guidance to attack the flew in a way to mimic on radar an F-105 squadron.
On January 7, 1967, a disguised F-4 formation led by Colonel Robin Olds shot down seven MiGs in 15 minutes.
In the wake of the attacks, the MiG force stood down for four months, after which Olds shot down another MiG in May.
By 1966, the USAF had four Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Group squadrons in South Vietnam and one in Thailand, with numerous ground bases on constant alert and airborne orbits over Laos.
The SAR task forces usually consisted of two HH-3 Jolly Green Giant helicopters, two A-1 Skyraider escorts, and an HC-130 control aircraft.
Helping hands A downed pilot in a steep ravine reaches for a helicopter's rescue cable in this painting by Pierre Mion, printed in National Geographic in 1968.
A former soldier himself, Mion was a war artist for the United States Marine Corps during the Vietnam conflict.
Under President Nixon, the air war mainly focused on Laos and Cambodia.
THE AIR WAR SHIFTS After Operation Rolling Thunder, the intensity of air-to-air and SAR actions decreased in Vietnam.
Olds led the USAF's 8th Tactical Fighter Wing, which downed 24 NVA planes in total. 99 eyewitness November 1968 A Pilot's View Pilots in Vietnam faced dangers from the ground when flying into a landing zone in North Vietnamese territory.
Captain Thomas A Pienta was flying a trail helicopter—tasked with waiting and reporting once the LZ became clear—with his ""Rat Pack"" gunship platoon when he came under fire from a North Vietnamese unit.
I had to pick my spot and could not come directly to the ground as I normally did.
Snaring a tail rotor in the trees could kill you just as easily as a machine gun.
We were just coming out of translational lift—the point at which a helicopter stops flying and starts hovering—when a rocket-propelled grenade slammed into our Huey.
The cliche about not hearing the one that gets you was true in my case.
It seemed as if there was a big whoosh, similar to the effect a Zippo lighter has after being freshly overfilled and lit, or the whoosh of a propane grill lighting after the gas has been left on too long before the igniter is applied.
CAPTAIN THOMAS A PIENTA DESCRIBING HIS EXPERIENCE AS A HELICOPTER PILOT TO VIETNAM MAGAZINE, DECEMBER 1996 Destruction from the skies An American pilot watches as a South Vietnamese T-28 aircraft drops napalm bombs on Viet Cong positions.
Even when not directly involved in the action, pilots had a front-row seat to view the danger and destruction of the air war.
Search-and-Destroy South Vietnam's volatile political situation required a flexible strategy to target enemy combatants, minimize civilian casualties, and keep American troops safe.
PHOTOJOURNALIST D espite the complexity of the war's political dimensions, United States military authorities settled on a relatively simple strategy to accomplish the United States goal of preserving an independent, noncommunist South Vietnam.
Ground operations focused on protecting United States military installations, destroying the Ho Chi Minh Trail and other supply routes, and wearing down the strength of the enemy through a strategy known as search-and-destroy.
Key objectives This strategy of attrition involved locating and killing enemy combatants, discovering and BEFORE destroying material intended to support the enemy (including food), and identifying and neutralizing people who supported the enemy and their efforts.
Its unprecedented mobility allowed the delivery of combat troops to remote areas in the jungle and mountains.
An archipelago of fire support bases built throughout South Vietnam provided security to United States military installations and delivered 1,369 deaths in Vie 9,378 The number of American combat deaths in Vietnam in 1965.
Search-and-destroy tactics, previously used by the British, were designed for guerrilla warfare.
BRITISH PRECEDENT The British had used search-and-destroy methods against communist guerrillas in Malaya in the 1950s, a conflict known as the Malayan Emergency.
MISSION CHANGE President Johnson's escalation of America's role in Vietnam in 1965 led to a change in mission.
Such firebases could be fairly elaborate and semipermanent, or could be more rudimentary, built and dismantled as the company moved on.
Either way, they would always have a landing zone for helicopters, medical and communication areas, and a tactical operations center.
Soldiers would hunker down in hootches or dugouts fortified with sandbags.
Measuring success Military Assistance Command Vietnam evaluated search-and-destroy operations by the statistical analysis of data— pounds of rice seized, the quantity Born Georgette Louise Meyer, photojournalist Dickey Chapelle had covered battles in Japan in World War II, as well as revolutions in Hungary, Cuba, and Algeria before her assignment in Vietnam.
Chapelle was outspoken in her dislike of communism and support for United States advisers in South Vietnam.
In November 1965, she became the first female journalist to die in the war, while on patrol with Marines on a search-and-destroy mission.
VETERAN JACK HILL, RECALLING A SEARCH-AND-DESTROY OPERATION IN 1967 THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY J of weapons captured, and the number of combatants killed.
The body count became search-anddestroy's main measure of success, with combat units rewarded by commendations, bragging rights, and even prizes such as ""standdown R&R""—a period spent in a base with superior amenities.
Civilian casualties The indiscriminate nature of the violence generated by search-anddestroy was ripe for tragedy.
Combat efforts against NVA regulars resulted in battles between well-prepared foes, but operations against Viet Cong insurgents yielded frequent civilian casualties.
It was difficult to distinguish ordinary civilians from insurgents, whose family homes were often in contested areas.
The creation of ""free fire zones""—from which all friendly forces had ostensibly been cleared—enabled United States commanders to bomb and shell areas thought to contain enemy combatants with impunity.
This lighter has an Army marksmanship qualification badge welded onto the front. indiscriminate violence against Vietnamese people.
Even when villagers suspected of having Viet Cong sympathies survived a search-and-destroy attack, they often endured forced relocation or watched helplessly as their livestock, rice stores, and homes were destroyed.
These encounters encouraged support for the insurgency among those affected.
They also left many American soldiers questioning the efficacy and ethics of the war they were charged with fighting.
Flaming arrow Lieutenant Commander Donald D Sheppard aims a flaming arrow at a bamboo hut believed to conceal a Viet Cong bunker on the banks of the Bassac River, in December 1967.
While United States forces succeeded again and again in seizing territory and inflicting higher casualties on the enemy than they endured themselves, American strategy failed to yield political results.
The morale of the insurgents withstood such attacks. and the infiltration of North Vietnamese soldiers and supplies increased.
American efforts to support the South Vietnamese military and take the war to the enemy also encouraged ARVN dependency on the United States, making American withdrawal more difficult.
AFTER s Search-and-destroy dominated American ground war strategy until the withdrawal of United States troops under President Nixon.
WESTMORELAND IS REPLACED General Creighton Abrams replaced General Westmoreland, the chief advocate of attrition, as MACV commander in June 1968.
Battle of la Drang Valley In November 1965, American and North Vietnamese troops fought their first large-scale battle, in the la Drang Valley of South Vietnam's Central Highlands.
Five days of brutal fighting established a pattern for Vietnam War battles that would repeat again and again.
T he Battle of la Drang Valley was part of the second phase of a month-long operation known as the Pleiku Campaign.
The first phase provided relief for the United States Special Forces camp at Plei Me, which was besieged by the North Vietnamese Army for a week in October 1965.
In the second phase, elements of the American First Air Cavalry Division were deployed to draw the NVA away from Plei Me.
Battle begins The operation, which was known as Silver Bayonet I, was an early demonstration of the air mobility concept, in which ground troops were dropped onto and withdrawn from the battlefield by helicopter.
After a brief artillery bombardment to clear the initial landing zone , helicopters began landing eight at a time, and the men of the First Air Cavalry took up defensive positions.
The battalion was dropped into the la Drang Valley on November 14, to engage with North Vietnamese units operating in the area.
They were quickly confronted by a large force at a well-defended base camp.
On the move The fighting at LZ X-Ray lasted for two days and nights, as United States forces repulsed attack after attack by NVA infantry advancing in waves.
Eventually, enough reinforcements BATTLE OF IA DRANG VALLEY 1 First wounded Men of the First Air Cavalry Division rest and receive medical care 3 miles north of the la Drang Valley in November 1965.
The weary men had survived an ambush, and had spent all day and night in intense firefights.
Men who had already endured three days of combat now found themselves fighting in close quarters, sometimes hand to hand, for 16 hours.
The tide finally turned on November 19, thanks to reinforcements and artillery and air strikes—so close to United States lines that they caused friendly fire casualties.
Both sides declared victory—the United States for suffering fewer casualties and achieving a territorial objective, and the NVA for standing up to United States forces and surviving to fight again United States forces eventually withdrew from the area and returned to their bases, allowing the NVA to resume operations.
It allowed soldiers in the field to calibrate the range, angle, and fuse setting of artillery pieces to hit the enemy target. arrived to even up the numbers of soldiers on each side, and LZ X-Ray was secured on day three—but at heavy cost.
The remaining United States units abandoned the area to make way for a B-52 strike, then marched toward a new landing zone.
NVA forces ambushed the column en route, resulting in a new round of vicious combat.
Lighting the way home Four days into the battle, wounded soldiers of the First Cavalry watch flares from planes light up a field in the la Drang Valley.
It was also the first major encounter between United States and NVA regular forces, and the battle established a template for the remainder of the war.
The United States would rely on superior technology and firepower to inflict heavy losses on their foe, who would withdraw when fighting was no longer prudent.
The North Vietnamese also learned that the best way to blunt the effectiveness of United States artillery and airpower during battle was to keep close contact AFTER The Battle of la Drang Valley was just the first of many such conflicts between United States and NVA forces over South Vietnam.
After the war, however, memoirs by those who had served softened public opinion.
We Were Soldiers Once ... and Young, a true account of the Battle of la Drang Valley by Lt.
THE BATTLE TO SAVE SOUTH VIETNAM, 2011 Air Mobility Helicopters enabled American commanders to move large numbers of troops over rugged terrain in a short amount of time.
They also provided air artillery, medevac supply, and other vital support functions.
Airmobile Blue Max This report relates to an action by the Second Battalion of the 20th Artillery, First Air Cavalry Division, known as Blue Max, one of two aerial artillery units operating during the Vietnam War, Their main air-to-ground weapons were Folding-Fin Aerial Rockets and M60 machine guns.
KOREAN WAR HELICOPTERS The United States Army acquired its first helicopters in 1947.
In 1954, General James Gavin published an influential article, ""Cavalry, and I Don't Mean Horses,"" praising the maneuverability that helicopters offered ground forces.
During the Cold War, the ability to disperse and move troops quickly provided greater force security than having large, slow formations of troops exposed to nuclear attack.
Despite some rivalry between the United States Army and Air Force, and some old-guard concern that helicopters were too vulnerable to attack.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara had the airmobile concept tested at Fort Benning, Georgia.
The results were encouraging, and in 1965 the Army created the First Cavalry Division and deployed it to Vietnam.
The helicopter war When the First Cavalry arrived in Vietnam, helicopters were already in use.
Army and Marine advisers had begun transporting and positioning ARVN troops with helicopters in 1962.
Also in that year, testing in the field of armed UH-1 Iroquois helicopters was underway.
The UH-1, known as the Huey or Slick by the troops, became the workhorse of Army and Marine Corps aviation in Vietnam.
In 1967, the Huey was supplemented by the AH-1 Cobra gunship attack helicopter, which, when fully loaded with rockets, had the same firepower as a ground artillery battalion.
Both the First Cavalry and the 101st Airborne Division —fully converted to airmobile in 1969—had their own aircraft.
Airmobility was so popular, however, that over time many other divisions and corps added their own aviation units.
The effectiveness of airmobility was apparent in the First Cavalry's tactics in the Battle of la Drang in the fall of 1965.
The engagement was a prototype of airmobile doctrine that became standard throughout the theater of the war.
Reconnaissance helicopters located the enemy and possible landing zones ; Hueys and larger capacity CH-47 Chinooks ferried entire companies of infantry to the landing zones with gunship cover; 4,000 The number of rounds per minute that the miniguns on the AH-1 Cobra gunship could fire.
Staying connected Captain William E Taylor, company commander of the First Cavalry Division, Airmobile, uses an AN/ARC-122 radio to coordinate ground and air actions during an operation in June 1966. medevac choppers (called Dustoffs) carried out dead or wounded soldiers, while other helicopters resupplied equipment and rations.
Throughout the battle, artillery observers and commanders could direct ground operations from light observation helicopters.
Airmobile limitations Although helicopters allowed generals to insert troops quickly, and without the fatigue that a long march entailed, their noisy approach forewarned the enemy.
In addition, much of the terrain in Vietnam was steep and covered in jungle, making it difficult for helicopters to land, and even for ground troops already in place to create a landing zone of sufficient size.
Although bombing sorties could open a patch of ground to create a landing zone, they could also telegraph an assault.
The airmobile units trained soldiers to rappel by ropes or ladders into dense vegetation that prevented aircraft from landing, but that maneuver also exposed the men to enemy fire.
Despite these dangers, the suppressing fire from gunners in the Hueys and Cobras reduced the threat to the landing zone and to the helicopters themselves.
The rapid insertion and extraction of troops was ideal for search-and-destroy operations in which United States technology inflicted severe losses on the enemy quickly, but air mobility was less useful when it came to clear-and-hold tactics.
It placed United States units in remote places that were difficult to defend and sustain. r » After Vietnam, vertical takeoff and landing became key to positioning ground troops in all wars in difficult terrain.
AIRMOBILE TO AIR ASSAULT In subsequent United States wars in Grenada, Panama, the Persian Gulf, Somalia, Bosnia, Iraq, and Afghanistan, helicopters—including innovations such as the UH-60 Blackhawk and AH-64 Apache— and the new V-22 Osprey tilt-wing aircraft remained the foundation of the airmobile concept.
The strategy is now known as air combat by the First Cavalry and air assault by the 101st Airborne and Marine Corps.
THE PEACETIME DRAFT The Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 authorized the first peacetime draft in United States history.
After World War II, this was was replaced by the Selective Service Act of 1948.
As manpower needs in the 1950s and early 1960s were low, the system aroused little opposition among the public.
J The Call to Service In the United States, the rights and obligations of citizenship have long engendered argument, and Vietnam was no different.
Many Americans questioned the necessity of the war, and millions of young men chose to avoid military service.
W hen President Johnson quietly escalated the war in the summer of 1965, he chose to rely on the draft to meet rising manpower needs rather than calling upon the National Guard and reserves.
Johnson's reliance on conscription was intended to avoid a divisive public debate about the war, but instead it provoked one.
When monthly draft calls more than doubled, young Americans who had never imagined joining the military were suddenly forced to contemplate combat in the remote jungles of South Vietnam.
Military service was not the experience of the majority of young men of the era.
Roughly one-third of those in Vietnam were volunteers motivated by patriotism, a hatred of communism, or the desire for a military career.
Another third were draft-motivated volunteers who enlisted to have some control over their futures when conscription seemed imminent.
The remaining third were draftees, often unable to invoke one of the lawful means of avoiding the draft, such as family hardship, infirmity, certain types of labor, conscientious objection, or student status.
Draft resisters Of the 16 million who avoided military service during the period of United States military involvement in Vietnam, only 600,000 actually Souvenir of service This combat jacket belonged to United States Army Sergeant Charles E Morris.
As noncommissioned officers, sergeants rose through the ranks to fill training and mentoring roles.
POPULAR ANTIWAR, ANTI-DRAFT SLOGAN OF THE 1960S AND 1970S broke the law by failing to report or fleeing abroad, most commonly to Canada.
These draft resisters risked jail for refusing to fight a war they did not support.
By the late 1960s, a majority of Americans regarded the draft system as unfair.
Local draft boards, usually composed of white men, often veterans themselves, adjudicated on requests for deferments while trying to meet their quotas.
Men of means who could provide documentation of physical infirmity from doctors or long-standing moral pacifism from clergymen had an advantage in this process.
Poor men and men of color were least likely to avoid military service, because draft boards tended to defer white, middle-class men whose futures were deemed more valuable than those unable to afford college.
The unfairness of this led to incremental changes to the system that eventually ended graduate school and teaching deferments.
The draft lottery As a result of the public discontent, Congress passed legislation in 1970, authorizing a lottery system nine rules to make draft selection fairer.
Young men watched with bated breath as Selective Service officials drew tiles—366 of them, one for each day of the year—from a hopper on national television.
Eligible men with birthdays drawn in the first third or so of the process received induction notices, while those whose birthdays were drawn last did not.
The process was more rational, but hardly felt fair to those who were called up and did not want to go to Vietnam.
Unlike in World War II, when soldiers I served for the duration of the conflict, during the Vietnam War individuals were deployed for a one-year tour of duty.
This policy was intended to blunt public hostility to the war by avoiding unit call-ups that could generate opposition within a community.
As a result, Vietnam veterans returned home as Code of conduct A card entitled Nine Rules was first issued to United States soldiers in Vietnam in 1967.
It summarized the United States government's view of the reason for the United States presence and gave guidelines for the conduct of troops serving in the country. individuals aboard commercial flights they nicknamed the Freedom Bird, often without fanfare except from their own friends and family.
Ending the draft was a long-standing promise of the Nixon administration.
Nixon's advisers believed that market forces would ensure a steady supply of suitable volunteers, but the unpopularity of the war contributed to a loss of respect for military service that affected military recruitment for the remainder of the 1970s and later.
NEW INVESTMENT Difficulty meeting military manpower needs remained an unfortunate legacy of the war until the 1980s, when massive defense spending finally improved the guality and popularity of the armed forces as a career option.
Similar to small towns, the larger bases were slices of Middle America in the jungles of Vietnam.
The construction boom in South Vietnam was unprecedented in American military history.
MOVING CAMPS Previous foreign wars had emphasized troop mobility rather than long-term occupation, and conflicts simply did not last long enough to result in sophisticated construction projects.
O ver the course of the war, the United States built hundreds of bases across South Vietnam.
Some were rugged outposts perched on mountaintops or hidden deep in the jungle, while others were just as well developed as any stateside base.
All of these bases supported the United States war effort, but the contrasts between the different types led to disparate experiences for the Americans who lived on them.
Between soldiers in makeshift camps eating C-rations, and men in catered brick mess halls, there could be no one typical experience of life in Vietnam.
Building infrastructure Constructing the United States base network took time and money.
Some 56 million square feet of storage areas were built, as well as cold storage—which facilitated fresh food for 90 percent of the meals served to American troops during the war.
Fun and games As the years passed, bases became ever more elaborate, necessitating all the services—water treatment, garbage collection, fire protection— TECHNOLOGY TRANSISTOR RADIO Developed in 1954, transistor radios were a must-have device in Vietnam, with 99 percent of American soldiers owning or having access to one.
They used them to tune in to sanitized transmissions on the United States Armed Forces Radio, but they also listened to rock music and defiant political commentary.
North Vietnamese radio programs, with hosts such as ""Hanoi Hannah,"" played music for United States troops, interspersed with anti-American propaganda and sometimes disturbingly accurate reports of battles and troop movements.
Religious ceremonies Making the most of the Christmas ceasefire, on December 25,1969, troops of the 25th Infantry Division take part in a carol service at Fire Base Evans.
As well as the Christian holiday, the festival of Passover was acknowledged, with an organized annual seder for Jewish troops. of modern United States cities.
Construction priorities shifted from housing and services to recreational facilities intended to boost troop morale.
Support personnel on larger bases often did regular shifts in offices, in warehouses, or on flight lines, leaving hours of off-duty time to fill.
To provide entertainment—and also prevent mischief such as drug use or going absent without leave —commanders authorized enabled military personnel to acquire souvenirs of their war experience—handicrafts, watches, cameras, jewelry, and even American-made cars—that helped to balance the negatives of spending a year in a war zone.
Out of danger The majority of United States personnel in Vietnam served in support capacities, as mechanics, drivers.
BA-MUOI-BA AND BODY BAGS, 2003 A PHILIPS RADIO the construction of theaters, craft shops, education centers, libraries athletics courts, and swimming pools.
Alcohol consumption was rampant among American troops, with more than 2,000 open mess clubs (unit-run bars) in South Vietnam at the system's peak.
Meanwhile, the expansion of electricity and broadcast media across the country enabled men to improve their barracks with simple pleasures such as electric fans, hot plates, and radios.
Shopping at the local post exchange , or placing an order in the Pacific Mail-Order System catalog for delivery back home, BEER eased tension and quenched thirst.
For those stationed on large rearward bases, their war was a far cry from the mud, dust, and constant danger of fire support bases, remote radio outposts, and especially combat patrols.
Poor morale among the troops was a persistent problem, and commanders often addressed it by trying to make life on base more comfortable.
Combat troops passing through these installations recognized that support troops risked little—yet received the same combat pay—and enjoyed far superior living conditions.
The abundance on display in American PXs, open mess clubs, and even individual soldiers' quarters did not only upset other United States personnel.
The largess was particularly shocking to displaced Vietnamese people nearby—many of whom worked menial jobs on base, and fashioned their homes and meals from American garbage.
AFTER Major United States construction projects continued in Vietnam even as America's role in the war began to decline.
BUILDING MORALE Commanders at Long Binh Post—which already had a golf course, massage parlor, nightclubs, and more—planned to build a 1,690-acre recreational lake for swimming and fishing in 1970.
Ill Recuperation and Entertainment For United States troops with only letters from loved ones to remind them of home, the long months and often tough conditions in Vietnam took a toll on morale.
Periods of relaxation, especially out of the country, were therefore eagerly anticipated.
THE USO Prior to the Vietnam War, logistical restrictions meant that travel outside the war zone for rest and relaxation was rare.
J L ife in the war zone meant acute hardships that over time dampened soldier morale.
High heat and humidity, endless rain and mud, biting insects, and, for combat troops, the anxieties and danger of battle all took their toll.
There were also long working hours, relentless military discipline, and limited opportunities for privacy or individuality.
Mail provided the only contact with friends and family back home, and loneliness and homesickness were rife.
Like antiwar demonstrators back in the United States, many service personnel questioned the war's ethics and necessity, and whether it could even be won.
Leisure facilities Low morale could lead to indiscipline, absenteeism, drug abuse, and other subversive behavior that threatened discipline and mission readiness.
To counter the problem, the United States military equipped bases with an array of leisure amenities to occupy the troops.
Most bases within the war zone had ball courts, while larger bases had swimming pools, and a few even had golf courses, go-cart tracks, and bowling alleys.
Some bases had education centers, arts and crafts workshops, libraries, movie theaters, and performance spaces.
Music therapy Singer and dancer Lola Falana performs for American servicemen in Da Nang as part of the Bob Hope Christmas tour in 1970.
Hope entertained the troops in Vietnam every Christmas from 1964 to 1972.
Although the United Service Organization arranged celebrity-studded tours from time to time, most of the civilian acts that toured the military bases were unknown entertainers flown in from Asia and Australia.
For bases that were too dangerous for civilian entertainers to visit, the Army's Special Services Division dispatched Command Military Touring Shows composed of GI musicians on temporary duty.
By the late 1960s, there were hundreds of acts touring the war zone at any given time, and the United States Army in South Vietnam was effectively the largest promoter of live entertainment in the world.
R&R centers The military also provided United States troops with respite from the war through a robust R&R program.
These were standard bases with extra amenities into which combat units rotated while on break from combat.
The military also built two in-country R&R centers at China Beach and Vung Tau, resorts with long sandy beaches, offering hotel services such as clean sheets and towels, and ceiling fans.
The most popular R&R option, however, was out-of-country R&R, which Reunion in Hawaii United States airman Patrick Nugent poses for the cameras with his son and his wife Luci, the daughter of President Johnson, in Honolulu, Hawaii, after his arrival on leave from Vietnam. provided the greatest contrast with the war.
Soldiers were able to indulge themselves with food, drink, prostitutes, and shopping for five days.
At the peak of the R&R program, troops on leave could visit one of nine destinations on the Pacific Rim, including Bangkok, Hong Kong, and Sydney.
Hawaii was the most popular out-of-country option, providing home comforts plus the chance to spend time with family. » f Advances in technology meant that United States soldiers in subsequent foreign wars did not suffer the same degree of isolation.
R&R SINCE VIETNAM United States military authorities continue to believe in the importance of maintaining troop morale.
MWR (morale, welfare, and recreation) centers were provided in Iraq and Afghanistan to provide units with leisure facilities, such as pool tables, video games, and swimming pools.
R&R in countries such as Qatar was also offered, but most troops chose to visit home instead.
V_ 3,200 The number of performers, from 26 countries, touring the Vietnam circuit in 1970.
AMERICA GOES TO WAR JANUARY 1 96 5-SEPTEMBER 1967 Mementos and Memorabilia Many veterans returned home from Vietnam with small tokens to remind them of their experience.
These war souvenirs most often commemorated the friendships they had made and the people they had fought alongside.
Hand-carved statue Sixteen inches tall, this statue was purchased in Pleiku in 1969.
Short timer calendar Colored-in calendars were also used to count down to the end of a tour.
Some featured popular cartoon characters—such as Snoopy—while others were more crude.
Teddy bear Belonging to a soldier killed in the war, this memento was left at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
Scrapbook made by Albert E Short The veteran created this book in the 1980s as a way to process his memories of the war.
EH Cigarette lighter With its clear protest symbol, this was likely inscribed after its owner had finished his tour.
EH Plastic cigarette lighter This lighter commemorates the partnership of the First Battalion RAR, from Australia and New Zealand, and United States 173rd Airborne Brigade.
Many young men took advantage of the facilities to enjoy their time on base—as was the case for Pete Whalon of Redondo Beach, California, who extended his tour to serve as a lifeguard at one of the 12 pools on Long Binh Post.
With its cold beer, loud music, absence of lifers (career soldiers), and lack of rules, the pool soon became the coolest place to party.
In his account, Whalon describes a typical evening at the Bayou with up to thirty drunks in and around the pool as music blasted from the Sugar Shack.
Marathon sessions of Monopoly would take place in the Shack and there were rowdy water-football games.
The smell of marijuana was heavy in the air and four maverick military policemen had assured them that they would never get busted for smoking marijuana while the four MPs were in country.
VIETNAM'S OTHER WAR: SEX, DRUGS, ROCK TV ROLL: A VERY DIFFERENT VIETNAM MEMOIR, 2006 The high life 61s pass around a joint in their living quarters on base in Quang Tri.
When allied support for the war began to wane, United States and South Vietnamese soldiers ended up providing most of the manpower.
Aussie support Servicemen of the Royal Australian Air Force arrive at Tan Son Nhut airbase near Saigon on August 10,1964.
More than 60,000 Australian soldiers fought in the Vietnam War from 1962 through the end of 1972.
BEFORE The formation of the United Nations in 1945 offered the promise of world peace by enabling nations to resolve their differences without violence.
COLLABORATIVE FAILURE Since 1948, the UN's peacekeeping force, composed of troops volunteered by member nations, have been been used to suppress noncompliant armed forces in conflicts around the world.
The biggest obstacle to the UN stepping in to prevent the Vietnam War was that the Soviet Union and the United States, both members of the UN Security Council, with the power to veto resolutions, supported opposing sides in the war.
Attempts by the United Nations to resolve the conflict through negotiation failed.
G eneral Westmoreland's strategy of attrition required steady increases in troop strength.
Believing that other countries should contribute to the war effort, in the summer of 1965 President Johnson pressed United States allies around the world to support the war effort.
Great Britain and Canada offered only rhetorical support, and Spain sent about 50 soldiers; other nations provided economic, technical, and medical aid to South Vietnam.
The Johnson administration fared better with regional allies, who feared communism's international advance.
The mutual defense provisions of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization provided formal justification for Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, and the Philippines to send troops to South Vietnam, while general support of United States regional interests led the Republic of Korea to support American efforts.
Soldiers from these nations were known collectively as ""Free World Military Forces"" and they fought in support of both United States and ARVN efforts in South Vietnam.
Australian troops The Australian government was fully committed to Johnson's policy.
Australia's first commitment of military advisers to train the ARVN in 1962 was escalated in 1965 to include combat troops, namely the First Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, and logistics personnel attached to the United States' 173rd Airborne Brigade.
This collaboration revealed major differences in United States and Australian operational methods, so later deployments of Australian forces involved only independent operations.
Australian troops relied less on heavy firepower and more on small patrols, Giggle hat This boonie hat, worn by Australian forces in Vietnam, was intended to protect the wearer in hot and humid climates.
Officially called ""hats utility, jungle green,"" such hats were nicknamed giggle hats (as well as ""hats ridiculous-for-theuse-of"") by troops due to their appearance.
ROK Forces The Republic of Korea (South Korea) provided considerable support to its United States ally, in return for Civilian support This badge was worn by civilian nurse Dorothy Angeil, who was part of an Australian Surgery Team at Bien Hoa in 1967.
Her team, from Melbourne's Alfred Hospital, performed hundreds of life-saving operations on Vietnamese civilians. aid commitments to South Korea.
About 300,000 ROK troops served in South Vietnam, 5,000 of whom were killed.
The ROK was the third largest force to combat North Vietnamese infiltration and the Viet Cong insurgency.
They conducted search-and-clear operations, usually in battalion-sized units, and excelled at setting ambushes and discovering weapons caches.
In their careful sweeps of Vietnamese villages, ROK troops earned a reputation for ruthlessness.
Their actions led to accusations of war crimes in several villages where hundreds of civilians were killed.
Thailand and the Philippines In addition to deploying soldiers to Laos and South Vietnam to fight North Vietnamese infiltration.
Thailand also hosted several large United States Air Force bases on Thai soil.
Bases in Thailand supported Rolling Thunder bombings and provided tactical air support to United States ground operations in South Vietnam.
Thai forces also undermined North Vietnamese efforts to extend Hanoi's influence into Laos, and about 40,000 Thai soldiers served in South Vietnam itself, as volunteers.
The Philippines provided similar support to United States air operations via the United States naval base at Subic Bay, which serviced the ships of the United States Navy's Seventh Fleet.
It also responded to President Johnson's call for ""more flags"" in South Vietnam by sending 1,500 troops to assist with civic action programs AFTER Public resentment toward the war in Vietnam caused problems for the governments fighting under the FWMF banner.
In Australia, they forced reductions in troop strength and eventual withdrawal, while intense protests in New Zealand ultimately altered its relationship with the United States for decades.
In South Korea, the Vietnam War remains a bitter subject, but keeping faith with its United States ally has proved economically fruitful in the long run.
PRESIDENT JOHNSON IN A MEETING WITH HIS ADVISERS, JULY 21,1965 pUblUUIl I Icdl IN I Id lldliy, Ull LI ltd dUULII Central Coast of Vietnam, in 1972.
The South Korean Ninth Infantry (White Horse) Division was based at Nha Trang.
Nowhere was this more true than at Long Tan, where they were victorious despite being outnumbered twenty to one.
T he First Australian Task Force's mission in Vietnam was to win control of Phuoc Tuy province.
The bulk of 1ATF was made up of two infantry battalions, a squadron of armored personnel carriers , and two Over time, Australia's advisory role in Vietnam changed to direct combat.
JUNGLE BASE In 1962, the Australian government sent 30 military advisers to South Vietnam.
Three years later it sent a battalion, which would operate under American command.
In 1966, the First Australian Task Force , an independent unit of 4,500 men, was sent to Phuoc Tuy province, southeast of Saigon, an area covered in dense vegetation, with a long tradition of resistance to foreigners. artillery batteries.
They were joined by a New Zealand artillery battery that had been in Vietnam since 1965, and supported by United States artillery and air support.
In June 1966, 1ATF established a base at Nui Dat, in the center of the province.
They improved the village defenses and mounted a series of patrols, without major engagements.
On July 29, however, Australian intelligence discovered a large force of Viet Cong and NVA troops, totaling some 2,500 men, in the surrounding area.
The communists' mission was to show their strength to the local villagers by striking at the Australians and perhaps overrunning the base.
Hanoi believed that a defeat of 1ATF would force the Australian government to scale back its role in the war.
The battle builds At 2:43m. on August 17, a bombardment rocked Nui Dat.
Three infantry companies were sent out to locate the communist forces but the rest of the day passed without significant incident.
His men were carrying light loads of ammunition—120 rounds per rifle and 1,000 rounds for each machine gun.
Coincidentally, August 18 was the date when two rock 'n' roll acts were due to give the first-ever concert at Nui Dat.
Australian signalman Private Ken Meredith, with a radio on his back, waits for the order to return to base after the Battle of Long Tan.
BATTLE OF LONG TAN Muzzle compensator Self-loading rifle The British-made LI A1 self-loading rifle was the standard rifle of the Australian Army from 1960 to 1992.
Gas-operated, it ejected spent cartridges and loaded new ones automatically.
RADIO MESSAGES FROM D COMPANY, AT 4:26 AND 4:31 P.M., AUGUST 18, 1966 Waves of attacks D Company advanced toward Long Tan, 3 miles from Nui Dat.
They were unaware that there was an enemy regiment massed in a rubber plantation near the village.
At 3:40m., a platoon from D Company clashed with forward troops of the Viet Cong and forced them to withdraw.
Returning in greater numbers half an hour later, the Viet Cong launched waves of attacks, hoping to encircle and destroy the Australians.
Monsoon rains decreased visibility, preventing the American jets called in to provide support from launching an airstrike.
The beleaguered company relied on artillery batteries at Nui Dat, which bombarded within 50 yards of their position and fired nearly nonstop, even though their position was twice struck by lightning.
To make the situation worse, a relief force was not immediately dispatched due to concern about leaving Nui Dat undefended.
Holding out Meanwhile, the Australians at Long Tan began to run out of ammunition.
Shortly afterward, the Viet Cong launched a massed assault, attacking on three sides.
Long Tan Action This commemorative artwork was painted by Australian war artist Bruce Fletcher in 1970.
Some of the details—such as the headlamps on the APCs and the resupply by cargo hook—are embellishments.
Supplies were dropped rather than lowered, and headlamps were turned off. fire held them off until the arrival of the relief force as darkness fell at 7m.
This forced the enemy to withdraw, and within 15 minutes all firing had ceased.
Australian dominance of Phuoc Tuy was not seriously challenged again. r » After Long Tan, the Australian presence increased, peaking at 7,672 soldiers in 1968.
Its main fire support bases in the area, Coral and Balmoral, were attacked for 26 days, making Coral-Balmoral the Australians' bloodiest battle of the war, with 25 deaths.
It holds Vietnam Veterans' Day on August 18, the day of the Battle of Long Tan.
War in the Iron Triangle In 1967, United States forces attacked North Vietnamese and Viet Cong strongholds in the border region northwest of Saigon.
General Westmoreland's plan was to push enemy fighters into less populated areas, where United States air power could demolish them.
North Vietnamese forces and Viet Cong insurgents enjoyed strong support from local villagers in the area, and the Viet Cong had invested heavily in a fortified tunnel complex in the area of Cu Chi.
The tunnels, like the Iron Triangle as a whole, provided a staging area for North Vietnamese and Viet Cong attacks on United States and South Vietnamese units in the region and also on Saigon itself.
American forces made three major assaults on the Iron Triangle over a nine-month period between the fall of 1966 and May 1967.
Operation Attleboro began in September 1966, Operation Cedar Falls in January 1967, and Operation Junction City lasted from February to May 1967.
Operation Attleboro The main aim of Operation Attleboro was to destroy NVA and Viet Cong supply lines in the Iron Triangle.
It developed into a major confrontation between a force of around 6,000 Viet Cong and NVA regulars and 22,000 United States and ARVN troops.
A series of intense battles over nearly three weeks resulted in heavy Viet Cong and NVA casualties and the seizure of oil stores, weapons.
However, as proved to be the case in most search-and-destroy operations, the Viet Cong chose to disengage from the fight when it was expedient to do so—in this case fleeing to sanctuaries across the Cambodian border.
Once American forces had withdrawn from the area, Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces simply returned.
A month after Cedar Falls, United States forces embarked upon the largest search-and-destroy operation of the war.
Ready and waiting Viet Cong guerrillas pose for a photograph as they track United States movements in a jungle clearing of the Iron Triangle during Operation Cedar Falls.
COLONEL HARRY SUMMERS, ESSAY IN VIETNAM MAGAZINE, 1988 Forced removal A United States Army Chinook helicopter arrives to evacuate civilians from the village of Ben Sue during Operation Cedar Falls in January 1967.
The reports, which took up almost the entire July 15 edition of the magazine, highlighted problems with the ethics of the American approach in Vietnam, providing arguments for the growing antiwar movement in America. maneuver, in which some American forces were stealthily positioned to block an enemy retreat while others effectively drove the enemy through the jungle toward them.
The battle plan also reversed the usual search-and-destroy methods by using American units to destroy suspected enemy villages, and then employing South Vietnamese units to detain and interrogate survivors.
Cedar Falls targeted the terrain with defoliants and Rome Plows to destroy vegetation that could conceal insurgent activity.
In terms of casualties, territory, and war materiel captured, the operation was a resounding victory for the United States.
However, the long-term goal of driving North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces into unpopulated areas, where they could be destroyed from the air, was not met.
They did retreat into an unpopulated area, but, as in Operation Attleboro, it was across the Cambodian border, beyond the reach of bombing authorized by Washington at this point in the war.
Cedar Falls also resulted in the demolition of an entire village, Ben Sue, which the Viet Cong used as a supply station on the Saigon River.
These were essentially refugee camps run by the South Vietnamese government.
Families that once sustained themselves through farming suddenly struggled to find food.
Meanwhile, United States forces burned, then plowed under and bombed, Ben Sue, ensuring that the refugees could not return to their village.
Reaction in the United States To the American public, the military successes of war in the Iron Triangle began to pale beside the disturbing human dimensions of the refugee crisis it created.
FIGHT FOR THEIR RIGHTS The African American Experience Race relations were tense in the early 1960s, even before the war drew hundreds of thousands of men of color into military service.
Questions about the war reached a fever pitch as African Americans confronted a war many deemed exploitative and imperialist.
Historically, African Americans viewed military service positively, because it provided job skills and conferred respect that could result in better employment opportunities in civilian life.
In World War II, African Americans embraced a ""Double V"" strategy that supported victory abroad while also demanding race equality in the United States.
However, the pace of change remained slow after the war, leading to the modern Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
King On January 15, 1971, African American soldiers raise their fists in black power salutes for the birthday of the late Dr.
His assassination in 1968 caused some black troops to reevaluate their participation in the war.
T he Vietnam War was the first United States conflict fought with a fully racially integrated military.
However, while the Armed Forces were formally desegregated by 1954, discrimination remained, often preventing black soldiers from rising in the ranks.
Racial tensions also continued to boil on the home front, especially as the Civil Rights Movement gained momentum.
Martin Luther King Jr. remarked in 1967 that it was a cruel irony to watch black and white men kill and die together in Vietnam, all for a nation unable to seat them together in the same room.
Changing attitudes During the Vietnam War, African Americans' traditional support for military service began to wane, and by 1969, 56 percent of African Americans opposed the war.
Many of those already fighting for civil rights turned their voices against the draft, with organizations such as the Black Panthers and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee denouncing the war.
One black man evaded the In H onor draft by fleeing to Canada—calling himself not a draft dodger but a runaway slave.
Generally, people » THE AFRICAN AMERICAN EXPERIENCE Pride in their culture Troops often had tour jackets personalized with images and dates of service.
This jacket, now in the National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington, D.C., declared support for the black power movement. of color were more likely than white Americans to oppose the war in Vietnam, because they saw it as exploitative.
An individual's draft status was determined at the local level, where young black men had to plead their cases to all-white draft boards that tended to bestow exemptions and deferrals onto more ""promising"" white college students.
There were no black Americans on draft boards in Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi, or Louisiana, and one member of a Louisiana draft board was even a Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan.
In contested areas, where the potential for violence made unity and brotherhood an operational necessity, race relations were mostly good, and some men found that the experience of battle had caused deeply held prejudices to be cast aside.
However, in rearward areas and bases such as Long Binh, where life was quieter, racial tensions rose to the surface.
Black power As a result of President Johnson's so-called Project 100,000, from 1966 to 1969, thousands more African American soldiers were recruited for the war effort.
Forty-one percent of the recruits under this program were African American, and many were not career soldiers—they hailed from poor urban areas.
However, some African Americans remained in the military after the war, and many black officers who served in Vietnam went on to have distinguished military careers.
KEY CONCEPT THE DAP African American soldiers in Vietnam often greeted one another with an elaborate handshake called the dap.
Customized by unit or hometown, it had political overtones as a display of racial solidarity between black men, even those who had never met before.
The dap could bring activities to a halt, as black soldiers dapped with every other black soldier in a club or chow line.
Some commanders and white soldiers resented the practice, and black soldiers risked punishment for engaging in it.
AT THE VIETNAM WOMEN'S MEMORIAL Many of these recruits were more radicalized than those in earlier years.
Some called themselves ""bloods,"" and were influenced by the teachings of men such as Malcolm X in the black power movement.
They objected to poor treatment and demanded the right to express their culture with hairstyles, jewelry, music, and the dap handshake.
Tensions sometimes erupted into violence, prompting the military to enact reforms in 1969.
African American soldiers often came together in solidarity to form groups such as the Unsatisfied Black Soldier to support each other, study their history, and lobby for the small comforts that white men took for granted.
As a result, life for black soldiers differed greatly from their white counterparts—in terms of experience, opportunities, and dangers.
Haywood T Kirkland, a Gl, described how black soldiers banded together in the face of racism, both in Vietnam and upon returning home.
Kirkland described rebel flags flying from jeeps and how it made him feel insulted and intimidated.
He noted that, often branded troublemakers, black soldiers were sent to the fields, even those who had supply clerk or cook military specialties, while the white soldiers usually got jobs as supply clerks or in the mess hall.
This led the black soldiers at the base camp to close ranks and become more organized as a group.
They began to discuss being part of the struggle of black people and how Vietnam was doing nothing for it.
When Kirkland returned home, the reaction of his peers who questioned why he had gone to war led to him developing a more revolutionary, militant attitude, the seeds of which had been laid back in Vietnam.
AN ORAL HISTORY OF THE VIETNAM WAR BY BLACK VETERANS, 1984 Out in the field An African American soldier and his fellow men, members of the 173rd Airborne Brigade, continue their search-and-destroy mission after a helicopter drops supplies in Phuoc Tuy province, Vietnam, in June 1966.
Logistics operators found that by dismantling the tails, they could transport five helicopters instead of three.
A s American troop levels climbed over the course of 1965, and the United States began to engage in offensive rather than defensive operations, more airpower was needed to support and protect these ground troops, deepening American investment in the war.
Supplying the troops The vast majority of the millions of fixed-wing and helicopter sorties flown over South Vietnam were for flying cargo, known in the war's vernacular as trash hauling.
Some of the crews flew a set schedule each day, making regular deliveries or providing a shuttle service on a predictable route.
Others flew ad hoc supply missions that often took them into treacherous weather conditions or onto dangerous runways.
Helicopter pilots often struggled to identify landing zones from the air, especially in remote areas.
They relied on radar guidance, nearby features in the Dropping supplies Supplies landed by helicopter are loaded onto a truck for distribution.
To ensure the grenades were not released by enemy combatants seeking to lure the pilot into a trap, the smoke was color coded.
Hauling cargo in South Vietnam might mean delivering hot meals to exhausted GIs on patrol in the jungle, or water and ammunition to a landing zone under fire, or perhaps flying a Conex AIRPOWER OVER SOUTH VIETNAM Danger zone A First Air Cavalry Skycrane helicopter delivers ammunition and supplies to United States Marines during the 77-day Siege of Khe Sanh, in February 1968.
The aptly named Skycranes were also used to deliver heavy artillery. target for an hour or more.
Weapons, houses, people— everything under fire from Spooky was turned to mulch.
Forward air controllers tried to exercise discretion over calling in air strikes when civilians were present.
Ffowever, like the ground war strategy of search-and-destroy, the air war over South Vietnam often involved indiscriminate violence.
American use of ""free fire zones""— areas targeted by bombing and artillery in which all Vietnamese people who had not evacuated were assumed to be enemy combatants—resulted in unknown civilian casualties and contributed to South Vietnam's shipping crate of consumer goods, suspended in a net that could be easily dropped, to a mountaintop firebase.
It could also mean flying combat troops into action, collecting the wounded and delivering them to hospitals, or removing the dead from the battlefield, a traumatic process that brought crews insulated to some degree by altitude directly into contact with the shooting war on the ground.
Whatever the mission, many United States and ARVN Air Force aircraft risked small arms fire when taking off, landing, or flying just above treetops.
Along the Ho Chi Minh Trail and in other hotspots along American bombing routes, airmen also faced antiaircraft artillery from the NVA and Viet Cong.
Air strikes The air war over South Vietnam also involved the tactical support of American ground troops, who could call for fixed-wing air strikes from Air Force or Navy bombers and covering fire from helicopter gunships.
The range and power of such air strikes was much greater than that of conventional artillery and formed an important component of search-and-destroy strategy.
Spooky, the modified Douglas AC-47, for example, could direct a curtain of machine gun fire onto a I United States air superiority ensured that not a single American soldier in South Vietnam was killed on the ground by enemy aircraft during the Vietnam War.
AFTER United States forces continued to police the skies over Vietnam even after Vietnamization.
Antipersonnel chemical weapons, such as napalm and white phosphorus, which caused untreatable wounds, resulted in further suffering.
American airpower directed at North Vietnamese forces proved a decisive advantage that kept North Vietnamese operations in check.
Conversely, American bombing in populated areas undermined efforts to win the support of the South Vietnamese people, driving families and even whole villages to support the Viet Cong.
Ultimately, perhaps, the indiscriminate nature of violence designed to protect American soldiers made them less safe.
THE VIETNAM ARCHIVE, TEXAS TECH UNIVERSITY Spooky in action The crew of this Douglas AC-47 plane fire 7.62 mm rounds at an enemy target.
These converted cargo aircraft, codenamed ""spooky,"" provided support for ground operations at night.
Bell OH-58 Kiowa Arriving in Vietnam in 1969, the OH-58 was frequently used for direct fire support, often equipped with a Ml34 7.62mm Minigun.
Bell UH-1 Iroquois Commonly known as the Huey, this workhorse performed diverse roles including air mobility, fire support, and medical evacuations.
Sikorsky CH-53 Sea Stallion The United States Navy and the Marines used this heavy-lift transport helicopter, which was adept at recovering downed aircraft.
Kaman HH-43 Huskie Notable for its intermeshed rotors, the Huskie was a dedicated search-and-rescue helicopter.
Sikorsky UH-34D Seahorse The Marines liked the simplicity of this transport helicopter and adapted it to assault and evacuation.
Bell AH-1G Cobra This heavily armed attack helicopter was used to provide fire support to ground forces.
MERICA GOES TO WAR JANUARY 1 96 5-SEPTEMBER 1967 Digging In Confronted with a much more powerful adversary, the Viet Cong leveled their odds on the battlefield by taking the war underground.
BOOBY-TRAPPED VC FLAG I 17 V ietnamese civilians and combatants—North and South—created thousands of miles of subterranean passageways and bunkers.
Vietnam's limestone and clay soil was relatively easy to excavate, but also stable enough to support large, permanent underground dwellings.
Bunkers became a standard part of Vietnamese homes, particularly in contested areas where bombs and artillery were a constant threat.
E F O R E The Viet Cong drew upon their experience of fighting the French in the First Indochina War to help them confront United States forces and the Saigon regime.
These included building a complex network of tunnels and bunkers to conceal political and military operations, store weapons and supplies, and to shelter from bombs.
The number of babies born in the tunnels of Vinh Moc during the course of the war.
Underground community In Vinh Moc, a village in the heavily fortified DMZ, local people took the bunker concept a stage further.
Eventually, 60 families relocated underground, living in a network of tunnels more than a mile long, safe from United States bombs and artillery.
The village tunnels included VIET CONG TUNNEL SYSTEM rooms for every family, a larger room for community meetings and school lessons, kitchens with special stoves to vent the smoke, an infirmary, and several secret entrances, including some that opened onto the beach.
Villagers lived this way for five years, going into the open only at night to farm their land or to ferry food and other supplies to Viet Cong guerrillas on Con Co island, a communist base about 15 miles offshore.
The villagers of Vinh Moc claimed that they did not lose a single life to American bombs after they relocated underground.
Inhabitants endured stinging insects, venomous snakes, malaria, intestinal parasites, food shortages, and vitamin D deficiency.
Rats and cassava, a nutritious root vegetable that grew wild, were mainstays of the villagers' diet.
Tunnel dwellers Mapping the tunnels This diagram, dating from 1966, is an American representation of a tunnel network.
United States training bases built tunnel systems to help prepare their troops.
In reality, the tunnels were more complex, with many entrances and booby traps. also risked tunnel collapse, oxygen deprivation, and death or injury from bombs.
THE VIETNAM WAR REMEMBERED FROM ALL SIDES, CHRISTIAN APPY, 2004 A compartment in the base stored a spare bulb and filters soldiers who braved darkness, the danger of getting lost, and booby traps, especially when they ventured into a tunnel for the first time or dropped through a trap door between two levels of a tunnel system.
They might be impaled by punji sticks— sharpened lengths of bamboo— stung by scorpions, or bitten by snakes tied to stakes in the roof.
Early attempts to use dogs instead of people were soon abandoned, as dogs could not detect traps.
Other precautions, such as using smoke to detect openings, or clearing tunnels with grenades had the drawback of alerting the enemy or destroying valuable intelligence.
An Australian combat engineer, Sandy MacGregor, is credited with being the first to discover the extent of the Cu Chi tunnels, an underground warren that spread for miles in the Iron Triangle northwest of Saigon.
MX-991/U flashlight Tunnel rats, charged with investigating tunnel networks, were equipped with a flashlight, a pistol, and a knife.
The angle-headed flashlights were waterproof and could be clipped to or suspended from the soldier's belt.
Two men went into a tunnel at one time; the job of the second man was to radio coordinates to the surface so that the tunnels could be mapped.
Worn down Eventually, the cumulative effect of bombing, Rome Plows (armored bulldozers), and search-anddestroy infantry operations such as Cedar Falls and Junction City blunted the effectiveness of the Cu Chi tunnels.
However, like the other tunnel networks in South Vietnam, Cu Chi was never eradicated.
INSIDE A VIET CONG TUNNEL TODAY The NVA and Viet Cong used the tunnel systems to help launch several major offensives, feats that are today celebrated in tours of the main tunnel systems.
LAUNCHING OFFENSIVES Bombing limited the usefulness of the tunnel systems at Cu Chi and Vinh Moc, but United States and South Vietnamese forces never succeeded in destroying the tunnels entirely.
TOURIST ATTRACTIONS Today, Cu Chi and Vinh Moc are important historical sites and open to tourists.
Tours of the tunnel systems stress the ingenuity and fortitude of the Vietnamese people.
V Captured guerrilla A United States infantryman trains his rifle on a Viet Cong guerrilla as he emerges from a tunnel entrance in the Trung Lap, about 25 miles west of Saigon, in January 1966.
Along with seven other ""thin, small men"" from his company, he was selected to infiltrate the elaborate underground networks of the Viet Cong as a tunnel rat.
Dominguez was known as Ghost for his ability to explore the tunnels undetected.
Many tunnels were rigged with explosives and trip wires, but Dominguez claims the worst thing about the tunnels was the bugs, which would eat you alive.
On one occasion he was sent down into a deep, complex hole, with very little room to move.
He crawled along until he had almost reached the end and he was able to straighten up a little.
He though he was walking through water—the flashlights tunnel rats were given were such poor quality it was difficult to see.
United States ARMY TUNNEL RAT RUBEN ""GHOST"" DOMINGUEZ, INTERVIEWED BY VIETNAM VETERAN NEWS, SEPTEMBER 2015 Rat in the hole Pistol in hand, Sergeant Ronald Payne emerges from a Viet Cong tunnel in the so-called Hobo Woods, South Vietnam, on January 21,1967.
During his mission underground, Payne discovered detailed maps and plans belonging to Viet Cong guerrillas.
DEVELOPING THE TRAIL During the war against the French, Viet Minh leaders in the mountains of the Laotian and Chinese border regions struggled to maintain contact with forces further south.
To do so, they relied on a network of footpaths through the Truong Son Mountains.
J War on the Ho Chi Minh Trail The United States waged war on the Ho Chi Minh Trail for years, without success.
For every high-tech method it deployed, the Vietnamese people maintaining and using the trail found an effective and often ingenious workaround—albeit at tremendous human cost.
T he Ho Chi Minh Trail was not a single trail, but rather a network of trails and roads that eventually reached 12,000 miles in length.
Rustic paths, treacherous bamboo staircases, and rope bridges traversed by porters pushing bicycles gave way, by the early 1970s, to one-lane roads and bridges able to carry truck traffic.
Working the trail North Vietnam deployed about 75,000 civilians to maintain the trail, including boys and girls in their teens.
These Youth Volunteers could expect to spend time filling bomb craters, repairing bridges, and even detonating unexploded ordnance.
They lived on the trail. deep in the jungle, generally sleeping by day, in hammocks or in underground bunkers, and coming out at night to work.
Malaria, dysentery, and trench foot were rampant, and medical care was rudimentary or nonexistent.
When the workers returned home at war's end, they were pale, hairless, and frail, with health problems that would plague them for the rest of their lives.
Repair and maintenance A cave on the trail serves as an auto repair shop in 1968.
LEAFLET DROPPED ON THE TRAIL, 1970 Battle of wits United States Air Force and Navy planes bombed the trail heavily, hunting trail workers and North Vietnamese troops going south to fight.
It is estimated that some 30,000 people died on the trail over the course of the war, though some put the figure as high as 100,000.
However, because much of the trail was hidden under jungle canopy, American pilots grew frustrated that they were risking their lives to bomb what was often just trees.
To address this, United States planes sprayed defoliants over the jungle to rid the trees of foliage.
They even engaged in cloud seeding—spraying clouds with silver iodide and lead iodide to create rain—in order to slow truck traffic by reducing visibility or washing out roads and bridges.
Project Popeye, a top-secret cloud-seeding operation over the Trail between March 1967 and July 1972, sought to extend the monsoon season each year by a month or more.
The United States military tried to locate the trail more precisely by planting motion and sound sensors to detect traffic, and also developed ""people sniffers,"" sensors designed to detect the smell of human urine and sweat.
Army and Air Force pilots dropped leaflets in Vietnamese on the Trail, threatening more devastating bombing and urging workers and soldiers to desert.
Vietnamese trail workers found ingenious ways to undermine these efforts.
They drove cattle down false trails to trigger motion and sound detectors, luring United States bombers away from actual trail traffic.
They hung bags of urine in trees far from the trail to fool the people sniffers.
But mostly they worked diligently to repair by hand (or occasionally with heavy machinery) the damage wrought by bombs.
Lost cause Despite their efforts, United States forces failed to slow, let alone stop, traffic down the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
Infiltration accelerated over the years, reaching 20,000 tons of war materiel per month by the late 1960s.
At one point, United States aerial surveillance detected 15,000 vehicles on the trail in a single day.
Thousands of American and South Vietnamese soldiers and airmen were killed or injured trying to interdict the trail, an effort akin to holding back the tide.
Today, the modern vestiges of the trail provide an interior highway for Vietnam, bringing economic development. v_ Low-tech solution Viet Cong guerrillas steer elephants through a high plateau forest in 1969.
The elephants' ability to carry heavy loads and force their way through jungle made them a useful addition to a range of transportation methods.
The Combined Action Program sent Marines into towns and hamlets to forge positive relationships with the locals.
D espite General William Westmoreland's use of the attrition strategy and searchand-destroy tactics, the war remained a political struggle in need of political solutions.
American units throughout South Vietnam embraced civic action as a means of winning hearts and minds, but the Marines built an entire program around it.
Under the program, the Army relocated villagers to specially fortified hamlets and declared their former homes to be free-fire zones for rooting out insurgents in search-anddestroy operations.
It sought to prove to the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong that they could not win the war and should therefore seek a settlement.
This strategy ensured a great deal of destruction, but it did little to stop NVA or Viet Cong fighters from receiving sanctuary at the village level.
When the Army did engage in civic action to improve civil-military relations, it did so in addition to—not in lieu of—search-and-destroy operations.
This shooting war was at odds with the Army's efforts to win hearts and minds.
Marine methods The Marine Corps, operating primarily in the northernmost part of South Vietnam , offered an alternative model for conducting the war.
Marine initiatives to improve villagers' standard of living included providing school supplies for children, tools for tradesmen, and equipment such as rice threshers for villages; sharing farming expertise to improve livestock and crop yields; and building dams and digging wells to provide clean drinking water and irrigation.
They also provided medical care and distributed emergency food and clothing.
It began as an improvised solution to a manpower shortage in 1965, when a junior officer suggested using South Vietnamese militia units to augment Marine strength.
They received about 10 days of training in Vietnamese language and customs before they were sent to live in a village to forge bonds with local people.
Working together The platoons were strengthened by the complementary skills each side brought to the unit.
The CAP Marines, who were on average about 20 years old, brought firepower, training, and also access to American resources such as medevac, artillery, and air support.
The local militia, on the other hand, had varying degrees of military prowess—some were veterans of the First Indochina War—but also contributed key ""A Patch of honor The seal of the Combined Action Program shows a South Vietnamese flag joined with the Star Spangled Banner, in reference to the program's collaboration between United States Marines and South Vietnamese militiamen. local knowledge of terrain and customs, as well as a fierce desire to defend their homes.
Ultimately, the Marine Corps declared the program a success, although the evidence is largely anecdotal.
CAP platoons generally experienced lower casualty rates than units engaged in search-and-destroy operations, but they produced a higher body count relative to unit size.
V_ Caring for the children As other young patients look on, hospital corpsman Ronald L Williams treats a boy with an infected leg in An Tan, during a medical civic action visit in June 1966.
MARINE CAPTAIN BING WEST, IN HIS MEMOIR, THE VILLAGE, 2003 to Viet Cong control, although that assertion might be rooted as much in Viet Cong pragmatism—why invest resources where public support is weak?—as it was in CAP platoons' ability to intimidate and persuade.
Ultimately, the CAP platoons were too small, few, and unevenly distributed to have much impact on the war's outcome.
However, CAP Marines often made friends among the families in the villages to which they were assigned, and were invited to eat meals in civilians' homes.
Friendships between CAP platoon members and South Vietnamese villagers who came to rely on them for security were remembered long after the war's end.
The United States also used psychological persuasion, known as PSYOPS, to win over the populace— and to threaten the NVA and Viet Cong.
General Westmoreland claimed that PSYOPS and civic action were at the heart of counterinsurgency.
Typically, these would urge people to reject the Viet Cong and support the South Vietnamese government.
It was the first service to go into formal combat operations in 1965 and it was the last one to leave Vietnam a decade later.
BEFORE The United States Navy had been a source of support for the South Vietnamese government since the 1950s.
ADVISORY ROLE In the 1950s, the United States Navy provided guidance to South Vietnam's Navy and advised the government on infrastructure projects and civic action programs.
These advisory and nationbuilding missions continued throughout the war.
A lthough the United States Navy did not have to contend with serious threats from North Vietnamese naval forces on the high seas, the Seventh Fleet provided critical support to the war effort in a broad range of capacities.
At Yankee Station, a point off the central coast of South Vietnam, multiple aircraft carriers launched airstrikes against North Vietnam and the Ho Chi Minh Trail as part of operations Flaming Dart, Rolling Thunder, and Linebacker, among others.
Warships at Yankee Station also shelled the coast of North Vietnam and provided artillery support to American units operating in South Vietnam.
At Dixie Station, much farther south, a single-carrier group provided close air support for United States troops engaged in combat operations.
Other Navy missions included advising the Republic of Vietnam Navy, transporting troops to Vietnam, building United States bases.
Aircraft carrier The USS Enterprise, here loaded with helicopters and planes during the evacuation of Saigon in April 1975, was used to launch airstrikes at various points in the war.
Harassing communist targets The U5S New Jersey fires shells into North Vietnam from the Gulf of Tonkin.
The New Jersey was a heavy bombardment battleship, equipped with 16-inch guns.
Fatal accidents Navy personnel engaged in riverine operations faced many of the same hardships and threats suffered by ground troops engaged in searchand-destroy operations farther north.
However, for sailors in the Seventh Fleet, the threat of accident—fires, helicopter crashes, collisions, explosions, and errors » The United States Navy played a vital role in United States retaliatory action following North Vietnam's Easter Offensive in 1972.
LAST FORCE OUT constructing and maintaining South Vietnamese port facilities, providing medical support in shipboard surgical hospitals, and coastal defense.
Intercepting supply lines One of the Navy's most important roles was disrupting the so-called Sihanouk Trail—the North Vietnamese supply route into South Vietnam via the port of Sihanoukville in Cambodia.
Initially, the Republic of Vietnam Navy addressed such smuggling, but its efforts were ineffective and prone to corruption.
In 1965, the United States Navy and Coast Guard launched Operation Market Time to intercept and search thousands of vessels.
The Brown Water Navy, which patrolled inland waterways, performed a similar function in the Mekong Delta and the Ca Mau Peninsula, where transportation routes largely consisted of rivers and canals.
Search-and-destroy The Brown Water Navy also conducted search-and-destroy missions against the Viet Cong, which had long operated in areas that infantry equipped with tanks and heavy artillery could not reach.
Long after most United States ground units had withdrawn from Vietnam, the United States Navy continued to provide advisory, logistical, and even combat support to the South Vietnamese.
V_ Riverine operation The crew aboard an inshore patrol craft , known as a swift boat, fire at Viet Cong positions in a search-and-destroy mission along the Duong Keo River on the Ca Mau Peninsula in April 1969.
REAR ADMIRAL ELMO R ZUMWALl, DESCRIBING THE BROWN WATER NAVY, 1969 River Patrol Force launched Operation Game Warden, an attack on Viet Cong capabilities in the Mekong Delta.
Consisting of small patrol boats and attack helicopters, it imposed a curfew on the local population and limited Viet Cong movements, securing waterways and preventing attacks on regional cities.
In 1967, the newly formed Mobile Riverine Force extended the Navy's capabilities by pairing Army infantry with Navy armored assault boats.
The initial operation in the Rung Sat Special Zone—a vast area of mangrove forest south of Saigon— involved a ""hammer-and-anvil"" attack in which riverine infantry landed to drive Viet Cong forces toward a second attack force delivered by helicopter.
The operation helped secure provincial capitals and prevented the Viet Cong from mining water approaches to Saigon. launching aircraft—exceeded the risk of injury from attack.
The heaviest Navy casualties due to enemy action occurred in 1968, when Viet Cong divers detonated two mines alongside the USS Westchester County, killing 25 sailors.
LRRP teams collected intelligence on the movement of communist fighters and coordinated artillery and air strikes.
Previous efforts to clear the area northwest of Saigon had had mixed results.
But United States forces and the ARVN lacked the resources to occupy and patrol the area, and the population soon moved back in.
To prevent accidents, ""Front toward enemy"" was always embossed on the side.
Junction City was intended to deal a deathblow to the insurgents' infrastructure in South Vietnam.
However, Viet Cong and NVA forces recognized the folly of trying to combat the United States war machine and sought to outlast it instead.
O peration Junction City was the largest joint US-ARVN operation of the war.
Launched on February 22, 1967, it lasted 82 days and involved 45,000 United States troops, including the war's only significant combat parachute assault.
War Zone C in Tay Ninh province northwest of Saigon, was relatively flat and dry compared to the saturated paddies of the JVIekong Delta and the steep hillsides of the Central Highlands.
Operation Junction City saw the heaviest use of armored vehicles during the war.
The objective As with other search-and-destroy operations, the objective of Junction City was to clear the region of North Vietnamese and Viet Cong fighters.
The COSVN remained elusive and retaining control of the Iron Triangle proved impossible for the United States and its allies.
RETURN OF THE VIET CONG ARVN forces charged with maintaining security in the iron Triangle after the initial United States assault proved either too small for the task or were simply not up to it, allowing North Vietnamese and Viet Cong fighters to filter back.
United States forces continued to hunt for the COSVN, whose staff increasingly took sanctuary across the border in Cambodia, beyond the reach of American troops. it made little difference in their ability to wage war against the South Vietnamese government and the American and South Vietnamese soldiers charged with defending it.
Junction City jump United States paratroopers parachute into the drop zone, a flat and clear area west of Katum Special Forces camp, in their only major combat assault of the war.
In general, Vietnam's rugged terrain made parachute assaults impractical.
Armored personnel carrier The relatively flat terrain of War Zone C was ideal for the United States Army's M113 armored personnel carrier, nicknamed the Green Dragon by the Viet Cong.
Operation Cedar Falls, Junction City employed a ""hammer-andanvil'' technique to drive enemy forces overland toward destruction.
Taking position Under the guise of conducting routine combat patrols, United States forces were placed in position for the assault.
Then, on the morning of February 22, eight infantry battalions under the control of the Boosting morale Overall, Junction City had mixed success.
The airborne assault was spectacular, making for dramatic 25th Infantry Division helicoptered into landing zones, where they met little to no resistance.
Collectively, these forces then extended their lines almost to the Cambodian border, creating a horseshoe-shaped cordon designed to trap the Viet Cong so that United States forces could hunt them down.
In fact, for the next month, American forces had only light contact with the Viet Cong, who were content to remain hidden.
Battle phase The second stage of Junction City began in mid-March, when United States forces set up Katum Special Forces camp and fire support bases to establish a 1 more permanent American presence in the region.
During this phase of the operation, Viet Cong forces mounted substantial resistance, especially on the grounds of a former rubber plantation.
These battles forged a pattern, in which the Viet Cong launched deadly assaults against United States forces, who beat them back with overwhelming firepower, inflicting heavy casualties.
The number of United States helicopers used to drop eight infantry battallions into position on February 22. headlines on the home front and boosting the morale of United States troops in Vietnam.
For the most part, the guerrilla fighters hid or retreated across the border into Cambodia, whose neutrality prohibited United States forces from following.
Although United States forces discovered a cache of enemy propaganda suggesting that a component of COSVN was active in the region, the organization as a whole was neither discovered nor seriously compromised by the operation.
Junction City's most significant contribution to the American war effort was its body count.
The CWS did, however, perfect the use of incendiary devices such as bombs and flamethrowers.
Rebranded as the Chemical Corps in 1946, it also developed biological weapons.
The use of chemical weapons opened another front for the antiwar movement, which targeted chemical manufacturers such as Monsanto and Dow Chemical for their support of the war.
Activists launched boycotts, disrupted job fairs, picketed chemical plants, and lobbied elected officials to regulate the chemical industry and rein in its ability to profit from the misery and horror of war.
J Operation Ranch Hand Improvised explosives A United States soldier lies wounded by a Viet Cong booby trap made from white phosphorus scavenged from unexploded American ordnance.
White phosphorus grenades were widely used to hit Viet Cong tunnel networks.
In the 1960s, the Army Chemical Corps was charged with protecting United States personnel from chemical attack, but also with perfecting and deploying chemical weapons.
In Vietnam, the Chemical Corps partnered with the Air Force to conduct Operation Ranch Hand— the aerial spraying of chemical defoliants on forests and farmland Jungle in flames from 1961 to 1971, with the stated A United States soldier clears a path through Vietnamese aim of killing roadside vegetation, jungle with a flamethrower.
In 1978, the United States defoliating jungle hiding enemy banned the use of flamethrowers in future troops, and destroying civilian combat, due to their ""indiscriminate"" and crops suspected of being grown excessively injurious effects. for enemy use.
Agent Orange The most widely used herbicide in South Vietnam was Agent Orange, named for the orange band on the barrels in which it was stored.
It consisted of two chemical herbicides mixed with diesel fuel or kerosene, but also a manufacturing byproduct.
Within two weeks of spraying, leaves would fall from trees or plants, remaining bare until at least the next rainy season.
Destroyed crops exacerbated poverty and drove people from their land, contributing to the refugee crisis.
The effect of multiple sprayings permanently destroyed vegetation and disrupted animal populations.
Dioxin, which is associated with birth defects and diseases, also filtered into the soil.
While international law prohibits chemical warfare against people, United States courts ruled that Ranch Hand targeted plants, indemnifying the United States from liability.
Incendiary substances United States chemical warfare in Vietnam also involved incendiary devices— ostensibly designed to burn structures but also highly effective against people.
Essentially jellied gasoline, napalm is chemically engineered to stick to its target; it burns incredibly hot and rapidly deoxygenates the air, suffocating people caught in confined spaces.
In Vietnam, the United States Air Force dropped napalm bombs over villages or forests sheltering enemy combatants, resulting in massive orange fireballs.
Soldiers also used napalm in flamethrowers to target bunkers and tunnels.
White phosphorus, an incendiary and smoke-producing agent, was also used in Vietnam.
Like herbicides, incendiaries were effective but controversial, because they led to untreatable wounds.
White phosphorus would continue to burn until it was completely deprived of oxygen, resulting in horrific burns and lethal poisoning.
Incendiaries did not discriminate between civilians and insurgents hiding in their midst.
This resulted in thousands of civilian casualties, who overwhelmed the South Vietnamese health service.
CHEMICAL WARFARE Deathly spray American UC-123K aircraft spray Agent Orange on a Mekong Delta mangrove forest in 1970.
The converted gliders had jet engines fitted and dispensers on their wings and tails, optimized to spray three gallons of pesticide per acre.
LIEUTENANT COLONEL JIM COREY, DEPUTY CHIEF OF CORDS, TO HIS SUPERIORS, MARCH 1969 AFTER Criticism of America's use of napalm and defoliants in Vietnam continues, as the side effects of Agent Orange linger.
CONTROVERSY CONTINUES Generations after the war, Agent Orange is believed to cause birth defects and many serious ailments, feeding continued public outrage.
This opposition, and a string of accidents in the 1960s, led to the disbanding of the Chemical Corps from 1973 to about 1980.
Now active again, Chemical Corps' new role includes preparing for chemical attack and mass decontamination.
AUSTRALIAN POSTER CRITICIZING AGENT ORANGE Rain of fire Huts in the South Vietnamese hamlet of Ban De burst into flames under a fall of phosphorus explosives, dropped by an American A-1 Skyraider aircraft during a 1966 strike against Viet Cong positions.
WAR JANUARY 1965-SEPTEMBER 1967 BEFORE When Ho Chi Minh declared the Democratic Republic of Vietnam independent from French control in 1945, he understood this to include all of Vietnam.
The vision of an independent, communist Vietnam, which Ho Chi Minh and his followers had been fighting for, slipped out of reach.
New ranks and a formal order of command were created, making the NVA more reflective of modern Western armies, and the NVA also acquired weapons from China and the Soviet Union.
Tanks and aircraft from these allies allowed the NVA to form artillery and air Ready to fire North Vietnamese forces line up, ready to fire, during a training exercize in Bach Dang in July 1966.
The NVA practiced tactical maneuvers and field exercises, hoping to make up for its lack of firepower by keeping its men well-prepared and well-disciplined.
T he Viet Minh agreed to the terms of the 1954 Geneva Accords because they had promised to reunify Vietnam under leadership determined by national elections in 1956, which virtually guaranteed victory for Ho Chi Minh and his movement.
Ngo Dinh Diem, president of the newly formed Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam), refused to hold these elections.
The politburo of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam believed that they had no alternative but to return to war to unify the country.
Patriotic society However, after eight years of war against France, North Vietnam knew it was not yet strong enough to win against the South.
This 1954 poster shows women and families saying goodbye to men leaving to fight in the NVA. force units, but the army continued to use the majority of its men in infantry units.
Patriotic society In the 1960s and 1970s, war was all many North Vietnamese youth had ever known—against Japan, France, and now the United States.
North Vietnam's one-party government ensured that the communists had no opposition.
Northerners received information about the world—and the war—exclusively through state-controlled media that reinforced the patriotic necessity of compliant support.
Primary school children were inculcated in a love for ""Uncle Ho"" and loyalty to the communist party; teenage Youth Volunteers cleared the Ho Chi Minh Trail of mines for years on end; elderly men served in village civil defense units that assisted with the aftermath of United States bombing raids.
The picture North Vietnam presented to the world was of undertaken by truck but more often, especially during the early years, involved long marches over rugged terrain.
Although trail workers deferred to soldiers for rations and shelter, conditions were still extremely harsh.
After surviving months on the trail, NVA soldiers often lived exposed to the elements in temporary encampments, dark tunnels, and cramped bunkers.
NVA units foraged on the march, procuring rice voluntarily from sympathetic peasants and taking it by force from those in opposition.
HO CHI MINH, AS FREQUENTLY QUOTED IN NORTH VIETNAMESE PROPAGANDA unity and determination, even as its people endured grief, frustration, and exhaustion.
A tough fight North Vietnam began to send NVA units southward in earnest in 1959.
They also encouraged insurgent activity by the National Liberation Front in South Vietnam; and coordinated the war effort between the two.
Like their American counterparts, soldiers in the NVA served a long way from home, but their tours of duty were indefinite.
The journey into South Vietnam was occasionally a change of clothes, nylon tent and poncho, hammock, canteen, bowl and spoon, first-aid kit, ammunition pouch, and perhaps a week's worth of rice, as well as personal items such as photographs of family.
They also carried machetes, shovels, flashlights, medical supplies, and 70n BILLION DOLLARS / UU The sum given to the NVA by the Soviet Union in 1967 alone, far surpassing China's contributions. weapons, though these were often in short supply.
Injured and ill soldiers received treatment in jungle hospitals before returning to duty.
For those too gravely wounded to fight any longer, the journey home—on stretchers carried by porters back up the Ho Chi Minh Trail—took several months and could prove fatal.
AFTER As American support for the war declined, the North Vietnamese politburo knew that it merely had to survive, not defeat United States forces.
The ARVN time and again proved itself weak, while the NVA only became stronger.
After United States withdrawal in 1973, North Vietnam set its sights on defeating the ARVN and deposing the Saigon regime in order to reunify the country.
V Celebrating success This enamelled aluminum badge commemorates the ""5-8"" victory of August 5, 1964—Operation Pierce Arrow, during which the first United States planes were shot down—and was later awarded to NVA soldiers who shot down United States aircraft.
MAT-49 This French submachine gun was seized in large numbers after French withdrawal from Vietnam.
CD Type 56 assault rifle Simple, reliable, and accurate, this Chinese copy of the AK-47 was the NVA's main infantry weapon.
Tokarev TT pistol Reliable and powerful, this was a popular semiautomatic.
Luger P.08 pistol Lugers, captured in previous wars, were supplied by the Russians and the Chinese.
Tropical cork helmet Helmets were also made from pressed paper or plastic.
Even those who did not actively participate in the war effort experienced terrible hardships, including the violent deaths of loved ones, homelessness, and hunger.
T he wars of the 20th century created opportunities for Vietnamese women, because their labor and skills were too valuable not to be utilized in the fight for national independence.
Traditional Vietnamese culture offered women few options beyond being wives and mothers, but in wartime, they often assumed more public roles.
They also served in local militias, providing security to their communities and even capturing downed United States airmen.
Thousands of teenage girls volunteered for service maintaining the Ho Chi Minh Trail, including disarming care, organize logistics, and serve as spies in support of the NVA and the Viet Cong.
They lived in danger and deprivation, returning home to North Vietnam only at war's end.
They lacked sanitary supplies to care for themselves, and many were rendered unable to bear children due to poor diet and constant stress.
A wider family Family was—and remains—of paramount importance to the Vietnamese people, and the communists were quick to exploit the power of family to mobilize political support.
They argued that one's family did not just consist of blood relations but of the entire Vietnamese nation, and that service to the nation was therefore also service to one's family.
By framing political struggle in this way, the communists encouraged many women to step into roles previously reserved for men.
LIFE VERSUS LEGEND The Trung Sisters led a rebellion against China in the first century ce.
Two hundred years later, Trieu Au, a ""Vietnamese Joan of Arc,"" reputedly rode into battle against the Chinese on an elephant.
Despite such examples, women struggled to assert their place in society—religious beliefs, Confucian principles, and custom often limited their influence to family and home.
POEM BY AN ANONYMOUS NORTH VIETNAMESE SEAMSTRESS, 1966 unexploded artillery shells and mines.
Women were among the North Vietnamese support personnel who went south to provide medical South Vietnam The political situation in South Vietnam demanded that women choose sides, with some supporting the Saigon government, others supporting the Viet Cong, and most just trying to survive.
Many soldiers in the South Vietnamese Army kept their families with them in the field, and thousands of women therefore acted as ""soldiers without serial numbers,"" even defending camps against Viet Cong attack.
Starting in 1965, women could also serve in the Women's Armed Forces Corps, an ARVN auxiliary that relegated women to support roles.
Adopting the new United States Major Kathleen Wilkes and Sergeant First Class Betty Adams look on as new recruits to South Vietnam's Women's Army Corps trade their ao dai (a traditional dress that fell out of favor in North Vietnam) for ARVN uniforms.
DOCTOR DANG THUY TRAM Born in Hue in 1942, Dang Thuy Tram volunteered for service in North Vietnam fresh out of medical school in 1966.
For four years, she worked as a battlefield surgeon, providing care to communist combatants and civilians from a mobile clinic hidden in the jungle, until she was killed in 1970.
Tram's diary, found by an American Gl, was returned to her family in 2005 and published, to great acclaim.
As United States air attacks on North Vietnam increased, workers took to keeping rifles close by as a precaution.
Civilian women Due to the ARVN draft on the one hand, and the appeal of fighting for the insurgency on the other, the men left in villages and refugee camps tended to be very old or very young.
It was not unusual, in contested areas, for young women to be widowed many times as their husbands were killed in combat.
Some found work on Appealing image This communist propaganda poster reading ""She made a determined attack on enemy positions"" encourages women to serve as combatants.
Others took a different approach, showing women harvesting rice or holding children.
Lacking other options, many women also worked as prostitutes in the nightclubs and massage parlors that sprang up around the bases, or offered themselves directly to United States soldiers, sometimes in exchange for food.
Whatever choices these women made, they were usually driven by their commitment to family.
Vietnamese women continued to assert their influence on the war until its final days.
Notably, Nguyen Thi Binh served as the foreign minister of the Provisional Revolutionary Government (Viet Cong) and was one of the signers of the 1972 Paris Accords.
AFTER After the war, most Vietnamese women returned to traditional roles in the domestic sphere.
Some areas still have issues with women being kidnapped, forced into prostitution, or sold as brides.
Economic reforms have limited female-headed households' access to loans.
The Vietnam Women's Union is currently working alone to push for increased gender equality.
Whatever the role, life in the army was one of unrelenting hardship, shown by the experience of NVA servicewoman Phan Ngoc.
In all the companies, there were women between seventeen and eighteen years of age who had joined the army hoping to fight.
When Phan Ngoc joined, she was initially assigned to cook and she describes her sense of anger and disappointment.
However, a month later she became a sapper, working with dynamite, filling craters, and rebuilding bridges.
As head of the company, she had twelve people working under her and was in charge of explosives.
A typical day for these women involved waking up at 5m., but they worked during the day or at night depending on the bombs.
They ate out of tins with branches because they had no chopsticks, cleaned the tins with leaves, and drank out of streams.
At the same time, they tried to retain some elements of a normal life by carrying books with them and at night they would read or write home.
MEMORIES OF WAR FROM NORTH VIETNAM BY KAREN GOTTSCHANG TURNER AND PHAN THANH HAO, 2008 Called to arms A group of young North Vietnamese women watch as one trains with a rifle.
All women in North Vietnam were taught to fight with weapons and in hand-to-hand combat, but few chose to join the NVA—those who did were often young, single, and childless.
IN THEIR FOOTSTEPS The Challenges of Ground Combat No corner of the war zone was entirely safe in Vietnam, and no role was without risk, but some places and duties were more dangerous than others.
Army and Marine Corps infantry—the ground troops—suffered most of the casualties.
B etween moments of violence and terror, American ground troops faced many physical hardships, especially out in the bush.
On patrols that might last hours, days, or even weeks, they ""humped"" through difficult terrain, hacking trails through I lacerating elephant grass and vicious thorns.
Vietnam's climate exacerbated soldiers' discomfort, guaranteeing oppressive heat and humidity most of the year, but also drenching rain at temperatures cool enough to cause hypothermia at higher elevations, such as in the Central Highlands.
Fighting gear might consist of a web belt with ammunition pouches, hand grenades, smoke grenades, first-aid kit, and canteen.
Packs contained a poncho and liner, extra socks and clothes, a gun-cleaning kit, and C-rations—cans of meat or chopped ham and eggs, cans of fruit, and pound cake.
There might also be small luxuries such as candy, cameras, and cigarettes.
The gear was so heavy that soldiers often discarded items on the march to lighten the load.
Frustration was perhaps the infantrymen's primary state of mind—frustration caused by all the Chest deep Private First Class Fred Greenleaf, with other soldiers and members of an ARVN Ranger Group, wade through an irrigation canal on the way to a Viet Cong-controlled village during Operation Rang Dong in 1967.
The hunger, exhaustion, fear, and loneliness endured by foot soldiers in Vietnam would have been familiar to veterans of World War II, Korea, the American Civil War, and conflicts long before that.
The United States Army and Marine Corps infantry are trained for combat, and they generally excelled in this role in Vietnam, but they were not prepared for the uncertainties of this particular combat zone.
While North Vietnamese regulars were easy to identify, the insurgents were often indistinguishable from the civilian population of South Vietnam.
Soldiers frequently “The national flower... should be an immense thorn.
Farley himself survived the war and was awarded the Silver Star, the third-highest United States military decoration for valor.
AFTER The number of United States ground troops in Vietnam continued to rise until 1969, as did the number of United States casualties.
MORE TROOPS General Westmoreland asked for more United States troops to be sent to Vietnam.
V described villagers as duplicitous, smiling and selling sodas to them during the day, then facilitating Viet Cong sabotage and sniping at night.
The language barrier—most American soldiers knew only a few phrases of pidgin Vietnamese— and racial and cultural prejudices exacerbated tensions between South Vietnamese villagers and exhausted American infantrymen.
Lir j i ivi\ Nmi-uwr and SUNBURN-PROTECTIVE HOT CLIMATE ANTICHAP ANTIFUNGAL POWDER Psychological impact Enemy mines and booby traps caused tens of thousands of American casualties, second only to small arms fire.
The psychological consequences of these weapons were perhaps worse, because soldiers in the bush understood that any step could be their last.
On any patrol, the danger was particularly acute for the ""point man""—the first man in a column of troops—whose every sense strained to catch sight, sound, or scent of the enemy.
To ensure the point man was mentally and physically fresh, point duty was normally rotated.
While all Americans who served in Vietnam suffered homesickness, loneliness, and resentment that life at home was moving on without -162-5G58 SUNBURN 7 PREVENTIVE PREPARATION MIL-S-11262C CONTENTS 2 OUNCES NET WEIGHT A-DEC/67 DIRECTIONS Rub on bare skin (face, neck, hands, arms, chest, back) before exposure to sunlight.
LOUSE REPELLENT SUNSCREEN them, combat troops also had the responsibility of taking lives, and to hesitate to do so could prove fatal.
Some struggled to reconcile the killing with religious prohibitions on violence, but a few reveled in it; most, however, recognized it as an operational necessity.
The loss and maiming of colleagues during combat also took a mental toll.
The vast majority of combat troops approached the challenges they faced stoically and with a high degree of professionalism, even though most of them were draftees or draft-motivated volunteers who never wanted to be soldiers.
Bare essentials Ground troops had to contend with natural hazards as well as the perils of combat.
Sun, humidity, insects, and leeches led to a host of serious ailments, including foot rot, leading to gangrene, and malaria.
M, Reaching Out Larry Burrows's photograph captures the moment Marine Gunnery Sergeant Jeremiah Purdie, a bloody bandage on his head, stumbles toward a wounded comrade after a firefight on Hill 484.
AMERICA GOES TO WAR JANUARY 1965-SEPTEMBER 1967 The War at Home As American involvement in South Vietnam grew, so too did the size and intensity of the antiwar movement.
Although white, middle-class college students became the face of the movement, Americans from all walks of life opposed the war in Vietnam.
CIVIL RIGHTS LEADER MARTIN LUTHER KING JR., 1963 The growing Vietnam antiwar movement in the United States had deep roots and broad appeal.
WINDS OF CHANGE The antiwar protesters had links to supporters among other mass social justice movements of the time, such as the antinuclear movement, the African American Civil Rights Movement, and the Berkeley Free Speech Movement, which advocated for campus reform.
This form of protest became more organized and widespread after 22-year-old David Miller was sent to prison for publicly burning his draft card in October 1965.
BOXER MUHAMMAD ALI M illions of Americans objected to the war in Vietnam, but only a small percentage of them participated in protests against it.
Reasons for opposition to United States involvement in the war varied dramatically, undermining the strength and solidarity of the antiwar movement as a whole.
Pacifists opposed the war on principle, but many more Americans specifically opposed the war in Vietnam out of concern for civilian casualties and doubts about whether the cost —in dollars and American lives— was justified.
Many young men opposed the war out of self-interest; they did not want to fight.
Others supported the aim of halting the spread of communism in South Vietnam, but disagreed on how to do so.
Some in this group, while supporting the escalation of America's role in the war, advocated withdrawal if the United States was not prepared to fight to win.
Early protests Many antiwar activists had participated in the Civil Rights Movement, in which nonviolent tactics, such as marching and sit-ins, swayed public opinion and lent the movement its moral authority.
In October 1967, 100,000 demonstrators gathered at the Lincoln Memorial, with more than a third of them also marching on the Pentagon.
By this time, protests consisting of tens 20,0001“ marching at an antiwar rally in Washington, D.C., in 1965.
Boxing champion Muhammad Ali became one of the antiwar movement's strongest voices when he refused induction into the army in 1967.
Ali, a conscientious objector due to his Muslim faith, declared that his enemy was not the Viet Cong, but racism in the United States.
Vietnam—led to a spate of legal trials that ensured antiwar protests remained in the headlines.
Students and hippies In the mid-1960s, the antiwar movement gained a particular momentum on college campuses, largely provoked by the increase in draft calls.
Some students conflated resistance to university authority and challenges to government authority.
Demonstrations on campuses voiced opposition to military recruitment, private-sector recruitment for government contractors such as Dow Chemical , and university research on behalf of the military.
Police brutality against these student protesters often became the antiwar movement's most effective recruiting tool, as hitherto apolitical bystanders became radicalized at the sight of violence against their classmates.
Many observers characterized antiwar protestors as ""drop outs"" or ""hippies""—followers of the 1960s' counterculture.
Although there was overlap between these groups, especially among white, middle-class youth, the antiwar movement also included workingclass people and people of color who objected to the draft.
Due to its links to other such movements, antiwar activism became associated with radical political and social ideas.
The seemingly radical tactics, methods, and language of many of those who spoke out against the war could also dissuade some groups— such as older people and political conservatives—from engaging with protesters, even if these groups shared many of the protesters' concerns about the war.
AFTER As United States troop commitments and casualties rose, increasing numbers of Americans from all walks of life began to question United States involvement in Vietnam.
She hoped to convince the Guardsmen to put down their arms and join her cause.
THE TURNING POINT September 1967-December 1968 In the fall of 1967, North Vietnam makes ambitious plans to retake Saigon.
One of the war's largest campaigns, the Tet Offensive sees a series of coordinated attacks across South Vietnam, resulting in fierce fighting, heavy casualties, and civilian displacement.
The ancient city of Hue saw the longest, bloodiest battle of the Tet Offensive, with some of the worst devastation of the war.
THE TURNING POINT SEPTEMBER 1967-DECEMBER 1968 n n the fall of 1967, North Vietnam and the Viet Cong began to prepare for an offensive they hoped would win the war.
After diversionary attacks on American bases in border areas, they delivered the main thrust of their offensive during the Tet holiday in early 1968.
The Viet Cong fought for control of towns and cities across South Vietnam, while the North Vietnamese Army seized the city of Hue.
In spite of the scale of the attack, the Tet Offensive was a military failure for the communists, and Viet Cong forces were weakened substantially by the campaign.
United States and South Vietnamese troops retook urban areas, and United States Marines successfully defeated a siege of their base at Khe Sanh.
Later in 1968, a second phase of the Tet Offensive, ""Mini Tet,"" also failed to win significant military gains for the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong.
Q] GIs regularly patrolled the paddy fields near the United States base at Da Nang.
Q] American aircraft launched strikes against Viet Cong guerrillas in Dak To, in the Central Highlands.
The United States responds with an aerial resupply of the base and bombardment of NVA positions.
Viet Cong guerrillas and NVA troops carry out attacks in cities and towns across South Vietnam, including Hue and Saigon, where they penetrate the United States Embassy compound.
FEBRUARY 1 United States and ARVN counterattacks begin, retaking Tan Son Nhut airbase in Saigon.
SEPT 11-OCT 31 The United States Marine base at Con Thien, near the DMZ, successfully resists a siege by NVA forces and prolonged heavy artillery bombardment.
OCT 29-NOV 7 An attack by the Viet Cong against a military outpost at Loc Ninh near the Cambodian border is repelled with heavy losses.
MARCH 7 The battle for Saigon ends with the clearing of Viet Cong guerrillas from the city.
OCTOBER-DECEMBER After targeting restrictions on United States bombing of North Vietnam are dropped, the United States conducts widespread raids on bridges and other transportation links, power plants, and factories.
NOVEMBER 3-22 In the Battle of Dak To, United States and South Vietnamese troops repel an offensive by communist forces in the Central Highlands.
FEBRUARY 24 After more than three weeks' fighting in the city of Hue, United States Marines succeed in retaking the imperial palace.
MARCH 12 The strong performance of antiwar Democrat Senator Eugene McCarthy in the New Hampshire primary casts doubt on President Johnson's chances of re-election.
FEBRUARY 28 The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff tell the president that 200,000 more soldiers are needed to win the war in Vietnam.
American involvement in the war are rejected. threatening the Khe Sanh Marine base in northern South Vietnam.
JULY 3 General Creighton Abrams replaces General Westmoreland as commander of United States forces in Vietnam.
OCTOBER 8 Operation Sealords is launched, a long-term campaign by United States and South Vietnamese naval and riverine forces against Viet Cong supply lines and bases in the Mekong Delta.
A Battle of Michigan Avenue, August 1968 A Route 9, April 1968 MARCH 16 As extensive search-anddestroy operations are carried out in the wake of the Tet Offensive, American soldiers massacre hundreds of Vietnamese civilians at My Lai APRIL 11 Defense Secretary Clark Clifford tells General Westmoreland he will not be given the extra troops he has stated he needs to win the war.
MAY 13 Preliminary peace talks open in Paris but they immediately stall over issues of procedure and representation.
JULY 5 United States troops evacuate Khe Sanh A few days later, the Viet Cong raises the North Vietnamese flag over the combat base.
APRIL 1 Operation Pegasus begins, an advance by United States troops along Route 9 to relieve the siege of the Marine base at Khe Sanh.
OCTOBER 31 Rolling Thunder, the American bombing campaign against North Vietnam, is terminated, reopening the peace talks.
NOVEMBER 5 Republican candidate Richard Nixon wins the United States presidential election, claiming to have a plan to end the war.
MARCH 31 President Johnson announces a halt to most bombings of North Vietnam to facilitate the opening of peace negotiations, and his decision not to seek another term in the White House.
APRIL 8 The Operation Pegasus relief force joins up with the Marines at Khe Sanh, ending the siege after 77 days.
DECEMBER 1 By the year's end, there are 495,000 United States military personnel in Vietnam; American deaths for the year total 16,899.
BEFORE In the early years of the war, the majority of Americans backed United States participation in the war.
Yet most Americans had been too preoccupied with the Civil Rights Movement and the 1960s' counterculture to question America's role in Vietnam.
More than half of all Americans approved of the war effort in polls conducted by Gallup in 1965 and 1966.
Mastermind at work General Vo Nguyen Giap , veteran of the First Indochina War against the French, directed the execution of the Tet Offensive of 1968.
BADGE OF PRIDE B y 1967, the Vietnam War had ground to a bloody stalemate, with neither side capable of achieving a final or even partial victory.
The American military and its allies had proved adept at winning conventional battles, while the NVA and the Viet Cong excelled at gaining the upper hand in smaller skirmishes and at controlling large parts of the South Vietnamese countryside through guerrilla warfare.
Viet Cong positions in South Vietnam were pounded with B-52 Arc Light raids on a daily basis, as well as by naval guns and ground artillery.
Some 20,000 United States troops had already been killed in action, yet Lyndon B Johnson was pouring ever more men and machines into the anticommunist cause and there was no reason to believe the escalation would abate.
The communist leadership determined that the only way to break the stalemate—and snatch victory from the jaws of deadlock— was to undertake a massive military offensive against multiple targets in South Vietnam.
At best, the assault might topple the South Vietnamese regime outright and drive the Americans into the South China Sea.
At worst, it would demonstrate the communists' ability to strike anywhere, at anytime—and inflict massive damage—thereby forcing the Americans to the negotiating table.
Choosing their moment In the fall of 1967, growing antiwar sentiment in the United States, as well as the continued unpopularity of President Nguyen Van Thieu and his corrupt, dictatorial regime in Saigon, encouraged North Vietnam's leadership to believe the time was ripe to launch a full-scale attack.
There was also a growing fear that North Vietnam— its economy in shambles due to the ongoing American bombing— might soon lack the necessary resources to achieve a military solution to the conflict.
In the summer of 1967, the politburo in Hanoi approved the general offensive and authorized General Giap, commander of the NVA, to put the plan into action.
Giap determined that the only way to strike at so many places along such a broad front was a coordinated action by NVA regulars and Viet Cong guerrillas.
He also decided that the best time to launch the assault was over Tet, Russian firearms The Viet Cong were often poorly equipped and outgunned.
To prepare them for the offensive, Hanoi resupplied them with the latest Soviet-made weaponry, such as AK-47 assault rifles and this FI fragmentation grenade. the Vietnamese New Year (at the end of January), when a ceasefire would be in place across South Vietnam and many ARVN troops would be on leave for the holiday.
In preparation for the offensive, the NVA bolstered its own arsenal and began resupplying the Viet Cong with arms.
Through the fall of 1967, men and materials began moving down the Ho Chi Minh Trail in ever-greater volume.
Diversionary tactics The final piece in Giap's strategy was to lure American troops away from their strongholds in urban areas and along the coast by attacking American and ARVN outposts along the DMZ and in the Central Highlands.
In addition to diverting United States troops, Giap hoped to conjure up fears of the siege he had mounted on French forces at the isolated base of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, a siege so terrible it had ended the First Indochina War.
Astonishingly, it was dismissed by United States intelligence agents as North Vietnamese propaganda. \ m * '•mm, i \ yii k wm S\\t* -Mr if, v « H, ■■ I .jVl * ■ ‘.i&i SC It L , Falling into line An NVA column marches along the Ho Chi Minh Trail, In the months leading up to the Tet Offensive, an estimated 200,000 NVA troops and more than 80,000 tons of military supplies were moved into South Vietnam via the trail.
GENERAL VO NGUYEN GIAP ON THE TET OFFENSIVE, INTERVIEWED BY STANLEY KARNOW IN THE NEW YORK TIMES, JUNE 24, 1990 r » In January 1968, General Giap put his plan into action, taking ARVN and United States forces by surprise in towns and cities throughout the South.
GENERAL GIAP, INTERVIEWED BY STANLEY KARNOW IN THE NEWYORKTIMES, 1990 Giap grew up in a staunchly anticolonial household.
His father took part in early uprisings against the French and later died in prison after his arrest for subversive activities.
One of Giap's sisters also died as a political prisoner and his first wife would perish in a French colonial prison.
These events had a profound effect on Giap's world view and political leanings.
Young subversive Following in his father's footsteps, Giap was active in politics from an early age.
He joined underground revolutionary groups and spent the late 1920s and early 1930s agitating against French rule in Indochina.
Giap secretly returned to Vietnam to organize the Viet Minh spy network, establish a paramilitary force, and start a propaganda campaign against the Japanese-supported government.
With the end of World War II, which halted the negotiations with France for independence, Giap and Decorated commander As commanding general, Vo Nguyen Giap led communist forces to victory in the First Indochina War and the Vietnam War.
A master of guerrilla warfare and one of the great military minds of the 20th century.
General Vo Nguyen Giap piloted the Vietnamese resistance to the Japanese invasion during World War II, spearheaded the military insurrection against the French colonists in the 1950s, and led NVA and Viet Cong efforts against the United States and its allies during the Vietnam War.
TIMELINE y GENERAL GIAP I -V 1 M ^ N r LT * ' "" His greatest victory Giap's 1954 victory at Dien Bien Phu is depicted in this propaganda painting on the walls of the old fort, where the French held out for 57 days before surrendering to the Viet Minh.
GENERAL GIAP, IN AN INTERVIEW WITH BBC NEWS, 2004 the Viet Minh launched a decadelong struggle to oust their colonial adversaries.
Showing a natural flare for guerrilla tactics, Giap took the fight to the French.
Tactical brilliance As a military strategist, Giap was adept at compelling the opposing army to divide its forces into smaller units spread across a huge area, which could then be isolated and attacked with force.
Giap's coup de grace was the 1954 battle against the French at Dien Bien Phu, where he achieved a decisive victory with his unconventional battlefield tactics.
Giap and his troops may have lost on the field of battle, but they were the clear victors in the propaganda People's hero Taking time off from battlefield duties, Giap lauds ""Heroes of Socialist Labor"" during Hanoi's May Day celebrations in 1968. struggle that followed.
As the commander in chief of the North Vietnamese Army , Giap also masterminded the 1972 Easter Offensive and then the 1975 Spring Offensive that would retake Saigon and reunify Vietnam.
After the war In 1975, although the United States had been expelled from Indochina, the threat to Vietnamese sovereignty was not over.
Hanoi found itself facing threats from former Communist allies—invasions by the Cambodian Khmer Rouge and Chinese—that Giap quickly quashed.
Although Giap retired from his military duties in the early 1980s, Giap persevered in politics for another decade, during which he wrote extensively and gave many interviews about military strategy and his own experiences.
In 2013, with his health failing, the general died—aged 102—after four years in an army hospital.
HIGH-TECH DEFENSE McNamara decided that the war could only be won by stopping NVA soldiers and supplies from infiltrating South Vietnam.
Scientists in the Pentagon proposed all kinds of devices to help secure the line.
Their aim was to to draw United States and ARVN forces into these areas and clear the way for a major communist assault on South Vietnam's cities and towns.
The McNamara Line, as it became known, was intended to link a chain of new or reinforced firebases from the border with Laos to the South China Sea.
However, when construction of the line began, North Vietnamese artillery harassed the construction crews to such an extent that General Westmoreland was forced to limit the project to firebases at Con Thien, Dak To, and Khe Sanh.
Meanwhile, General Giap and the NVA high command, planning their ""general offensive,"" saw how they could use the American firebases to their advantage.
If they could lure United States and ARVN units away from their urban strongholds to firebases around South Vietnam, their offensives in Saigon and other major cities would have a greater chance of success.
Attack on Con Thien Located in Quang Tri province just 14 miles inland from the coast and 2 miles south of the DMZ, Con Thien (""Hill of Angels"") firebase came under attack on May 8, 1967, as United States Marines repulsed an intense NVA ground assault with bloody hand-to-hand combat.
Fighting continued around the firebase throughout the summer as the Mobile ack-ack One of the few ways the North Vietnamese could counter total American domination of the skies above South Vietnam was the use of mobile antiaircraft guns mounted on armored cars.
Marines and their ARVN allies launched counterattacks to find and destroy NVA bunkers and artillery emplacements.
The Marines drove back an NVA ground assault before it could breach the inner defensive wire, but in the Siege of Con Thien, from September 19 to September 27, thousands of artillery and mortar rounds rained down on the beleaguered Marines.
The United States forces responded with their Vulnerable to attack The NVA targeted American outposts that were vulnerable to siege.
Khe Sanh, near the Ho Chi Minh Trail, was massively reinforced and its landing strip upgraded through 1967.
This aerial view was taken in November of that year. own massive bombardment from land, sea, and air—a barrage that eventually broke the siege.
The siege of Dak To A similar situation played out in June 1967 at Dak To firebase in Kontum province, near the Laotian border, not far from the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
The siege began with a heavy mortar attack against United States Special Forces stationed there.
Fighting was so intense that United States airborne, infantry, and cavalry units, as well as ARVN forces, were deployed to hold the firebase and surrounding hilltops.
American forces eventually prevailed with a combination of close aerial support and a series of bold sweeps during which they dislodged the NVA from their elevated positions, which were connected by trenches and tunnels.
The firefight took more than two days to play out and included one of the war's worst friendly-fire incidents—42 soldiers killed and as many wounded when a United States Air Force fighter dropped a bomb on a United States position by mistake.
The siege was finally lifted during a fierce battle through the first three weeks of November, with heavy casualties on both sides.
Three members of the 173rd Airborne Brigade were posthumously awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor for their actions.
AFTER J The McNamara Line did very little to halt North Vietnamese infiltration or the resupply of Viet Cong forces in the South.
By October of that year, the whole scheme to create a physical barrier along the DMZ had been abandoned.
The lack of United States military power in the area around the DMZ made it even easier for communist forces to move men and materials along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
However, there was never another attempt to construct a defensive barricade between North and South Vietnam.
Their prime target was the ""Saigon Circle,"" which included the United States Embassy and the ARVN headquarters at nearby Bien Hoa.
PARIS OF THE ORIENT Before the war, South Vietnam's capital felt like a largely French city, with its tree-lined avenues, colonial villas, and Catholic churches.
Until 1968, the South Vietnamese capital had been comparatively free of violence.
Ordered out of their jungle bases by the communist leadership in Hanoi, the Viet Cong secretly entered cities and towns across South Vietnam in readiness for a major offensive scheduled for Tet, the Vietnamese New Year, on January 31.
It was anticipated that many ARVN soldiers would be on leave over the holiday and urban areas filled with out-of-town visitors, providing a perfect cover for the civilian-clad Viet Cong to blend in with the general population.
The infiltration coincided with the announcement of a ceasefire over the Tet holiday by both the Saigon government and the National Liberation Front , the The initial thrust Viet Cong troops charge from hiding places in the jungle during the initial phase of the Tet Offensive.
Retaking Saigon block by block ARVN infantry supported by United States troops in tanks and armored personnel carriers counterattack Viet Cong units in northern Saigon during the Tet Offensive.
Fighting in the capital lasted the better part of a week. political wing of the communists in the South.
With South Vietnam lulled into a false sense of security, the stage was set for the massive and unprecedented assault.
Night raids Due to communication problems, the attack actually began on January 30, a day earlier than scheduled, with raids on United States and ARVN bases in towns in the Central Highlands and along the north coast.
This led General Westmoreland to place United States forces on high alert and South Vietnam's President Thieu to cancel ARVN leave.
These measures were enough to quell the initial wave of attacks but not what was to come.
The main offensive erupted across South Vietnam in the early hours of January 31.
The offensive, which included nearly every provincial capital and major city, was especially fierce in Saigon where around 5,000 Viet Cong attacked strategic targets around the capital, supported by North Vietnamese regulars in the countryside.
Communist leaders were confident their forces would gain momentum as civilians rose up against the Americans and the Saigon regime.
Key targets Dozens of South Vietnamese and American government buildings and bases were attacked between 2 and 3m.
Among the hardest hit were Tan Son Nhut airbase and the adjacent MACV compound, the headquarters of the United States high command, nicknamed Pentagon East on account of its size and importance.
Other targets included the presidential palace, the United States Embassy, the ARVN headquarters, the national radio station, and the national police barracks.
The embassies of the Philippines and South Korea, America's allies in the war, were also attacked.
Using sappers to blast their way through fortified walls and front gates, the Viet Cong r The number of communist battalions, totaling 35,000 men, in the Saigon Circle at Tet.
Their task was made easier by the leisurely pace at which ARVN troops returned from their leave and the fact that few United States Using weapons smuggled into the city inside coffins and delivery trucks in the months leading up to Tet, the Viet Cong assembled in local hotels where they were staying under the guise of ordinary holiday visitors.
Some were clad in civilian clothes, others dressed in stolen ARVN uniforms.
Exiting their assembly points, the Viet Cong waylaid private cars and taxis to reach their targets.
Along the way they gunned down South Vietnamese police or American MPs unfortunate enough to stray into their path.
The vast majority of American combat units were stationed up north where much of the fighting had taken place over the previous six months.
Although an intervention by General Weyand had boosted the number of troops in the wider Saigon area, the city center was held by the undermanned ARVN Fifth Rangers and a small detachment of Marines guarding the United States Embassy.
Most of the United States personnel remaining in Saigon were administrative staff rather than battle-hardened combat troops.
ARVN soldier The United States had put the ARVN in charge of the defense of Saigon just a few weeks before the Tet Offensive in recognition of its growing confidence in South Vietnam's army.
Westmoreland and his staff were forced to take refuge in his command bunkers in the MACV compound.
As the fighting around the United States headquarters intensified, the general's staff drew Spoils of war Captured Viet Cong guerrillas are displayed alongside Soviet arms seized during fighting to retake Saigon's Cholon district.
Among the weapons are automatic rifles, rockets, Sten guns, and ammunition clips. their arms and joined the last-ditch defense.
In a move indicative of the dire situation, Westmoreland mandated that many of the duties of the central command should be immediately transferred to the United States Army headquarters in Long Binh.
Embassy and airport A similar situation was unfolding at the United States Embassy in downtown Saigon.
Armed with mortars, grenades, automatic weapons, and explosive charges, the Viet Cong blasted their way through the front gate and into the landscaped area surrounding the six-story structure.
As American diplomats sought safety inside, a firefight ensued between the Viet Cong and the Defending the South South Vietnamese troops and policemen return fire from behind a wall as part of a counterattack against Viet Cong forces in Saigon.
With the bulk of United States forces deployed elsewhere, ARVN troops were key in repelling the communist attack.
United States troops managed to prevent the attackers from storming the building, but could not immediately drive them from the compound outside.
Reinforcements were on their way to the embassy but had no idea of the obstacles they might face along the way.
The situation was far less desperate at Tan Son Nhut airbase on the outskirts of Saigon, where the Seventh Air Force Command had raised its security alert to the highest level just before Tet.
Although Viet Cong sappers breached the perimeter and hundreds of attackers flooded into the airbase, USAF reaction forces were able to respond quickly and beat back the attack with relatively little loss of life or damage to Air Force aircraft and structures.
By daybreak, Saigon was shrouded in smoke from fires sparked by the overnight fighting, and the smell of cordite and the sound of gunfire drifted across the capital.
Entire sections of Saigon were under Viet Cong control, including the Cholon district, where many of the city's ethnic Chinese resided.
The streets were strewn with the bodies of combatants from both sides and hundreds of civilians caught in the crossfire.
Civilians who survived the carnage huddled in their shops or houses, tending to wounded family and friends.
By midday on January 31, most of the strategic targets around Saigon had been secured and the attackers had been driven back with heavy casualties.
It took nearly a month to clear Cholon of Viet Cong forces, but within a week American and South Vietnamese forces had recaptured the rest of Saigon and repelled NVA and Viet Cong attacks on most of the communist targets in the South.
The offensive caused immense destruction and heavy loss of civilian life, but no popular Collateral damage Civilians sort through the ruins of their shops and homes in the Chinese quarter of Cholon.
The hub of economic activity in the city, Cholon saw some of the fiercest street fighting during the Tet Offensive.
In total, an estimated 45,000 NVA and Viet Cong troops were killed, captured, or wounded.
The real winner Although the Tet Offensive was a massive military defeat for the NVA and the Viet Cong, it also proved a major strategic victory for North Vietnam because of its psychological impact on the American public, media, and politicians.
The overall attack, especially the communists' penetration of the United States Embassy compound in Saigon, caused a media firestorm and a profound political backlash in America. r The Tet Offensive continued elsewhere through the spring, and erupted again in Saigon in May.
In the wake of the atrocities committed against civilians, especially in Hue, their political influence also diminished in South Vietnam.
NEW LOOK After Tet, and as the war went on, the city took on an increasingly American landscape, with Gl bars and military bases.
At the same time, English overtook French as the second language after Vietnamese and vehicles came to supersede cydos and handcarts on the streets of Saigon.
EYEWITNESS January 31, 1968 Tet Offensive As the Tet Offensive exploded across South Vietnam, Saigon came under intense attack from Viet Cong units.
Among their foremost targets was the compound of the United States Embassy, held by a small contingent of military police and Marines with the help of a handful of embassy staff.
Diplomat Allan Wendt recalls how he reacted when he was woken at around 2.30 in the morning by an enormous explosion and the sound of masonry falling.
Rockets were crashing into the building and the embassy was under a full-scale assault.
Estimates put the number of Viet Cong guerillas at 20; they had blown open the wall and were pouring into the compound, firing rockets and AK-47 assault rifles into the building.
At this point, Wendt began making numerous phone calls to the military assistance command, to Washington, D.C., to speak to the Situation Room in the Whitehouse, to the Operations Center in the State Department, and to the military command headquarters at Tan Son Nhut airport, with whom he pleaded for relief.
United States EMBASSY WORKER ALLAN WENDT, VIDEO TRANSCRIPT FROM THE ASSOCIATION FOR DIPLOMATIC STUDIES & TRAINING, 1968 Attacking the seat of United States power As their dead comrades lie nearby, three United States military police protect the American Consulate adjacent to the United States Embassy in Saigon.
Images like this one, showing the embassy compound in danger, caused consternation in the United States.
United States forces were equipped with a range of standardized small arms.
E 1941 backpack This example includes an M1951 entrenching tool and a rolled-up camouflage tent.
E Tropical WR II class pants Made of lightweight fabric, these were designed to offer comfort in tropical combat zones.
United States infantrymen in Vietnam generally carried at least two canteens.
E M1910 aluminum canteen Old-style canteens remained in use throughout the 1960s.
E Tropical combat boots Combat boots made from nylon and canvas were introduced after leather boots proved unsuitable.
E Claymore mine bag Once the mine had been detonated, the bag could be used independently.
EH M61 grenade This fragmentation grenade was filled with 5. ounces of explosive.
EH M16A automatic rifle This became the United States Army's standard rifle in 1969.
E3 M1911 pistol The magazine of the United States Army's standard sidearm from 1911 to 1986 holds seven rounds.
EH Ml 4 self-loading rifle This was the primary United States infantry weapon in Vietnam until the arrival of the Ml 6.
EH M79 grenade launcher Nicknamed the Blooper by United States troops, the M79 could fire a variety of rounds, including explosives and smoke.
Extra ammunition was distributed across infantry squads to spread the weight.
As a result, many Americans lost confidence both in the Pentagon's version of events and the ability of United States forces to triumph.
BEFORE Embedded reporters Photographers Terry Fincher of the Daily Express and Larry Burrows from Life magazine take a break during an operation in 1968.
Burrows often followed the same men for extended time periods—such as Captain Vernon Gillespie—to give a more complete glimpse into their lives.
Battle-ready equipment Long before digital cameras were invented, photographers used a variety of sturdy film cameras—like this vintage Nikon Model F single lens reflex camera.
One of these cameras saved the life of photographer Don McCullin, taking a Viet Cong bullet as it hung from his neck.
Self-timer I n 1960, there were more than 52 million American households with TV sets; the overwhelming majority were black-and-white units, and satellite broadcasts were still a thing of the future.
Three big nationwide networks (CBS, NBC, and ABC) dominated the airwaves.
News and entertainment programming was conservative and largely conformed to middle class, white American values.
Prior to United States involvement in Vietnam, American TV technology and culture were relatively primitive.
Pentagon approval During the early years of the United States involvement in Vietnam, the media painted an optimistic picture of eventual and inevitable United States victory in Vietnam.
Due to this positive coverage, the Pentagon allowed journalists unprecedented access to Interchangeable lens United States troops, bases, and battlefield operations.
At the beginning of the war, the Pentagon had no reason to believe that its special relationship with the press would sour.
However, media coverage of the civil rights struggle and antiwar movement back home was often slanted against the establishment.
The rise of a popular counterculture press pushed the mainstream media into being more critical of United States policies than it otherwise might have been.
Early controversies Negative press coverage of the Vietnam War started before Tet.
His The phenomenon of reporting from the battlefield was not new to the Vietnam War—nor was the use of photography to capture the horrors of combat.
HISTORIC PARTNERSHIP The United States media's cozy relationship with the military stretched back to the Civil War, when reporters began to dispatch eyewitness stories from the battlefield.
Most of the coverage was slanted toward the ""home side""— the Union or Confederacy.
During World War I, General Pershing allowed reporters to be embedded with his troops on the Western Front, while World War II produced reporters such as Ernie Pyle.
War photography had an equally long history —one of the first war photographers, Roger Fenton, took pictures during the Crimean War in 1854.
President Kennedy tried to pressure the Times into recalling the young reporter and Vice President Johnson inferred he was a traitor.
But Halberstam held his ground and two years later won a Pulitzer Prize for his war coverage.
An ever-growing number of correspondents refused to tow the Pentagon line during the 1960s, among them Neil Sheehan and Peter Arnett.
One the most controversial TV reports was broadcast in 1965, when CBS correspondent Morley Safer accompanied United States Marines on a search-and-destroy mission.
Larry Burrows's evocative photos for Life magazine depicted the plight of ordinary GIs in the face of horrible battlefield conditions.
Coverage after Tet The Pentagon's policy of giving reporters extraordinary access would backfire in the wake of the Tet Offensive in 1968.
Despite claims by American leadership that Tet was a United States and ARVN victory, TV images, photos, and stories about the offensive seemed to prove otherwise.
Witnessing carnage in the streets of every major South Vietnamese city, the media now painted a picture of looming defeat.
The Tet Offensive radically altered the perception of the war by media stars back home, many of whom had a great influence over American public opinion.
CBS anchorman Walter Cronkite, venturing to Vietnam in the aftermath of the Tet Offensive, aired a scathing report on the state of the war effort.
The conversion of Cronkite and other media gatekeepers from ambivalent onlookers to antiwar advocates was a major blow to the American effort in Vietnam.
GENERAL WILLIAM WESTMORELAND IN TIME MAGAZINE, APRIL 5, 1982 AFTER American television evolved by leaps and bounds during the course of the war.
REVOLUTION ON THE AIRWAVES By 1975, more than 71 million households had television.
The launch of the Telstar satellite in 1962 enabled broadcasts from Vietnam, while progressive TV shows such as M*A*S*H (set in the Korean War) and All in the Family brought pressing cultural issues and antiwar sentiments into American living rooms.
Later on, veteran war correspondents were instrumental in launching news shows such as 60 Minutes and a cable news network, CNN, which debuted in 1980.
EYEWITNESS February 1, 1968 Saigon Execution One of the most famous images of the Vietnam War captures the moment ARVN General Nguyen Ngoc Loan executes a Viet Cong officer on a street in Saigon.
The photographer, Eddie Adams, recalls both the moment he took the shocking image and the impact it had on the general's life.
On that day in February, Adams was taking occasional pictures as three men walked toward him.
When they were about five feet away, the soldiers stopped and backed away A man walked into his camera viewfinder, took a pistol out of his holster, and raised it to the head of the Viet Cong officer.
Expecting this man to interrogate the officer, Adams got ready to take a picture.
But the man shot the Viet Cong officer in the temple at the same time as Adams took the photo.
This photograph had a negative impact on the life of General Nguyen Ngoc Loan.
Adams claimed he killed the general with his camera that day, and that he felt bad for him and his family for a long time after.
Photographs capture a moment but they do not ask the viewer what they would have done if they were there at that time and place.
The image, which contributed to growing antiwar sentiment, won the Pulitzer Prize in 1969.
THE TURNING POINT SEPTEMBER 1967-DECEMBER 1968 The Battle for Hue Communist forces overran the city of Hue at the start of the Tet Offensive and held fast in Vietnam's ancient capital for nearly a month.
United States and ARVN forces fought street by street—and often hand-to-hand—to oust them.
Storming the Citadel Viet Cong troops storm the Citadel's Ngo Mon Gate at the start of the Tet Offensive.
The Citadel contained the Tay Loc airfield and the headquarters of the ARVN Rangers, who were also known as the Black Panthers.
Hue became Vietnam's imperial capital in the early 19th century when Emperor Gia Long moved his royal court from Hanoi to the river city.
ROYAL ENCLAVE Started in 1804, the Citadel was a fortress-palace complex surrounded by high walls and filled with palaces, temples, and gardens.
It contained the Imperial City, where the emperor and royal family lived inside the Forbidden Purple Palace.
Hue remained the royal capital until 1945, when Emperor Bao Dai «16-17 abdicated and went to live in exile in Paris.
A s the headquarters of the United States military and the South Vietnamese government, Saigon was the primary objective of the Tet Offensive, but the ancient city of Hue was next in line.
The city's imperial history made it highly symbolic, and in the eyes of the NVA and Viet Cong, capturing Hue would show the nation and the world that their struggle was against all forms of imperialism.
By the eve of Tet in 1968, some 10,000 Viet Cong guerrillas and NVA regulars had worked their way into clandestine positions all around the city.
Synchronizing their attack with many others around South Vietnam, they launched their assault on Hue shortly after 2m. on January 31.
Disguised in ARVN uniforms, a small group of NVA soldiers tricked the guards and House-to-house in Hue United States Marines take refuge in a devastated building during the battle to retake Hue.
The Marine in the foreground wields an M60 machine gun; his companion by the window has an M79 grenade launcher.
Reinforcements delayed United States Marines stationed at Phu Bai airbase and other spots within 10 miles of Hue were ordered to reinforce the city, but they also came under fire, a combination of ground attacks and rocket-mortar bombardments that kept them either pinned down in the airbase or engaged in local firefights.
Marines from the First Battalion under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Marcus Gravel finally entered the city from the south.
Continuing their push, the Marines reached the south bank of the Perfume River.
Crossing the main bridge, they came under heavy enemy fire and retreated to the MACV compound.
As night fell on January 31, the compound was surrounded by NVA forces.
There had been no reinforcements for the ARVN troops inside the Citadel.
The third group that survived the night was a company of ARVN Black Panther reconnaissance troops defending Tay Loc airfield inside the Citadel.
General Truong commanding the First Division ordered the Black Panthers to organize a strategic retreat from the airfield and join the defense of the ARVN headquarters.
However, there seemed little hope that the ARVN would be able to hold out for long.
Meanwhile, the popular uprising the communists had hoped to spark elsewhere in South Vietnam actually materialized in Hue as students, teachers, and Buddhist monks welcomed the attackers.
Gas attacks The Marines, wearing gas masks to protect themselves, flush out snipers with tear gas during the battle to retake Hue.
W SOMERSEt MAUGHAM, THE GENTLEMAN IN THE PARLOUR, 1930 gained access through the western gate of the Citadel on the north side of the Perfume River.
Communist troops poured into the sprawling royal compound on the hunt for South Vietnamese troops.
Other battalions swarmed through the modern town on the south bank with the objective of disabling or destroying Hue's civilian government and any United States military presence.
Hanoi was able to claim that it had liberated a major South Vietnamese city for the first time.
Pockets of resistance However, Hue was not completely in communist hands.
On the north side of the river, several battalions of ARVN airborne and infantry engaged communist troops in heavy fighting and eventually broke through into the Citadel and recaptured the airfield.
Later that day, they were reinforced by more South Vietnamese troops, flown in under low clouds by Marine helicopters amid heavy mortar fire.
Despite the arrival of the United States Army First Cavalry troops on the western side of the Citadel, progress in retaking the city remained painfully slow over the first few days of February.
Communist resistance was much tougher than expected, and casualties mounted at an alarming rate as American GIs confronted a warren of snipers, machine-gun nests, spider holes, bunkers, and booby traps.
United States commanders eventually reversed their earlier decision not to bombard the city, but even then they and their ARVN allies had to fight hard.
The Viet Cong base in the commercial Civilians flee the fighting A United States Marine guards Vietnamese civilians caught up in heavy fighting on a residential street in Hue.
It was difficult for the Americans to tell whether civilians were friends or foes.
By dawn on February 1, the United States Marines and their ARVN allies had gathered enough troops around Flue to launch a counterattack on the communists.
Their biggest challenge was the lack of intelligence regarding the size, power, and placement of Viet Cong and North Vietnamese units inside the city.
American commanders had little choice but to order their units to advance.
They could not have foreseen that it would take the better part of a month to clear Hue of communist troops or that along the way they would lose one man to every yard they gained inside the Citadel.
Gravel and his men tried to break out of the MACV compound and retake other strategic points in the commercial quarter, but they were thwarted by communist forces that had dug in overnight.
Marine reinforcements began to arrive on the southern outskirts of Hue, but their progress was slowed by intense street fighting against veteran NVA units.
The counterattack was also hamstrung by foul weather, which thwarted air support, and an initial reluctance to use close-quarter bombing and artillery in advance of an attack for fear of causing high civilian casualties and damage to historic buildings.
TIME MAGAZINE, FEBRUARY 16, 1968 Communist atrocities The discovery of mass graves containing government workers, policemen, and anyone suspected of collaborating with the Saigon regime turned much of Hue's civilian population against the NVA and Viet Cong. quarter was finally taken on February 6, and the remainder of the south bank of the river over the next three days.
By then, the communists had destroyed the last bridge, forcing the Marines to cross the river in assault craft supported by helicopter gunships.
More bloody fighting ensued as the Marines, Army, and ARVN attempted to dislodge the Viet Cong and NVA troops from their well-fortified positions.
The tide turned on February 21, when a break in the monsoon cloud enabled close air support from United States airbases and carriers in the South China Sea.
That same day. the communists were finally flushed from the Imperial palace and forced into a last stand in the Citadel's southwest corner.
The handful of Viet Cong and NVA troops still inside the walls were ordered to retreat under cover of darkness.
Cleanup operations continued in the new town and Citadel until February 25, when the Battle of Hue was finally over.
Aftermath Half the commercial quarter of the city lay in ruins, as did nearly all of the historic monuments in the Citadel.
Mindful of the atrocities committed during the Tet Offensive, the population fled the city, impeding the ARVN defense.
RESTORING THE CITADEL Postwar projects restored some of Hue's historic buildings.
In 1993, UNESCO enshrined the Citadel and nearby royal monuments as a World Heritage Site, citing the walled city as a remarkable example of the planning and construction of late feudal urban planning in East Asia.
BEFORE The Marines have served in nearly every United States overseas conflict since the corps was founded during the Revolutionary War.
WORLD WAR I RECRUITMENT POSTER BORN TO BE BOLD On November 10, 1775, the Continental Congress instructed Samuel Nicholas to raise two battalions of seaborne soldiers.
Their nickname leathernecks derives from the stiff neckpieces of their early uniforms.
In World War I, the Germans called the Marines devil dogs for their ferocious performance at the Battle of Belleau Wood in 1918.
In World War II, the Marines rose to world renown for their bravery in battles against the Japanese in the Pacific.
T he United States Marine Corps was an important component of United States operations in the war.
Between 1965 and 1975, around 450,000 Marines served in the conflict; some 13,000 were killed in combat, and more than 88,000 were wounded.
Fifty-seven Marines were awarded the Medal of Honor for bravery under fire.
Recruitment and training The Marine Corps is a selfcontained combined-arms force with its own artillery and airpower, but it is best known for its infantry—rapid response ground forces that engage in close-range combat.
The corps is part of the United States Department of the Navy, reflecting its original role of supporting naval campaigns.
In Vietnam, the vast majority of Marine recruits were volunteers, typically between the ages of 18 and 20.
They signed up for a minimum of three years, although this was reduced to two during the buildup of United States troops in 1965 and again in 1967.
To ensure would-be recruits had the necessary physical and mental stamina, they were put through rigorous training at the Parris Island Recruit Depot, South Carolina, or its sister establishment in San Diego, California.
The four-month program included an 80-day boot camp—cut to 60 days during parts of the war—beginning with an obligatory hair cut and drill.
Further training in combat skills included long-range shooting, a specialty of Marines.
This included learning the Rifleman's Creed, a guiding doctrine avowing the pact between man and gun.
Rather than facing enemy troops, however, the ""devil dogs"" of the Ninth Marine Expeditionary Brigade were met by TV crews and welcome banners held by grateful South Vietnamese.
It was not long before they were engaged in counterinsurgency activities and open combat against Viet Cong guerrillas and NVA regulars.
Their first major offensive, Flying ace This Marine Corps patch shows Charles Schultz's cartoon character Snoopy flying an Mk4 pod gun, a weapon mounted on the exterior of various models of United States Navy and Marine attack aircraft. involving some 5,500 Marines, was Operation Starlite in August 1965, a mission to interdict and destroy Viet Cong forces massed around Chu Lai air base south of Da Nang.
By the end of 1965, the initial force of Marines had been augmented by units under the aegis of the III Marine Amphibious “ They are called the Viet Cong, but you are Marines.
A COLONEL IN THE FOURTH MARINE REGIMENT TO HIS MEN, AUGUST 1965 I * i m THE United States MARINES AVIATOR INTO THE 1980s By the end of the war, United States strategic interest had begun to shift to the Middle East.
Thirteen Marines were among 65 Americans taken captive when Iranian revolutionaries stormed the United States Embassy in Tehran in 1979.
Later that year, Marines took part in the United States invasion of Grenada in the Caribbean.
General Westmoreland sent these combined action platoons on search-and-destroy missions in the countryside.
Typically, they were equipped with M-16 rifles, M60 machine guns, Ka-Bar combat knives, grenades, and machetes for hacking through the jungle.
Center stage The Marines faced their biggest challenge in 1967 and 1968, when communist forces attacked Marine bases along the DMZ prior to the Tet Offensive.
They repelled a fierce attack on Con Thien, endured a brutal 77-day siege at Khe Sanh, and ousted NVA and Viet Cong troops from Hue in bloody house-to-house fighting.
By the summer of 1969, Marine units began to withdraw from the war zone, though they formed part of the invasion of Cambodia in 1970.
Most of the last ground units left Vietnam on June 25, 1971, leaving a small GRUNT Slang for a member of the Marine Corps fighting in Vietnam.
Later in the war, it was applied to all United States soldiers on the frontline. detachment to guard the United States Embassy.
Twenty-six Marines were among the POWs handed over by North Vietnam after the 1973 peace treaty was signed.
The Marines distinguished themselves again during the evacuations of the United States embassies in Saigon and Phnom Penh , in April 1975, and in the rescue of the USS Mayaguez from the Khmer Rouge.
IRAQ AND AFGHANISTAN Marine aerial and ground units led the invasion of Iraq during the First Gulf War and were called upon again during the Iraq War that toppled Saddam Hussein.
Marines are still active in Iraq as well as in the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan.
Reveille at Khe Sanh Marines raise the Stars and Stripes while a bugler renders honors to the nation atop Hill 881, near Khe Sanh, in January 1968.
The United States Marines continue to be a vital part of American military action overseas.
FRANK E PETERSEN When Frank Petersen graduated from the Naval Aviation Cadet Program in 1952, he became the Marine Corps' first African American aviator.
In Vietnam, where he flew a McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom, he was forced to bail out when his aircraft was shot down on a 1968 mission.
He survived, and that same year became the first African American to command the Black Knights squadron.
When ARVN troops eventually entered the imperial palace, they found the communists had already slipped away.
WORLD WAR II WAC POSTER United States Women at War Ignored by many histories of the war, approximately 1,000 United States military women who were not nurses served in-country in Vietnam from 1962 to 1973.
Women were not allowed to serve in combat positions, but nonetheless fulfilled a variety of key support roles.
World War II saw the first American WAC detachment activated in a war zone.
GOING IN GREEN Vietnam was only the second United States war to utilize a WAC detachment.
While willing to serve in Vietnam, many women were ill prepared for the realities of a combat zone.
Basic training consisted of classes on ironing, deportment, make-up application, manners, hairstyles, and speech.
Like the men, women experienced the stresses of life in a combat zone— walking by body bags, seeing the wounded, and hearing the incoming choppers.
However, they also battled challenges unique to their gender, including sexism, harassment, and sexual violence.
She was one female soldier among more than 10,000 United States military personnel in Vietnam in 1962.
Major Kathleen Wilkes and Sergeant First Class Betty Adams, stepped off the plane to serve as advisers to the newly formed Vietnam Women's Armed Forces Corps.
General Westmoreland soon decided to bring over more women as stenographers.
All smiles As they await training on their only visit to the shooting range, First Sergeant Crawford jokes with Captain Ready to aim at the target, not the men, who ""spread to the four winds"" upon seeing women with weapons.
They arrived in 1966 and 1967, followed by many others in the ensuing years.
The WAC Detachment was established at Tan Son Nhut airbase and moved to Long Binh for greater safety after the Viet Cong breached the Tan Son Nhut compound in 1967.
Captain Peggy Ready was the first Detachment commander in Vietnam, and Marion Crawford was her First Sergeant.
Officers who agreed to have female staff members discovered that these women were not only highly competent, but would work long hours without complaint.
The women took on a variety of roles, serving as intelligence analysts, translators, clerk-typists, flight controllers, couriers, physical therapists, or photographers.
Soon, many of the male holdouts wanted women assigned to their staff, even though senior military leaders did not believe women, other than nurses, should serve in a combat zone.
Their success brought more women from the Air Force, Marine Corps, and Navy.
Within a year, they were wearing jungle fatigues, boots, and helmets, and knew the fastest route to their bunkers during rocket attacks.
Firsts and figures The majority of Army Women were assigned to Long Binh and Saigon, although some were stationed in distant places, such as The number of women who served with the USAF in Vietnam. *5 r The number of United States women who served with the United States Marine Corps.
In addition to Army women, the Air Force sent women to Vietnam, Thailand, and Hawaii.
The Navy sent eight female officers, as well as four who served on the USS Repose and USS Sanctuary.
June Hilton, Carol Hornick, Rita Pitcock, Barbara Snavely, Shirley J Brown, and Eva Nordstrom.
Lieutenant Commander ^ Barbara Bole was the first Navy woman to get the Bronze Star with Combat ""V"" , and in 1970, Army Colonel Clotilde Dent Bowen, MD, arrived in Vietnam to be chief psychiatrist—the only African American physician in the Army.
Air Force Major Barbara Thompson became the first female engineer to be assigned to the Rapid Engineer Deployable, Heavy Operations Repair Squadron.
The service of these women paved the way for United States military women thereafter. a ""baby killer"" by protesters.
The total number of United States women who served in Vietnam is unknown.
United States Army records are lost, while the Air Force records exist only in paper archives.
Pallas Athene This Vietnam-era guidon was lost for years before it was returned, no questions asked, to the United States Army Women's Museum.
PROGRESS FOR WOMEN Military women in Vietnam opened doors for later wars.
Congress disestablished the WAC as a separate corps in 1978, and women now constitute about 15 percent of the United States military.
They were called frauds or liars simply for wearing the combat patch they had earned, and were subjected to harsh criticism—Specialist Sherri Tipton recalled being called Dulinsky was the first woman Marine to serve in a combat theater.
OUR UNTOLD STORIES, 2015 ICUiaiiAr Wag det <gjgl It USARV Hitting the ground United States Marines at Khe Sanh scramble to take shelter from incoming fire.
In 1966, Khe San was reinforced with large numbers of Marines; the Green Berets moved to Lang Vei, a few miles west.
L ike other combat bases along the DMZ, Khe Sanh and the nearby Special Forces camp of Lang Vei had come under attack by communist forces through the summer and fall of 1967.
United States forces had successfully counterattacked, supported by aerial bombing.
There was no reason for the United States to believe that the action around Khe Sanh in January 1968 would be any different from these earlier battles.
The geography of Khe Sanh and Dien Bien Phu was remarkably similar—isolated hilltop forts near the Laotian frontier, surrounded by old coffee plantations and jungle that favored guerrilla warfare.
Giap also resolved that the 304th Division of the NVA—heroes of Dien Bien Phu—should be one of two NVA divisions (totaling around 18,000 troops) that would launch the strike.
Two more divisions, with similar troop strength, were positioned to block Route 9, the only overland route to Khe Sanh from United States bases on the coast.
No significant ground was gained, but the NVA destroyed the Marines' ammunition dump and other vital supplies.
Khe Sanh commander Colonel David Lownds reacted to this initial assault by evacuating civilians from the area and calling in more Marines and elite ARVN Rangers, boosting allied numbers to around 6,000 men.
Over the week that followed, the communists tightened the noose around Khe Sanh and Lang Vei, creeping closer to the base's perimeter until their trenches were only 1,000 yards from their opponents.
As a prelude to a a Mapping the battle Ihese maps accompanied reports of the battle circulated by the United Press International news agency.
A large number of journalists risked their lives to report on the siege, which received more media coverage than any other combat zone during the let Offensive. ground assault, they unleashed a massive mortar, artillery, and rocket barrage on the American positions.
Low cloud and fog impeded close United States air support, allowing the NVA to capture the road between the two bases, thus isolating Lang Vei.
But the United States airlift continued whenever weather permitted, the airplanes and helicopters dodging incoming fire.
SIEGE SURVIVOR JOHN ""DOC"" CICALA, INTERVIEW FOR STARS AND STRIPES, 2014 Second onslaught As the Tet Offensive exploded across the rest of South Vietnam on January 30 and 31, the area around Khe Sanh remained eerily calm.
Two days later, thousands of ground troops from the NVA's The hill, W r . named after its height in meters, where United States forces came under attack on January 21 and February 5.
The opposing armies fought fiercely for control of the heights around Khe Sanh. 304th Division attacked Lang Vei, supported by light tanks.
By late afternoon, the NVA had broken through the perimeter and was overrunning the camp.
With the NVA in control of the road and nightfall closing in, relief by ground or air from Khe Sanh was impossible.
Faced with certain defeat and probably slaughter, the Green Beret commander called for a blistering artillery barrage to be directed on his own base and ordered his troops to retreat into the jungle.
LIFE MAGAZINE ARTICLE ON OPERATION PEGASUS, APRIL 19,1968 At sunrise on February 8, the situation looked bleak for the United States soldiers at Khe Sanh.
The nearby Special Forces camp at Lang Vei had been utterly destroyed with great loss, the main firebase was surrounded by tens of thousands of communist troops, and Route 9 to the coast was blocked.
Although the Tet Offensive had been blunted nearly everywhere else in the South by early February, there was no sign of a communist retreat from the warren of bunkers and zigzag trenches around Khe Sanh.
Under cover of darkness, foul weather, and artillery attacks, Giap's forces continued to inch closer to the American lines.
Operation Niagara The Marines dug in for the siege, hunkering down in muddy bunkers strewn with garbage that attracted legions of rats.
The lack of proper sanitation led to infections and disease while the constant stench and noise of explosives pushed defenders to the brink of mental breakdown.
The United States responded to the initial attack and siege with the only logical means—a massive air strike.
Codenamed Operation Niagara, the aerial assault entailed thousands of sorties by B-52 bombers flying from bases in Guam and Thailand and by fighter-bombers based in South Vietnam.
Together they dropped more than 110,000 tons of ordnance onto NVA positions around Khe Sanh, often perilously close to the perimeter of the base itself.
The vast majority of Giap's troops who lost their lives during the siege were killed by this downpour of conventional bombs Hide and seek United States soldiers set fire to Vietnamese huts between Khe Sanh and the coast during Operation Pegasus.
After the bombing, Marines combed the area around Khe Sanh, flushing out any NVA troops hiding in the villages. and napalm.
The bombardment also destroyed large amounts of their weaponry and supplies of ammunition.
Last-ditch attempt On February 29, Giap's forces made a final effort to storm Khe Sanh.
The vaunted 304th Division—heroes of Dien Bien Phu and Lang Vei—launched a substantial ground attack along the eastern edge of the base.
After heavy fighting, they were beaten back by the ARVN Rangers stationed there.
The siege and its incessant shelling continued through early April, when the United States Army's First Cavalry Division kicked off Operation Pegasus to recapture Route 9 between the coast and Khe Sanh.
To support the operation, Army and Marine engineers built a forward base with a landing strip just north of Ca Lu off Route 9, a feat achieved in just 11 days.
Going into the jungle in small patrols, the United States forces incurred far higher casualities than during the siege itself.
As communist shelling of the base resumed, the United States high command decided to abandon and destroy the combat base rather than risk another costly siege.
The final troops were evacuated on July 5 and a few days later the North Vietnamese flag was raised over the ruined combat base.
This shoulder patch recalls the division's descent from horse-mounted cavalry, used for the last time in World War I and also valued for agility and rapid response.
Despite the siege being lifted, fighting continued around Khe Sanh as Marines and Army units SIEGE AFTER _ I _ A Khe Sanh and the wider Tet Offensive marked a watershed in the war.
POLICY CHANGE Following Khe San, General Westmoreland ordered United States troops to abandon combat bases along the McNamara Line.
ECOLOGICAL IMPACT In addition to the cost in human lives, bombing and napalm destroyed much of the rainforest surrounding Khe Sanh.
Over the decades, the jungle reclaimed many of the bomb craters while much of the military ordnance left on the battlefield was collected and sold or repurposed by the hilltribes of the area.
V eyewitness January-March 1968 Siege of Khe Sanh As part of the Tet Offensive, the North Vietnamese Army subjected the isolated Marine base of Khe Sanh to daily shelling for six weeks.
Sometimes there was little that the besieged Marines could do but hunker down in their sandbag bunkers and hope that the United States bombing campaign to repel the NVA would eventually prevail.
Outside the bunkers, Marines filling sandbags were caught by the first shell burst, and exploding rockets sent showers of hot fragments everywhere.
Meanwhile, inside the bunkers the marines tried to make themselves as small as possible by hugging their legs and bowing their heads.
As the tempo of the shelling increased, in their minds the small opening to the bunker seemed to grow and the 6,000 sandbags over the bunker seemed dangerously thin.
When the shells stopped, a few men climbed out of the bunker and checked if more dead or wounded men were outside.
ASSOCIATED PRESS CORRESPONDENT JOHN T WHEELER, DISPATCH FILED FROM KHE SANH, FEBRUARY 12, 1968 Running for shelter Three United States Marines arriving to reinforce the besieged stronghold at Khe Sanh drop their duffel bags to run for shelter as a rocket explodes nearby.
The Americans built artillery bases as defensive strong points and to allow infantry patrols to order strikes against enemy targets.
Type 31 60 mm mortar Produced by the Chinese, this mortar was captured from the Viet Cong by Australian troops in 1968.
E BM-21 Grad rocket launcher Supplied Vietnam) The NVA also used this Soviet howitzer.
Ml 16 howitzer Supplied to Chinese forces in World War II, this American howitzer was used by the Viet Minh against French forces.
E Ml 14 155mm howitzer Developed during World War II, the Ml 14 remained in widespread service with United States forces.
E Mortar smoke shell White phosphorus was used to create smoke screens.
Ell Howitzer shells Artillery pieces like the Ml 14 fired 155mm shells.
Beginning negotiations, however, proved no easy feat, with each side stubbornly refusing to compromise on key starting points.
BEFORE The negative press of the Tet Offensive gave Johnson a reason to once again seek conciliation.
PRESIDENT JOHNSON MEETS A United States SOLDIER O n the evening of March 31, 1968, President Johnson delivered a televised address to the American nation from the White House, during which he surprisingly announced a partial halt to the United States bombing of North Vietnam— an olive branch that he hoped would lead to peace negotiations with Hanoi and a rapid de-escalation of the conflict.
While Johnson had attempted in 1965 and again in 1967 to halt the bombings and appeal for peace talks, these earlier overtures had failed to lead to a resolution.
It is to save the lives of brave men—and to save the lives of innocent women and children.
The address was a remarkable (if perhaps unintentional) admission on Johnson's part, acknowledging that the NVA's Tet Offensive— despite failing to achieve its military objectives and largely neutralizing the Viet Cong as a fighting force—had achieved its major political aim.
In the eight weeks since the offensive, the United States media had turned against the war.
Rather than extend a war that seemed unwinnable, Johnson pushed for peace.
Common ground Several locations were suggested as potential settings for the peace negotiations, including Warsaw and Phnom Penh.
Officially called the International Conference on Vietnam, the talks unfolded at the Majestic Hotel near the Arc de Triomphe.
Since French President Charles de Gaulle was hosting the meetings, it was determined that French would be the official language of the conference.
Discussions stalled William Averell Harriman, former United States ambassador to the Soviet Union and Great Britain, headed up an American delegation that also included future secretary of state Cyrus Vance.
On the other side of the table, the North Vietnamese team was led by former foreign minister Xuan Thuy, whom the United States would soon come to view as a major obstacle to their goals during the peace process.
Diplomats on both sides hoped the talks would bring a quick end to the war in Indochina.
However, weeks of negotiating yielded nothing, with both sides refusing to budge from their original positions.
The major sticking point for the United States was the refusal of Xuan Thuy and his team to immediately withdraw all North Vietnamese troops from below the DMZ and recognize the legitimacy of the Saigon government.
Historic setting Delegates from both sides gather in May 1968, under the crystal chandeliers in the ballroom of the Hotel Majestic in Paris.
Once a palace owned by Isabella II of Spain, the hotel belonged to the French government from 1936 to 2008.
The war would continue for five years—and see a new United States president—before peace accords took the United States out of Vietnam. delegation, the primary hurdles to reaching an agreement were the United States delegates balking at a proposal to include the National Liberation Front in a coalition government in the South and the Saigon government's refusal to recognize the legitimacy of the Viet Cong.
Death and disorder The peace talks were held against a backdrop of chaos in the streets of Paris that nearly toppled Charles de Gaulle's government.
Student demonstrations coupled with widespread general strikes brought the entire country to a standstill for the better part of two weeks in the middle of May.
Talks stalled for four months, until November, when Johnson agreed to suspend all bombing and end Operation Rolling Thunder.
Voice of the Viet Cong Nguyen Thi Binh crashed the peace talks on behalf of the National Liberation Front (the political arm of the Viet Cong) and eventually got a place at the table.
A skilled diplomat, she has served two terms as the vice president of Vietnam in the postwar era.
Striking against more than a hundred targets, it was also called Little Tet, the May Offensive, or Phase Two of the Tet Offensive.
Fighting was especially fierce in and around Saigon—where a combined Viet Cong and NVA force BEFORE The United States had bases across South Vietnam, but Tan Son Nhut airbase, on the outskirts of Saigon, was the most important.
UNE LETTRE EST TOUJOURS PRESSEE AVIATION POSTER GATEWAY TO SAIGON By the 1930s, Tan Son Nhut was the primary air gateway into southern Vietnam, served by carriers such as Air-Orient.
It became an American base in 1961, and in 1967 became the headquarters of United States' Military Assistance Command Vietnam . captured part of Tan Son Nhut airbase—as well as Kham Due in the Central Highlands.
The NVA's attack on Saigon unfolded in the hours before dawn on May 6, as communist troops infiltrated the city via several routes, including Phu Tho racetrack and the French cemetery on the western edge of Tan Son Nhut.
Using rockets, mortars, sniper fire, and ground troops, Viet Cong units attacked the western and southern perimeters of the base and engaged United States and ARVN troops in heavy fighting.
Although parts of the airfield were damaged by rocket fire, the defenders responded quickly and by late afternoon had stemmed the attack.
Fall of Kham Due After the first phase of the Tet Offensive, Kham Due in the Central Highlands west of Da Nang was the only remaining United States Special Forces base along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
On May 10, the Viet Cong attacked and overran Ngok Tavak, an outlying post manned by a small Australian unit.
Fearing that a major assault was imminent, airborne United States reinforcements were rushed to protect Kham Due.
By the morning of May 11, the base was completely surrounded by Viet Cong and NVA forces, who unleashed a blistering rocket and mortar attack on the base.
Coinciding with the barrage, they began to capture isolated hilltop outposts around Kham Due.
Determining that it was not as easily defendable as Khe Sanh, General Westmoreland and the United States high command decided to evacuate the base.
Surrounded, outmanned, and outgunned, the United States executed a chaotic air evacuation of more than 1,500 personnel as B-52 strikes, close air support, and helicopter gunships kept the communists at bay.
Nine United States aircraft were lost to enemy fire during the evacuation.
Despite such setbacks, the United States evacuation was punctuated by a conspicuous act of gallantry when Lieutenant Colonel Joe M Jackson landed his C-123 under heavy fire on the airfield to retrieve three members of a combat control team who had been left behind.
Rather than trying to capture or disrupt Tan Son Nhut airbase or other United States facilities, the Viet Cong concentrated their efforts on Cholon, the city's main ethnic Chinese district.
Once a horse racing venue enjoyed by French officials, the track in western Saigon was later used to land helicopters. from attack, the Viet Cong took refuge inside Buddhist temples.
The assumption proved wrong, however, and ARVN and United States troops gradually drove them from the city.
Better intelligence gathering in the wake of the first Tet Offensive enabled United States and ARVN forces to intercept many NVA units before they could reach their targets.
However, just as in the May offensive, many of these attempts were short-lived.
At the end of 1968, both sides had gained little from the offensives, and at the expense of great loss of life.
EVACUATION HUB Tan Son Nhut would once again be at the center of the action in 1975.
When it was reoccupied by United States infantrymen in July 1970—during Operation Elk Canyon I and II—patrols were sent out to look for the missing men.
The bodies of crewmen from the Butcher crash were found in the 1990s, and were finally buried in the United States in 2008.
United States AIR FORCE VETERAN SAM MCGOWAN, ON THE EVACUATION OF KHAM DUC, OCTOBER 2015 Running for his life Bleeding from a facial wound, an ARVN Ranger—identifiable by the Black Panther insignia on his arm and helmet—runs for cover in a lumber yard while his unit comes under heavy fire from Viet Cong infiltrators.
P acification programs were designed to win over local people and lessen their desire to revolt.
They encouraged people to live peaceably and cooperate with United States and ARVN forces in spite of a turbulent situation.
Early programs had not been especially effective, leading the United States to devise new ways to win the ""hearts and minds"" of South Vietnam's rural population.
Foremost among these was the Civil Operations and The ""hearts and minds"" campaign developed out of earlier civilian pacification programs launched by United States forces.
EARLY EFFORTS The United States first experimented with proactive pacification techniques during the Philippine—American War , trying to win over the populace by building schools and public works.
From the very start, the programs concentrated on a rural, peasant population long abused under French colonial rule and most likely to have political, social, and economic gripes about the South Vietnamese regime.
J Revolutionary Development Support program created by United States Ambassador Flenry Cabot Lodge in 1967.
White Flouse Special Assistant Robert Komer was brought to Vietnam to head the program.
Setting priorities Under Komer's leadership, CORDS integrated personnel from the military intelligence.
Central Intelligence Agency , and a number of South Vietnamese agencies into teams that could gather and assess intelligence data, in cooperation with operatives and advisory teams in the field.
The program was tasked with growing the People's Self-Defense Force militias in rural areas.
The other major priority for CORDS in 1968 was the resettlement of displaced Montagnard tribespeople.
Militia patrol Female volunteers of the People's Self-Defense Force patrol the perimeter of the hamlet of Kien Dien to discourage Viet Cong infiltration.
By 1972, the PSDF's combat arm numbered around one million people, with another 2. million in support roles.
At the same time, the United States Agency for International Development made a push to bring modern health care into villages across South Vietnam.
Their work ranged from efforts to eradicate malarial mosquitoes to staffing and equipping rural aid stations and provincial hospitals.
Flawed system One of the offspring of CORDS was the Hamlet Evaluation System —through which the United States collected and analyzed data on more than 9,000 hamlets and villages across South Vietnam.
Given the pressure on advisers to increase security in their zone, it was inevitable that data was frequently inflated.
Worse was Playtime Sometimes hearts and minds were won with small, spur-of-the-moment actions, like this American Gl interacting with a Vietnamese child as she uses the antibomb sandbags in front of her home as a playground. the fact that hamlets under total communist control were not included in the system.
The evacuation of rural areas, a massive flow of refugees to coastal and urban areas, and the diversion of personnel and funding to the counterattacks impacted the CORDS program.
Once the NVA offensive was thwarted, the program regained its momentum.
It also utilized two types of local militia—Regional Forces and Popular Forces , known collectively as RuffPuffs to their American advisers— who grew into an effective fighting force.
Through them, CORDS could provide some security for villages vulnerable to Viet Cong attacks.
However, CORDS mostly failed when it came to convincing Viet Cong troops and other communist sympathizers to come to the side of the United States and South Vietnamese.
AFTER Although the concept had mixed results in Vietnam, the United States would use ""hearts and minds"" as a nonviolent companion to military might in later conflicts.
MIDDLE EAST PACIFICATION First established in 2002, Provincial Reconstruction Teams became a cornerstone of United States policy in both Afghanistan and Iraq.
Composed of members of the United States military, diplomats, civilian advisers, and representatives of USAID and other government agencies, PRTs build schools and hospitals, distribute aid, and assist farmers.
The result was the Phoenix Program, a systematic drive to destroy the political structure of the Viet Cong and root out communist sympathizers.
The Phoenix Program's mandate went much further than previous intelligence initiatives.
As well as authorizing the detention of communist agents and sympathizers, it sanctioned their torture and assassination.
Hunted down The first task of Phoenix personnel in any operation was to identify the communist leadership in each province, district, and village.
Thousands of committees were set up to gather information on « The Central Intelligence Agency was involved in Indochina long before the first United States military advisers or troops arrived.
OPS AND ASSASSINATIONS The CIA opened its first covert station in Saigon in 1954.
A year later, the agency laid the initial groundwork for a ""secret war"" in Laos against communist forces that would last for nearly 20 years.
Under Project Tiger, the agency inserted South Vietnamese spies into North Vietnam from the late 1950s.
Pinning their hopes This 1965 Viet Cong badge made of brass and enamel carries the phrase ""National Liberation and the red, blue, and gold Viet Cong flag.
Such open allegiance became much less common once the Phoenix Program had been established. individuals and compile lists of names.
In theory, accusations had to be confirmed by at least three independent sources before suspects could be interrogated.
The PRU then took the accused to a provincial interrogation center, where he or she could be detained for up to two years without trial.
Their members in South Vietnam were assigned to districts in which they already had contacts.
Much of the countryside, especially around the Mekong Delta, was effectively controlled by the Viet Cong.
At the outset of the program, J it was estimated that around 70,000 individuals were actively working for the communists in South Vietnam, and thousands of sympathizers performed small duties or favors for the cause.
Clandestine methods PRUs used enhanced interrogation techniques—many of which were considered torture under the Geneva Convention governing the treatment of civilians in war—to extract information from captives.
These torture methods included waterboarding, electric shocks, starvation, sodomy, and gang rape.
The PRUs used information obtained through such methods to identify other communist leaders and collaborators.
In cases where suspects could not be detained, persuaded to surrender, or seek amnesty, PRUs were authorized to eliminate them by any means they deemed necessary.
Wrongly targeted Many of those who were detained, tortured, or assassinated under Phoenix were noncommunist opponents of the South Vietnamese regime.
Villagers sometimes falsely accused neighbors out of revenge or for other personal reasons, often incriminating whole families.
Informants were also paid for their information—leading to more false accusations—while others were persuaded to make accusations in order to avoid their own torture or death.
At one point, they were required to identify several thousand suspects every month.
Without a doubt, Phoenix helped to cripple Viet Cong Infrastructure in South Vietnam.
However, it was not until after the war that the organizers of the program began to realize how effective it had been.
Colby claimed that communists had found the years the program ran to be the most difficult of the entire war.
It aimed to combat negative publicity about the program in the United States by laying out a legal framework for the program and establishing limitations on the PRUs.
HISTORIAN DOUGLAS VALENTINE, THE PHOENIX PROGRAM, 2000 AFTER Enhanced interrogation tactics, including torture, were used in United States intelligence operations after the Phoenix Program.
UNDER PRESSURE in 1971, program architect William Colby attended a Congressional hearing on the Phoenix Program.
He admitted that the program included illegal killings but said that this was a necessary element of war.
The posters were sold for a few dollars each, mainly to the rising antiwar student population.
GROWING DISSENT Before 1968, Americans protested against the war through campus teach-ins, draft resistance, and a large-scale march on Washington in 1967.
Contemporary to the antiwar movement was the Civil Rights Movement, which also rocked the nation.
Johnson would be elected president in his own right in 1964, in a landslide victory.
Women speak out Members of the ""Women's Strike for Peace"" activist group—one of the first groups to oppose the war—push their way to the doors of the Pentagon building to demand a meeting.
Protest and Elections The Tet Offensive inflamed passions in the US, leading to widespread antiwar protests in the streets and on college campuses.
These disturbances would spill over into the presidential election of 1968.
The list included Allen Ginsberg, Noam Chomsky, James Baldwin, and many other famous and influential writers who opposed the war.
Challengers step up It was shaping up to be a hotly contested election year.
Senator Eugene McCarthy, an antiwar senator from Minnesota, had already announced his intention to challenge Johnson for the Democratic nomination when the Tet Offensive in January 1968 threw the entire campaign into Ready for victory Richard Nixon flashes his signature ""V for Victory"" sign as he is carried by supporters at a rally in Miami Beach, Florida.
Two days later he would accept the Republican nomination for the 1968 presidential election.
The blowback from Tet and mounting opposition within his own party contributed mightily to President Johnson announcing on March 31 that he would not seek reelection.
Martin Luther King Jr. was California primary—threw the election and the nation into bedlam again.
As Nixon was officially named as the Republican candidate, protesters rioted in the streets of Miami.
Meanwhile, Hubert H Humphrey emerged as the Democratic candidate in the midst of violence around the convention hall in Chicago.
The Chicago riots tipped the election in favor of the Republican candidate.
Although the margin AFTER Sensing the antiwar sentiment that was growing in the country, President Nixon called for a de-escalation of American involvement in Vietnam.
SEEKING APPROVAL After 1968, it was not only a small number of students and civilians who expressed their feelings against the war.
When McCarthy nearly bested Johnson in the New Hampshire primary in early March, others jumped into the fray.
Robert Kennedy, brother of John F Kennedy, declared his candidacy on March 16.
Alabama's segregationist governor George Wallace was also in the race, running as a third party candidate with Vietnam veteran General Curtis LeMay as his running mate.
Wallace would have one of the strongest third party campaigns in United States history, carrying the southern states of Arkansas, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Georgia.
Wave of chaos Violence erupted in 60 cities across the United States in the wake of King's assassination, with a wave of protests and riots that coincided with rising antiwar sentiment, especially on college campuses.
By early summer, Kennedy had emerged as the favorite to capture the Democratic nomination and face presumptive Republican nominee Nixon.
Robert Kennedy's assassination on June 6—on the heels of his victory in the ECISIVE MOMENTS BATTLE OF MICHIGAN AVENUE The 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago saw eight days of violent confrontation between thousands of demonstrators and the Chicago Police Department, accompanied by United States Army troops and the Illinois National Guard.
Post-convention reports identified the Chicago police as the instigators of the violence, but seven antiwar leaders—including Hoffman and Rubin—were arrested and put on trial for inciting riots.
Thousands of medals were discarded in the national demonstration by Vietnam Veterans Against the War.
NIXON'S WAR JANUARY 1969-DECEMBER 1971 □ resident Richard Nixon took office in 1969 with the North Vietnamese due to poor leadership and morale. promise to ""bring the boys home"" without losing South Peace talks in Paris soon stalled.
Cambodia, already take on a bigger role in the war, and American troop presence destabilized by American action, also came under threat from was steadily de-escalated.
Meanwhile, in the United over to them, the ARVN saw mixed results in battle against the States, antiwar protests would increase in scale.
OCTOBER 15 National Moratorium peace demonstrations take place across the United States.
R Hard hat riot, May 1970 APRIL 30-JUNE 30 American and South Vietnamese forces carry out major operations across the Cambodian border, attacking communist base areas.
JUNE 8 President Nixon announces the withdrawal of 25,000 troops from Vietnam.
AUGUST 14 Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk appoints proAmerican General Lon Nol as his prime minister.
FEBRUARY 21 Henry Kissinger begins secret peace talks with Hanoi politburo member Le Due Tho in Paris.
MARCH 18 In Cambodia, a US-backed coup led by General Lon Nol overthrows President Norodom Sihanouk.
MAY 14 Two students protesting the war at Jackson State College, Mississippi, are shot by police.
JANUARY 20 MARCH 17 Richard Nixon is inaugurated President Nixon authorizes as United States president, promising the secret bombing of enemy to bring peace with honor supply lines and bases in Vietnam. in Cambodia.
V Richard Nixon JANUARY 22 United States Marines launch their last major offensive campaign of the Vietnam War, Operation Dewey Canyon.
NOVEMBER 15 About 250,000 antiwar protesters gather in Washington, D.C. for the ""Mobilization"" peace demonstration.
MARCH An investigation begins into the March 1968 massacre at My Lai, triggered by letters from Vietnam veteran Ronald Ridenhour.
FEBRUARY 22 In a renewed offensive, the Viet Cong and NVA launch attacks against United States bases and cities across South Vietnam.
The American death toll for APRIL 30 1969 American troop levels in Vietnam reach their peak at 543,400.
PRESIDENT NIXON, ADDRESS TO THE NATION, NOVEMBER 3, 1969 H ARVN ""tigerstripe"" tunic JUNE 24 The Tonkin Gulf Resolution is repealed as the United States Congress tries to reassert control over the president's power to take the country to war.
JAN 30-MAR 25 In Operation Lam Son 719, some 20,000 ARVN troops invade Laos with American support, aiming to cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
JUNE 13 The publication of leaked Defense Department documents about the war begins.
H Protest badge, September 1970 MARCH 29 A military court finds William Calley guilty of murdering 22 Vietnamese civilians in the My Lai Massacre.
SEPT 5-OCT 8 Operation Jefferson Glenn, inland from Hue and Da Nang, is the last major combat operation in which United States ground troops take part.
MAY 1-5 A series of nonviolent acts of civil disobedience by antiwar militants in Washington, D.C. results in 12,000 arrests.
OCTOBER 3 Cambodian government troops launch an offensive against Vietnamese communist and Khmer Rouge forces.
OCTOBER 9 An instance of combat refusal by troops of the Air Cavalry Division draws public attention to the poor morale of American troops in Vietnam.
OCTOBER In Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge controls all territory east of the Mekong by the month's end and continues to make further gains.
DECEMBER 31 By the year's end, the number of United States troops in Vietnam has fallen to 156,800.
Within hours, his presidential cavalcade was being pelted with rocks and beer cans from antiwar protesters.
THE OLD NIXON As vice president in the 1950s, Nixon had a reputation for being a tough anticommunist.
He had urged President Eisenhower to use United States troops and airpower in Indochina.
Even after losing the 1960 presidential election to Kennedy, Nixon supported the new administration's decision to increase American aid to South Vietnam.
PROMISES OF PEACE While campaigning for the presidency in 1968, Nixon suggested he had a secret plan to end the war.
He promised ""peace with honor"" and created the expectation that he could end the stalemate and make Hanoi capitulate.
J The Nixon Administration Richard Nixon assumed the presidency in January 1969, believing he could force Hanoi to negotiate, while also reducing United States troop levels in Southeast Asia.
Within a year, he was as frustrated with the war in Vietnam as his predecessors had been.
N ixon's initial efforts to end the war were as much improvisation as grand strategy.
The president and his national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, guided the nation's foreign policy.
Nixon was a veteran politician and Kissinger was an Ivy League international relations scholar.
They shared a penchant for secrecy and crafted United States policy in Vietnam without significant input from others.
They had no blueprint for success in Indochina but they were confident that one existed and they would find it.
The Madman Theory Both Nixon and Kissinger were convinced that diplomacy and the use of force had to be better coordinated.
On January 25, 1969, they expanded the peace talks that Johnson had begun in Paris to include representatives of North Vietnam, South Vietnam, and the Viet Cong.
Shortly afterward, on March 18, the United States secretly began to bomb North Vietnamese military sanctuaries in neutral Cambodia.
Haldeman that he wanted the North Vietnamese to believe that he was unpredictable and dangerous, a rampant anticommunist with his hand on the nuclear button.
Secretly, the Nixon administration called the plan Operation Duck Hook.
They deliberately leaked to the press that Nixon planned a ""go for broke"" air and naval assault to inflict punishing blows on North Vietnam.
The Silent Majority On March 19, the administration announced the introduction of Vietnamization, a plan to increase the combat role of the South Vietnamese while reducing the number of Americans fighting the ground war.
Such a prospect was widely welcomed by the American public, which was growing restless about the high cost of fighting the war, in terms of both human lives and resources.
However, those who opposed continued United States intervention in Vietnam were not willing to wait for de-escalation.
In October, large and peaceful antiwar protests occurred throughout the country.
Talking while fighting Nixon's threats of massive bombing did not move the politburo in Hanoi, in part because it could see that the United States public had turned against the war.
Also, leadership in North Vietnam was in the hands of Le Duan following the death of Ho Chi Minh in September 1969.
While Ho Chi Minh had never ruled out negotiation, Duan was ruthlessly determined to win the heroic victory he thought was in sight.
Nixon and Kissinger, the global strategists, turned to Hanoi's chief patrons, Beijing and Moscow.
Kissinger also undertook secret negotiations with North Vietnamese representatives in Paris, and Nixon made high-profile trips to the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union in 1972.
Despite a historic handshake with Mao Zedong in China and a nuclear arms treaty with the USSR, Nixon gained little leverage against North Vietnam from these trips.
HALDEMAN, 1969 Photo opportunity After Nixon's Silent Majority speech on November 3, White House staff invited the press to photograph Cabinet members reading telegrams from the so-called Silent Majority.
In fact, the telegrams were part of a letter-writing campaign organized by the administration.
Meeting the troops Nixon greets members of the First Infantry Division at their base camp in Di An, south of Saigon, in July 1969, during his first visit to Vietnam as president of the United States.
A NEW STRATEGY Nixon knew that he had to try to end United States intervention in Vietnam while preserving the credibility of his leadership at home and that of America abroad.
RICHARD NIXON'S INAUGURAL ADDRESS, 1969 on the outskirts of Los Angeles.
In 1922, the family farm failed and the Nixons moved to nearby Whittier.
Carving a career At the outbreak of World War II, Nixon secured a job at the federal government rations office in Washington, D.C., where he got his first taste of Washington politics.
He was, however, unhappy sitting behind a desk when a war was taking place, so he enlisted in the United States Navy.
Posted to the Solomon Islands in the Pacific, he helped coordinate cargo operations.
Southern California Republicans searching for a rising star convinced Nixon to run for United States Congress in 1946.
Victory led him Striking gold Richard Nixon rose quickly from humble origins among the orange fields of southern California to congressman, senator, vice president under Eisenhower, and ultimately the 37th president of the United States.
R ichard Milhous Nixon rose from humble Quaker origins in southern California to become Eisenhower's vice president and then president himself in the 1968 election.
Although he brought American troops home from Vietnam, he went down in history for having to leave office in disgrace.
Born in 1913, Nixon grew up in the small community of Yorba Linda, TIMELINE RICHARD « ^ ^ MUlm, •; _ TT 4k Paving the way for Ford President Nixon , Secretary of State Henry Kissinger , and White House Chief of Staff Alexander Haig meet with Congressman Gerald Ford in October 1973 to discuss Ford succeeding Spiro Agnew as vice president.
RICHARD NIXON, NO MORE VIETNAMS, 1985 back to Washington and a meteoric political career that took him to the Senate in 1950 and then the White House in 1953, when be became Dwight Eisenhower's vice president.
Nixon was known as a zealous anticommunist and a politician willing to cut ethical corners in order to win office—a reputation that earned him the nickname Tricky Dick.
TV politician Nixon was one of the first politicians to exploit the power of television—he earned fame for his 1952 ""Checkers"" speech rebutting allegations of financial irregularities while campaigning as Eisenhower's running mate.
However, his tired appearance in a televised presidential debate with John F Kennedy in 1960 (Nixon was recovering from flu) probably cost him the White House.
He was defeated again in 1962, running for governor of California, but won the presidential election in 1968 with his promise to bring the troops home from Vietnam.
His Vietnamization program, ping-pong diplomacy, and detente with China, including his landmark Mounting pressure Campaigners outside the United States Capitol state their demands on October 21, 1973, the day after Nixon fired Watergate Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox and Attorney General Elliot Richardson resigned in protest. visit to Beijing in 1972, culminated in the Paris Peace Accords of 1973.
Despite his conservative leanings, Nixon's environmental policies were often progressive.
He created the Environmental Protection Agency and supported the Clean Air Act of 1970.
The Nixon White House also launched the controversial War on Drugs, which some thought was a way to attack two of the constituencies that most opposed him—African Americans and young, liberal whites.
Watergate and after Despite running well ahead of Democrat George McGovern in the 1972 presidential election, Nixon could not divorce himself from the dirty tricks that had always marked his campaigns.
On June 17, 1972, five men were arrested for breaking into the Democratic party headquarters at the Watergate complex.
Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein linked the burglars to the White House.
President Gerald Ford, Nixon's successor, granted him a full pardon in September 1974.
Nixon began the process of rehabilitating his image by writing books and making high-profile foreign trips.
January 9, 1913 Born the second of five children to Frank Nixon, the owner of a service station, and Hannah Milhous Nixon, a committed Quaker, in Yorba Linda, California.
II 1922 The Nixon family moves to Whittier; Richard excels in high school and becomes a skilled debater.
II 1960 Looks tired and sickly in the televised presidential debate with John F Kennedy and later loses the election.
REEVALUATING COMMITMENT United States military personnel in Vietnam totaled 543,000 in April 1969, marking the highpoint of American ground combat forces and support personnel.
By 1969, public opinion and that in Washington had shifted against the war.
J Vietnamization Wary of the rising human costs and the unpopularity of the war in Vietnam, the Nixon administration was eager to withdraw American troops.
B y 1969, the war had gone on longer and cost more than anyone had foreseen General Creighton Abrams had replaced Westmoreland as the head of Military Assistance Command Vietnam Defending their homes At the village level, Vietnamization entailed training a civil self-defense force to provide security against Viet Cong and NVA attack.
These lightly armed local militias in each province received about 13 weeks of training. in 1968, and after Nixon became president, Abrams began a process called Vietnamization.
The Nixon Doctrine Reportedly coined by Nixon's Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird, Vietnamization was the operational term for what journalists called the Nixon Doctrine.
It was the policy of transferring responsibility for combat in Vietnam from American forces to the ARVN, leading to the withdrawal of United States troops from Vietnamese soil.
Citing improved ARVN capability, the White House announced the withdrawal of 25,000 United States forces on June 8, 1969.
Shortly after, Nixon met with South Vietnamese president Nguyen Van Thieu at Midway Island.
He praised Thieu's leadership and reaffirmed United States support for the Saigon government.
Then, in a press conference on the Pacific island of Guam, in July 1969, the United States president made a statement—quickly labeled the Nixon Doctrine—that while the United States would continue to provide military VIETNAMIZATION Operation Keystone Eagle The First Battalion, Ninth Marine Regiment board the troop ship USS Paul Revere at Da Nang, headed for Okinawa.
Their departure on July 14, 1969, followed a lavish ceremony for the Ninth Marines, who were some of the first troops redeployed as a result of Vietnamization. and economic aid to its allies, those nations would henceforth be expected to use their own soldiers to bear the burden of any fighting.
Although Vietnamization was portrayed as evidence of progress in Saigon, it was actually central to Nixon's effort to end the drain of the war on the United States and reduce political pressure at home.
Vietnamization was a policy, not a PERCENT of the generals in the United States Army believed / that Vietnamization was so effective that it should have been implemented earlier, according to a 1974 survey. plan, and its timing and evolution were determined almost entirely by United States domestic politics.
Fewer American service personnel in Vietnam meant fewer American casualties—and, the administration hoped, less public outcry against the war.
While the program decreased the role of American troops, it also increased supplies to the ARVN, which reassured the war's supporters that commitment to South Vietnam remained strong.
To be successful, Vietnamization had to be about more than simply substituting ARVN troops for United States units—or South Vietnamese blood for American blood.
As United States troop levels dropped sharply in 1969 and 1970, MACV returned to the advisory model for United States units that had existed before 1965.
The three seifs Nation building in South Vietnam also required many nonmilitary improvements.
The country needed rural pacification, public services, economic viability, and security for its citizens.
However, policing, land reforms, controlling inflation, holding local elections, rooting out Viet Cong, and increasing the rice harvest were not improvements that United States military assistance alone could provide.
The South Vietnamese summarized their needs as selfThe word from Washington United States Special Forces and Montagnard Civilian Irregular Defense Group members at Due Lap listen to the radio broadcast of Nixon's November 3, 1969, speech, which affirms that South Vietnamese troops will assume full responsibility for the defense of South Vietnam. defense, self-government, and self-development— known as the three seifs.
Vietnamization assessed The success of the policy was difficult to measure.
South Vietnam provided well for refugees, and succeeded at land redistribution.
The rice harvest in 1969 was the best in five years, and tractors replaced water buffalo for plowing.
Viet Cong and North Vietnamese activity decreased in many areas of South Vietnam but likely not because of increased ARVN size.
The politburo in Hanoi held back, biding its time for further United States withdrawals.
Meanwhile, low morale and weak leadership continued to plague Saigon's troops.
Those tasked with training the ARVN struggled to keep up with the timetable created by Nixon's administration.
AFTER After just over two years in office, the Nixon administration had halved the number of United States forces in South Vietnam.
VIETNAM SERVICE SLEEVE INSIGNIA FIGHTING THEIR OWN FIGHT The number of United States military personnel in Vietnam fell to 239,000 in June 1971 and continued to decline.
Westmoreland's war of attrition, designed to force Hanoi to abandon the South, had failed and a new approach was needed.
Abrams believed that the security of the South Vietnamese, right down to village level, was the key to success.
Modest start Born in 1914 in Springfield, Massachusetts, Abrams grew up in modest circumstances in the nearby town of Agawam.
At the age of 17, he entered the United States Military Academy at West Point, graduating in 1936 alongside William Westmoreland.
He began his career in horse cavalry but soon switched to the armored branch.
Abrams first saw combat in World War II, commanding the tank battalion that spearheaded General Dedicated public servant Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger described the direct and plain-speaking Abrams as ""an authentic national hero” for his personal bravery, tenacity, and unwavering dedication to service.
An aggressive and talented leader, he led the relief of the besieged 101st Airborne Division at Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge.
During the Korean War, Abrams served as chief of staff of three different army corps.
In 1963, and by then a lieutenant general, he commanded V Corps in West Germany, on the frontline of £4191 the Cold War.
As United States involvement in Vietnam deepened, President Johnson promoted Abrams to the rank of general (over the heads of several three-star generals), alongside Harold K Johnson and William Westmoreland.
Upgrading the ARVN From 1964 to 1967, Abrams and Johnson worked as a team to create an army that was fit for Vietnam, even though it contained a large number of draftees and inexperienced officers.
From it, Abrams took the idea of ""one war""—the integration of military operations and pacification.
Over the next six months he traveled to every ARVN command in the country.
When World War II hero Abrams twice received the Distinguished Service Cross for extraordinary bravery.
On both occasions, his tank advanced ahead of his battalion, against superior forces, inspiring his men and turning the course of battle. the Tet Offensive erupted in January 1968, the ARVN's improved response _A was credited to him.
Abrams himself directed the US-ARVN counterattack that retook Hue during the Tet Offensive.
Abrams's war Upon replacing Westmoreland in July 1968, Abrams began implementing his ""one war"" ( interrupt enemy supplies and provide more local security.
While the shorthand for Westmoreland's method had been search and destroy, for Abrams it was reconnaissance in force— now referred to as clearand-hold.
Success was measured by the number of towns and villages under the control of Saigon.
For Abrams, it was a complex effort that required more time to implement than he had at his disposal.
The political will to continue United States intervention was already gone by then.
GENERAL CREIGHTON ABRAMS BRIEFING JOINT CHIEF OF STAFF CHAIRMAN GENERAL EARLE WHEELER, OCTOBER 4, 1969 concept.
He cut back on the heavy use of artillery against villages and on the large-unit rural sweeps that often hurt civilians.
Instead, he employed small-unit patrols to General Frederick Weyand in June 1972.
In his new appointment as United States Army chief of staff, Abrams worked to restore morale and purpose to the institution that had been his life, and whose pride and reputation had been battered by an unpopular war.
He was still serving in this position when he died of cancer on September 4, 1974.
It is unknowable whether Abrams's ""one war"" approach, if started earlier, would have produced a better outcome for Washington and Saigon than what occurred, but within the United States Army Abrams holds an honored place.
Cigar moment General Abrams and Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird light each other's cigars as they listen to a briefing on pacification at the village of An Noi, 27 miles northwest of Saigon, in 1970.
TIMELINE 11 September 15, 1914 Born in Springfield, Massachusetts, the son of a repairman for Boston & Albany Railroad.
The three sons become army officers, and the three daughters marry army officers.
ABRAMS IN THE TURRET OF A TANK, 1945 11 1953-54 Serves as chief of staff for three corps commands in Korea.
T he ARVN was formally established by the government of President Diem in 1955, following the French withdrawal.
Organization The ARVN grew from a modest strength of 150,000 in the 1950s to a seemingly robust total of one million by 1975.
In addition to the army, there were separately organized and smaller air, naval, marine, and commando services.
The best was the regular army, consisting of 13 infantry divisions, seven ranger groups, and various elite and support elements.
The regional forces supplied the troops for the ARVN's four regional commands, and the popular forces under the control of local councils In recognition of valor The highest military decoration of South Vietnam, the Military Merit medal was awarded mostly to enlisted men for valor in combat.
Established in 1950, the medal was modeled after the French Medaille Militaire.
THEVNA The officers and NCOs of the VNA were almost entirely French, and the soldiers themselves remained poorly trained and ill equipped.
Leadership One of the major weaknesses of the ARVN was that senior officer positions were largely determined by patronage and there was little possibility of promotion of able soldiers into the officer class.
The majority of commanders were Catholic, as was Diem, but most of the troops were Buddhist.
Corruption was endemic as the less-qualified officers pocketed funds intended for their units or kicked back funds to superiors to retain their positions.
Reforms occurred under Vietnamization, but a toxic culture remained entrenched.
Many of the top commanders adhered to vestiges of passive French defensive tactics, while their younger, Americantrained juniors often favored aggressive operations— creating tension and confusion in the officer corps.
A frequent charge was that the generals commanded from safe rear areas, rather than facing the enemy.
Life in the ranks The enlisted men often lacked loyalty to their own government, felt pushed aside by the American commanders, and were ill-equipped INTERVIEW WITH PHAN THUY, ARVN ARTILLERY OFFICER, 1999 Camouflaged in combat The “Tiger Stripe"" camouflage pattern on this ARVN Marines shirt is believed to have been first used by the Vietnamese Marine Corps from 1959.
Many soldiers only missed reporting for duty on one or two days or joined another unit closer to their home while still listed as a deserter on another roster.
ARVN conscription methods were severe, and the Saigon government was largely unresponsive to the personal needs of its troops.
ARVN soldiers received no mail, their pay was meager, and barracks and dependent housing were in short supply and corruptly allocated.
American canned goods and soy sauce were poor substitutes for the fish, rice, vegetables, and nuoc mam cham that were the staples of the South Vietnamese diet. and poorly trained.
American officers sometimes declared that the ARVN spent too much time complaining, but the conditions under which many served were deplorable.
These largely conscripted troops were often very young and poorly trained.
As the war progressed, the South Vietnamese forces became increasingly dependent upon American support.
The continuous supply of replacement parts and new equipment, and the availability of massive air support when needed paradoxically seemed to inhibit the resourcefulness and self-reliance of the Southerners.
Packing parachutes Following the establishment of a training school for female soldiers in 1966, soldiers of the Women's Armed Forces Corps of the ARVN took on a variety of support roles.
Here, a group of recruits are instructed on parachute packing at the 90th Aerial Eguipment Depot.
Nevertheless, many ARVN officers and troops fought effectively during the multipronged Tet Offensive of 1968 and then in the Easter Offensive of 1972.
They also offered strong resistance during the final chapter of the war in April 1975.
It has often been observed that, in combat, soldiers in all armies fight for one another above all else.
It is clear that the ARVN fought to protect their homes and families more than for the government.
THE FATE OF THE ARVN When the victorious North assumed control of South Vietnam in April 1975, some conscripted soldiers of the ARVN returned to their villages.
Decades after the end of the war, the families of those who supported the government of the South were subject to restrictions.
WAR ANTHEMS One of the most popular songs among the troops, the 1965 hit ""We Gotta Get Out of This Place"" by the Animals, was banned from Armed Forces Radio by the South Vietnamese government.
A merican troop withdrawals did not happen all at once, but by the end of 1969, the number of troops in Vietnam had decreased by 115,000, and by December 1970, there would be only 280,000 left.
The strain of fighting in Vietnam, their letters home damning the immoral, unlawful, and inglorious war they found themselves still fighting in.
Incremental exit United States troops were withdrawn from Vietnam in a series of incremental ""redeployments"" under the codename Keystone.
A United States ARMY MEDIC SPEAKS TO DOCUMENTARY FILMMAKER JOHN PILGER FOR THE QUIET MUTINY, 1970 Desperate and fatigued A United States infantryman lies exhausted on the ground as he drinks from a canteen in the Fishhook region.
The United States suffered heavy losses during grueling combat there in 1970, relying on a steady influx of troops to replace the fallen. a war with poorly articulated objectives manifested itself in attacks on both officers and noncommissioned officers , racial disharmony, and increasingly widespread drug use.
Echoing debates at home, many soldiers began to question America's role Infantry Division, departed Vietnam in June 1969 in Operation Keystone Eagle.
Keystone Cardinal, in late 1969, withdrew 45,000 United States troops, and Keystone Bluejay, in spring 1970, saw another 50,000 return home.
The troops sent home came from various branches of the military, so that proportional representation of each service was maintained.
This was counter to General Abrams's original plan, which would have seen the bulk of initial redeployment focus on the Marine Corps; arguments about the makeup of each increment would continue into 1972.
Racial tensions For those left behind in Vietnam, morale was in freefall.
The United States military during the late 1960s reflected the same issues prevalent at home.
Before 1969, troops in Unhappy service This Zippo by artist Bradford Edwards— engraved with a quote from Czech historian Konstantin Josef Jirecek—is a copy of a lighter used by a Gl in Vietnam.
Soldiers often had their lighters engraved with words showing dark humor, disillusionment, and references to death.
Vietnam were not immune to the racial tensions in American society, but combat had a way of bonding warriors.
After 1969, however, the self-segregation of soldiers off duty or in rear areas away from active combat became ever more apparent.
This practice likely mirrored attitudes brought over from the United States.
Threats to discipline In an era when the youth culture was openly challenging authority in America on many fronts, strong leadership of young men in combat also became a special challenge.
The expansion of the Army had left a deficit in experienced small unit leadership—junior officers and sergeants.
While most men placed in these roles performed well, there were some who exposed units to ambushes, firefights, or petty harassment.
Six-month rotations of officers and one-year tours of duty in-country also made unit cohesion difficult and threatened the ability of leaders to command the respect of their men.
Drugs and alcohol played a part in most of these disputes, threatening to undermine discipline.
Marijuana and amphetamines, commonly used by young Americans in the late 1960s, were cheap and easy to obtain throughout Vietnam.
I /-/-V PERCENT of GIs used drugs to escape anxiety or boredom, according to a 1970 report by the Pentagon.
Escaping the war GIs exchange heroin vials in a decorated bunk in Vietnam.
Opium and heroin were cheap, and of a high quality, but used primarily in secure areas because their narcotic effect could get the user killed.
Counting the days A tank crew member nicknamed Big Buddha stares morosely at his combat base in 1971.
A hand-painted sign on the tank's protective shield expressed his desire to leave Vietnam, as ever more United States units left the country.
Studies of Vietnam veterans indicated that drug use primarily stemmed from combat exposure and that 90 percent of veterans stopped using drugs upon their return to the United States.
NEGATIVE IMAGES Although the Nixon administration tried to downplay the military's concerns about drug use, popular stereotypes began to emerge back home of service members as ""potheads"" and drug addicts.
Longing for peace United States artillerymen take a break at the Laotian border in 1971.
The proliferation of peace signs among United States troops—who painted them on tanks and pinned them to helmets—showed their diminishing support for the war.
E F O R E The United States top command in Vietnam had changed, but skepticism of American strategy remained.
THE END OF ATTRITION Strategy under General Westmoreland had followed the attrition model, which relied on large unit operations intended to produce body count and to exhaust the enemy.
Hamburger Hill The American push for Ap Bia Mountain, later known as Hamburger Hill, was the product of General Abrams's positional strategy.
A grim and grueling battle, it produced a high body count on both sides and further inflamed public debate on United States conduct of the war.
W estmoreland's attrition strategy underestimated the value of holding territory.
General Abrams was prepared to use United States combat power, but his new idea was to use it not just to take out the North Vietnamese Army , but to deny its forces access to major population centers.
To accomplish that objective, he sought to target key locations and not just enemy personnel.
The wounded were hooked up to saline drips and treated with field bandages before they were carried on litters to waiting Medevac choppers. cities of Hue and Da Nang by targeting the NVA's logistical network and staging areas between the Laotian border and the coast.
Unpopular strategy The heaviest fighting of Apache Snow occurred in Ap Bia Mountain in the A Shau Valley.
Marked on United States military maps as Hill 937— meaning it was 3,074 feet high—it was known to locals as the Keeping record This 1967 Philips portable tape recorder was used in the field in Vietnam.
Battlefield reports heavily influenced United States public opinion on Hamburger Hill, with one such report by Jay Sharbutt for the Associated Press bringing the name ""Hamburger Hill"" into American discourse.
Cables to connect microphone to recorder Mountain of the Crouching Beast.
The United States would later come to know it as Hamburger Hill—so called because the terrible carnage there made it akin to a human meat grinder.
Carnage on the hill Units of the Third Brigade of the 101st Airborne Division, the Ninth Marine Regiment, and ARVN First Division's Third Regiment were flown in by transport helicopters, to approach up the hill and attack the NVA on the top.
Rather than retreat, the NVA on the hill decided to stand and fight on the high ground, and combat raged there for 10 days.
After one United States regiment attacked with little success, two regiments of the 101st Airborne, and the ARVN regiment, reinforced the attacking force.
The tenacity of the United States and ARVN ground forces—and the heavy bombardment by air support with B-52s—dislodged the defenders, but the fog of war prolonged the engagement.
A torrential downpour on May 18 turned the mountain slopes into mudslides, and on two occasions United States helicopter gunships mistakenly struck elements of the 101st Airborne approaching the ridge However, with all four United States and ARVN regiments involved in the eleventh assault on the mountain, the NVA finally withdrew into Laos on May 20.
These numbers were not TERRIBLE TOLL Under pressure from the public and the Pentagon, General Abrams switched to a strategy of protective reaction, which would minimize United States casualties.
Many did not die at Hamburger Hill, but the public associated them with the battle nonetheless.
War critics argued against continuing to endanger United States troops in battles over territory that would not be held—and would likely return to enemy control soon after.
It was difficult for those who were already against the war to appreciate the distinction Abrams made between denying the enemy a place and occupying that area.
A 19-YEAR-0LD Gl, INTERVIEWED BY UPI STAFFER BERT W 0KULY, MAY 1969 Waterproof poncho United States Army-issued multipurpose ponchos such as this one were worn during the downpour at Hamburger Hill, but could also be unbuttoned for use as tents, shelters, blankets, and ground sheets. as high as those from single engagements in 1968 during and after the Tet Offensive, but the NVA had taken heavy losses and been forced out of the pivotal A Shau Valley.
Operation Apache Snow's objectives had been achieved, and United States forces and those of the ARVN withdrew from Hill 937.
Although the NVA moved back onto the hill, they would not use the supply route through the valley for three years.
IMPROVED RESPONSE In Korea, Medevac helicopters took soldiers from the front lines to makeshift Mobile Army Surgical Hospitals, pioneered by surgeon Michael DeBakey.
While this allowed wounded men to be treated much more quickly than before, the war still saw 26 percent of casualties die from their wounds.
In 1966, he got permission to test it as a sutureless wound closure on the battlefield and in field hospitals in Vietnam.
The glue worked, successfully reducing bleeding and infection, but the version in use at the time was too concentrated and also caused irritation to the skin.
M edical support for United States forces increased with the escalation of ground forces.
All-purpose kit Combat medics were expected to treat a wide range of problems.
In South Vietnam, the United States created evacuation hospitals, surgical hospitals, field hospitals, and a convalescent hospital.
These essentially permanent facilities had air-conditioning, sanitary environments, and high-tech equipment.
United States Army surgeons were also able to perform blood transfusions—even in the field— and other lifesaving procedures.
The hospitals were staffed with a wide range of surgical and other specialists.
Each division of the army had its own medical specialists, including physical therapists, dieticians, and pharmacists.
Such roles were not limited to men, and some women served in these capacities.
Evacuating the wounded The availability of medevac, commonly called ""dust off,"" helicopters, and the proximity to the battlefield of well-equipped and staffed evacuation hospitals saved countless lives.
The air ambulances were reconfigured UH-1 troop transports, known as ""Hueys"" or ""slicks,"" that could accommodate up to nine litters.
Despite large red crosses on the aircraft, they faced intense enemy fire when extracting the wounded.
Armed escort gunships provided suppressing fire, but many times medevac pilots ignored standard procedures and flew into hot LZs without cover.
They flew day and night and in all types of weather and terrain, performing seemingly impossible rescues.
The peak year for the number of patients evacuated by dust off was 1969, when 206,000 US, ARVN, other allies, and civilians were transported.
The + dust off pilots and crews and the medical corpsmen in each unit performed heroic service, and in the two-year period, 39 medevac crew members were killed in action in Vietnam.
Of those who made it through the first 24 hours after injury, only one percent died.
Overall, 19 percent of United States casualties died from their wounds in Vietnam.
One reason for these survival rates, which were better than in previous wars, was the less destructive Many soldiers returned home with severe psychological and physical trauma, necessitating further care on United States soil that was sometimes hard to come by.
CONTINUED CARE Many combat veterans experienced post-traumatic stress disorder , which was poorly understood and diagnosed.
Agent Orange exposure led to serious conditions in veterans and birth defects in their children.
The many amputee veterans would also require long-term or lifelong care. nature of North Vietnamese and Viet Cong weapons.
More than half of United States deaths were from small arms, mines, and booby traps.
The transportation system, coordinated by Military Assistance Command Vietnam , sought to utilize Pacific and mainland United States resources, while also maximizing the availability of beds and resources in Vietnam.
MICHAEL BRADBURY, THIRD BATTALION OF THE 26TH MARINE REGIMENT, THIRD MARINE DIVISION, IN AN INTERVIEW, 2003 Rushed from the field A wounded soldier of the 101st Airborne Division is carried to a waiting UH-1H after battle at Hamburger Hill.
While medevac helicopters were required to be marked with a red cross, medics had stopped wearing this symbol.
AMPUTEE VETERANS United States Nurses The enduring image of American women serving in Vietnam is that of the nurse.
These women provided a broad spectrum of care for soldiers and civilians alike, and many emerged from the war traumatized by what they had seen.
M ost nurses in Vietnam served in United States Army hospitals, but the war also saw the service of United States Air Force flight nurses and United States Navy nurses on hospital ships.
All treated a steady stream of 83 60 patients with horrific injuries and serious tropical diseases, and many experienced difficult social and professional readjustment after their service.
HISTORY OF SERVICE In the 19th century, Clara Barton was called the American Nightingale for her nursing of soldiers during the American Civil War, and about 10,000 United States nurses served overseas during World War I At the beginning of World War II, women had to be white, unmarried volunteers, and graduates of a civilian nursing school to join the Nurse Corps.
It had become more diverse by the end of the war, with African American nurses in all-black units.
This diversity further increased in 1955 when the first man, Edward T Lyon, joined the Corps.
Most of them were young, in their early twenties, and had clinical training but limited experience with the injuries and illness they encountered in the war zone.
All were volunteers, and most were patriotically motivated, but in many cases also attracted by recruiting incentives that subsidized nursing training.
Much of their work was in disease and infection control, pain management, and the provision of psychological comfort to the wounded.
Malaria and dengue fever were prevalent in Vietnam, and both were life-threatening, as were encephalitis, typhus, hepatitis, and other infectious diseases.
They would also play a role in caring for those undergoing treatment for drug addiction.
In addition to taking care of American personnel, United States nurses participated in humanitarian operations, such as the Medical Civic Action Program , which provided vital outpatient medical services to South Vietnamese civilians in rural areas.
Earning recognition United States Navy nurses Lieutenant Barbara Wooster, Lieutenant Ruth Mason, and Lieutenant Ann Reynolds become the first women awarded purple heart medals in Vietnam, for surviving the Christmas 1964 Viet Cong bombing in Saigon.
Job stress Nurses in a war zone suffered many kinds of emotional strains and stresses.
The incidence of both post-traumatic stress disorder and emotional problems was high among nurses, who were faced with treating a relentless stream of horrific and painful wounds.
The evacuation of severe cases to other hospitals or out of the country meant that nurses and doctors did not have the satisfaction of seeing all patients through to recovery.
In addition, nurses experienced social isolation owing to the low number of women in the area and the tensions of living and working in the violent, male-dominated environment of war.
Nurse Judy Marron, writing about her time in Vietnam, described the horror of seeing cockroaches crawl out of amputees' stumps.
Female nurses also dealt with stresses that were unique to their gender.
According to one study, 63 percent of them experienced sexual harassment, ranging from ""small pranks"" to rape.
Nurse casualties Lieutenant Sharon Lane was the only nurse killed as a direct result of enemy action.
The blast from an artillery round struck her while she was working at the 312th Evacuation Hospital in Chu Lai on June 8, 1969.
In addition, several nurses died in helicopter crashes, including Second Lieutenant Carol Drazba and Second Lieutenant Elizabeth Ann Jones, both assigned to the Third Field Hospital in Teamwork in action Captain Bernice Scott and several male officers of the United States Army Nurse Corps take the blood pressure and cut the field bandages off a man who has just arrived at the 2nd Surgical Hospital in Lai Khe, in September 1969.
Expert care As a result of their experiences, nurses in Vietnam became more specialized than they would have been in civilian practice.
Especially in the areas of trauma, critical care, and anesthesia, military nurses often developed expertise that gave them increasing autonomy.
In mass casualty situations, nurses also took on triage of the wounded—the responsibility for determining who received care first and who was beyond medical help.
In 1970, Colonel Anna Mae Hays, the chief of the Army Nurse Corps who had built the nursing staff in Vietnam, became the first woman in the United States military ever to be promoted to the rank of brigadier general.
AFTER In 1993, a new statue honoring the contribution of military women was dedicated at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
THEY WERE VETERANS TOO Paid for through public donations, Glenna Goodacre's Vietnam Women's Memorial statue shows three nurses aiding a wounded soldier.
While not exclusively for nurses, this memorial highlights their contributions.
VIETNAM WOMEN'S MEMORIAL V Ready to serve Twenty-three-year-old Army Second Lieutenant Roberta Steele alights from a medical supply truck in Qui Nhon in 1966.
Steele, from Tillamook, Oregon, was eager to serve in Vietnam and had traded places with a recently married nurse in 1965.
However, the reality of war was often shocking and permanently transforming.
On returning to the US, Nancy Randolph, a nurse from the South who served in Vietnam for a year, found a medical culture and society from which she felt alienated.
Back in the United States as a professional nurse has had its complications.
United States ARMY NURSE NANCY RANDOLPH, INTERVIEWED IN THE HUMAN TRADITION IN THE VIETNAM ERA , 1998 Air ambulance Nurses attend to wounded American soldiers as their plane prepares to evacuate them from Vietnam.
Seriously wounded soldiers were transported to army hospitals in the Philippines and Japan for treatment.
This picture—and others of women and children at My Lai—were taken by army photographer Ronald Haeberle on his personal camera.
The My Lai Case The My Lai massacre was the largest single American atrocity in the ground war in Vietnam.
In 1969, the exposure of what had happened and the search for explanations prompted troubling questions about the moral risks the war posed for the United States.
A VIOLENT HISTORY In the 19th century, United States soldiers killed innocent Native American women and children in massacres such as the one at Wounded Knee.
I n 1971, controversial court martial proceedings captured the attention of the nation.
The J event had been covered up by the participants and their immediate commanders for a year and a half, until Ron Ridenhour—a soldier who had learned what happened from men in the company—began writing letters to the Army, members of Congress, and even the president.
Led by Lieutenant General William Peers, their report in March 1970 recommended that no fewer than 28 officers be charged.
As part of the post-Tet operations in 1968, a task force, including three infantry companies, was sent to Son My.
Charlie Company, under Captain Ernest Medina, landed outside My Lai on March 16.
Expecting to find a Viet Cong unit, two platoons entered with guns firing and began to round up the inhabitants.
Within the division, it was a secret that My Lai was cold-blooded brutality, which included rape as well as murder.
THE MY LAI CASE i Evidence and guilt The courts martial at Fort Benning, Georgia, would last four months, as the testimonies of 91 witnesses were heard, and documents, depositions, and photographs were scrutinized by the prosecutors.
Thirteen of the officers charged were acquitted owing to lack of evidence.
One officer was tried on charges of a cover-up and acquitted for the same reason.
Calley said he had only been following orders, and claimed that his only crime was to value the lives of his troops above those The media coverage and trials brought public attention to the massacre and raised serious issues about the conduct of the war.
The military prosecutors, Aubrey Ready to be tried Lieutenant Calley leaves a preliminary hearing on August 24, 1970, with a civilian attorney and a military escort.
Calley s court martial was a general court martial—the most serious court of military trial—for which a preliminary Article 32 hearing is mandatory.
SERGEANT LARRY LA CROIX, QUOTED BY RON RIDENHOUER, MARCH 29, 1969 AFTER The My Lai case helped turn United States public opinion even further against the war in Vietnam. of the enemy.
Rifleman Paul Meadlo testified that Calley had ordered him to help kill the civilians.
Witness Dennis Conti described Calley firing on villagers as they cowered in a ditch.
Lack of justice At the end of the trial, only Calley was convicted—for personally killing 22 villagers.
Despite an initial life sentence for premeditated murder, the lieutenant served only three months in military prison and three and a half years under house arrest.
Nixon reduced the sentence under public pressure from those who saw Calley as a scapegoat for the failures of the Army.
Daniel and William Eckhardt, claimed that politics interfered with the army's ability to bring the perpetrators to justice.
Other questions were also being raised about United States conduct of the war.
Although Nixon tried to quash public access to the report, the damage was already done.
CALLEY NOW Protest button The ""Free Calley"" movement believed that the lieutenant had been unfairly blamed for the orders of those higher up in the chain of command.
They made a hero of him, holding rallies and writing songs in his honor.
A popular antiwar poster emerged from his response, with his reply, ""and babies,"" superimposed onto a photograph of the massacre.
Today, many veterans make pilgrimages to the site, hoping to make peace with these memories.
The Johnson administration had attempted to manage Cambodia's precarious neutrality, but the Nixon government launched several major operations within this small country that dragged it further into the wider war.
United States INCURSIONS Repeated cross-border raids against Viet Cong hideouts by ARVN forces, backed up by United States advisers and air support, brought tensions to a head.
Following an incident that left 17 Cambodian villagers dead, Norodom Sihanouk ordered United States diplomats out of Phnom Penh.
J P resident Johnson had placed some restrictions on United States military and intelligence actions along the Cambodian border and had rejected a request from General Westmoreland for B-52 strikes along the frontier.
Nevertheless, United States reconnaissance and land-mining patrols, codenamed Salem House and later Daniel Boone, repeatedly entered Cambodia, and Cambodian villagers continued to suffer from ARVN raids planned with the United States command.
Relations restored Norodom Sihanouk did not like the Vietnamese communists' use of his country for their operations, but he wanted the United States to recognize Cambodia's borders, stop the incursions, and sever the ties that he perceived the Americans to have with his domestic rivals.
As a presidential candidate, Nixon had criticized Sihanouk as not truly neutral and agreed with military strategists who wanted more United States operations in Cambodia.
Once in office, however, he surprised almost everyone, including the «**c*X""s , Prince in Paris Shortly before his overthrow, Norodom Sihanouk addresses the media outside the Elysee Palace, Paris, after a meeting with French President Pompidou.
CAMBODIA IS DRAWN INTO THE WAR leaders of South Vietnam, by recognizing Sihanouk's demands for respect for his country's rights and territory, and in July 1969 diplomatic relations were restored between the two countries.
Nixon and Kissinger created a public image of cooperation with Sihanouk but the reopening of the United States Embassy in Phnom Penh was also useful for intelligence gathering, a factor that was of growing importance as these diplomatic moves occurred in the wake of significant military developments.
Ready to fire Troops of the Cambodian army take up firing positions behind a bank near Kampong Cham in the Mekong Delta region in May 1970.
Cambodian forces were fighting in operations linked to the United States and South Vietnamese incursions that followed the fall of Sihanouk. vote of no confidence removed him as head of state.
The war had caused the urban middle class and many in the military to lose faith in Sihanouk's ability to defend the country.
Cheng Heng, Chairman of the National Assembly, was appointed interim head of state.
Operation Menu The Nixon administration was intent upon one thing, defeating North Vietnam and the Viet Cong, and had little regard for Cambodia.
On March 18, 1969, the United States Air Force had begun Operation Menu, a covert bombing campaign of eastern Cambodia, known to be a support area for the infiltration of North Vietnamese forces into South Vietnam.
American commanders also thought it was the location of the headquarters of the Central Office for South Vietnam , the base of operations for communist forces in the South.
The nature of so-called sanctuaries and of COSVN itself had been in dispute—one reason Johnson had refused to bomb Cambodia—but Nixon and many of his military advisers were committed to this strategy.
In the event, almost 4,000 sorties were flown, but COSVN, a main target, was not destroyed.
RICHARD NIXON, NOTE TO HENRY KISSINGER, JANUARY 8, 1969 GENERAL LON NOL POLITICIAN 1913-85 Lon Nol served in the French colonial service from 1937 and entered the police force in 1951.
He joined the army in 1952, taking part in the fight against Vietnamese communist insurgents.
Subsequently, he held the posts of defense minister and prime minister, alternately or simultaneously.
Following the overthrow of Sihanouk in March 1970, and despite a debilitating stroke in 1971, he led the government in Phnom Penh until March 1975, when he left Cambodia.
Effects of the bombing Many Cambodian villagers died in these raids, however.
The Vietnamese communist forces moved westward from the border and further into Cambodia, increasing their political influence on the Cambodian population.
The United States had never asked Sihanouk for approval of these bombing operations.
In addition to the devastating impact of the American bombing and continued ground operations on the Cambodian population as i a whole, United States strategy also had • a catastrophic effect on Sihanouk's hold on power.
In March 1970, while Sihanouk was absent in Europe supposedly for medical care, a parliamentary New blood General Lon Nol had not plotted the coup, but in the preceding weeks he had been urging Sihanouk to be tougher with North Vietnam.
Public demonstrations in Phnom Penh after the overthrow of Sihanouk provided the pressure for parliamentary leaders to invite Lon Nol to take charge.
AFTER General Lon Nol failed to halt the activities of communist forces— both from Cambodia and Vietnam—in spite of military support from the United States.
A leading figure in the resistance to French rule in Cambodia, he later became committed to the overthrow of the government of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who steered a neutral line in foreign policy.
Under Sar's leadership, the CPK was transformed into the extreme and violent movement that became the Khmer Rouge.
Although the communists of North Vietnam initially supported the Khmer Rouge, by the mid1960s, this alliance had broken down.
Unintended consequences Operation Menu, which was launched by the United States in March 1969, upset the political balance in Cambodia.
The Khmer BAS RELIEF OF KHMER SOLDIERS FROM ANGKOR WAT Historical antagonism between Cambodians and Vietnamese inhibited fraternal relations between the communist movements in each country.
When a small group of communist-led rebels formed in Cambodia in the 1950s to oppose Sihanouk, they received little help from the Vietnamese communists.
A VIET CONG DOCUMENT, CAPTURED IN APRIL 1970 and the Vietnamese communists led the Khmer Rouge to hate both in equal measure.
Although versed in the ideologies of the French revolution, Marxism, and Stalinism, Pol Pot believed that Cambodia had nothing to learn from external influences and envisioned the restoration of the old glory of the Khmer Kingdom.
He and his followers viewed all Vietnamese people—from the North or South—as enemies.
The Forest Army For years, Sihanouk considered what he called the Khmers Rouges little more than a nuisance.
They remained a small, isolated group of extreme zealots, nurturing their own vision of ""pure"" revolution and extolling suffering and sacrifice.
It was a rural-based agrarian communism roughly modeled on Mao Zedong's peasant movement.
In its camps Rouge took advantage of the weakness in Phnom Penh under Sihanouk and subsequently Lon Nol, and the spread of the Vietnam War to Cambodia to expand their membership among disaffected rural Cambodians.
Although Nixon had bluntly declared that ""no Cambodians had lived in [the area bombed] for many years"" and that ""it was totally occupied by the North Vietnamese Communists,"" American intelligence knew otherwise.
Terrified villagers fled the B-52 attacks, and some of the survivors ended up in the ranks of the rebels.
Those who did not join the militants became sympathetic to the enemies of the United States.
Very young, displaced villagers were radicalized and trained as guerrillas.
Khmer Rouge guerrillas Few photographs exist of Khmer Rouge soldiers in their camps in the 1960s and 1970s.
Pictured at their base in western Cambodia in February 1981, these Khmer Rouge guerillas are as young and committed as those of earlier decades.
Strange bedfellows The overthrow of Sihanouk by conservative factions of the ruling class, led by Lon Nol, created a moment of opportunity for the Khmer Rouge.
Responding to anarchy Cambodia descended into a violent anarchy of rival gangs, Khmer Rouge guerrillas, and Vietnamese troops of various kinds grasping for Peasant support The Cambodian peasantry was overwhelmingly apolitical, but had royalist sympathies.
After Sihanouk voiced his support for the Khmer Rouge, their numbers swelled from 6,000 to 50,000. advantage.
Prompted by United States officials in Phnom Penh, Lon Nol appealed for outside help, and the Nixon administration was more than ready to respond.
But the Khmer Rouge was also ready to make a ""recruiting sergeant"" of the misery caused by continued United States and Vietnamese incursions.
Under Prime Minister Lon Nol, Cambodia began the creation of a Cambodian national army with the advice and training of United States Army Special Forces operators.
MAKAROV PISTOL USED BY THE KHMER ROUGE alignment with the ousted prince whom they had long opposed and with the Vietnamese communists, whom they distrusted.
At the time of the coup, France briefly floated a proposal for an international conference that might secure Cambodian sovereignty and neutrality, but failed to get support from enough nations to make this a reality.
Understandably angry and feeling betrayed, Sihanouk took refuge in Beijing.
In later years, he JANUARY 1969-DECEMBER 1971 Cambodian Incursion In spring 1970, Nixon decided to risk public criticism and attack Viet Cong and NVA bases in Cambodia, an officially neutral country.
He also wanted to shore up Lon Nol, Cambodia's newly installed pro-American premier, and send an intimidating message to the North.
The heat of battle Armed with M16 rifles, an M60 machine gun, and a sniper rifle—but without shirts, flak jackets, or helmets, because of the oppressive heat—members of the Ninth Infantry Division fight enemy forces in Cambodia's forest terrain.
F ollowing the coup in Phnom Penh in March 1970, the new prime minister General Lon Nol quickly offered military cooperation with the United States as a way of controlling communist activity.
Although Nixon had publicly declared that the United States had no advance warning of the coup, it was clear that the change of leadership was welcomed by the United States.
Entering the Parrot's Beak On April 30, 1970, at the request of General Abrams, Nixon ordered incursions into Cambodia.
The plan and execution of the incursion was a joint operation with South Vietnamese forces and a combat test of Vietnamization.
RICHARD NIXON, MAY 1,1970 E F O R E By 1970, President Nixon and Henry Kissinger were conducting peace negotiations in private.
FIGHTING AND TALKING On February 21, 1970, Henry Kissinger had begun secret talks with North Vietnam's Le Due Tho in Paris.
Private meetings were evidence of Nixon's and Kissinger's secretive conduct of the war and of their concern to use political pressure as well as military means to force a settlement.
Le Due Tho demanded United States withdrawal from Vietnam and a role for the People's Revolutionary Government, the political arm of the Viet Cong.
The goal was to encircle and destroy a large concentration of North Vietnamese forces there.
Two days later, a primarily American force attacked the ""Fishhook,"" some 48 miles north of Saigon and believed to be the site of the Central Office for South Vietnam , the nerve center of the Viet Cong, which United States intelligence believed was operating out of Cambodia.
Over the following weeks, the attacking ARVN and United States forces often operated independently in multibattalion cross-border attacks or in brief raids.
Some stayed to occupy an area to provide support for the army of Lon Nol's Cambodian government , and others quickly went back to South Vietnam.
It was the largest military sweep since Operation Junction City in 1967.
The incursion was intended to force communist units away from Vietnam's border, thus buying time for Vietnamization and reducing pressure on Lon Nol's pro-American but precarious regime.
United States commanders claimed the operation killed around 11,000 enemy troops, destroyed 8,000 bunkers, found thousands of weapons and tens of thousands of rounds of ammunition, and seized tons of rice and medical supplies.
This costly effort did not have a significant impact on the strength of communist forces in Vietnam or move Le Due Tho from his hardline position in the Paris peace talks.
The COSVN was not a place but a leadership group that moved frequently between various meeting sites in order to avoid attack or capture.
At a time when Washington was attempting to reduce the scale of its engagement in Indochina, the theater of war had expanded with the accompanying costs and risks.
United States forces pull out On June 30, 1970, United States forces left Cambodia.
Without United States or ARVN troops to defend Phnom Penh, the Cambodian Army now faced the emerging Khmer Rouge alone.
Within four months of the United States withdrawal, the Khmer Rouge controlled the country east of the Mekong, and much beyond.
While Lon Nol's government held on to the capital, it was unable to regain any territory.
Cambodia's economy quickly deteriorated and poverty and hunger took hold.
Captured enemy weapons Members of the First Cavalry Division and 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment at their base at Quan Loi near An Loc survey some of the thousands of enemy weapons captured in the Fishhook area during the incursion of May and June 1970.
AFTER The incursion into Cambodia inflamed antiwar protests and provided added impetus to the scaling down of United States operations.
He also said that he sought to bridge the country's deep differences over the war.
Instead, Nixon ignited a political firestorm that would engulf his presidency.
A siege mentality began to develop inside the White House E F O R E The selective service system had long been a point of controversy.
DRAFTEES TO VOLUNTEERS Congress—concerned about requiring young Americans to participate in an increasingly unpopular war, and the fairness of the selection system—decided to draw birth dates by lottery to set the order of induction.
However, the continued unpopularity of the draft led Congress to end the lottery in 1972 and institute an all-volunteer service. as it assessed domestic politics.
Many members of Congress who were already opposed to the war exploded in anger over Nixon's Cambodian incursion.
Some charged that the administration had lied outright to Congress, as only days before the incursion Secretary of State William Rogers had testified to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that there were no plans for operations in Cambodia.
Congressional doves On May 1, two bills challenged the president's authority.
Republican John Sherman Cooper of Kentucky and Democrat Frank Church of Idaho sponsored a measure to cut off all funds for military operations in Cambodia after June 30.
Neither bill became law, but in June the Senate voted for a resolution to terminate the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Young martyrs Four students were killed and nine more were wounded during 13 seconds of gunfire at Kent State.
Only two of the four students killed, Jeffrey Miller and Allison Krause, had actually taken part in protests.
On hundreds of college campuses, antiwar voices called the incursion an invasion.
Ten days later, two students were killed in a similar incident at Jackson State in Mississippi.
On the antiwar side, the Vietnam Veterans against the War expressed their discontent.
Chanting ""America, love it or leave it,"" these counter-protesters beat some peace marchers with work tools.
LIEUtENANT JOHN KERRY TO THE SENATE FOREIGN REEATI0NS COMMITTEE, APRIL 22, 1971 THE NATIONAL DRAFT LOTTERY Resolution upon which Johnson and Nixon had claimed authority to deploy United States forces to Vietnam.
The Cambodian incursion inflamed domestic opposition to the war that had been mounting misconduct they had witnessed.
Lieutenant John Kerry, a Navy veteran, argued that loyal young Americans Stung by the intense public criticism, Nixon responded to the protests by taking action.
THE HUSTON PLAN Convinced that radical groups in the United States were linked to foreign governments, Nixon authorized the Huston Plan to wiretap and burglarize the homes of ordinary Americans.
NO CONSEQUENCES Nixon created the President's Commission on Campus Unrest in response to the events at Kent State.
However, the guardsmen were not punished, and were acquitted by a Grand Jury in 1974.
Tom Grace, a sophomore on the way to a history exam, was caught up in the tragedy that followed.
The students felt that it was their campus and they were doing nothing wrong, and that the armed National Guardsmen had no right to order them to disperse.
At the same time, some students were wandering through the area with textbooks, unaware of what was taking place around them.
All of a sudden, the National Guardsmen got to the top of the hill where they began to fire rifles.
Tom Grace describes turning and running as fast as he could, before being knocked off his feet by a bullet through his left heel.
There was no cover and farther down the hill in the parking lot, he could see people were dropping.
He didn’t know if they were being hit by bullets or if they were just hugging the ground. “it... kept going and going and going.
THE SIXTIES EXPERIENCE IN THE WORDS OF THOSE WHO LIVED IT, 1987 Picture of despair Fourteen-year-old Mary Ann Vecchio screams over the body of 20-year-old Jeffrey Miller in this Pulitzer Prize-winning image by photojournalism student John Filo.
Instead of firing blanks, National Guardsmen shot 67 live rounds in 13 seconds, killing four and wounding nine.
He became the first pilot to be held prisoner in North Vietnam and remained in captivity for eight and a half years.
LONGEST CAPTIVITY The longest-held American prisoner was United States Army Special Forces Captain Floyd James Thompson who was captured in South Vietnam on March 26, 1964, after only three months in the country.
J “ What [our North Vietnamese captors] wanted was to subdue us and then win us over to the point where we would routinely do their bidding.
JEREMIAH A DENTON JR., WHEN HELL WAS IN SESSION, 1976 Taken prisoner First Lieutenant Gerald Santo Venanzi. is taken prisoner by a young Vietnamese woman.
Venanzi was copilot of a plane that was brought down in North Vietnam on September 17, 1967.
Prisoners of War The number of Americans held prisoner or categorized as missing was relatively small, but the fate of American prisoners of war in North Vietnam became a burning political issue during the war, throughout the peace negotiations, and after the conflict was over.
Many of these surviving prisoners had suffered extreme hardships in captivity.
Most of them died in fiery crashes or at the hands of guerrillas in remote areas, and few remains were ever found.
Known to Americans as the Hanoi Hilton, it was once a French jail holding Viet Minh suspects.
A large fortress covering a city block, it had 20-foot high walls that were topped with electrified barbed wire.
Many prisoners were isolated and tortured in special interrogation rooms in attempts to secure confessions for propaganda use.
Mistreatment included beatings, shackling, being held in darkness for extended periods, and being denied washing facilities.
Zoo inspection American POWs stand for an inspection by international observers in the yard at Hanoi's Nga Tu So prison, nicknamed the Zoo, on March 29, 1973, just before their release.
They left the prison shortly after, still dressed in their prison uniforms. continue the war primarily for the purpose of POW release.
Backed by the administration, some members of Congress, and the media, the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia was formed in May 1970.
While successful in gaining support at home, diplomatically the focus on POWs backfired.
The North Vietnamese reasoned that their negotiators could use offers to release POWs as leverage to gain the concessions it wanted from the United States to reduce its support for the Thieu government.
Vietnamese POWs in the South The United States military did not hold Vietnamese POWs—these were held by the South Vietnamese— and North Vietnam did not make its own prisoners or missing an issue in the peace negotiations, even though their numbers were far greater. prisoners devised ingenious methods of surreptitious communication and found ways to keep up morale.
The Hanoi Hilton held some prisoners who were destined for later prominence, including Medal of Honor winner and later admiral James B Stockdale and future senator and presidential candidate John McCain.
The reasons are unclear but may have related to North Vietnam's perceptions of United States military de-escalation and the possibilities for negotiation raised by the POW issue.
The POW issue As a counter to the peace movement and to acquire political support for the administration, Nixon and his aides began to prioritize the demand for the release of American prisoners of war.
Many Americans had been willing to fight communism, but they had become opposed to the continuation of a costly war to maintain the unpopular Saigon regime.
By making POW release an issue, Nixon gained backing from POW families and from pro-war individuals, notably millionaire H Ross Perot, who headed the United We Stand organization, which lobbied to I The longest-held American civilian prisoner was Ernest Brace, a contract pilot taken in Laos in May 1965 and held for nearly seven years.
Captive guerrillas Suspected Viet Cong fighters await interrogation by the United States Marines in July 1967.
United States forces did not hold prisoners long term, but took advantage of their capture to question them for information about enemy plans.
After interrogation by American intelligence, all North Vietnamese and Viet Cong prisoners were placed under the jurisdiction of the ARVN military police.
The South Vietnamese Ministry of the Interior operated four prisoner of war camps, one in each military region.
Communist political operatives who were not soldiers were placed Enduring reminder A student organization called Voices in Vital America first issued these bracelets in May 1970 as part of their campaign to ensure that POWs would not be forgotten.
Those who wore the bracelets vowed to leave them on until the soldier, or their remains, were returned.
Originally forming part of a French colonial prison, the Tiger Cages were only 5 feet square and 9 feet high with an open roof of metal bars.
No North Vietnamese soldiers—except for some POWs convicted of murder in prison camps—were held at Con Son.
Conditions at the prison were so terrible that in July 1970 the Red Cross declared it in violation of the Geneva Convention prohibiting inhumane treatment of prisoners.
Reports on the prison helped to convince the United States Congress to begin to curtail aid to South Vietnam—a significant turning point in the war.
Raid on SonTay In tandem with diplomatic efforts to obtain the release of United States prisoners, the Nixon administration wanted a military success in Vietnam to demonstrate to the North and the American public that the United States political will to fight the war remained strong.
RICHARD NIXON, REMARKS AFTER SONTAY RAID, NOVEMBER 25, 1970 50 American POWs at a camp at Son Tay about 23 miles north of Hanoi.
This seemed to provide the opportunity to liberate American prisoners from the heart of North Vietnam, which would be a valuable propaganda coup.
On the night of November 20, 1970, United States Air Force helicopters ferried 56 United States Army Rangers into Son Tay.
What the intelligence had failed to discover was that, due to flooding from heavy July rains, the North Vietnamese authorities had moved the prisoners about 15 miles away.
Going home Newly freed prisoners of war show their joy as their military aircraft lifts off from Hanoi on February 12, 1973.
No American lives were lost in the raid, which was considered a tactical success and could well have rescued prisoners had they still been there.
Some commentators saw it as a courageous attempt worth the risk, though others labeled it a foolhardy and provocative act.
While Nixon did not get the kind of accolades he wanted, the action did impress the North Vietnamese.
The United States had inserted and extracted troops very near to their capital and had inflicted a significant number of casualties on the camp's defenders.
Living conditions became very crowded in the Hanoi Hilton, with some men sleeping shoulder to shoulder, but the increased contact had the benefit of enhancing prisoner morale.
Homecoming heroes Operation Homecoming was the name given to the repatriation of American POWs in 1973 following the signing of the Paris Accords in January 1973.
The North released the prisoners as the last remaining United States forces withdrew from South Vietnam, except for a small contingent at the American embassy in Saigon.
With great fanfare, the returnees were welcomed home as heroes, a reception few other service members received when they came back from the controversial war. r » Although Nixon proudly proclaimed that all POWs had returned in 1973, many Americans remained skeptical that the North had cooperated fully.
HOPE SURVIVES Reports of live sightings and other ""evidence"" of POWs allegedly still held in Southeast Asia fueled speculation and kept hope alive for many families.
However, separate congressional and Department of Defense investigations in the 1970s concluded that no United States prisoners remained anywhere in Southeast Asia.
Nevertheless, for a further two decades the United States demanded that the Vietnamese government provide a full account of all missing United States servicemen before diplomatic relations could be established.
Conditions were often atrocious and the POWs had only the most basic necessities for daily life.
Toothbrush Items for personal hygiene such as toothbrushes were provided.
Soap Highly valued by prisoners, small pieces of soap were pressed together to form larger bars.
Metal spoon This NVA issue spoon was used by Commander David Rollins, who was held from 1967 to 1973.
Metal cup This was issued to Colonel Carlyle Harris, who was a POW for nearly eight years.
J S > f«* iU, ‘y dinli EH PAPER TOWEL Transporting intel This map case was used by Viet Cong and NVA troops to carry important documents along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
Cases like this one often held information about enemy supply routes and intelligence from Hanoi regarding enemy positions or strategy.
BEFORE By 1971, the Ho Chi Minh Trail had been operational for 16 years, bringing soldiers and supplies from North Vietnam through Laos and Cambodia into South Vietnam.
During 1970, an estimated 8,000 men and 10,000 tons of supplies moved along the trail each month.
FORBIDDEN ZONE After the Cambodian incursion, Congress repeatedly attempted to limit the United States president's war powers and block any expansion of the war beyond Vietnam.
The Cooper-Church amendment to a military appropriation bill finally passed Congress in December 1970.
Codenamed Lam Son 719, the operation was a major test of Vietnamization.
I n early 1971, General Creighton Abrams planned an operation to interdict the flow of North Vietnamese and supplies into South Vietnam along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
The initiative was welcomed by both the United States and South Vietnamese administrations.
Both President Nixon and President Thieu were eager to see the South Vietnamese Army succeed as United States troop strength declined, to shew that the ARVN was capable of holding its own in battle.
Because of the Cooper-Church Amendment, United States ground forces could not enter Laos, through which much of the Ho Chi Minh Trail passed.
Therefore, it was decided that the operation would be an ARVN ground attack with function.
Truck convoys of 40 to 60 vehicles moved through the area each night on a maze of roads.
Marching into Laos The ARVN advance along Route 9 toward Tchepone went easily for a few days.
As trained by the US, South Vietnamese troops built fire support bases as they went.
After an advance of about 12 miles in two weeks, the ARVN column came under heavy attack.
Counting on United States air support, the southern forces hunkered down in the firebases, but low clouds, antiaircraft fire, and the proximity of enemy to friendly forces negated the use of B-52s or low-level fighter bombers.
American UH-1 Hueys—with Cobra (( I hope Thieu understands .. that this may be his last crack at massive United States support.
There were no American advisers or forward air controllers with the ARVN units.
All of the houses had been destroyed and the local people were living in caves, but the roads, communication network, antiaircraft artillery, and a rebuilt Buddhist temple continued to gunship protection—lifted two South Vietnamese battalions into the town.
However, by March 1, Tchepone had been abandoned by the North Vietnamese, and the assault therefore had no military consequences.
President Thieu considered his objectives realized, and ordered Lam's forces to retreat.
Taking control North Vietnamese troops attack a fire support base at Hill 31, Laos, 15 miles northwest of an American border base at Lang Vei.
They soon set their sights on the nearby Hill 30. training and leadership needed to accomplish the task.
It was only the bravery of United States helicopter crews, going in despite poor weather and devastating antiaircraft fire, that enabled the rescue of thousands of ARVN troops.
Lam's forces lost at least 5,000 men, killed or wounded, plus 2,500 missing in action.
Traffic along that part of the Ho Chi Minh trail was only briefly stopped, and plans to expand the trail farther into Laos were underway.
In April 1971, Nixon announced the withdrawal of another 100,000 United States troops from Vietnam.
Nearly 40,000 NVA troops attacked the ARVN as they left the town, and the withdrawal quickly became a rout.
In this test of Vietnamization, many fought well, but the army faced some overwhelming challenges.
An orderly retreat under fire would have been a difficult maneuver even for veteran troops, and the ARVN forces lacked both the AFTER In October, Nguyen Van Thieu was reelected as president of South Vietnam, albeit amid charges that the election was rigged in the incumbent's favor.
THE ONE-MAN ELECTION In 1971, Thieu forced a list of criteria for presidential candidates through the National Assembly that not even Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky could satisfy.
One popular general met the criteria, but chose not to run despite CIA efforts to pay him to stay in.
Thieu went to the polls unopposed in October and received almost 80 percent of the vote, with a 90 percent turnout.
Thieu's own ambassador to the United States wrote that this election only reinforced the image of the regime inside and outside of Vietnam as a corrupt and repressive dictatorship.
The NVA had attacked Phu Loc during the ARVN's advance in February, but it remained under South Vietnamese control.
In an attempt to bring all parties back to the negotiating table, the United States rains bombs on strategic targets in the North.
EASTER OFFENSIVE TO United States EXIT JANUARY 1972-JANUARY1973 t Easter 1972, North Vietnam launched a major offensive against the South, using tanks and heavy artillery.
The North Vietnamese Army struck southward across the DMZ to capture Quang Tri and across South Vietnam's western borders toward Kontum and An Loc.The United States responded with extensive bombing of the North and provided air support for South Vietnamese ground troops.
After initial reverses, the South Vietnamese army halted the offensive on all fronts.
In the fall, the Paris peace talks broke down after coming tantalizingly close to agreement, prompting President Richard Nixon to order air raids by B-52 bombers against key targets in Hanoi and Haiphong.
A resumption of negotiations in January 1973 brought swift agreement on terms for a ceasefire and the final withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam.
ED Blocking Route 13, the road to Saigon, became a key objective for South Vietnamese soldiers during North Vietnam's Easter Offensive at An Loc.
In May 1972, the United States unleashed Linebacker 1, an air campaign against strategic targets in North Vietnam.
The devasation wreaked by the Easter Offensive caused thousands of civilians to flee their homes.
MARCH 30 The NVA launches the Easter Offensive, a large-scale invasion of South Vietnam, using armored vehicles and artillery to strike across the DMZ toward the city of Quang Tri.
JUNE 28 ARVN troops in northern South Vietnam launch a counteroffensive with the aim of retaking Quang Tri province.
APRIL 10 B-52 bombers begin large-scale raids on targets deep inside North Vietnam as America escalates the air war.
MAY 1 The city of Quang Tri is occupied by the NVA as South Vietnamese troops retreat southward in disorder.
MAY 17 President Nixon approves Operation Enhance, the provision of large quantities of American military equipment to the South Vietnamese armed forces.
JULY 20 The Siege of An Loc ends in an NVA defeat after 95 days of fighting.
MAY 5 South Vietnamese forces stabilize a defensive line, halting the North Vietnamese advance toward Hue.
V ARVN soldiers at La Vang , July 1972 APRIL 7 After a three-day battle, North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces capture the town of Loc Ninh, near the Cambodian border north of Saigon.
APRIL 12 Communist forces advance from base areas in Laos and Cambodia toward Kontum.
MAY 8 President Nixon orders the mining of Haiphong Harbor and other North Vietnamese ports to block the import of war materiel.
APRIL 13 The city of An Loc, north of Saigon, comes under attack and its defenders are placed under siege by communist forces.
MAY 10 United States air forces begin Operation Linebacker, a sustained bombing campaign against North Vietnam, which attacks military installations, supply routes, and storage facilities.
AUGUST 11 The last combat patrol carried out by American troops in Vietnam is completed near Da Nang.
JUNE 9 Communist forces are cleared from Kontum City, ending the threat of South Vietnam being cut in two.
AUGUST 27 United States Navy vessels carry out a night raid against the defenses of the port of Haiphong.
LETTER FROM COLONEL WILLIAM NOLDE, LAST United States COMBAT CASUALTY IN VIETNAM, KILLED JANUARY 27, 1973 SEPTEMBER-DECEMBER JANUARY-MARCH 1973 OCTOBER 22 The communist Easter Offensive ends.
The American Linebacker bombing campaign against North Vietnam is halted.
NOVEMBER 14 Nixon assures President Thieu that if Hanoi does not abide by the terms of the proposed peace deal, the United States will retaliate swiftly and severely.
DECEMBER 20 Six B-52 bombers are shot down by North Vietnamese SAMs, forcing a revision of American bombing tactics.
FEBRUARY 12 Operation Homecoming— the transfer of United States prisoners of war from North Vietnam to the United States—begins.
December 1972 SEPTEMBER 16 South Vietnamese forces retake Quang Tri City, lost to the communists at the start of May.
DECEMBER 14 As peace negotiations in Paris stall, Nixon and his advisers decide to resume the bombing of North Vietnam. if ARVN recapture Quang Tri, September 1972 DECEMBER 18 Operation Linebacker II, known as the Christmas Bombing, begins.
FEBRUARY 21 A peace agreement is signed between the Royal Laotian government and the Pathet Lao.
OCTOBER 8 Meeting in Paris, North Vietnamese negotiator Le Due Tho and United States National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger agree a draft peace agreement.
OCTOBER 26 Henry Kissinger declares that ""peace is at hand"" in Vietnam, despite the rejection of the peace deal by South Vietnam's President Thieu.
JANUARY 21 President Thieu reluctantly accepts the proposed peace terms.
The ""land grab"" begins as communist and South Vietnamese forces fight for control of villages across South Vietnam.
NOVEMBER 7 Richard Nixon is re-elected as president in a landslide victory, winning over 60 percent of the popular vote.
The provisions include a ceasefire and the withdrawal of all American forces from Vietnam within 60 days.
I n the latter half of 1971, the North Vietnamese Politburo began to make plans for a major new offensive into South Vietnam for spring 1972.
It was to be a campaign unlike anything they had tried before, with troops waging conventional warfare, employing massed tanks and heavy artillery.
The North Vietnamese planned to coordinate closely among main force, regional, and local troops and to fight in urban and rural areas alike; unlike the Tet Offensive, which had unfolded in waves, the attack would be relentless.
Moscow also sent tanks, along with modern cannons and more sophisticated missiles, such as the shoulder-fired SA-7 ""Strella"" antiaircraft in 1972.
Anxious to cushion the shock these diplomatic openings might cause Hanoi, they supplied North Vietnam with additional increments of military aid.
China tripled shipments of 2 /^ The number of l U U trucks sent to Hanoi by China between 1971 and 1972, increasing capacity along the Ho Chi Minh Trail by 50 percent. weapon and the AT-3 ""Sagger"" antitank missile.
Hanoi prepared for the much greater supply needs that were anticipated.
It built a pipeline to pump oil to the South, and supplemented the existing Keeping up the fight This Viet Cong propaganda poster, published in 1972, was designed to keep up morale among the guerrilla force during the lull in combat leading up to the Spring Offensive. road net with a new Secret Road that connected Tchepone in Laos with the Cambodia-Laos-Vietnam ""triborder"" region.
Able to carry trucks and built entirely under jungle canopy, it could be used 24 hours a day, and accelerated the movement of troops (who had previously marched), reducing deaths and sickness.
A mock-up of At the end of 1971, Hanoi was in a strong position, especially after the ARVN failure in Lam Son.
VIET CONG IN ACTION IN 1968 The T-54 Tank Communist allies augmented the NVA's supply of light PT-76 tanks with medium T-54 orT-55 vehicles, which were a better match for the United States M48.
The combat divisions themselves— tasked with mastering the new mass tactics in a very short time— each specialized in certain types of attack, such as urban or mountain fighting, or ambushes.
NORTH VIETNAMESE LEADER LE DUAN Preparations for the 1972 invasion of the South were masterminded by Le Duan.
A veteran strategist, who had led the Viet Minh against the French in the Mekong in the 1950s, Le Duan became the effective ruler of North Vietnam after Ho Chi Minh's death in 1969, eclipsing rival Pham Van Dong.
Evidence suggests that Le Duan took part in a 1967 purge of pro-Soviet leaders that had marginalized Dong.
Placing the troops The ambitious plans called for forces of several divisions to attack across the DMZ, in the Central Highlands, and north of Saigon.
Priority was initially given to the Saigon area but this shifted to the northern provinces of Quang Tri and Thua Thien shortly before the attack began.
Hanoi expected to overrun those provinces, as well as Kontum and Pleiku in the Central Highlands.
The final pieces in the plan were for the Viet Cong to attack in the Mekong Delta and for more NVA troops to enter northern Laos.
The NVA committed almost all its forces, keeping only one division in reserve.
Evoking a heroic figure in Vietnamese history, Hanoi called the campaign the Nguyen Hue Offensive, after the warrior (also known as Quang Trung) who defeated a Chinese invasion in 1789 and went on to become a modernizing emperor of Vietnam.
Peace talks between the North Vietnamese and Henry Kissinger continued in Paris.
Hanoi worried that a Chinese-American rapprochement had begun at its expense.
TIME TO STRIKE By its military offensive, Hanoi sought both to demonstrate its resolve and break the deadlock in the peace talks.
It believed the United States was stalling for time in the peace talks while Washington rebuilt the military capablities of the South Vietnamese.
In September 1971, the Director of the CIA, Richard Helms, had briefed the National Security Council that something was afoot and expressed most concern about the DMZ and the Central Highlands.
In a presidential conversation with Henry Kissinger in November 1971, Nixon had expressed his desire for the United States to take a hard ""pop"" against Hanoi after the 1972 presidential election, regardless of who became president.
Nixon instructed Kissinger to reinforce the United States fleet off Vietnamese shores.
J RICHARD NIXON, NOVEMBER 20, 1971 f jggL, Wjgg AMERICAN STRATEGY IN 1972 Cause for alarm At that point, the intelligence turned dark.
North Vietnamese infiltration, which had been at a very low rate in summer and fall of 1971, increased exponentially over the winter, with 20,000 soldiers setting out along the Ho Chi Minh Trail in one week and 63,000 more following over a four-month span.
Meanwhile, aerial reconnaissance detected a tank concentration bigger than anything they had seen previously, North Vietnamese jets at airfields in the southern panhandle of North Vietnam, and two dozen NVA surface-to-air missile battalions taking position in the DMZ-Trail area.
Defense Intelligence Agency staff had also noticed a more aggressive tone in NVA and Viet Cong pronouncements.
On January 17, 1972, senior officials meeting in Washington tentatively predicted an attack in the DMZ in March and discussed how it could Final preparations Nixon meets with bipartisan Congressional leaders in the White House Cabinet Room on February 17,1972, to discuss his upcoming trip to China.
That afternoon, he left for Hawaii, where he would stay for four days before flying west.
Fighting the propaganda war Actress and activist Jane Fonda delivers an antiwar message on Hanoi Radio in North Vietnam in July 1972.
Exploiting the propaganda value of Fonda's visit to the full, Hanoi got her to sit on an antiaircraft gun while she made the broadcast. be met—ARVN capabilities and the scale of United States support in terms of tanks, planes, and artillery.
On January 20, General Abrams asked Washington to authorize more airstrikes and extend United States air support for the ARVN, including into Laos.
Warning the public On January 25, the president went on national television to prepare the public for what might unfold.
His speech revealed the secret peace negotiations that had been taking place with the North Vietnamese, including a peace proposal presented to them in the previous October.
He stated that if this proposal was rejected, he would take action to defend the remaining personnel in Vietnam.
By the end of January, the president had confirmed General Abrams's requests, and airstrikes were stepped up against the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos.
Planners studied the intersections, choke points, and river crossings of the Trail, designating ""blocking belts""—strategic points that when destroyed made escape difficult— and laying electronic sensors to provide target intelligence.
The United States also added to the Seventh Fleet in the South China Sea, and began preparations to operate B-52 bombers from the island of Guam and from Thailand.
Reaching out Strategy in Washington in 1972, however, was not solely focused on Vietnam.
As the war there dragged on, Nixon surprised the United States public by visiting the People's Republic of China in February to normalize relations.
AFTER The United States were proved right in their expectation of a major offensive.
In March, the NVA and Viet Cong unleashed their most ambitious offensive of the war.
It turned out to be a three-pronged attack, across the DMZ, from the west into the Central Highlands, and from Cambodia toward Saigon in the south, employing conventional tactics and weapons.
The ARVN, supported by massive United States airpower, faced its greatest test so far.
V Standing by for action United States Marines train in 1972, using helicopters and amphibious vehicles.
By this point in the war, the last United States Marines in Vietnam were preparing to stand down, or training the ARVN, but the prospect of a new North Vietnamese offensive saw numbers increase, readying for combat.
Quang Tri United States and ARVN commanders had been anticipating a major North Vietnamese offensive in the early months of 1972, but when the action began, the South Vietnamese forces were in disarray and United States support was limited because of ongoing Vietnamization.
B y March 1972, the American policy of Vietnamization had reduced the American presence to a fraction of its former might.
Yet the ARVN still depended heavily on American support to operate effectively against the NVA and Viet Cong.
United States Army advisers were working with the ARVN Third Division, in charge of defending the Quang Tri region of Military Region 1, the northernmost zone bordering the DMZ, but the ARVN forces were Line of defense South Vietnamese troops and tanks take counteroffensive action against North Vietnamese forces attacking Highway 1, southwest of Dong Ha, on April 20, 1972, « Bordering the DMZ, Quang Tri province had been a key target for communist attacks since the start of the war.
The siege of the combat base at Khe Sanh «200-203 was one of the fiercest engagements in the war.
CHANGING THE GUARD In October 1971, the ARVN's newly formed Third Division, under General Vu Van Giai, replaced the departing United States 101st Airborne Division, which had previously defended Quang Tri province.
Late in March, the ARVN Joint General Staff learned the North Vietnamese attack would begin on March 29 and ordered an alert.
General Giai, commanding the Third Division, was in the process of switching his Second Infantry with the 56th Infantry, which meant that neither regiment was in protective strongpoints when the attack commenced.
General Hoang Xuan Lam, and General Giai expected the Countering air attacks The NVA used the Soviet-made 9K32 Strela-2 shoulder-fired surface-to-air missile launcher to counter United States air attacks during the Quang Tri Offensive.
They managed to shoot down 14 fixed-wing aircraft and 10 helicopters. attack to come from the west, descending from the hills to the coastal plain, rather than across the DMZ, and the most effective regiment, the Second Infantry, was being removed from this sector.
Some artillery and air strikes had countered these attacks, but Giai felt he had no strength for a ground operation beyond his defense line.
The North Vietnamese had more than 30,000 troops backed by many guns and a full armored regiment.
Their prongs of attack across the DMZ, which included tanks, took the ARVN by surprise.
Cloud descends The skeleton group of United States advisers sprang into action.
B-52 bombers hit NVA Fleeing the battle Thousands of civilians were forced to flee their homes and villages during April 1972 as North Vietnamese forces advanced through Quang Tri province.
Many were killed by NVA bombardment of the routes along which they were fleeing.
GENERAL NGO QUANG tRUONG DESCRIBING CIVILIANS FLEEING QUANG TRI, 2010 staging areas at Khe Sanh and points outside the fighting zone.
However, poor weather prevented fighter bombers from aiding South Vietnamese Marines under pressure in the west.
Surrender of Camp Carroll By the evening of April 1, the western firebases had become untenable for the South Vietnamese and General Giai was forced to move his headquarters east to Quang Tri City.
On April 2, Easter Sunday, the situation for the ARVN defenders in the west deteriorated further.
Camp Carroll, the most important of the DMZ firebases, and the best equipped militarily, was surrounded by enemy forces.
With the loss of Camp Carroll went all the Vietnamese Marines' artillery and the ARVN's heaviest guns.
The United States advisers stationed there only just escaped in time, while some 1,500 ARVN soldiers were captured.
Stabilizing fins Hamburger city for the way new men arrived at night but were dead before dawn.
The South Vietnamese fought them every step of the way and took the last positions in Quang Tri's citadel on September 15.
With both armies exhausted and the city in ruins, the offensive in Quang Tri province was over.
The Easter Offensive in Quang Tri showed that the ARVN was capable of fighting well, but only when circumstances were right.
MIXED RESULTS The Quang Tri campaign proved that United States air support, and the good weather required, was critical to the success of ARVN actions.
MEASURING SUCCESS Although the ARVN regained Quang Tri city, it fought to a standstill that left the communists with permanent territorial gains.
Communist firepower Made in China for the NVA, the CHICOM Type-50 antitank grenade was a copy of the Soviet RPG-2.
The interruption provided the ARVN with time to regroup its forces and attempt a counteroffensive, but without much effect.
On April 23, the North Vietnamese renewed their attacks, this time slowly grinding away in an attempt to wear down ARVN morale.
The ARVN forces abandoned Dong Ha on April 28, and Quang Tri was lost on April 29.
The loss of Quang Tri and the NVA bombardment of villages and towns in the area led to a mass of refugees fleeing down Route 1 toward Hue.
The NVA targeted the road, and the loss of civilian lives there comprised one of the worst atrocities of the war.
In the wake of this catastrophic defeat, President Thieu replaced Military Region 1 commander Lam with General Ngo Quang Truong, South Vietnam's best field commander.
General Giai was fired, tried by a military tribunal, and sentenced to jail, his place taken by Nguyen Duy Hinh.
The First Division, which Truong had once led, was far more organized in its defense of Hue, the next assumed target.
When ARVN defenses held to the west and north of Hue, Truong moved to stabilize the line along the My Chanh River, about halfway between Quang Tri and Hue.
By May 13, ARVN forces had regained enough confidence to make further attacks and they gradually expanded their efforts west and north of the city of Hue.
On June 14, General Truong presented a plan for the recapture of Quang Tri and reached the town on July 4.
Both the assault and the defense were fierce, with house-to-house fighting.
NVA soldiers began to call the town The estimated I U| U number of NVA troops killed in the battle for Quang Tri City.
The estimated 5,000 number of ARVN killed in the retaking of Quang Tri city.
The bridge is blown Following the loss of Camp Carroll, General Giai ordered his forces to withdraw behind the Cua Viet River, setting up a battle for the town of Dong Ha.
This was a critical location because the bridge carrying the main north-south transportation route.
A second bridge, built by the French, stood nearby, and a third bridge crossed the river near Camp Carroll.
The three crossings formed the gateway to the heart of Quang Tri province and the cities of Hue and Da Nang.
By April 2, the Vietnamese Third Marine Battalion, ordered up from reserve, had entered the town, along with the 20th Armored Squadron on M-48 Pershings, the ARVN's heaviest tanks.
To the north, across the river, the North Vietnamese tanks had taken up positions.
Colonel Turley ordered Captain John Ripley, top adviser to the Third Marines, to blow up the bridge.
Captain Ripley displayed extreme bravery and skill as he climbed through the steel structure of the bridge to set the explosives.
Fresh attacks By forcing the NVA tanks to make a lengthy detour westward to cross the river, the destruction of the bridge at Dong Ha effectively sapped the momentum of the NVA advance.
Supplies to their forces also had to ARVN TROOPS V_ Mekong Delta, was placed in charge of Military Region 1 after the fall of Quang Tri in late April 1972.
South Vietnamese pilots dropped napalm bombs, believing their targets to be enemy soldiers.
Phuc sought asylum in Canada in 1992, and now speaks publicly about what happened.
She describes running from Cao Dai temple in Trang Bang and seeing an airplane getting lower.
It spread over her body, especially her left arm, burning off her clothes.
She lost consciousness and woke up in hospital, where she spent 14 months and had 17 operations.
When she eventually went home, she found that their house was destroyed and they had lost everything.
Despite the pain, itching, and headaches she suffered almost constantly, Phan Thi Kim Phuc dreamed of becoming a doctor.
But her studies were cut short by local government who refused to allow her to go to school anymore.
PHAN THI KIM PHUC, FROM THE LONG ROAD TO FORGIVENESS, NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO, JUNE 30, 2008 Shocking the nation The Associated Press initially rejected Nick Ut's image of the terrified Phan Thi Kim Phuc fleeing the napalm attack, on the grounds of nudity.
Editors, however, believed the news value of the photo overrode any reservations.
Kontum The security of the Central Highlands was a paramount concern for South Vietnamese and United States strategists in early 1972.
Loss of the Highlands and adjacent coastal plains would cut South Vietnam in two.
REPEATED ASSAULTS In 1965 and in 1967, there was major fighting in the Central Highlands.
This strategy was repeated two weeks before the start of the Easter Offensive when NVA units increased their activities in the area.
A n attack from the west through the Central Highlands—Military Region 2—was one of the three prongs of attack that comprised North Vietnam's plan for a spring offensive.
For this advance, the Montagnard defenders Soldiers from the hilltribes, or Montagnards, played a key role in opposing the NVA advance during the campaign in the Central Highlands.
Here, Montagnard troops rest in camp at Kontum while B-52s bomb the surrounding area.
North Vietnamese assembled three infantry divisions along with a tank unit, two artillery regiments, and three regiments of independent infantry—roughly 20,000 troops.
The South Vietnamese, aware of the threat, also posted a brigade of the ARVN Airborne Division to the region.
The ARVN benefited from a formidable United States adviser, John Paul Vann, who was able to convince The NVA in action In a photograph released by the North on April 28,1972, North Vietnamese soldiers are seen in action as they fire rockets at ARVN tanks.
The location of the photograph was identified as ""Dak Can,"" but the location is probably Tan Canh or Dak To.
General Abrams to prevail upon the ARVN to send a second airborne brigade to the Highlands.
KONTUM of additional ARVN forces from Pleiku to forward positions above Kontum.
A north-south backbone of the Highlands, had several firebases but it was still a tempting target for North Vietnamese forces looking to cut off Kontum from Dak To and Tan Canh, MR 2's northerly outposts.
Further preparations for the expected offensive included the deployment The action unfolds Serious fighting began at the end of March with clashes in Binh Dinh province, where the NVA attempted to cut Route 19, which connected the coastal ports with the upland cities.
In the Highlands, the NVA troops carried out bombardments on March 30, but held off on ground assaults for several more days.
A serious engagement came near Dak To, where on April 1, ARVN troops faced NVA sappers.
By April 11, fighting had become generalized from Rocket Ridge to Dak To and Tan Canh.
THE BATTLE TO SAVE SOUTH VIETNAM, 2011 Meanwhile, the South Vietnamese chose to move the airborne brigades out of the Highlands in exchange for the Sixth Ranger Group from Quang Tri.
The Rangers were exhausted from nearly a month of fighting, and moving up troops of the 23rd Division at Pleiku simply weakened the defenses.
Rocket Ridge positions collapsed, after which the NVA swiftly attacked the major base at Tan Canh, using tanks.
Some tanks were destroyed from the air, but the ARVN at Tan Canh and Dak To collapsed on April 24.
Opposing tank attacks The M72 LAW was the primary ground-operated United States antitank weapon during the Vietnam War.
Operable by one person and highly portable, it provided mobile defense against tank assaults by the NVA such as those during the Kontum campaign. became one of the heroes of the Easter Offensive, holding out against numerous challenges.
General Abrams designated Kontum for a day of B-52 strikes on May 12, just as the North Vietnamese were resuming their attacks.
By May 30, the area was sufficiently secure for President Thieu to make a visit.
A tragic footnote to the story occurred on June 9, when Vann's helicopter was shot down in the area where he had declared the last NVA positions to be eliminated.
ESSENTIAL SUPPORT The struggle against North Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands highlighted the continuing importance of United States airpower during major ARVN engagements.
LIMITED SUCCESS In spite of its success in holding Kontum, the ARVN did not manage to retake either Tan Canh or Dak To, both of which remained under North Vietnamese control after the Easter Offensive.
Lucky mascot United States troops, members of a tank-killing unit, are carried by helicopter into Kontum in the Central Highlands on June 3,1972.
Holding Kontum Kontum lay only 25 miles away, but this was a major challenge for the North Vietnamese forces.
Their advance forces were in need of supplies, and weeks passed until the NVA was able to mount its assault on the town.
By then, the ARVN leadership had sent back one of the airborne brigades and President Thieu had appointed a new corps commander and a fresh leader for the 22nd Division.
While tank battles were rare, armored vehicles provided greater mobility and were key to the NVA's offensives.
Centurion MK 5 This battle tank was deployed by the Royal Australia Armored Corps in Vietnam.
M42 Duster (US/South Vietnam) Designed as a self-propelled antiaircraft gun, the Duster's guns also proved effective in breaking up infantry assaults.
M55 A self-propelled howitzer, the lightly armored M55 required a crew of just six men.
M706 Commando (US/South Vietnam) This amphibious armored car was used mainly as a reconnaissance and patrol vehicle.
Ml 13 (US/ South Vietnam) This armored personnel carrier was usually armed with an M2 Browning machine gun.
PT-76 (North Vietnam) An amphibious tank exported to allies of the Soviet Union, the PT-76 first saw service in Vietnam during the Tet Offensive.
By 1965, the NVA had begun to use a Chinese copy of the Soviet T-54—the Type 59.
An Loc The area between Saigon and the Cambodian border, known as Military Region 3, was crucial for South Vietnam: it formed a safety belt for Saigon and contained most of the country's industry.
The area around An Loc had been the scene of several battles between the United States and communist forces earlier in the war.
In March 1969, the United States First Infantry Division and 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment fought a tough battle against the NVA in the abandoned Michelin rubber plantation at An Loc to stop its advance south toward Saigon.
NVA forces, and the Viet Cong in particular, were relatively inexperienced at fighting as a conventional force.
Division, responsible for this part of MR 3, was not fooled by Tran Van Tra's diversions but he was not able to convince his South Vietnamese counterpart.
On April 5, General Tra sent two regiments supported by two dozen tanks plus heavy artillery, to Binh Long's town of Loc Ninh, just north of the province capital of An Loc.
Air Force close support planes, and Vietnamese planes all responded, but on April 6, Tra's Seventh Division blocked a section of Route 13, and surrounded Binh Long province.
Loc Ninh fell to the Viet Cong's Ninth Division on April 7, making An Loc, the NVA's next target.
The ARVN had scattered groups of its Fifth Division across the province, which General Tra's forces took some time to drive back.
President Thieu summoned a full division, the 21 st, from MR 4 , to block the road to Saigon, while bringing up the ARVN First Airborne Brigade to back the An Loc defenders.
Colonel Tran Van War companions United States adviser Lieutenant Colonel Burr M Willey, accompanied by his dog Moose, fires his rifle as he moves up Route 13 toward An Loc with a South Vietnamese army unit.
Nhut, the province chief, who had been at a conference when the attacks started, hastened to An Loc to reorganize the available Regional Forces troops.
Artillery bombardment What became the siege of An Loc began on April 12 with an NVA attack, accompanied by a 7,000-shell barrage.
ARVN soldiers initially ran away from the T-54 tanks, but soon discovered the effectiveness of both their shoulder-fired light antitank weapons and the support of United States gunship helicopters.
In spite of their efforts, however, the ARVN lost the northern half of the town.
By then, the ARVN's First Airborne Brigade had reached nearby positions and joined the defense, taking charge of recovering the airdropped supplies.
On April 29, Tra's troops employed the SA-7 antiaircraft missile, forcing the air drops to a high altitude that demanded special parachute techniques.
As the NVA crowded into An Loc, with second echelon forces concentrated behind them.
South Vietnamese efforts shifted to the restoration of ground links between Saigon and An Loc.
I t is thought that Hanoi's objective in Military Region 3 was to strike down Route 13 from the Cambodian border and storm Saigon.
Initial proposals to make it the main focus of the offensive, however, were changed because of supply problems.
Cardboard tanks The assault opened on April 2, 1972, with a diversion—an NVA regiment advancing toward the province of Tay Ninh.
The North Vietnamese had even placed cardboard T-54 tanks opposite the city of Tay Ninh to convince South Vietnamese leaders that the attack would come there.
In fact, the real attack began three days later, when North Vietnamese General Tran Van Tra led his main force of three divisions from Cambodia into Binh Long province.
The NVA Seventh Division aimed to block Route 13 and isolate the battlefield, while other forces conquered the province and prepared for the pursuit south into Saigon.
BEYOND AN LOC Although the ARVN had regained An Loc, it did not attempt to recapture the Loc Ninh district of the province.
PRAYER OF THANKS The ARVN paid a heavy price for its victory at An Loc, with some 5,400 casualties, half of whom were killed.
He knelt and prayed before a statue of Christ that had survived the shelling.
UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN N IRWIN, WASHINGTON SPECIAL ACTION GROUP MEETING, APRIL 10, 1972 Tasting success ARVN forces stand and cheer on a knocked-out NVA tank as airlifted reinforcements arrive on July 3,1972.
Lieutenant Colonel Ed Benedit also recorded the destructive transformation of the city.
Captain Harold Moffett Jr. describes how they counted the rounds as they came in to An Loc by the hour until they increased so much they could not keep up.
It seemed almost impossible to put so many rounds into one small area in such a small period of time.
Lieutenant colonel Ed Benedit saw the intermittent shelling transform the once bustling, rural metropolitan area into a cemetery where nothing moved.
LIEUTENANT COLONEL ED BENEDIT, SENIOR ADVISER IN AN LOC, QUOTED BY PHIL CLARKE IN THE READER'S DIGEST, MARCH 1973 Reduced to rubble Vietnamese civilians search through the remains of An Loc's main market for food and valuables on June 22,1972.
Once the siege was over, the inhabitants emerged from underground hiding places to find their homes and livelihoods destroyed by the bombardment.
Disruption of this lifeline to the North became a priority for the United States.
I n the spring of 1972, President Nixon, fresh from the diplomatic triumph of his visit to China in February, thought he had isolated the North Vietnamese regime.
But the Easter Offensive forced back the South Vietnamese on front after front.
On April 5, Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman Admiral Moorer asserted that the president wanted new options.
The first proposal would have been a focused bombing campaign like that of 1967.
The second, named Pocket Money, envisioned mining Haiphong and other North Vietnamese ports.
Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird protested that mining Haiphong would achieve little unless North Vietnam was also bombed.
Nixon promptly approved plans for the first ""Linebacker"" operation of bombing the North.
However, no state of war existed between the United States and any country in Southeast Asia.
A full menu of diplomatic notices and private meetings therefore accompanied Pocket Money.
Nixon also surrounded this planned escalation with the trappings of a decisionmaking process, including meetings of the National Security Council, consultations with senior members of Congress, and a televised address to the nation.
The major worry concerned the response of the Attack on Haiphong United States jets bomb warehouses and shipping areas in Haiphong on May 17, 1972.
The mining of Haiphong occurred alongside the Linebacker I bombing campaign.
PRO-WAR BUTTON, 1965 Joint Chiefs of Staff contingency plans dating back to 1965 regularly envisioned sealing off North Vietnam's Haiphong harbor, by mining or blockade.
This aircraft carrier launched many of the aircraft that seeded mines at the entrance to Haiphong Harbor from May 1972.
Nixon was shortly due in Moscow for a summit conference and signature of agreements on the nuclear arms race.
The fear was that the Russians might cancel the summit and boost their aid to North Vietnam.
It was also conceivable that they might respond to the mining of Haiphong with force.
Although the USSR responded by sending submarines and a flotilla of warships into the South China Sea, they kept the date for the summit.
It was fortunate for the Americans that Soviet agricultural production that year had fallen far short of its needs and the USSR needed to secure grain supplies from the United States.
Mines in place Initial preparations for Pocket Money were advancing in high gear by April 20 and the tactical plans were complete by April 23.
Mineman Second Class Robert D Gill Jr. was sent from his duty post in Charleston, South Carolina, to the USS Coral Sea in the Gulf of Tonkin to prepare the mines.
Six LTV A-7 Corsair aircraft and three Grumman A-6A Intruders dropped the mines at the entrance to the harbor.
A number of visiting merchant vessels given warning of this deadline left port.
Others, still unloading, remained, to be penned in until the end of 1972.
The mines were programmed to deactivate after a certain period of time.
By early 1973, United States forces had deposited 11,603 mines in North Vietnamese ports and waterways at a total cost of $9. million.
HENRY KISSINGER TO United States AMBASSADOR ELLSWORTH BUNKER, MAY 6, 1972 The success of the United States mining operation is extremely difficult to judge.
The CIA had repeatedly warned that the North Vietnamese army requirements for war in the South were so small that stopping entry into Haiphong would not affect their supplies.
Although the NVA's move to conventional warfare in the Easter Offensive had greatly increased its logistics requirements, and that offensive died down after May 1972, it is not clear if the cessation was a result of the mining operation.
The most intense phase of the offensive had halted before the mining of the harbor began.
Advocate of mining Admiral Elmo R Zumwalt Jr., commander of riverine warfare in South Vietnam , was chief of naval operations from 1970 to 1974.
AFTER The Paris Accords committed the United States to clearing the mines from Haiphong Harbor.
ASSESSING THE IMPACT The CIA estimated that North Vietnam's imports in June and July 1972 fell to about 3,000 tons a day, less than half the 6,100 ton daily level of the previous year, but still more than the estimated daily requirements of 2,700 tons.
Eventually, it was agreed that the United States would take responsibility for removing the mines.
This was undertaken by the United States Navy's Mine Warfare Service in an operation codenamed End Sweep between February and July 1973.
This strategy had little impact on the North Vietnamese war effort and later bombing campaigns extended the targets from bridges, roads, and railroads to whole areas to demoralize the population.
An aircraft equipped with an LGB could plant bombs within 20 feet of the intended target, which was a massive improvement on the accuracy of fighterbombers equipped with standard munitions.
The Rolling Thunder campaign had ended in 1968, with only sporadic later bombing.
E arly in 1972, the United States had begun planning a renewed bombing campaign of North Vietnam, and the Spring Offensive of April reinforced a determination to disrupt supply lines from the North.
Advances in aerial bombing technology made the precise targeting of military objectives without excessive collateral damage a real possibility. aircraft attacked the notorious and highly defended Thanh Hoa Bridge, a key conduit for supplies down the panhandle of North Vietnam.
During Rolling Thunder the bridge had been bombed many times but never destroyed.
The strike, with two dozen laser-guided bombs, demolished the western span of the bridge.
Repeat raids ensured the North Vietnamese were unable to that remained problematic throughout the bombing campaign.
As of August 12, some 22,400 sorties had been scheduled but 15 percent were abandoned due to bad weather.
Although barely half the listed targets had been hit, the operation was unquestionably more successful than the raids that preceded it.
Preparing to strike Crewmen on the aircraft carrier USS Constellation, positioned off the coast of North Vietnam during Linebacker I, fit bombs to an F-4 Phantom jet on May 23, 1972.
PHILIP A 0DEEN TO HENRY KISSINGER, AUGUST 12, 1972 Precision attack The planning for the operation that would be named Linebacker I was well underway by March.
The Air Force and Navy had assembled significant reinforcements of aircraft and ships from South Korea, Taiwan, Japan, and the United States.
The first day of the operation was May 10, 1972, when strike formations of Navy and Marine aircraft flew into North Vietnam from Yankee Station in the Tonkin Gulf, and Air Force planes from United States bases in Thailand flew in along the Mekong River.
Over the ensuing days and weeks, the Americans destroyed bridges, railroad facilities, roads, and tunnels.
One of the big successes occurred on May 13, when United States repair the damage during the war—but they were ingenious at finding alternatives.
The smart bombs were a highly effective addition to the United States armory, but their use required good weather.
NEW EDGE Special training for United States naval air crews and new weapons for air forces improved American survivability and destructiveness and immediately put Washington in a stronger position for air warfare.
However, although a draft agreement was reached, both North and South Vietnamese negotiators found cause to resist signing.
V 3 ; Successful strike United States Navy bombers destroy the Hai Duong railroad bridge over the Song Thai Binh River southeast of Hanoi on May 10,1972, during Linebacker I One of the spans of this strategic bridge was destroyed in the action. tactics enabled Navy crews to achieve a 13 to 1 kill-to-loss ratio against Hanoi's planes.
Losses of both Navy and Air Force aircraft were minimized by warnings of North Vietnamese fighter activity provided by United States warship radars and Air Force intelligence units.
The worst day for the Americans was on June 27, when four Air Force Phantoms were shot down, three by MiGs, with no North Vietnamese losses.
Assessing the impact In all, North Vietnam lost 62 of its own fighter interceptors to the Americans.
The United States had demonstrated to North Vietnam that Washington would respond forcefully to its actions in the South and would exact a cost for supplying the insurgents.
Hence Washington knew almost nothing about the composition of imports, stock levels, or other key indices, and this made definitive judgments about the effectiveness of the bombing impossible.
SOUTH VIETNAMESE CONCERNS The Thieu government's objectives were the removal of North Vietnamese forces from the South, the disarming of the Viet Cong, and securing the continued leadership of Thieu.
OPPOSING MOTIVES The major concern of the North was to secure a total withdrawal of the United States from South Vietnam, ensuring the Viet Cong was brought into the Saigon government, and, if possible, ousting President Thieu.
ANTIWAR BADGE Progress of the Peace Talks Open, or ""plenary"" talks, with permanent delegations from all the participants had got underway in Paris by 1972.
These proceeded alongside secret talks involving Henry Kissinger for the United States and Le Due Tho for North Vietnam.
B y 1972, it had become clear that any progress in Vietnam peace talks would have to come from the meetings between Henry Kissinger and Le Due Tho, which left out the intensely wary South Vietnamese.
Although the United States played its hand very close to its chest, the South Vietnamese received periodic updates.
After January, when President Nixon revealed the existence of the secret talks, public pressure to reach an agreement grew more intense.
The North Vietnamese refused to call off their offensive and the United States negotiators rejected a proposal to unseat President Thieu.
With the peace talks in a state of deadlock, the next scheduled discussion was cancelled.
Breaking the deadlock During a summit with the Russians in Moscow, Nixon sent the North Vietnamese another message via Soviet hands—that a commission that would be created to carry out a new presidential election in the South could function as an interim coalition government.
That proposal interested the North Vietnamese, and meetings on July 19 and August 1 began to break the deadlock.
The United States agreed to include both political and military elements in an agreement and the North Vietnamese, assuming Thieu would resign before any election, relented on their demand that he give up power immediately.
Thieu rejected the idea of a ""commission"" that could become a coalition government, and any ceasefire that did not force the North Vietnamese to withdraw from the South.
Kissinger nevertheless asked Thieu to help to extend the negotiations until Nixon, with a renewed presidential mandate in November, could unleash a new show of force against the North.
The key negotiator for North Vietnam in the peace talks that led to the 1973 Peace Accords, he refused the Nobel Peace Prize he was offered jointly with Henry Kissinger.
Meanwhile, Kissinger's deputy, Alexander Haig, arrived in Saigon at the end of September.
Unbeknown to the South Vietnamese, Haig carried a new plan for bombing North Vietnam, which he discussed with American air commanders.
Thieu pushes back After a final round of Paris talks, Kissinger returned to Saigon with a final draft ceasefire agreement.
He had intended to go on to Hanoi, where the paper would be initialed ahead of a formal signing.
Thieu, however, rebelled, making the very same objections that he had tabled earlier.
At that point the North Vietnamese went public and revealed the text of the draft peace AFTER On December 13,1972, Kissinger recommended that Nixon approve massive bombing of North Vietnam.
DEMONSTRATING COMMITMENT With the South unhappy with the terms of the draft agreement, Nixon was keen to demonstrate his commitment to the South.
DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER ALEXANDER M HAIG, CABLE TO HENRY KISSINGER, OCTOBER 4, 1972 agreement, and the United States was forced to seek revisions in accordance with Thieu's demands.
A new round of talks started in November 1972, but they were again inconclusive.
Both the president and Kissinger told him that from January 1973, following the opening of the next session of the United States Congress, it would not be possible for them to continue the war, but Due refused to budge.
Further secret talks between Kissinger and Le Due Tho took place without result, and Kissinger yet again broke off the negotiations.
Rapprochement with China President Nixon and Chinese Premier Chou-EnLai toast each other during a reception in China in February, 1972.
Nixon's contacts with China played a key part in preparing the ground for peace talks with North Vietnam.
Unlike the diplomats and generals who have populated his career, Kissinger did not work his way up through the ranks, but went straight to the top, due to his skills as a policy analyst—and by the judicious cultivation of patrons.
From Germany to Harvard Born in 1923—the first of two sons—to orthodox Jewish parents in Fiirth, Germany, Kissinger began life as Heinz Alfred.
The family moved to England in 1938 to escape Nazi persecution, and then to the United States, where Heinz became Henry.
His native German led to assignments in Army intelligence, and toward the end of World War II to a role in military government, overseeing a district of occupied Germany.
After the war, he won admission to Harvard, graduated with high honors, and went on to gain a doctorate in history, crafting a prize-winning dissertation on the Congress of Vienna and the end of the Napoleonic Wars.
Ending the Vietnam War was a highlight of Kissinger's career, and one for which he was jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize with Le DucTho, North Vietnam's chief negotiator.
Due declined the prize on the grounds that real peace had not been achieved. and advisory institute.
He also served as rapporteur for study groups on key national security issues of the day, then turned his notes into books.
He directed a prestigious Defense Studies Program, attended by future world leaders, and became a professor in 1962.
Kissinger's first visit to China in July 1971 recognized the legitimacy of the People's Republic and prepared the ground for President Nixon's visit in 1972.
Elder statesman Kissinger, a regular fixture on international lecture circuits, greets the audience at a ceremony at China's Hopkins-Nanjing Center, in 2007.
Kissinger saw the rise of China, and the potential of economic cooperation, from an early point in his career.
JOURNALIST ANTHONY LEWIS WRITING ABOUT KISSINGER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES, 1982 policy reviews on every imaginable subject, diverting its staff while he created National Security Council mechanisms for key policy areas, including Vietnam.
Kissinger then used these NSC sub-committees to take control of policies in selected areas.
It is a measure of Henry Kissinger's power that United States policies advanced in areas where he exercised control.
Both the Vietnam negotiations and those on nuclear arms control—as well as Nixon's opening to China— involved dominant Kissinger roles.
In Nixon's second term, Kissinger became secretary of state as well as NSC adviser.
President Gerald Ford kept him as secretary of state but appointed a new national security adviser at the end of 1975.
Post-government Kissinger left government in 1977 and opened an international consulting business.
President Ronald Reagan appointed Kissinger to a policy review commission for Central America, and Kissinger advised George W Bush on the Iraq war.
Hillary Clinton also courted Kissinger when she was secretary of state in the Obama adminisitration.
Meanwhile, some critics continue to accuse Kissinger of war crimes for his role in various conflicts, including Vietnam.
By this time, Kissinger was already advising the United States president.
He counseled President Kennedy on the 1961 Berlin Crisis—a Cold War confrontation over the status of Berlin—and advised both Kennedy and President Johnson on Vietnam.
During the presidential election of 1968 there are reports, never refuted, that Kissinger supplied inside information to Republican candidate Richard Nixon.
After the election, Nixon made Kissinger his national security adviser.
Kissinger's penchant for tactics quickly became clear—he set the bureaucracy to work on extensive TIMELINE 11 May 27, 1923 Born in the Bavarian town of Furth, Germany.
KISSINGER WITH HIS WIFE NANCY MAGINNES 11 1974 Marries second wife, Nancy Maginnes, in Arlington, Virginia.
NEGOTIATING SUCCESS In October 1972, the North Vietnamese negotiator at the Paris peace talks, Le Due Tho, agreed that President Thieu could remain in power in the South after a ceasefire was signed.
However, B-52S IN PLACE In preparation for a winter bombing campaign, a B-52 force was assembled in nearby countries by late 1972.
CHRISTMAS BOMBING Christmas Bombing In the closing weeks of 1972, the United States planned a high-intensity bombing campaign, codenamed Linebacker II, that had both military and diplomatic objectives.
W hen the peace talks in Paris broke down on December 13, United States forces were already gathering for Linebacker II, a successor to the Linebacker I bombing campaign that had ended in October.
General Van Tien Dung had approved the final defense plan on November 24, and had ordered that everything be ready by December 3.
That evening, B-52s in the lead wave took off from Thailand, flew up the Mekong River valley and approached Hanoi.
Navy and Air Force attack planes entered from seaward hoping to distract the North Vietnamese.
The lead bomber, piloted by Captain Hal Wilson, reported wall-to-wall surface-to-air missiles ahead.
About an hour into the raid NVA headquarters learned a SAM from the 261st Missile Regiment had downed a B-52.
Over the succeeding days the attacks continued, with a halt for Christmas itself.
The bombers blasted air defenses, railroads, and industries; tactical aircraft added armed reconnaissance.
The North Vietnamese tried mass firings of SAMs, missile launchings in unguided mode, fighter intercepts, even a deliberate midair crash.
Political firestorm In America, where pundits dubbed the operation the Christmas Bombing, a firestorm of political protest ensued.
Marches and protests took place in many cities despite the winter cold.
There were rumors of Air Force pilots refusing orders— and actual instances of the radio spies of the Teaball (radio interception) unit halting work.
Alexander Haig said later that Briefed for action Prior to flying out from Andersen Air Force Base on Guam, B-52 crews are briefed for their missions in Linebacker II.Thirty B-52s from this base were involved in the first wave of attacks on the night of December 18, 1972.
AFTER Linebacker II achieved its objective in forcing all sides back to the negoitating table.
However, it did not impinge significantly on communist forces in the South.
BACK TO THE TABLE The scale of the bombing had a swift effect on the peace process.
FIGHT ANOTHER DAY With the bombing leaving the NVA forces in the South untouched by the bombing, and the Ho Chi Minh Trail not targeted, the North Vietnamese could renew their operations at any time.
V Witnesses to destruction American singer Joan Baez and two other antiwar activists visit the ruins of Hanoi's airport on December 21, 1972.
Nixon gave up the Christmas Bombing because his cabinet deserted him and there were threats of impeachment.
The bombing was not sustainable politically any more than it was militarily.
Admiral Moorer told his colleagues on the Joint Chiefs of Staff that he had tried to get Nixon to continue the bombing until the North Vietnamese signed an agreement, not simply agreed to reopen talks, but that he had failed in that endeavor.
Doves had previously been a popular feature on badges, buttons, and posters designed by protesters against the Vietnam War.
From August 1969, additional peace talks were conducted in secret in Paris.
Talks stalled in the fall of 1972 over South Vietnam's President Thieu's insistence that NVA troops should leave the South.
In early January 1973, the Democratic majority in both houses of Congress voted to deny military aid when Nixon next requested it.
J The deal is sealed Henry Kissinger shakes hands with Le Due Tho on January 23, 1973, to conclude their negotiations.
This final, four-hour meeting was held in the Peninsula Hotel on Avenue Kleber in Paris; previous talks had taken place in private apartments and villas.
The Peace Accords With all parties sitting down in Paris to discuss peace, hopes were high for a resolution of the conflict.
However, many details had to be worked out, and some important issues were still outstanding when the final document was signed.
On December 30, 1972, the United States called a halt to the bombing of the North.
By January 5, both sides were discussing ways in which a peace agreement would be enforced, including locations for checkpoints to monitor people and equipment entering or leaving additional lure for the South Vietnamese was the supply of extra equipment by the United States in operations Enhance and Enhance Plus.
To maximize South Vietnam's arsenal in advance of the Peace Accords, supplies included broken items that would be eligible for replacement under the one-for-one rule.
AGREEMENT ON ENDING THE WAR AND RESTORING PEACE IN VIETNAM, JANUARY 27, 1973 r The ceasefire agreed between North and South Vietnam soon eroded.
The agreement also included a provision that military equipment could be replaced on a one-for-one basis, which then raised the question of monitoring.
It was decided that an International Commission for Control and Supervision — with contingents from Indonesia, Canada, Poland, and Hungary— would handle all such issues.
Details resolved The Paris agreement provided for a ""standstill"" ceasefire, which left all military forces in the positions they occupied at the instant fighting stopped.
This meant no North Vietnamese forces would leave South Vietnam, but all of the remaining American forces would withdraw and United States prisoners of war would be handed back.
The two South Vietnamese parties were supposed to agree to work toward elections through a National Council of Reconciliation and Concord.
The next day, the sides agreed on all outstanding issues in the agreement's main text, leaving only details to be settled.
By January 11, Kissinger and Nixon were deliberating on a schedule that would involve signing the agreement in Paris and Kissinger subsequently visiting Hanoi.
Final drafts The popular history of these last months of talks is that Kissinger and Le Due Tho came to a draft accord, to which South Vietnam demanded numerous changes that Hanoi would reject.
North Vietnam meekly accepted Thieu's demands after the Christmas Bombing, and the Paris agreement was based cm the revised formula.
However, a comparison of the draft agreement of October 1972 and the one signed in January 1973 tells a different story.
The most significant change was that the national council would not be an ""administrative structure,"" which minimized the possibility of it emerging as a coalition government.
There was some new language on the DMZ, but the failure to convert it to a border was a success for North Vietnam.
The removal of NVA forces from South Vietnam was delegated to the joint committees, which would frustrate Saigon's representatives.
I Under Operation Enhance, the United States supplied South Vietnam with 63 working trucks— and 1,350 broken ones—along with weapons and other vehicles.
Peace agreed The signing took place on January 27, with William Rogers the United States signatory and Nguyen Duy Trinh North Vietnam's.
Homecoming welcome Women at the Miramar Air Station, California, wait for their husbands to arrive back on United States soil in February 1973.
Their husbands, United States Marines, were among the first POWs released following the Peace Accord.
It •* was taken on March 17,1973, and shows the family of Lieutenant Colonel Robert L Stirm rushing to greet him at Travis Air Force Base, California.
ENDGAME AND AFTERMATH After January 1973 Despite the Paris Peace Accords, the Vietnamese remain embroiled in conflict.
After a final push for Saigon in 1975, the fate of all of Indochina is sealed.
In the 1980s, the United States worked with the governments of Vietnam and Laos to bring MIA and prisoner of war remains home.
ENDGAME AND AFTERMATH AFTER JANUARY 1973 O he departure of American forces did not end the war in Vietnam.
Despite an official ceasefire, fighting continued between the ARVN and communist troops.
In America, the political will to support the Saigon government rapidly evaporated.
Realizing the United States would not intervene, North Vietnam embarked upon a final offensive in spring 1975.
The last American personnel were evacuated from Saigon as NVA tanks entered the city.
Meanwhile, Cambodia fell to the communist Khmer Rouge, its population suffering immense hardship.
Vietnam fought further wars against the Khmer Rouge and China before a kind of peace prevailed.
In America, the process of coming to terms with the war and its consequences was painful and prolonged.
DECEMBER 31, 1973 About 25,000 ARVN troops have been killed in combat by the end of 1973 despite a supposed ceasefire.
MARCH 13 President Thieu decides to withdraw his forces to a defensive perimeter around Saigon and the Mekong Delta.
APRIL 21 President Thieu resigns, denouncing the Americans for abandoning South Vietnam to its fate.
APRIL 28 General Tran Van Minh becomes South Vietnamese president and seeks a deal to end the fighting.
AUGUST 15, 1973 As the Case-Church Amendment comes into effect, the United States Air Force carries out its last bombing mission over Cambodia.
MAY 9, 1974 United States Congress begins impeachment proceedings against President Nixon in response to his role in the Watergate scandal.
AUGUST 6, 1974 Congress votes to cut aid for South Vietnam to $700 million in 1975.
DECEMBER 13, 1974 The NVA and Viet Cong attack the provincial capital of Phuoc Long to test both the morale of the ARVN and the United States response to an open breach of the Paris Peace Accords.
APRIL 30 Communist tanks drive into the center of Saigon and the government of South Vietnam surrenders.
MARCH 30 Da Nang quickly falls to communist forces as South Vietnamese military and civilian morale collapses.
APRIL 9-20 At Xuan Loc, outnumbered South Vietnamese troops put up valiant resistance but are eventually forced to fall back on Saigon.
APRIL 17 In Cambodia, Khmer Rouge guerrillas occupy the capital Phnom Penh and forcibly evacuate the population to the countryside.
DECEMBER 3 The Pathet Lao overthrows the Laotian monarchy and declares Laos a People's Democratic Republic.
WILLIAM COLBY, DIRECTOR OF THE CIA, 1975 1976-PRESENT « Stamp commemorating the . first national assembly after Vietnam's reunification DECEMBER 25, 1978 The Vietnamese Army launches a full-scale invasion of Kampuchea in association with Cambodian rebels.
JUNE 1979 The Boat People exodus peaks, with 54,000 refugees fleeing Vietnam in a month.
SEPTEMBER 26, 1989 Vietnam completes the withdrawal of its military forces from Cambodia after an 11-year occupation of the country.
JULY 11, 1995 President Bill Clinton announces the restoration of full diplomatic relations between the United States and Vietnam.
DECEMBER 1990 Vietnam adopts a Law on Private Enterprise that encourages private business, triggering a period of rapid economic growth.
JANUARY 7, 1979 Vietnamese forces occupy Phnom Penh and overthrow the Pol Pot regime, installing a new government under Heng Samrin.
CAC VUA HUNG OA CO CONG DUNG NUUC BAC CHAUTA PHAICUNG KHAU Git; Niroc FEBRUARY 17, 1979 China launches a punitive offensive into northern Vietnam, in response to the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.
APRIL 15, 1992 Vietnam amends its constitution to open the country to foreign investment in the pursuit of economic growth.
NOVEMBER 13, 1982 The Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall is dedicated in Washington, D.C. ft Faux Ho Chi Minh propaganda poster, made for the war tourist market 52 Vietnam Veterans Memorial dedication, November 1982 ftChoeung Ek, a ""Killing Field in Phnom Penh, Cambodia JANUARY 13, 1993 A United States Senate Select Committee announces that there is ""no compelling evidence"" that there are United States prisoners of war still held captive in Vietnam.
Sporadic border fighting between the two countries continues into 1978.
JANUARY 7, 1976 The Khmer Rouge renames Cambodia as Democratic Kampuchea.
Pol Pot is the key figure in a regime that massacres about a quarter of the Cambodian population.
SEPTEMBER 1978 Large numbers of people begin fleeing Vietnam by sea, and are dubbed the Boat People.
SEPTEMBER 24, 1993 Norodom Sihanouk is reinstated as king of Cambodia under a new monarchical constitution.
MARCH 16, 1979 Chinese troops complete a withdrawal from northern Vietnam, claiming their mission has been successfully completed.
JULY 2, 1976 North and South Vietnam are formally unified as the Socialist Republic of Vietnam under hardline communist rule.
The Paris Peace Accords allowed the withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam, but did not end the war.
Fighting continued between South Vietnamese and communist forces, while political developments in the United States undermined support for its allies. either side in Vietnam had any intention of observing the provisions of the Paris Peace Accords.
President Thieu would not accept the continued presence of North Vietnamese forces inside South Vietnamese borders as legitimate, while the North Vietnamese government still aimed to unite all of Vietnam under communist rule.
Land grabs In the period immediately before and after the signing of the accords, both sides engaged in land grabs, attempting to extend the area under their control and seize strategic sites.
Hundreds of South Vietnamese villages changed hands, some several times, in the attacks and counterattacks across the country.
The international commission, which was meant to supervise the ceasefire, proved ineffectual.
An NVA offensive in Easter 1972 succeeded in occupying substantial areas of South Vietnam, but was halted by American airpower.
AMERICA PUSHES PEACE Peace talks took on new momentum when the United States agreed to accept a ceasefire without the withdrawal of NVA troops.
The withdrawal of United States military personnel was completed on March 29, including the return CELEBRATING THE American homecoming prisoners of war.
South Vietnamese forces lost some 25,000 men in combat in 1973, but generally performed better in the piecemeal fighting.
The United States had flooded Saigon with military equipment before its withdrawal, while North Vietnam took time to Nixon and Thieu President Thieu meets with President Nixon at San Clemente, California, in April 1973.
Although Nixon renewed his promise to give military support to South Vietnam if the peace accords were violated, Congress would place severe limits on the president's ability to act.
Investigators linked this break-in to a committee working for the re-election of President Richard Nixon.
As evidence mounted of attempts to block the investigation, and of other abuses of power, on August 9, 1974, Nixon resigned to avoid impeachment.
Kissinger to Remain The ,37th President Is First to Quit Post AFTER In spring 1975, South Vietnam underwent a rapid military collapse, its morale and fighting efficiency fatally undermined by the withdrawal of American aid.
V Barrel M203 grenade launcher The American public's frustration with the war was, by this point, reflected in Congress.
In June 1973, it passed the Case-Church Amendment, which banned further military action in Asia.
In November, this was followed by the War Powers Resolution, which severely restricted the president's ability to engage the United States Grenade launcher foresight case, by the time the War Powers Resolution was passed, Nixon's authority was all but collapsing under the Watergate scandal.
Changing fortunes South Vietnam had inherited from the United States a costly way of waging war.
The impact of financial cuts on the ARVN, combined with a global chance that the United States would re-enter the war.
Since President Nixon had assured Thieu that America would intervene if North Vietnam breached the peace accords, the North's offensive had to wait for the right moment. in war without Congressional approval.
Congress cut military aid to Saigon from $1. billion to $1. billion for 1974, while aid for 1975 was just $700 billion.
Soldiers' wages did not keep up with inflation, which undermined morale and increased the rate of desertions.
South Vietnam's corruption and poor leadership came to the fore yet pipeline.
As men and munitions flowed into South Vietnam, the North made significant gains in 1974, especially around Da Nang, in coastal Quang Ngai province, and north of Saigon.
In spite of these gains, the North Vietnamese politburo remained cautious— while they planned a major offensive for 1975, they did not expect victory until 1976. recover from losses incurred in the 1972 Easter Offensive and from the Christmas bombing of its ports.
Hopes of resuming guerrilla warfare in South Vietnamesecontrolled territory proved in vain.
North Vietnam bides its time By October 1973, the North Vietnamese politburo was preparing a full-scale offensive on South Vietnam.
They accepted, however, that this could not happen, as long as there was still a again, with senior officers devoting themselves to black market deals rather than attending to their men.
Preparing for an attack Meanwhile, North Vietnam built up its strength.
With no American bombers to threaten its security, the Ho Chi Minh Trail became a paved highway with an oil Rifle with grenade launcher The M16A1, here fitted with an M203 grenade launcher, became the United States military's standard assault rifle during the Vietnam War.
The Americans left the South Vietnamese army well equipped with such state-of-the-art weaponry.
United States SECRETARY OF STATE HENRY KISSINGER TO PRESIDENT NIXON, OCTOBER 6, 1972 A n often-maligned figure, former ARVN general Nguyen Van Thieu served as the president of South Vietnam until 1975.
He was the last South Vietnamese president to govern for a substantial period of time—his successor, Duong Van Minh, was president for just two days before Saigon fell to North Vietnamese forces.
Thieu was criticized during his presidency for his authoritarian style, and for his perceived intransigence, which Nixon and Kissinger blamed for stalling the peace negotiations in 1972.
Thieu, on the other hand, felt betrayed and abandoned by the United States, and publicly expressed great anger toward his American allies in the final years of his presidency.
Young commander Nguyen Van Thieu was born in November 1924, but would later change his birthday to April 5, on the advice of an astrologer.
However, his capability as a general was questioned after the loss of the Central Highlands, and as a politician he was not particularly beloved by his people. poor, coastal province of Ninh Thuan, and chose to join the Viet Minh in the struggle against the French.
Despite rising in its ranks, after a year he renounced the brutal communist front and chose instead to ally with the French— even attending infantry school in Coetquidan, France.
He drove them from his village in 1954, even attacking those hiding in his family home, and from there his military career picked up momentum.
After the First Indochina War ended, Thieu joined the new South Vietnamese Army and underwent military training in the United States in 1957 and 1960.
In 1960, commanding the Seventh Division, Thieu sent troops to defend President Diem from a coup attempt, but later turned on him; he led an attack on the presidential palace during the coup that ousted Diem in 1963.
Appointed a general, he became a member of a group of young officers known as the young Turks.
In 1964, they helped to oust the ruling military junta, and the group also played a role in a subsequent coup in 1965.
That year, Thieu became chief of state under the new government of fellow young Turk Nguyen Cao Ky.
Addressing his allies President Thieu addresses 7,000 American troops and a crowd of journalists during a visit from United States President Lyndon Johnson to Cam Ranh Bay in October 1966, A major United States Navy base, Cam Ranh Bay also had a large Air Force base and a substantial United States Army presence.
President and general Thieu had taken a back seat to Ky in 1965, but this all changed in the 1967 election.
With ARVN support, Thieu displaced Ky to run as the presidential candidate, making Ky his running mate.
As the war continued, concern from the West about Thieu's regime grew, especially after the 1971 election, which appeared to have been rigged in his favor.
As the United States became more determined to reach a peace agreement, Thieu became a major obstacle, angered by the secret talks between Hanoi and Washington.
Standing alone Thieu eventually signed the 1973 Peace Accords, on the basis that the United States would continue to supply aid and air support.
When United States support diminished, Thieu publicly accused Henry Kissinger of tricking him into signing the agreement.
With the United States out of the war, Thieu and the ARVN were left to fight the North Vietnamese Army alone.
During the final NVA offensive in 1975, Thieu and his army were proved inadequate by the communist forces, which soon closed in on Saigon.
Time and again, Thieu expressed his bitterness over being left to fight alone by his former allies.
On April 21, 1975, Thieu made an emotional final speech to South Vietnam, and resigned as president, leaving the task of surrendering Saigon to his successor.
He lived a quiet life in Foxboro, Massachusetts, until his death in 2001.
NGUYEN VAN THIEU, IN HIS TELEVISED FAREWELL SPEECH, APRIL 21, 1975 democratic government, enact social reforms, and crack down on corruption.
However, he also increased mobilization, swiftly removed rivals, and engaged in censorship—his authoritarian style causing some to call him a dictator.
When peace talks began in 1968, Thieu did not attend, refusing to acknowledge the communist National Liberation Front as a legitimate authority.
He hesitantly accepted Nixon's Vietnamization policy in 1969, but Greeting the general President Nguyen Van Thieu is saluted by ARVN servicewomen during a visit to South Vietnam's Quang Tin province on February 5, 1969.
During his presidency, the general often made inspection visits to ARVN units in the field.
A October 1961 Commands the First Division, in Hue; given command of the Fifth Division, in Bien Hoa, in 1962.
NGUYEN THI MAI ANH February 1968 Declares martial law in response to the Tet Offensive.
June 8, 1969 Meets with Nixon on Midway Island and is informed of first United States troop redeployment.
II 1971 Re-elected president, apparently receiving 94 percent of the votes.
April 25, 1975 Flies to Taiwan; later settles in London, England. 1990s Moves to the United States.
It showed that neither the United States nor South Vietnam had the resolve to stop a communist victory.
ARVN Regional I n October 1974, the North Vietnamese leadership held a meeting to discuss how best to proceed toward their goal of final victory in Vietnam.
On the one hand, Le Duan and his colleagues E F O R E After the withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam, scattered but persistent fighting continued in spite of an agreed ceasefire.
TESTING THE WATERS President Richard Nixon had promised renewed military intervention in defense of South Vietnam if required.
Meanwhile, the North Vietnamese prepared for a future major offensive, building up their forces and developing their supply routes to the South.
SOLDIER OF NORTH VIETNAMESE ARMY believed that the resignation of Richard Nixon had sharply reduced the chances of any renewal of United States military intervention.
They also noted that the performance of South Vietnamese forces had deteriorated over the year.
On the other hand, their efforts to build up stores of heavy equipment and develop a supply system to their troops in the South were still far from complete.
The members of the politburo also continued to be wary of the possible United States response to a full-scale offensive, even under the presidency of Gerald Ford.
The result of their deliberations was to authorize an all-out assault to capture Phuoc Long province, in the Central Highlands near the Cambodian border.
If the United States failed to respond and the ARVN performed poorly, the communists would sense the way was open for them to escalate operations further in 1975.
PRESIDENT THIEU, APPEAL FOR MOURNING AFTER FALL OF PHUOC LONG, JANUARY 7, 1975 NVA superiority The attack on Phuoc Long, set to be launched in December 1974, was masterminded by General Tran Van Tra, who amassed a force of two infantry divisions, a tank battalion, an artillery regiment, and an antiaircraft regiment, plus support units.
In contrast, remote and thinly populated Phuoc Long was initially defended only by South Vietnamese Regional and Popular Forces.
The Third Marine Division in Okinawa was put on alert and the USS Enterprise was sent closer to Vietnam, but no other action was taken.
The provincial capital of Phuoc Binh—also known as Phuoc Long City—was quickly isolated, its defenders dependent on aerial resupply.
Heavy antiaircraft fire deterred ARVN pilots from flying low enough to achieve accurate airdrops or provide effective close air support to ground troops.
North Vietnamese artillery were pouring 3,000 rounds a day into Phuoc Binh by early January.
Two companies of elite Airborne Rangers were flown in as the situation worsened for the ARVN, but this was no more than a sacrificial gesture.
It was the first provincial capital lost by the South Vietnamese government since Quang Tri at Easter 1972.
President Thieu announced three days of national mourning after the defeat and vowed to retake Phuoc Binh.
With the loss of Phuoc Binh and the evident withdrawal of American support, Thieu saw his prestige plummeting.
The United States made a formal protest, accusing Hanoi of seeking to impose a military solution on Vietnam, but at a press conference on January 21, 1975, President Ford stated that he could foresee no circumstances under which America would reenter the war in Vietnam.
Secondly, the loss of Phuoc Long underlined the weakness of the South Vietnamese forces and leadership.
The initial successes of the NVA were to be expected, given their ability to concentrate forces against a weakly defended point, but the failure of the ARVN to organize a substantial response revealed the fatal waning of both its morale and resources.
North Vietnam continued to plan its conquest of the South, envisaging a final offensive for 1976.
TAKING SAIGON Hanoi decided to start with a local offensive in the Central Highlands.
The initial blow was to fall on another poorly defended provincial capital, Buon Ma Thuot.
Celebrating conquest After the unification of Vietnam under communist rule, the Victory Monument was erected in Phuoc Long City to celebrate the defeat of South Vietnamese government forces in Phuoc Long province.
DAUGHTER OF AN ARVN SOLDIER AWAITS EVACUATION ENDGAME AND AFTERMATH AFTER JANUARY 1973 Final Offensive Begins In March 1975, North Vietnamese forces commanded by General Van Tien Dung launched a major offensive at Buon Ma Thuot in the Central Highlands.
This precipitated a collapse of South Vietnamese defenses that left the way open for a final drive to take Saigon.
It had an army base and airfield, but in March 1975 was garrisoned only by a single ARVN infantry regiment and a Ranger Group, supplemented by Montagnard regional forces and militia.
Holding the strategic initiative, the North Vietnamese forces were able to concentrate « The fall of Phuoc Long province to North Vietnamese forces in January 1975 emboldened the leadership in Hanoi to pursue a final military victory over South Vietnam's President Thieu.
The United States had made it clear that no further military support could be expected.
Meanwhile, North Vietnam's leaders, although remaining cautious, decided to mount a spring offensive in the Central Highlands.
SOUTH VIETNAMESE DEFENSES overwhelmingly superior forces against this poorly defended target, deploying three whole divisions in their attack.
Beginning on March 4, the NVA cut all the highways around Buon Ma Thuot, isolating the town.
Ordered to retake Buon Ma Thuot, two ARVN regiments were airlifted to nearby Phuoc An, but instead of mounting a counterattack on the NVA, large numbers of demoralized South Vietnamese troops fled the scene, and joined a stream of civilian refugees attempting to escape the fighting.
Fateful decision Faced with this crisis, on March 13 President Thieu made the fateful decision to abandon the defense of the Central Highlands and all of the northern provinces except the coastal enclaves.
He envisaged a withdrawal to a line from Tay Ninh on the Cambodian border to the coast at Nha Trang.
This was the target date set by Hanoi in spring 1975 for the capture of Saigon at the end of what had been dubbed the Ho Chi Minh Campaign.
It was theoretically a good strategy to concentrate South Vietnam's limited military strength on the defense of this region, but attempting such a withdrawal under the circumstances prevailing in spring 1975 invited disaster.
General Pham Van Phu, the commander in the Central Highlands, was ordered to move all his regular forces immediately from the major bases at Kontum and Pleiku to the coast at Tuy Hoa.
The only road open to them was Provincial Route 7B, a jungle track requiring repair, bridge-laying, and mine-clearance to be passable.
Tens of thousands of fleeing civilians impeded the movement of military vehicles.
The 320th NVA Division, pursuing the retreating South Vietnamese, threatened to cut the road entirely.
NVA artillery bombarded the packed mass of troops and refugees as ARVN engineers worked valiantly to bridge rivers.
On 27 March, the disorganized remnants of the ARVN corps reached Tuy Hoa.
Vital bases fall Thieu's decision to concentrate his forces in more defensible positions precipitated a string of disastrous events in the northern provinces.
SOUtH VIETNAMESE VICE PRESIDENT NGUYEN CA0 KY ON THE ARVN ROUT, TV INTERVIEW C.1980 AFTER Responding to the sudden collapse of South Vietnamese resistance, the North Vietnamese leadership set General Dung a new target—to capture Saigon before the onset of the monsoon season in May.
In a fierce two-week battle, South Vietnamese troops acquitted themselves with credit, but the town eventually fell.
V A 3 Chaotic retreat The roads from the northern provinces were choked by a stream of military personnel and civilians fleeing south from Quang Tri and Hue ahead of the North Vietnamese advance.
General Ngo Quang Truong, was told to hold the base at Da Nang at all costs, but his crack Airborne Division was withdrawn to strengthen the defense of Saigon.
South Vietnamese Marines were pulled out of Quang Tri province to reinforce Da Nang.
The withdrawal of the Marines triggered an exodus of civilian refugees southward from Quang Tri and the city fell to the NVA on March 19 without a fight.
On March 29, General Truong evacuated some 10,000 troops, who waded out to ships from the beaches where United States Marines had disembarked 10 years before.
From 1945, he served as a general in the Viet Minh guerrilla movement and then as chief of staff of the North Vietnamese Army.
In 1974, he replaced General Vo Nguyen Giap as commander of the NVA and led the final offensive in South Vietnam.
He went on to command the NVA in wars with Cambodia and China in 1979 before retiring in 1986.
Thousands flooded transportation routes in the so-called Column of Sorrow.
ENDGAME AND AFTERMATH AFTER JANUARY 1973 The Battle of Xuan Loc Amid the general collapse of South Vietnamese forces in spring 1975, the determined resistance of troops at Xuan Loc was a beacon of hope for President Thieu.
Although the ARVN salvaged some honor, the North Vietnamese advance could not be halted.
The resignation of Richard Nixon as United States president in August 1974 was another blow to President Thieu.
Thieu's regime was left a small area around Saigon and the Mekong Delta. _ j T he sudden collapse of South Vietnamese forces in March 1975 took the North Vietnamese leadership by surprise.
Having not expected final victory before 1976, the North Vietnamese politburo altered its timetable.
On March 25, NVA commander General Van Tien Dung was ordered to proceed to the capture of Saigon and the end of the war.
The ARVN took positions on the five main roads to Saigon in a defensive circle around the city.
He planned to avoid a battle inside the city by crushing each of the ARVN formations outside Saigon.
Given the South Vietnamese troops' recent performance, it was reasonable to expect a swift victory.
Ultimate defense At the eastern end of the ARVN defensive ring was the town of Xuan Loc.
Standing on Route 1, almost 40miles from Saigon, it protected the vital air base at Bien Hoa as well as the road into the capital.
Both sides recognized it as the keystone of the South Vietnamese defenses.
Xuan Loc was garrisoned by the previously undistinguished 18th ARVN Division, commanded by General Le Minh Dao.
They faced the NVA IV Army Corps—three divisions with plentiful tanks and artillery.
Spectacular resilience On April 9, the NVA pounded Xuan Loc with artillery fire, while infantry and armored vehicles surged forward to overrun the defensive perimeter.
ARVN resistance was unexpectedly resolute and the NVA suffered heavy losses of men and tanks.
GENERAL LE MINH DAO, ARVN COMMANDER At XUAN LOC, TV INTERVIEW, APRIL 1975 Counterattacks by ARVN troops from outside Xuan Loc meant the NVA diverted their resources from the assault to defend their flanks.
Bien Hoa airbase Some 16 miles outside Saigon, Bien Hoa airbase served the United States and South Vietnamese air forces during the Vietnam War.
It came under artillery fire during the Battle of Xuan Loc and was occupied by advancing communist troops on April 25, 1975.
On April 10, the NVA was forced to withdraw from positions they had seized in the town.
The spectacle of ARVN troops fighting with skill and dedication roused understandable excitement among supporters of the South Vietnamese government.
However, opinion in the United States Congress was unmoved by stories of soldiers' courage or the sufferings of civilians.
Reinforcing both sides Thieu had the ARVN First Airborne Brigade lifted into Xuan Loc to aid defense, but the NVA had far greater resources.
On April 16, the NVA II Army Corps captured Phan Rang and was released to join the advance on Saigon.
President Thieu set the ARVN's remaining reserves against the NVA troops.
With no hope of further reinforcements, the evacuation of Xuan Loc began.
The ARVN First Airborne Brigade experienced heavy losses and, when General Dao's 18th Division reached Saigon, it had lost around a third of its men.
Taking responsibility for his country's military collapse, Thieu resigned his presidency on April 21, as forces surrounding Xuan Loc, but the NVA fought them off.
The NVA bombardment of Bien Hoa airbase, curtailed the South Vietnamese air force's efforts to support ground Honor denied The National Order of Vietnam was bestowed for outstanding courage.
Instead of receiving this accolade, General Dao served 17 years in a re-education camp after the fall of Saigon.
Air assistance Chinook heavy-lift helicopters belonging to the Vietnam Air Force take part in the movement of people and supplies out of Xuan Loc during the evacuation of the city.
The South Vietnamese were able to hold out for a fortnight against overwhelmingly superior forces. communist troops moved in to occupy Xuan Loc.
In effect, the outcome of the war had now been decided—conditions were primed for the communists to launch an assault on Saigon.
His departure raised hopes for a negotiated end to the war, but NVA commander General Van Tien Dung attacked and occupied Saigon.
J Waiting to escape South Vietnamese civilians hoping to be included in helicopter evacuation wait anxiously outside the United States Embassy in Saigon on April 29, 1975.
Many who believed they had been promised a flight to safety were in fact left behind.
Evacuation The final act of United States involvement in Vietnam badly damaged the country's global image.
America was left humiliated in defeat, as frantic helicopter evacuations left desperate Vietnamese civilians behind.
T he sudden collapse of South Vietnamese forces in spring 1975 left the United States with a dilemma.
The Ford administration was looking to Congress for aid to South Vietnam that might support the defense of Saigon and pave the way for a negotiated end to the war, avoiding a humiliating total defeat for America's ally.
Graham Martin, the United States Ambassador in Saigon, was especially resistant to authorizing a general evacuation, producing elaborate arguments for postponing action.
Nonetheless, by early April, United States fixed-wing military transport aircraft were making regular flights out of Saigon's Tan Son Nhut airport to evacuate nonessential American personnel and certain categories of ""at risk"" Vietnamese.
Tragedy and chaos The highly publicized Operation Babylift, which transported Vietnamese orphans to the United States, was interrupted by a tragic accident on April 4, when a Lockheed Galaxy transport aircraft crashed, killing many of the children on board.
Meanwhile, many American personnel earmarked for evacuation refused to leave unless they could take Vietnamese dependents and friends with them.
After the fall of Xuan Loc and the resignation of President Thieu on April 21, there was no longer any serious question of defending Saigon.
Evacuation by fixed-wing aircraft continued at a more rapid pace, but without sufficient urgency, as some senior figures, including United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Ambassador Martin, did not believe that Saigon would be attacked.
Panic sets in On April 28, two United States Marine corporals at Tan Son Nhut, Charles MacMahon and Darwin Judge, were killed during a bombardment.
The next day, Ambassador Martin at last accepted that fixed-wing flights were no longer possible and authorized implementation of a backup plan, codenamed Frequent Wind, for final evacuation by helicopter.
United States Navy carriers were in position off the Vietnamese coast to carry out the plan.
After gathering at assembly points in response to a signal—the playing of the song ""White Christmas"" on the radio—most evacuees were bussed to the Defense Attache Office compound.
A subsidiary evacuation was arranged from the United States Embassy building.
Flying back and forth between Saigon and the fleet, helicopter crews acted with outstanding skill and efficiency under trying AFTER When communist forces occupied Saigon on April 30,1975, South Vietnamese President Duong Van Minh ordered his troops to lay down their arms.
ENFORCING REUNION Hopes that the victors would follow a policy of political compromise proved vain.
North and South Vietnam were formally reunited under communist government in 1976.
About 130,000 Vietnamese managed to leave the country in the last months of the war.
Flight decks were disrupted by the arrival of fleeing Vietnamese in their own helicopters or fixed-wing aircraft.
Parked helicopters had to be ditched overboard to make space for new arrivals to land.
At the same time as the airborne evacuation, more than 40,000 fleeing Vietnamese escaped by sea to join private or naval vessels.
By the early hours of April 30, the only remaining evacuation point was a helipad on the roof of the United States Embassy.
Ambassador Martin was among the last to be flown out as panic-stricken Vietnamese stormed the embassy building, desperate to escape the city.
North Vietnamese tanks reached the presidential palace in the heart of Saigon.
Going overboard A helicopter landed on the deck of USS Okinawa by a South Vietnamese pilot is manhandled over the side to make room for further arrivals.
South Vietnamese fleeing on their own initiative complicated the evacuation.
Fall of Saigon The Vietnam conflict had begun as a guerrilla war, but victory came to a military force plentifully equipped with armored vehicles and heavy artillery.
Hopes of a negotiated end to the war vanished when the North Vietnamese Army entered Saigon as conquerors.
B y resigning on April 21, 1975, President Nguyen Van Thieu signaled the opening of the Vietnam conflict's brief concluding phase.
His departure was a public admission that South Vietnam had lost the war, as the last hope of United States intervention had disappeared.
Vice President Tran Van Huong, who had succeeded Thieu, called for a ceasefire and negotiations to end the war through adherence to the Paris Peace Accords.
Intent on offensives Back in early April, the North Vietnamese politburo had given its senior commander.
General Van Tien Dung, orders to pursue the military offensive until Saigon was taken.
They had no reason to change their attitude once their forces were on the verge of victory.
South Vietnamese troops had not given up—there was an especially fierce encounter between the rival armored forces at Long Thanh east AFTER » Victorious army NVA soldiers flying the flag of the Provisional Revolutionary Government sit atop a T-54 tank outside the Independence Palace in Saigon on April 30, 1975.
The mood of the victors was relaxed after South Vietnamese troops obeyed orders to lay down their arms.
The leader of the coup that overthrew the Diem regime in 1963, Minh had lost out in the subsequent power battles between South Vietnamese generals.
He advocated a ""Third Force"" to keep contact with the communists and seek peace on the basis of shared nationalism.
On April 28, Minh was chosen to replace Huong as president, in the belief that he was the man who could reach a deal with the communists.
No more negotiations President Minh's inaugural speech proposed a ceasefire and a coalition government of reconciliation.
Minutes after his speech, North Vietnamese pilots flying captured A-37 attack aircraft hit the city's Tan Son Nhut airport.
The timing was not planned, but effectively showed the communists' disregard for talks.
General Dung set April 29 as the day for the final assault on the city—rockets at 4m. signaled the start of the action.
NVA COLONEL BUI TIN, ADDRESSING PRESIDENT MINH, SAIGON, APRIL 30, 1975 of Saigon—but the superiority of the communist side in numbers and weaponry was overwhelming.
Desperate hope South Vietnamese and American politicians kept pursuing a fantasy of settlement without surrender.
United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger declared that he expected a negotiated end to the war.
In Saigon, hopes focused on General Duong Van Minh, known as Big The only obstacle that remained to delay the North Vietnamese occupation of Saigon was the continuing American presence.
Still cautious about a possible military reaction from Washington, the politburo preferred to avoid Meeting the press General Tran Van Tra, deputy leader of communist forces during the final campaign, addresses a press conference after the fall of Saigon.
The city in effect came under military rule, with General Tra as area commander.
General Dung was ordered to allow a pause, offering the Americans time to complete their evacuation.
Seizing control The occupation of the city began on the morning of April 30.
Some South Vietnamese generals wanted to keep resisting, but at 10:24m.
As South Vietnamese soldiers abandoned their weapons and uniforms, NVA tanks and infantry in trucks rolled unopposed into the center of Saigon.
A dozen tanks approached the seat of South TOT Oof The estimated ZoZ f UU number of ARVN troops killed in the war.
With unnecessary violence but a fine sense of theater, the lead tank crashed through the palace gates onto the lawn in front of the building.
Minh's government, waiting inside ready for formal surrender, was informed by a North Vietnamese officer that all power had passed into the hands of the revolution and they could not hand over what they did not have.
In the afternoon, taken into custody by the conquerors, Minh was ordered to make his second r j The aftermath of the communist victory was a disappointment to people who had longed for peace and reconciliation—Vietnam still suffered hardship and warfare.
COMMUNISTS IN CONTROL Saigon was renamed Ho Chi Minh City and Vietnam was formally reunited under the communist government in Hanoi.
Saigon's new rulers announced the liberation of the city and that the administration accepted unconditional surrender.
Following sustained attacks against Nol's regime and the withdrawal of United States aid, the Khmer Rouge achieved their goal of ultimate control.
With Cambodia dragged into the war, the Khmer Rouge steadily grew while the Cambodian government unraveled.
Phnom Penh had been the Cambodian capital since the fall of the Angkor kingdom.
Many refugees flocked to Phnom Penh or into the ranks of the Khmer Rouge.
Operation Eagle Pull April 12, 1975 saw the final evacuation of United States nationals and Cambodian allies to ships in the Gulf of Thailand.
Several Cambodian officials refused to leave the city, even though the Khmer Rouge had marked them for execution.
More than L 00,000 homes were destroyed and thousands of people were killed.
By March 1975, the city's airfield was destroyed and the United States could no longer airlift ammunition and rice into Phnom Penh.
A fter the Paris Accords in 1973, the Khmer Rouge separated themselves from the NVA and conducted an independent insurgency against Lon Nol's Cambodian Republic.
United States bombing shifted from North Vietnam and Laos to concentrate on the rebels in Cambodia.
The Khmer Rouge intensely increased their efforts to secure the country.
During 1973 and 1974, the Khmer Rouge encircled the capital and engaged the Cambodian Republic Army.
United States bombing protected Phnom Penh from the Khmer Rouge in 1974, but Lon Nol's army was systematically weakened.
Mysticism and corruption In his years in power, Lon Nol had become increasingly authoritarian.
His deteriorating health led him to depend on soothsayers and Khmer Rouge attack By 1975, the Khmer Rouge had conquered almost all of Cambodia, with the exception of Phnom Penh and the Preah Vihear Temple at the northern border with Thailand.
They controlled the roads into the city and placed mines in the Mekong River to stop river traffic.
Their artillery and rocket bombardment of Phnom Penh got underway in Buddhist mystics—during one Khmer Rouge assault on Phnom Penh, he sprinkled a line of holy sand around the city in order to defend it.
Overrun by desperate refugees from the countryside who lived in squalor and were exploited by the government, Phnom Penh depended on United States aid to survive.
Lon Nol's regime was despised by both the city's refugees and native inhabitants. government.
On April 1, Cambodian government and military leaders forced Lon Nol to resign and leave the country.
After months spent on the outskirts of the city, the Khmer Rouge forces entered Phnom Penh on April 17, 1975.
The soldiers were a mixture of fighters who had been at war in the countryside for years and young peasants with no concept of urban life, abducted and recruited by the Khmer Rouge.
Glad that the Lon Nol regime was gone, many citizens came out in the streets to welcome the rebels— but their hopes for an end to strife were quickly dashed.
Tyranny begins The Khmer Rouge leadership was already determined to eliminate all threats to their new order.
Within hours of entering the city, they ordered more than two million people to leave Phnom Penh for the countryside.
The people were told that they must evacuate for safety from American bombing, assured that they would return within a few days when the city was secure.
Restoring their old homes and old lives, however, was not Pol Pot's true plan.
Celebrations and eliminations The ""Mouvement National"" takes to the streets of Phnom Penh to welcome the Khmer Rouge in 1975.
Despite its popular support, the group was thought to be run by members of Lon Nol's regime and was soon eliminated.
Hundreds of thousands perished in enforced marches to the countryside and the labor camps that waited there. people.
Cambodia now marks this horror with an annual Day of Remembrance, formerly called the National Day of Hate.
BLANK SLATE Pol Pot's conception of a peasant revolution against modern culture exceeded even the 1960s' Cultural Revolution in China.
Cambodia's new life as ""Democratic Kampuchea"" started at ""Year Zero"" with no trace of the old regime.
Hospitals, schools,and factories were targeted, as well as scores of M * DAY OF HATE CEREMONY The Mayaguez Incident When Cambodian gunmen boarded a United States cargo ship two weeks after the fall of Saigon, the American response was robust.
The only known engagement between United States ground forces and the Khmer Rouge, the incident was also the last military action of the Vietnam War.
Retaking the Mayaguez When the USS Harold E Holt approached the USS Mayaguez to recapture the ship, the crew found it already abandoned.
Marines from Holt conducted the first hostile ship-to-ship boarding by the United States Navy since 1826.
Aerial evidence This photograph taken by a USAF reconnaissance plane shows a patrol boat belonging to the Khmer Rouge alongside the USS Mayaguez, soon after the attack on the container ship. [before _ In 1975, after decades of internal strife in Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge, led by the dictator Pol Pot, came to power.
O n May 12, 1975, a month after the Khmer Rouge takeover in Phnom Penh, Cambodian gunboats seized an American container ship, the USS Mayaguez, on its way to Thailand.
The Khmer Rouge claimed that the ship had violated Cambodian waters by sailing inside the 12 mile territorial limits of the tiny, uninhabited island of Poulo Wai, 59 miles off Cambodia's coast—the United States recognized only a 3 mile limit.
Efforts at diplomatic resolution through the People's Republic of China failed when China refused to mediate.
Reminded of the capture of an American spy ship, the Pueblo, by North Korea in 1968, when the crew had been held hostage for 11 months.
President Ford ordered a significant military response to Cambodia's action.
Ford orders the attack The Khmer Rouge took the ship to Koh Tang, an island about 32 miles from the Cambodian coast, where they transferred the 39 crew members to fishing vessels.
These boats took the Mayaguez crew to another small island nearby and Realizing that the crew would be harder to track once they reached the mainland.
However, American pilots lost track of the boat among the hundreds of fishing vessels in Kompong Som's harbor, and the Pentagon's lack of information about the area complicated its rescue plans.
VICE PRESIDENT NELSON ROCKEFELLER DURING A NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING, MAY 12,1975 then attempted to move them to the mainland at Kompong Som . island, and bomb Kompong Som.
While the first and last objectives were achieved easily—the ship itself had already been abandoned—the attack on Koh Tang was more challenging.
The Marine and Air Force landing party found the island far better defended than their intelligence briefings had indicated.
Upon hearing of the release of the American sailors, President Ford ordered the suspension of the invasion and a withdrawal of United States forces.
Several troop-carrying helicopters were hit and destroyed, including one that was blown up in the air, killing 13 servicemen and injuring the pilot.
The rescue of the United States forces proved to be just as dangerous as the assault.
In a 14-hour battle, 15 United States servicemen died, while 23 perished in a helicopter crash in Thailand, where troops were preparing for action.
Left behind Three Marines—in addition to the unrecovered bodies of dead servicemen—were left behind in the precarious extrication from the island, which was conducted at night under heavy fire.
Not knowing the fate of the lost men, and certain that more would die in any rescue mission, the United States command denied the Marines' request to return for their stranded comrades.
The Khmer Rouge commander of Koh Tang later reported that one of the Marines had been captured and executed immediately afterward.
The other two were also captured and subsequently killed, although accounts of the timing and circumstances differ.
AFTER In retrospect, the Mayaguez mission was seen as poorly planned and executed, in spite of the heroism involved.
ON REFLECTION The United States recognized the heroism displayed by Marines, Navy, and Force personnel in the combined response to the Mayaguez Incident by awarding one Navy Cross and 12 other major citations, in addition to bronze stars to the 23 men who died in the helicopter crash in Thailand.
In 2008, more than 30 years after the incident, a law was drafted to award the Vietnam War Service Medal to veterans of the mission, who had previously been ineligible, addition, collaborative efforts between Cambodia and the United States to find and repatriate bodies from Koh Tang continue today.
VIETNAM WAR SERVICE MEDAL V Pathet Lao Takeover The American withdrawal from Vietnam in 1973 and the subsequent communist victory gave a boost to the Pathet Lao, who had won control of large areas of their country. 60 0 ehtjao'H Celebrating modern Laos The victory of the communist Pathet Lao forces in 1975 led to the establishment of a one-party state, which celebrated its achievements through posters and other forms of propaganda.
BEFORE \ The battle against North Vietnamese forces in Laos and along the Ho Chi Minh Trail made that country a crucial theater in the war in Indochina.
DIVIDED COUNTRY Following the 1954 Geneva Conference, the Pathet Lao established control in two northern provinces.
A coalition government between Royalists and communists collapsed in 1959 and a long civil war ensued.
CHUEVANG ON BEING ORDERED TO FIGHT FOR THE PATHET LAO AT AGE 8, MISSOULA TIMES, MAY 27, 2015 T he United States exit from Vietnam affected all of Indochina.
In February 1973, the Pathet Lao and the Royal Laotian Government signed a ceasefire— the Vientiane Treaty—but the Pathet Lao did not disarm and the NVA remained in the country.
With the communist takeovers in Phnom Penh and Saigon in April 1975, the Pathet Lao stepped up attacks on the Royalist forces.
The prime minister Souvanna Phouma knew that his forces could not prevail against this assault.
He had little choice but to accept a promise of moderation from the leader of the Pathet Lao, his half-brother Prince Souphanouvong, and invite the communists to participate in a coalition government.
On August 23, 1975, 50 Pathet Lao troops entered Vientiane, the capital city, claiming to ""liberate"" it.
Over the ensuing months the communists extended their control to the rest of the country.
Coalition collapses For a few months the Pathet Lao cooperated with the Royalists in the government.
Souvanna Phouma ordered the Royalist. military forces not to oppose the Pathlet Lao.
The United States cut off economic aid, but maintained a diplomatic presence.
They swept aside the noncommunist members of the coalition, forced King Savang Vatthana to abdicate, and abolished the monarchy.
The king and the royal family were sent to a brutal re-education camp in November 1976 and all died within the next two years.
The regime broke economic relations with China, while Soviet and other Eastern bloc countries provided economic aid.
Forced return A Pathet Lao soldier orders a group of Meo hill people to return to their homes following an attempt by the Meos to march to the Laotian capital to protest against repression by the new communist-led government in May 1975. to appoint advisers to help oversee the country and to station armed forces there.
The United States withdrew entirely and Laos fell almost totally under Vietnamese hegemony.
The new government set out to punish the Hmong who had fought with or supported General Vang Pao, a Hmong leader who had collaborated with the United States in fighting the communists in Laos.
This quest for revenge expanded into a genocidal campaign aimed at eradicating the Hmong people and their culture.
As many as 200,000 Hmong fled into Thailand and a number of Hmong fighters took refuge in mountains.
In later negotiations Laos agreed to repatriate 60,000 Lao refugees living in Thailand, including several thousand Hmong people.
Fearing violence against them, the Hmong resisted return—their imprisoned for up to ten years in so-called ""re-education"" camps similar to those in Vietnam, located in remote areas.
About 10 percent of the population, including most among the business, professional, and educated classes fled the country.
Nevertheless, the United States State Department's annual report on human rights violations did not mention Laos in 1976, 1977, or 1978.
In 1979, the report noted some improvements in human rights in the preceding two years and rejected the charge of genocide, downplaying torture in the re-education camps.
It reported evidence but not ""absolute proof"" of chemical warfare against the Hmong.
Initially housed in refugee camps in Thailand, by 1995 more than 183,000 had been resettled worldwide.
HMONG DIASPORA After some hesitation based on the belief that the Hmong people would not be able to adapt to life in America, the United States accepted some 140,000 Hmong from camps in Thailand.
They settled mainly in California, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and North Carolina.
Among them was General Vang Pao, whose death in California in 2010 was widely mourned by the Hmong. concern was well founded.
The communist government bombed their villages with poison gas and allowed atrocities against those who returned.
Re-education The Hmong were not the only people to suffer under the new Laotian government.
Many people were persecuted due to their politics, religion, or even career choice, causing large numbers of South Vietnamese to flee their homeland for good.
United at last This stamp commemorates the 1976 session of the Vietnamese National Assembly—the first for unified Vietnam.
I n the frantic evacuation of the United States Embassy, officials left behind many undestroyed files.
Among these was a list of 30,000 Vietnamese who had worked in the Phoenix Program, helping to root out Viet Cong agents in rural areas.
These individuals were quickly rounded up—later reports suggest that they were executed.
Although the feared bloodbath on a larger scale did not occur immediately, South Vietnamese citizens suffered deeply at the hands of the new regime.
Survivors, some of whom spent as many as 10 years incarcerated, described hard and « ~\ The government in Saigon did not last long after the departure of United States forces in 1973.
After the ARVN were defeated at Xuan Loc, the NVA marched uncontested toward Saigon.
An estimated 165,000 people died in the camps—from starvation, disease, exhaustion, suicide, and by execution.
Bribery and extortion payments by family members inside and outside of Vietnam allowed some of the incarcerated to survive and even buy release.
Singled out Religious people, especially Christians, were persecuted, as were ethnic minorities, including the significant Chinese population.
Among the major targets were approximately 30 tribes of Montagnards , who had cooperated with the French and later the United States in the two Indochina wars.
Fighting for their cultures and autonomy, many Montagnards continued to resist for both ethnic and religious reasons.
The new regime responded harshly, slaughtering thousands of tribespeople.
Economic adaptation Persecution, however, was not the only item on the SRV government's list of punishments.
Between 1975 and 1980, more than one million North Vietnamese citizens were sent to live in the south and central regions of the former South Vietnam, apparently to balance the population.
Meanwhile, up to one million South Vietnamese people were relocated, and families were moved to previously uninhabited areas in the mountains called New Economic Zones.
Seeking asylum Unsurprisingly, many former South Vietnamese people chose not to remain under the new regime.
After the communist takeover, two Paying the price Prisoners do manual labor in a re-education camp.
The camps engaged in indoctrination but, despite the name, were more about punishment than converting people to communism.
Children's burden Orphans eat at the Bamboo Shoot Orphanage in Ho Chi Minh City, in April 1980.
Many of the orphaned children in Vietnam had American fathers, or birth defects as a result of chemical defoliants like Agent Orange. million people fled Vietnam by boat.
These refugees, who became known as the ""boat people,"" risked their lives to escape.
A BETTER LIFE Vietnamese people in America have achieved notable distinctions, for example, as scholars and professionals, high-ranking military officers, and, in one case, as an NFL professional football player.
Many firstand second-generation Viet Kieu have acquired wealth and return to Vietnam for business ventures.
Economic renovation in 1986 created a market system to help Vietnam's integration into the world economy.
I ~J /""v PERCENT of boat people / \J died at sea, according to SRV sources.
Vuong Thanh Loc's middle-class family owned a grocery store, and two of his brothers had worked for the South Vietnamese government.
Vuong had tried to escape seven times and had been jailed twice, before he embarked on the difficult journey that would eventually take him to Australia.
The boat was very small, around 26 ft long and 10 ft wide, but fifty people were crammed into it like sardines in a can.
It was unseaworthy; the engine was very old and it did not have a hooded cover, exposing it to the elements.
The owner had promised a bigger ship would be waiting for them out at sea, but he had tricked them.
In the hope a ship at sea could save them, they carried on with their journey.
But the engine broke down after ten hours at sea, and with no sails or paddles, the boat was left adrift.
Finally, on the night of seventh day the boat came ashore but they did not know where they were until the police came.
VUONG THANH LOC, FROM VIETKA, ARCHIVES OF VIETNAMESE BOAT PEOPLE, 2005 Seeking sanctuary Vietnamese refugees arrive at the island of Tai A Chau, Hong Kong in 1989.
Cambodia Under Communism Pol Pot and his regime sought to transform Cambodia, now called Democratic Kampuchea, in accordance with their radical ideology.
Almost a quarter of Cambodia's population were brutally slaughtered in the name of progress and purification.
Road to agrarianism Pol Pot believed that to cleanse society, all people must return to the land.
Untold numbers of people perished on long marches from urban areas to rural work camps.
Starvation, disease, and work exhaustion killed hundreds of thousands more.
Systematic genocide Numerous prison camps and execution centers were set up in the countryside to hold and punish those considered enemies of the regime.
The leader of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, he became prime minister after Phnom Penh fell in 1975.
He relinquished his army in 1985 and lived a shadowy life until his death in 1998.
Many details about his life remain shrouded in secrecy Never forgotten This bas relief at Wat Samrong Knong near Battambang, Cambodia, is one of a series of scenes detailing the atrocities committed by the Khmer Rouge.
Here, victims are cruelly joined together en route to their mass execution. these camps was Tuol Sleng prison—known as S-21— which was presided over by the notorious Comrade Duch, Kang Kek lew.
In such prison camps, interrogators employed heinous torture methods to gain confessions from supposed ""traitors against the revolution,"" many of whom were casualties of the internecine power struggles among the Khmer Rouge factions, or were accused of being Vietnamese sympathizers.
Of the 17,000 people who passed through Tuol Sleng, only a few— one source says seven—survived.
The others were executed at nearby Choeung Ek, a former orchard that became known as the most infamous of ""The Killing three million were killed under the Khmer Rouge regime.
Mass graves have been identified to account for nearly 1. million individuals.
Like the Nazis during World War II, the Khmer Rouge torturers kept meticulous records and thousands of pictures of their victims.
However, like Mao, the Khmer Rouge soon realized that their regime would not survive without the restoration of the very institutions and skills they had sought to eradicate.
Prisoners there were often hacked, beaten, or bludgeoned to death to save bullets.
Religion was outlawed, and communal living replaced single-family homes.
Children were removed from their parents in order to be indoctrinated, while married couples were allowed to visit each other only on a limited basis.
Those caught engaging in sexual activity could be executed on the spot.
The radicalism of Pol Pot was even more extreme than Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution in Although Vietnam had sponsored the Khmer Rouge originally, Hanoi's politburo never ceased wanting to annex Cambodia.
By the beginning of January, they had ousted Pol Pot and replaced the Khmer Rouge with a Vietnamese puppet regime.
However, the Khmer Rouge continued to fight the Vietnamese, and its guerrilla forces returned once more to bases in the jungles.
KHMER ROUGE GUERRILLAS Denouncing modernity A Cambodian cyclist passes broken cars on the roadside.
One of many possessions associated with urbanization and the West, cars were destroyed under the Khmer Rouge regime.
However, the three nations, along with their Chinese neighbor in the north, had an ancient history of border and ethnic disputes dating from long before The last United States citizens departed from Indochina in 1975, and Vietnam was reunified.
T he Second Indochina War came to an end in 1975, with communist governments in power in all three Indochina countries, but the scars of the conflict were deep.
Whatever levels of cooperation under the fraternal banner of communism might have existed during the war quickly fell apart, as historical animosities prevailed.
The following decades were a dark and violent time in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos.
Centuries of antipathy between Cambodia and Vietnam, somewhat covered over during the Indochina Wars, resurfaced after the triumph of communist regimes in both countries in 1975.
Ethnic and border issues, as well as conflicting claims over islands, resulted in military skirmishes that escalated to major engagements.
Following months of attacks on Vietnamese villages, in September 1977 Democratic Kampuchea (the new Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia) sent six divisions into Vietnam's Tay Ninh province.
The new Socialist Republic of Vietnam was Angkor Wat temples Khmer troops pass through Cambodia's Angkor Wat temples.
Pol Pot saw Angkor Wat as proof of what the Khmer people could accomplish.
Bullet holes from battles between the Vietnamese and the Khmer Rouge can still be seen around the temples today.
The final straw for China was Vietnam's 1979 takeover of Kampuchea, an ally of China.
That February, China launched a punitive invasion with 200,000 forces penetrating about 25 miles into Vietnam before they got bogged down and withdrew.
It is estimated that China suffered at least 7,000-8,000 deaths in the three-week war.
Vietnam never released military casualties but announced that 10,000 of its civilians died in the invasion.
Border engagements continued through the 1980s until a settlement was reached in the late 1990s.
Cambodia and Laos A peace agreement signed in 1991—yet again in Paris—brought an end to Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and allowed the countries in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to increase their economic activity with Vietnam.
In 1995, Vietnam became a member of the organization, and also restored its diplomatic relations with the United States.
The Khmer Rouge disaster, Vietnamese occupation, and continuing civil war in Cambodia prevented stability and development.
In 1992, the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia , quick to respond; it amassed eight divisions, invaded Kampuchea, and by January 1978 its troops came within 24 miles of Phnom Penh before withdrawing.
More border conflicts resulted in another Vietnamese incursion in June and a full-scale invasion was launched on December 25, 1978.
Employing 13 divisions, 150,000 soldiers, and abundant artillery and airpower, Vietnam wiped out half of the Kampuchean Revolutionary Army in only two weeks.
Khmer Rouge political leaders fled to the western regions of the country.
On January 7, 1979, Vietnam installed a puppet government, the People's Republic of Kampuchea, headed by Heng Samrin and other former Khmer Rouge defectors.
Sino-Vietnamese conflict Despite China's support during the Vietnam War, Sino-Vietnamese relations also had a long history of Battling with China A Vietnamese soldier captures a Chinese tank driver in Vietnam's Cao Bang province.
While the province's mountains had offered protection to Vietnamese communists for decades, Chinese troops invaded the city of Cao Bang in 1979. hostility.
Vietnam and the People's Republic of China had border disputes and mutual claims to the Paracel and Spratly Islands.
PHAM VAN DONG, PRIME MINISTER OF VIETNAM, 1979 Vietnam made discernible political and economic progress as it moved into the 21st century.
Meanwhile, Cambodia and Laos, two of the poorest, most corrupt, and dysfunctional countries in the world, continued to suffer from the impact and legacy of the Indochina Wars. negotiating Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia, accepted a mandate to administer the country, organize an election, and address the Khmer Rouge's crimes.
Laos remained under Vietnamese control, but had a civil war of its own to fight, between the Lao People's Army—with Vietnamese allies—and a Hmong insurgency.
Unexploded ordnance remained an unseen danger throughout Indochina, and represented just one of many ways in which the landscape was weaponized against the communist forces during the First Indochina War.
The two leaders worked to open trade and reconcile relations during the trip.
BEFORE -\ Indochina saw almost constant war for nearly 50 years, from World War II until the 1990s.
Indochina into the 21st Century Indochina entered the 21st century with outmoded political systems, causing social and economic stagnation, while their Asian neighbors embraced modernization.
Vietnam has since started down this path, but Cambodia and Laos still lag far behind.
W ith a population of more than 90 million, Vietnam is the 14th most populous country in the world, and it is one of only five remaining single-party communist countries in existence.
The establishment of diplomatic relations with the United States in 1995 opened doors, and the two have engaged in both military exchanges and joint exercises.
Increasingly, American Vietnam veterans have returned to visit, and even though this is an aging cohort, the Vietnamese consider war tourism to be an expanding market.
Other popular modern imitations include Zippo lighters, dog tags, and grenades turned into key chains.
Dan Sinh market in Ho Chi Minh City is full of supposed ""war surplus."" dissidents, state control over the media and judiciary, and harsh treatment of minorities.
Economic achievement Since 2000, Vietnam's economic growth rate has been impressive; in 2008, PricewaterhouseCoopers projected that it could become the world's fastest-growing emerging economy by 2020.
Vietnam has attracted significant foreign investment (including from Vietnamese people who now live overseas), seen a construction boom, and dramatically increased foreign trade.
In 2007, Vietnam became a member of the World Trade Organization, which opened up new world markets.
The stunning Ha Long Bay is popular Cambodia struggles It has been a less optimistic story in Cambodia.
The Prime Minister Hun Sen, a former Khmer Rouge, has ruled with an iron fist since 1985, repressing several uprisings against him.
King Norodom Sihanouk, who had served as the titular head of the Khmer Rouge and as Cambodia's nominal monarch since 1993, abdicated in 2004.
The actions of the United Nations Transitional Authority in 1992 did little to improve the situation.
Cambodia continues to have one of the worst records of corruption. human rights abuses, sexual exploitation of young girls, and HIV/AIDS in the world.
Although very poor and largely agricultural, the country nevertheless experienced one of the world's highest growth rates from 2004 to 2011, when household consumption increased by 40 percent, and the poverty rate fell from 52 percent to 21 percent.
Comrade Duch received a life sentence for crimes against humanity in 2012; Nuon Chea, Pol Pot's right-hand man, and Facing the music Former Khmer Rouge head of state Khieu Samphan stands trial in Phnom Penh.
Samphan maintained his innocence throughout his trial, calling the charges against him a fairytale.
Khieu Samphan, Pol Pot's successor as leader of the Khmer Rouge, were both arrested in 2007 and given life sentences in 2014.
Poverty in Laos In contrast to Vietnam, Laos remains one of the world's poorest countries.
It has one of the lowest annual incomes in the world, with a third of its people living below the poverty line.
In 2015, it ranked 29th among countries with the world's worst hunger problems.
During the United States war, more than two million tons of bombs were dropped on Laos.
An estimated 30 percent of PERCENT The literacy rate in Vietnam in 2015. these bombs did not explode— leaving an estimated 78 million pieces of unexploded ordnance in Laos.
The unearthing and sale of scrap metals from these bombs has, however, become a major industry on the Plain of Jars.
Today, scrap and unexploded bombs lie with megalithic burial urns in an area known as the Plain of Jars.
All three countries have young burgeoning populations and some natural resources.
UNCERTAIN FUTURE All three Indochinese countries have the potential for further development and political liberalization.
Vietnam will likely continue its growth, while Cambodia, appears set to stagnate under Sen's leadership for at least the near future.
In Laos, some foreign investment, the rapid expanse of tourism, and rich deposits of minerals offer some hope to improve its bleak status.
V_ ENDGAME AND AFTERMATH AFTER JANUARY 1973 American Homecoming Americans' antipathy to the war was shown not only toward the policymakers and generals, but also toward returning servicemen and women.
For some veterans, especially those who saw combat, homecoming was a difficult adjustment.
M ost Vietnam veterans returned to the United States to live stable, productive, and distinguished lives.
Studies demonstrate that 85 percent made successful transitions to civilian life after their time in Vietnam, and 91 percent of veterans indicated that they were proud of their service.
Compared to their peers who did not serve in the war, Vietnam veterans enjoy a higher annual income, and a lower percentage of them have spent time in prison.
There is no difference in statistics on drug addiction or homelessness.
Many veterans still struggle to get compensation for disabilities caused by their service, and the Veterans Association reports that the number of Vietnam veterans making claims continues to grow.
Service honored More Purple Heart medals (for miliary merit) were awarded in Vietnam than in any other American war but World War 11.
Many African Americans from the South had been forever changed by their war experiences, but their rural communities / expected them to return quietly to the traditional racial patterns of Southern life.
Some urban black veterans found militant groups such as the Black Panthers appealing.
Unemployment was also a serious problem among African American veterans.
United States veterans organizations, dominated by those who served in World War II, did not welcome the new generation of veterans, and were especially resistant to African Americans.
Untold stories The 6,400 female Vietnam veterans, who experienced an unusually high degree of trauma from the war, were often ignored and their experiences trivialized.
Nurses' stories dominate the conversation about female Vietnam veterans, while those who served in other capacities have found their experiences largely ignored; the Women's Army Corps records were lost, and remain so despite veterans' calls to find them.
Some female veterans have expressed their struggle to see themselves in the Vietnam Women's Memorial, which depicts an Army nurse tending to a wounded soldier.
The triumphant homecoming of prisoners of war caught the nation's attention, but thousands of men missing in In memoriam A crowd gathers at the dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in November 1982.
The two-acre wall is inscribed with the name of every member of the United States Armed Forces who served in the war.
Families grieved as the government appeared to give up on these men, treating them like inconvenient remnants standing in the way of new relations with former foes.
Hopeful future At the end of the war, change came quickly to America's armed forces.
The draft was ended, an allvolunteer military inaugurated, and more emphasis was placed on improving reserve forces.
The number of women in the military increased, from less than 2 percent at the end of the Vietnam War to over 15 percent in 2015, with most combat positions open to them.
The dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., was a decisive event and other memorials soon followed.
The GI Bill, inaugurated in 1984, expanded benefits for Vietnam veterans.
The 1991 Gulf War elevated the honor of patriotic military service, a trend reinforced by 9/11.
Vietnam veterans today stand alongside those who have served in the various theaters of the war on terrorism as worthy heroes—however shocking the new mantra of ""Thank you for your service"" may be to Vietnam veterans who experienced a totally different reception when they came home.
S' DESERT STORM VICTORY PARADE V_ * For America, losing the Vietnam War provoked an intense re-examination of everything about the war.
The Green Berets i Jj A YANK IN VIET-NAM, 1964 GO THE GREEN BERETS, 1968 The War in American Popular Culture The deep divisions that the war created in American society are found in the portrayal of the conflict in popular culture.
Almost all the movies and novels about the war reflect subtle or overt proor antiwar bias.
The Green Berets, 1968 Co-directed by and starring John Wayne, this took a clear pro-war stance.
The Deer Hunter, 1978 This focused on the psychological impact of the war on veterans.
Apocalypse Now, 1979 Francis Ford Coppola's acclaimed film offered a hallucinogenic rather than realistic view of the war.
Platoon, 1986 Written and directed by veteran Oliver Stone, the movie was intended as a rebuke to 1968's The Green Berets.
The Hanoi W/7fon,1987 This movie tells the story of United States soldiers who were prisoners of war in Hoa Lo Prison.
Full Metal Jacket, 1987 Stanley Kubrick's movie was based on veteran Gustav Hasford's semi-autobiographical novel The Short-Timers.
Good Morning, Vietnam, 1987 Containing comedic elements, this also examined the politics of the conflict within Vietnam.
MBorn on the Fourth of July, 1989 Oliver Stone adapted paralyzed Marine Ron Kovic's autobiography into a film dealing with the conditions facing wounded veterans.
HD The Ballad of the Green Berets, 1966 This was a prominent pro-war song.
Born in the USA, 1985 Bruce Springsteen's seventh album addressed the loss of American lives in Vietnam and the hardship faced by veterans.
Chickenhawk, 1983 This memoir was written by veteran helicopter pilot Robert Mason.
FIRST BLOOD PART II, 1985 QD PLATOON, 1986 For Americans captured in Vietnam, one war ended.
Tags are often left at the wall—as are boots, photographs, and personal objects—in honor of Vietnam veterans. il'ARI F •A I )SQN |\LPH C 4/1D C J/ i\LPH E i it z ■ H RaHS 1 Vta '.kY WtATj'l > ""^T-tNiTv 'jlh fi > X' v' rr I ■CTWJ jSJA J j^sj f ; 1 \A 1L” M rMlHIB Bl ki *3^1 ^ o -r TMifiTi ilf ii i mmmmmmmk w\^ wmmaam Visiting Vietnam War tourism is a growing industry in Vietnam and attracts many veterans—especially American veterans.
Today, visitors can tour museums, prison camps, and tunnels, or visit monuments and cemeteries, to learn more about the war or pay respects to the fallen.
BA RIA-VUNG TAU Con Son Island This island was first used as a penal colony during the French colonial period.
In 1970, the prisons were visited by United States Congressional representatives who notably reported seeing prisoners kept inside tiger cages.
Today, Hang Duong Cemetery on Con Son is a site of pilgrimage, housing the remains of the 22,000 prisoners who died on the island.
BINH DUONG Binh An Cemetery This cemetery—previously known as the Bien Hoa Military Cemetery—was established in 1965 for soldiers of the South Vietnamese Army , but does not appear to have been used until 1968.
The cemetery's location on Highway 1 is marked with a sculpture, nicknamed ""Thuong Tiec,"" of a tired ARVN soldier.
BINH PHUOC Phuoc Long Victory Monument The Battle of Phuoc Long, which began in December 1974, was a key defeat for the ARVN and an important precursor to the final North Vietnamese offensive.
BINH THUAN Ho Chi Minh Museum, Phan Thiet Set on the banks of the Ca Ty River, this small museum contains artifacts from the life of leader Ho Chi Minh.
Bunker of General de Castries The capture of the French commander's bunker was a key moment in the 1954 Battle of Dien Bien Phu.
The bunker has been preserved—and in places, reinforced with stronger materials—for visitors, but United States visitors should be aware that information within is mainly presented in Vietnamese and French.
Dien Bien Phu Military Cemetery This peaceful burial ground contains the remains of Vietnamese soldiers who fought against the French in 1954.
While many graves are unmarked, memorial walls give the names of those who died in the battle, listed by province.
Dien Bien Phu Military Museum Containing objects, weapons, and photgraphs from the Battle of Dien Bien Phu, this military museum also contains some oddities—such as a bathtub owned by French commander de Castries.
While the public cannot enter the old base, day tours drive visitors around the complex to see the main gate and crumbling walls, as well as uphill to Buu Phong Pagoda, from which the base can be seen through binoculars.
The ""veterans return"" tour also drives by the bars frequented by United States pilots, and the major United States base of Long Binh Post.
Dong Nai Province Museum The museum on Nguyen Ai Quoc Street is home to the original Long Tan Cross, as well as other Vietnam War artifacts from Dong Nai.
Long Tan Cross and Battlefield The Sixth Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment erected the Long Tan Cross in 1969 to commemorate the site of the August 1966 battle between the First Australian Task Force and the NVA and Viet Cong.
The current cross at the site is a replica of the original, which is now in the Dong Nai Province Museum.
Visitors may not visit the battlefield site without official authorization.
Ma Da Cemetery Known as the ""cemetery of no tombs,"" this burial ground is located in the old D military base in the province's Vinh Cuu district.
The cemetery gets its name from the fact that thousands of remains buried there during the war have not yet been discovered.
Military Cemetery, Long Khanh This cemetery, near the Xuan Loc Victory monument, contains the graves of both Viet Minh and NVA soldiers.
Xuan Loc victory monument The Battle of Xuan Loc was a key victory for the NVA during their final offensive of 1975.
The grand monument in Long Khanh, commemorating the battle, is dedicated to the soldiers of the North Vietnamese Army.
The plane's remnants were later removed to this nearby museum, which commemorates aerial combat during the Vietnam War, and specifically NVA antiaircraft artillery.
Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum Open from November until September, this marble building was built from materials gathered from across Vietnam to house the glass sarcophagus of communist leader Ho Chi Minh.
Hoa Lo Prison Called the Hanoi Hilton by its American inmates, Hoa Lo Prison is one of the most infamous sites to house American prisoners of war during the conflict.
The prison now contains exhibits on United States pilots who were imprisoned there— notably Senator John McCain—as well as on the prison's use during the First Indochina War.
Vietnam Military History Museum Built in 1956, this museum contains weapons, uniforms, and photographs from the Vietnam War.
It is a popular place for veterans and visiting foreign dignitaries to pay their respects.
Vietnamese People's Air Force Museum This museum has a substantial collection of aircraft, helicopters, and weapons from the Vietnam War.
The collection includes aircraft lost by United States forces—for example, the wreckage of USAF Colonel Joseph Kittinger's F-4 Phantom, downed on May 11, 1972, and the gear he was wearing when taken prisoner.
HO CHI MINH Cu Chi Tunnels The most famous of the Viet Cong tunnel networks, the tunnels of Cu Chi, span a large amount of underground territory around Saigon, and were a major base for Viet Cong operations during the 1968 Tet Offensive.
Day tours to Nui Dat, Long Tan, and Vung Tau Of particular interest to Australian veterans are day trips from Saigon to Nui Dat, Long Tan, and Vung Tau.
These private guided tours visit the former sites of Australia's Nui Dat Task Force Base, the location of Horseshoe fire support base, the Long Tan Cross Memorial, the Long Phuoc Tunnels, and the site of the Australian base at Vung Tau.
Ho Chi Minh Campaign Museum Dedicated to the final NVA offensive of 1975, the museum has an outdoor exhibit with tanks and planes, such as a South Vietnamese Air Force Cessna A-37 and a US-built F-5E Tiger.
The museum is home to one of the very tanks that entered the grounds of the Presidential Palace to capture Saigon in 1975.
Their service is memorialized on the second floor of this museum in Ho Chi Minh City.
Reunification Palace The current building at this site was built in 1962, after President Ngo Dinh Diem's own Air Force bombed the previous presidential residence.
South Vietnamese President General Minh surrendered on the palace steps.
Francis Xavier Catholic Church, Cholon In an attempted flight from the coup that would oust him in 1963, South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem was arrested at this church as he took mass.
En route to Tan Son Nhut, Diem and his brother were executed at close range in the back of an armored personnel carrier.
Tet Offensive memorials Two memorials stand at the site of the United States Embassy, which was demolished in 2002.
One commemorates the efforts of the Viet Cong during the 1968 Tet Offensive; the other pays tribute to the fallen United States Marines and embassy employees who lost their lives in that same struggle.
It also includes an outdoor exhibit featuring United States and ARVN planes.
War Remnants Museum Pulling no punches, this attraction is one of the most popular stops for war tourists in Vietnam.
The exhibits contain weapons, vehicles, and artifacts from both United States and Vietnamese veterans, as weil as harrowing photographs and accounts of the conflict.
It also contains replicas of the notorious ""tiger cages,"" in which communist prisoners were confined on Con Son Island.
Xa Loi Pagoda A key site of resistance to President Ngo Dinh Diem, the pagoda today has a shrine honoring the martyrdom of Buddhist monk Thich Quang Due, whose selfimmolation nearby captured the eyes of the world in 1963.
KONTUM Skull Slope Kontum was the site of a major battle between the NVA and ARVN during the Easter Offensive of 1972.
While few visual reminders of the battle remain, Kontum does have a monument to the war.
Dak To A monument on a roundabout in the town of Dak To celebrates the liberation of the Dak To-Can Tanh base by North Vietnamese forces in the 1972 Easter Offensive.
At the monument are two Russian-made tanks that took part in the offensive, and placards paying tribute to the North Vietnamese soldiers who died there.
NGHEAN Kim Lien Museum This free museum was the childhood home of Ho Chi Minh. who lived there between 1890 and 1895.
He moved to nearby Lang Sen at the age of six— visitors to the town can see a replica of the home he lived in there, and visit a local shrine to the beloved leader.
QUANG NGAI Son My Memorial Park In March 1968, American soldiers massacred innocent civilians at a hamlet known as My Lai, leading to the court-martialling of its leaders.
The tranquil site is now home to statues and memorial walls paying tribute to the dead, but the scars of the massacre remain visible in bullet holes and the foundations of burned down houses—each with a plaque commemorating the fallen.
QUANG TRI DMZ Vietnam was divided into two territories along the 17th Parallel in 1954.
The area around this division was technically a demilitarized zone , although in practice it saw its fair share of military action.
Today, visitors to the DMZ can see the Rock Pile, which was used as a United States Marine Corps lookout and artillery base, and the remains of Camp Carroll—a base from 1966 to 1972.
Day trips to the area go past the Rock Pile, McNamara Line, Khe Sanh, and Hamburger Hill.
Guides into DMZ territory mostly operate from the former United States Marine post at Dong Ha; going into this territory without a guide is not recommended, due to the amount of unexploded ordnance that remains there, unmarked.
Hien Luong Bridge and Ben Hai River Museum Destroyed in 1967, the original Hien Luong Bridge marked the division of Vietnam along the 17th Parallel, and was painted half red and half yellow to acknowledge this physical and ideological boundary.
The bridge was reopened in 1975, now blue and yellow, as a symbol of Vietnam's reunification.
Today, tourists can visit the Ben Hai River Museum, on the bridge's north side, for exhibitions on life in the DMZ territory during the war.
Khe Sanh Museum This base near the DMZ was a major target of the NVA's Tet Offensive, with United States troops besieged there under heavy artillery fire.
The Khe Sanh Museum commemorates the battle with a reconstruction of an American bunker, as well as vehicles, weapons, and objects.
Truong Son Cemetery This hillside cemetery was built for those who died on the Ho Chi Minh Trail—the major supply route from the North to the South—which was known to them as the Truong Son Trail.
The cemetery is home to around 10,000 graves, which is only two-fifths of the total number of people who died on the trail.
Vinh Moc Tunnels An entire coastal village was driven to seek refuge inside these tunnels, sometimes for days or weeks at a time, as shelter from American bombs.
More spacious than the Cu Chi tunnels, Vinh Moc's underground network has been partially reopened for visitors.
THUA THIEN-HUE Ho Chi Minh Museum, Hue Hue's museum focuses on the schooling of the revolutionary leader, who studied therefrom 1895-1901 and 1906-09.
Hue Citadel A major target of the 1968 Tet Offensive, the imperial city of Hue bears the scars of battle.
While some of the buildings have been destroyed, the northern sector in particular is riddled with bullet holes and crumbling walls.
HO CHI MINH TRAIL Biking the trail The Ho Chi Minh Trail was a key supply route into South Vietnam, making it a target for United States bombings during Operation Rolling Thunder.
Many visitors wanting to learn more about the trail visit the Ho Chi Minh Trail Museum in Hanoi.
Motorcyclists can drive through scenic mountain passes, following the same route used during the war, which largely remains unchanged.
Even with a guide, the full tour—from the north, through Laos, and back into the south—takes around two weeks to complete.
VETERANS' TOURS Returning to Vietnam Many of the war's major battlesites, crash sites, landing zones, and the remains of former bases are now gone—or, if they were particular to United States troops, have not been well preserved.
However, many local guides specialize in ""veteran return"" tours, and will, for a fee, locate and take veterans to the places where they served.
Collection of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture, Gift of James E Brown.
Jacob F Field is a writer and historian, specializing in early modern English and military history.
Jeremy Harwood worked in publishing for many years before becoming a full-time history writer.
His particular interests include World War II and France's postwar battles with its colonies.
Grant is a history writer who has published more than 30 books, many of them about aspects of military conflict.
Sergeant Major Donna Lowery was part of the first group of military women who went to Vietnam.
During her military career, she completed four tours as a First Sergeant, was a Senior Drill Sergeant, Personnel Sergeant, Administrative Supervisor, and the Inspector General SGM for Korea.
The History of an Unwinnable War, 1945-1975, which was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize and won the Henry Adams Prize in American history.
Joe Yogerst has written three books on Vietnam including the award-winning Land of Nine Dragons which took him to postwar Hue, Da Nang, Khe Sanh, Dien Bien Phu, and other Vietnam War locations.
His writings on history, culture, and travel have appeared in 32 National Geographic books.
