Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov said on Monday that United States plans to deploy missile systems near the Russian border risks a nuclear standoff on a par with the height of the Cold War.
EPA11 A United States patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter during the Cuban missile crisis when the world stood on the brink of nuclear disasterCredit: Getty11The Cuban missile crisis erupted in 1962 when the Soviet Union responded to a United States missile deployment in Turkey by sending ballistic missiles to Cuba just miles from the United States coastline.
It sparked a tense two-week standoff that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
The crisis was defused when Soviet ships headed for Cuba turned back in the face of a United States naval blockade.
Eventually, the Soviet Union agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba in return for the United States promising not to invade Cuba.
Washington secretly said it would remove the United States missiles from Turkey to avoid a repeat of the near-catastrophe.
We could find ourselves in a situation where we have a rocket crisis close not just to the crisis of the 1980s but close to the Caribbean crisisSergei RyabkovRussian Deputy Foreign Minister Russia has also been fiercely critical of President Trump's recent withdrawal from the INF arms control treaty.
Earlier that month, the United States said it would withdraw from the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty with Russia in six months.
It would do so unless Moscow ended violations of the landmark 1987 arms control pact although Russia denies any violations.RUSSIAN WARSHIP The warning came as one of the Russian navy's most advanced warships entered Havana's harbour on Monday.
It docked at the port used until this month by United States cruise lines with tourists seen taking photos of the imposing vessel.
The Admiral Gorshkov which entered service last year is armed with cruise missiles, air defence systems and other weapons.
The frigate is based at the Arctic port of Severomorsk and is part of Russia's Northern Fleet.
IN 1962, leaders of the United States and Soviet Union engaged in a tense, 13-day political and military standoff over the installation of nuclear-armed Soviet missiles on Cuba.In a famous TV address, President John Kennedy notified Americans about the presence of the nukes and explained his decision to set up a naval blockade around the island.
He made it clear the United States was ready to use force to neutralise the threat to its national security.
Following the news, many feared the world was on the brink of nuclear armageddon.
However, disaster was avoided when the United States accepted Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev’s offer to remove the missiles in exchange for the United States promising not to invade Cuba.
It's the first ship in a new class of frigates intended to replace aging Soviet-era destroyers to project power far away from Russian shores.
But the Kremlin has moved to bolster Russia's military capability amid tensions with the West following the annexation of Crimea in 2014.
To inquire about a licence to reproduce material, visit our Syndication site.
