C L A S S R O O M C O U N T R Y P R O F I L E S The Cold War The Cold War was a period of heightened tension between the communist world, led by the Soviet Union, and the capitalist West, led by the United States.
This period, which began soon after World War II, brought with it the rise of nuclear weapons as a global threat, the Space Race, and several proxy wars.
The Cold War ended in the late 1980s, when communist regimes in Eastern Europe collapsed and the United States and the USSR signed a series of arms reduction agreements.
During the Second World War, the Soviet Union entered into an alliance with the Allied Powers.
Together with the United States, Britain, and other Western capitalist nations, the Soviet Union defeated Nazi Germany.
Federal Republic of Germany—Often referred to as “West Germany” during the Cold War, it was estabWhen the war ended in 1945, the Allied Powers occupied Germany.
The lished in 1949 as a Western-style democracy with a Soviet Union controlled Germany’s northeast, while the US, Britain, and market-based economy.
The Federal Republic of France divided the western and southern regions into zones of occupation.
Germany still exists today and now includes East Germany, which it absorbed during reunification in Disagreements between the three Western nations and the Soviet Union the 1990s. over what to do with postwar Germany appeared almost immediately.
East Germany was home to a highly sophistiNegotiations broke down and in 1948 the USSR announced that the highcated and repressive security force called the Stasi. way and rail lines connecting West Germany to Berlin would be closed.
In response, A “cold” war—The United States and the USSR never enthe United States began flying supplies into West Berlin, bypassing ground transgaged in direct combat but competed for influence portation.
This operation, known as the Berlin Airlift, helped force the Soacross the world, thus the “cold” war.
However, they viet Union to relent and reopen supply routes. fought each other indirectly through proxy wars.
The next year, the Western powers helped establish the Federal Republic of Germany, which would come to be known as West Germany.
The Soviet Union responded by establishing the German Democratic Republic, a socialist state based on the Soviet model.
As east-west tensions rose in the ensuing years, East Germany built a wall dividing East Berlin from West Berlin.
The Berlin Wall divided the city until 1989, the year communism began to fall in Eastern Europe.
As it became increasingly clear that there would two German states, one based on Western capitalism and one based on Soviet-style communism, the USSR and the United States began a competition to spread their influence to other countries, a conflict that would dominate global politics for decades.
Traditional Ukrainian Easter Eggs After the war, the Soviet Union also occupied the states of Eastern Europe, such as Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Romania.
The USSR installed new communist governments in these countries—undemocratic regimes that would persist until 1989.
In 1946 British Prime Minister Harry Truman delivered a famous speech in which he said that an “iron curtain” had descended across the continent.
As tensions rose over the fate of Germany and communist regimes formed in Yuri Gagarin—In April 1961 the Soviet Union Eastern Europe, western allies feared further encroachment into Europe by the sent the first human to space, Yuri Gagarin.
The The United States followed with Alan Shepard in May. alliance was meant to resist further Soviet military and ideological advancement.
This standoff served as the basis of the Cold War. launch systems to Cuba in response to US missile deployments in Italy and Turkey.
The 13-day confrontation brought the two nations In 1945 the United States shocked the world by dropping two atomic bombs on to the brink of nuclear war.
Soviet spies infiltrated the United States nuclear weapons program, and the USSR backed down when the United States agreed to remove embarked on its own atomic project at the end of the war.
The United States deployment had been ion detonated its first atomic bomb.
The event accelerated a nuclear arms race kept secret, and thus the USSR’s capitulation between the United States and the USSR, with each developing increasingly destructive looked like a major victory for United States President weapons.
The two countries Mutually Assured Destruction—MAD was a began developing rockets, based on stolen German designs, that could carry doctrine that held that a nuclear strike by one large nuclear warheads across the world. side would provoke a response by the other, leading to the destruction of both.
To show their growing capabilities, the United States and the USSR began sending rockets into space.
The USSR was first, launching the Sputnik satellite in 1957 and sendDétente—A period during the 1970s when ing Yuri Gagarin to space in 1961 atop a modified intercontinental ballistic missile. tensions between the United States and the Soviet UnThe space race was in full force throughout the 1960s as the countries competed ion temporarily eased and the two countries to send the first humans to the moon.
In 1969 the United States triumphed with Apollo 11. participated in a number of negotiations and summits.
Hostilities resumed in the early Meanwhile, the two countries continued to stockpile nuclear weapons and develop 1980s during the Soviet-Afghan War and the new missiles.
Kyiv Post English News C L AS S R O O M C O U N T R Y P R O F I L E S The USSR and the United States never entered into direct military conflict.
Doing so would have risked escalation into all-out nuclear war and mutual destruction.
However, the two countries participated in several proxy wars during the Cold War.
The USSR supported communist revolutionary groups throughout the globe, while the US attempted to contain communism’s expansion to other countries.
Traditional Ukrainian Easter Eggs Shortly after the end of World War II, civil war broke out in China.
The Soviet Union provided aid to communist revolutionaries, while the United States supported nationalists with military supplies.
The first major conflict of the Cold War was in Korea in 1950, when the Soviet Union and China supported a communist government in the north and the United States military intervened on behalf of the non-communist south.
The war ended in stalemate in 1953, when Korea was split into the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the north and the Republic of Korea to the south.
The United States provided military advisors to assist the government in South Vietnam and Why did the United States and the USSR fight proxy eventually invaded on its behalf, fighting communist forces in the north.
Split stucommunist forces captured the capital in 1975, ending the war. dents into groups representing the victorious allies and ask them to discuss ways to solve The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979, fighting to install a communist govthe German question.
The United States provided support to insurgent groups, known as the mujahideen. er their country’s interest in the outcome.
The USSR fought the costly war for nearly 10 years before withdrawing in 1989 as the Cold War was coming to an end.
United States President John F Kennedy meets Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in “The Cold War” — 1998 television documenAustria, a country that remained neutral during the Cold War.
