The Soviet Union has few nuclear missiles; many cannot reach the United States.
The Soviet Union does have a massive number of nuclear bombers that can hit the United States, yet the United States can shoot down many of these planes.
The United States has a huge number of nuclear missiles and nuclear bombers, many of which can hit the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union has conventional military superiority in Europe; it has a sizable presence in Cuba, but nothing near the military might the United States can bring to bear in the Caribbean.
The Soviet Union has been trying to push the Western powers out of West Berlin.
The most recent crisis in summer 1961 has not been resolved, and a major foreign victory in placing nukes in Cuba would be very helpful to Soviet prestige.
The United States has tried to invade Cuba by supporting the “Bay of Pigs” invasion in 1961.
Our KGB agents in Cuba report that the Americans have repeatedly tried to kill Castro.
There is a reasonable risk that any missile sites could be discovered before their construction is completed.
Consider only this information and what you, as Khrushchev’s advisor, would have known before the Soviets put missiles in Cuba.
Explain in an essay how nuclear war might have occurred if the US, USSR, and/or Cuba had acted differently at that step.
United States responds affirmatively to Khrushchev’s first letter but says that first missiles now in Cuba must be rendered inoperable and urges quick agreement.
President Kennedy is debating what to do about the missiles in Cuba, and he needs advice.
There are nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba; our best estimate is that these missiles are capable of hitting almost any city in America.
We have imposed a “quarantine” around Cuba to prevent the future installation of any missiles or placement of military forces in that country.
In practice, this means that we have dispatched the United States Navy to blockade the island.
But earlier today, Premier Khrushchev publically announced he would only remove missiles from Cuba if the United States pledged never to invade Cuba and to withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
Meanwhile, our spy overflights indicate that construction is nearing completion on the missile sites.
This means that if the United States Air Force hopes to strike the Soviet missiles before they are operational, it will need to do it very soon.
An American U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down today by a Soviet surface-to-air missile over Banes, Cuba, killing its pilot, Major Rudolph Anderson.
Give into Soviet demands to withdraw missiles from Turkey and pledge never to attack Cuba.
Give into Soviet demands to never invade Cuba, but secretly agree to withdraw missiles from Turkey.
Since that time, the nuclear disarmament movement has ebbed and flowed.
Today, statesmen including George Shultz, Henry Kissinger, Sam Nunn, and Bill Perry, and groups like Global Zero advocate for the elimination of all nuclear weapons in order to avoid nuclear war.
Others argue that this goal is ultimately a fantasy, and that nuclear weapons are a stabilizing force for world politics.
