January ■ February ■ March ■ April ■ May ■ June ■ July ■ August ■ September ■ October ■ November ■ December 1961 was a common year starting on Sunday of the Gregorian calendar, the 1961st year of the Common Era and Anno Domini designations, the 961st year of the 2nd millennium, the 61st year of the 20th century, and the 2nd year of the 1960s decade.
As MAD Magazine pointed out on its cover for the March 1961 issue, this was the first ""upside-up"" year —e., one in which the numerals that form the year look the same as when the numerals are rotated upside down, a strobogrammatic number — since 1881.
Buddhist 2505 calendar Burmese 1323 calendar Byzantine 7469-7470 calendar Chinese calendar 4657 or 4597 both exhausted for lack of sleep, and had taken excessive alcohol at the time of the crash.
January 5 ■ Italian sculptor Alfredo Fioravanti marches into the United States Consulate in Rome, and confesses that he was part of the team that forged the Etruscan terracotta warriors in the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
January 7 Following a four-day conference in Casablanca, five African chiefs of state announce plans for a NATO-type African organization to ensure common defense.
January 8 In France, a referendum supports Charles de Gaulle's policies on independence for Algeria.
January 9 British authorities announce they have uncovered a large Soviet spy ring, the Portland Spy Ring, in London.
January 17 ■ President Dwight Eisenhower gives his final State of the Unio n Address to Congress.
January 20 John F Kennedy is sworn in as the 35th President of the United States.
January 25 ■ In Washington, D.C., President John F Kennedy delivers the first live presidential news conference.
February ■ February 1 The United States tests its first Minuteman I intercontinental ballistic missile.
John F Kennedy inaugurated as the 35th President of the United States March ■ March-April Drilling for Project Mohole is undertaken off the coast of Guadalupe Island, Mexico.
These events result in the beginning of the colonial war with Portugal.
Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin becomes the first human in space, orbiting the Earth once before parachuting to the ground.
Four French generals who oppose de Gaulle's policies in Algeria fail in a coup attempt.
As of 2020, this is the last time Tottenham have won the English League.
A Freedom Riders bus is fire-bombed near Anniston, Alabama, and the civil rights protestors are beaten by an angry mob of Ku Klux Klan members.
Alabama Governor John Patterson declares martial law in an attempt to restore order, after race riots break out.
Freedom Riders are arrested in Jackson, Mississippi for ""disturbing the peace"", after disembarking from their bus.
President Kennedy announces, before a special joint session of Congress, his goal to put a man on the Moon before the end of the decade.
This is later considered the founding of the human rights organization Amnesty International.
June ■ June 1 Ethiopia experiences its most devastating earthquake of the 20th century, with a magnitude of 6.7.
The town of Majete is destroyed, 45% of the houses in Karakore collapse, 17 kilometers of the main road north of Karakore are damaged by landslides and fissures, and 5,000 inhabitants in the area are left homeless.
July ■ July 4 Soviet submarine K-19 suffers a reactor leak in the North Atlantic.
Kennedy urges Americans to build fallout shelters, setting off a four-month debate on civil defense.
Soviet cosmonaut Gherman Titov becomes the second human to orbit the Earth, and the first to be in outer space for more than one day.
September ■ September 1 ■ The Eritrean War of Independence officially begins, with the shooting of the Ethiopian police by Hamid Idris Awate.
The Soviet Union resumes nuclear testing, escalating fears over the ongoing Berlin crisis.
The new creator, Gene Deitch, makes 12 more Tom and Jerry episodes until 1962.
Years later, after Disney's death, the stillon-the-air program will be renamed The Wonderful World of Disney.
French police in Paris attack about 30,000 protesting a curfew applied solely to Algerians.
A standoff between Soviet and American tanks in Berlin, Germany heightens Cold War tensions.
The Soviet Union issues a diplomatic note to Finland, proposing military co-operation.
November ■ November 1 ■ The Hungry generation Movement is launched in Calcutta, India.
In a nationally broadcast speech, Cuban leader Fidel Castro announces he is a MarxistLeninist, and that Cuba will adopt socialism.
One of the closest election results in Australian history, such a result will not be replicated again until 2016.
Notably, former Prime Minister Earle Page loses his seat, although he dies a few days later, never knowing the result.
Date unknown Sheila Burnford's The Incredible Journey, a story of three pets travelling through the Canadian wilderness, is published in the United Kingdom.
Hans-Jorg Rheinberger, ""Experimentalsysteme Eine Geschichte der Proteinsynthese im Reagenzglas"" Wallstein; ISBN 3-89244-454j4 10.
