ON rHE BnlNx An Octobcr 20, President Kennedy decided on a that Kennedy would behave with the ""same timidity LlU,ockade of Cuba by the United States Navy to preverrt and irrdecision which doomed the Bay of Pigs."" further shipments of military supplies to thc' island.
Many Americans simply held their br:eath and The president deciclec-l to use the word ""quarantine"" iroped that the world would not be consumed in a insteacl of rhe word ""blockacie"" because itr internanuclear holocaust. tional law a blockade was considered to be an act <lf war.
This option allowed the prc'sident to steer a "" Can y ou imagine n ot seeing another Cltris tma s, middle course between ExComm's varied options.
We're just too young to die."" nounced in a televised speech to the American public Ma ss nchuse tt s s chool girl that the Sorriets were installing nuclear rrrissiles in -A Cuba.
He tlren informed the nation of his clecision to enforce a quarantine of Cuba trntil the missiles were What was the Soviet Union's reaction to removed.
For several hours, there was no rryarned that ""many months of sacrifice and self-disresponse.
Like most Americans, they first and our will will be tested."" learned of the Soviet missile build-up in Cuba through Kenrredy's speech.
Khrushchev maintained that the American public into supporting the quarantine demissiles in Cuba, regardless of their type, were meant cision of their prersident.
Stevenson called for a UN vote to condenrn the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba, but the Soviet ambassador to the UN vetoed Stevenson's proposal.
Although reactions variecl, the missiles were placed in Cuba infuriated effects of the crisis influenced the lives of many and found expresLatin American governments.
One reaction can be found in the words of Latin American leaders also feared Cuthe well-known singer Bob Dylan.
Dylan wrote the song ""A Hard ban support of commullist guerrilla Rain's A-Gonna Fall"" during the missile crisis. movements in their own countries.
What military sfeps did the United ""HArd Rain is a desperatekind of song.
Americans feared that r,var, possiblv -Bob Dylan nuclear \^/ar, w;rs probable.
On October Heard the sound of a clown who cried in the alley, 25, at least a dozen Soviet ships en route And it's a hard, and it's a hard, it's a hard, it's a hard, to Cr-rba turned back, but preparations at And it's a hard rain's a-gonna fall."" the missiler sites on the island accelerated.
The DEFCON scale rutrs from five, for peacc'-time conditions, to zero, for a nuclear attack.
One hundred and eighty-three bombers were clispatched to thirty-three airfields.
Ninety United States rruclear missiles were placed at a heightened state of readiness.
Mearrwhile, ExComm received reports After hours of analyzing and discussing the two that thc. missiles in Cuba were about to becorne operaletters, Kennedy and his advisers decided to respond tional. only to the first letter and to igrrore the second one.
If the the evening of October 27, the president offered to Soviets refused to back do\4'n, the United States would ""give assurances against the invasion of Cuba"" and to be facecl with the options to allow the nrissiles to re""remove' prornptly"" the quarantine measures that main in Cuba, launch an air strike, or to invade the were in effect. in return, Kennedy expectecl the Soviet island.
To make nratters more difficult, there was no rnissiles to be rernoved from Cuba unde.r international assurance that the Soviets exercised complete control observation and supervision.
No one manded safeguards to ensure that such weapons in Washington knew for sure'if nuclear warheads had would not be placed in Cuba again. reached Cuba, but United States leaders hacl no choice but to That same evening, President Kemredy sent his assumc'that they werc'on the island.
With these presbrother, Attorney Gerreral Robert F Kennedy, to meet sures bearing down on ExContm, tlte possibility of u'ith Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
During renroving United States Jupiter rnissiles from Turkey in exthe course of his meeting, itobert Kennedy warned change for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Ambassador Dobrynin that events \A,ere spiraling out Cuba was recorrsidered.
Unless the Soviets agreed to remove the a plarr recognized that it slrould not be seen as a pubmissiles, Kennedy stated, the president would order lic trade.
The first letter, reshould understand that if they ditl not remoae ceived October 26, \^/as an emotional appeal those bases, we would remoae them.
President apparently composed by Khrushchev himself, calling Kennedy had great respect for the Amhassador's on Kennedy to avoid the catastrophe of nuclear war. country and the cournge of its people.
We had Khrushchev. f'his letter took a much more hardline onhl a few ntore hours-zue needed an ansroer position, insisting that the United States remove its immediately from the Soaiet Union.
I saicl zoe nuclear missiles from Turkey in return for a withmust lmae it the next day."" drarwal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy found General Robert F Kennedy -Attorney the demancls contained in the second letter unacceptable for two reasons.
First, Turkey rvas not rvilling t<t llobert Kennedy also revearled to Dobrynin that ha'u'e the Jupiter missiles removed.
Turkev and clther the United States missiles in'Iurkey were outmoded and that U""S. allies on the Mediterranean counted on United States methe United States had already made plans before the dium-range nuclear missiles to deter an attack by the crisis to remove them.
United States preparations for an air strike The next day, Premier Khrushchev chose to deagainst thc'missile sites and an invasion of Cuba infuse the confrontation.
C)ver 100,000 battle-ready troops had quickly as possible to President Kennedy, Khrushchev massed in Florida to await the president's orders. ordered that a message be broadcast by radio.
In addition, he narral base at Guantanamo to Cuba, and end the onreceived a cable from Castro.
Thc' Cuban lc'ader exgoing United States ercononric blockade of Cluba. pressed his belief that the United States would itrvade While Moscc.nv, Washington, and the rest of the his island in the comin6; days and called on Khrushworld breathed easier after October 28, Castro kept chev to launch nuclear missiles at the United States in Cuba on a \ rar footing.
E{Ttlflt *f :$*[{lrff $l|lF. ry$[fr*|.[$ 1,,,, 'tu:3 r 'e' ry'"" A United States destroyer inspects a Soviet ship transporting a missile from Cuba to the Soviet Union. in anticipation of a United States invasion.
Castro was conStates continued its naval quarantine and daily reconvinced that thc.
Uniteid States lt'ould not honor its naissance flights during the negotiations. pledge not to invade Culra.
F{er had believec{ all along In the end, Castro saw the arrangement that rethat the Sorriet missiles were neecled to deter United States insolved the missile crisis as a threat tcl Cuba's security. tervention and defend the Cuban revolution.
Khrushchev had not only agreed to withdraw the In the weeks following the resolution of the mismissiles, but also to remove a squadron of Soviet sile crisis, Soviet diplomats pressed Castro to accept bombers from the island. tlre Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement.
Castro, however, would not permit United States specialists to conre to ""We belieae that besides hazting salaaged zt,orld Cuba to verify the removal of the missiles, and he acpeace and haaing preaented nucl.earonr, we ctrsecl the Soviets clf abancloning Cuba iu thc' face o1' shottld nlso lraue salungetl peace Jor Cubn, n peace United States aggression.
Verification had to take place in inthnt inclttdetl a halt to the econonic blockade, ternational waters.
The Sovic't-Cuban talks dragged turning oaer the naa{il hase at Gunntanarno, And on until Novenrber .19 before Castro reluctantly gave an end to nII attacks on Cuba."" his assent to other aspects of the agreement.
President Ketrnedy said he believed that used in Vietnam and in other cases."" there was a 30 to 50 percent chance that the missile Shakltnazflr7), an aitle to former crisis n'ould lc'ad to a uuclear war. -Georgtl Souiet President Mikh ail Gorba cheu ln order to avoid a nuclear exchauge', Khrushcllev turned his back on his Cuban ally and came to terms with his Cold War rival.
By doing so, the Soviet Kennedv focused onbuilding on the opening in leader risked both his ties with Cuba and his country's SovietUnited States relations created by the Cuban missile crireputation as a global superpower. sis.
T'he ideological conflict would continue, but both After the rlissile crisis, a hotlirre was establislred Khrushchev and Kennedy worked to diminish the to ease communication betweetr United States alnd Soviet [eadtensions bc.tween the tr,r'o nations. ers in times of crisis.
The arratrgenrent featured teletype machines installed in both the Kretnlin and ""If zue cnnnot nou) end our differences, at least the White House.
The hotline was reportedly used TDe can help make tlrc world safe for diuersity. dozens of times.
The risk of a rnisunderstanding reFor, in the final analysis, our ntost basic conrsulting indeadly conflict was reduced. nnn link is the fact that ztte aII inhabit this planet.
T'he missile crisis also impressed on the minds We ttll hreathe the same nir.
We all cherish our clf Kennedy arrd Khrushchev the dangers of malcing children's future.
Flaving collle sc) fident antl unnfraid, we lnbor on-not townrd a close to the unthirrkable horror of a nuclear war, strntegy of anniltilntion, but tozuard n strategy leader:s on both sides recognized the treed to emof peace."" bark on a new path to prevent nuclear cotrfrontation Kennedy, -President in the future.
By the time of Union, key participants in the 1962 crisis from the the missile crisis, Soviet nuclear capabilify was still far United States, the former Soviet Union, and Cuba met behind United States capabiliry.
United States intelligence in 1962 estion several occasions to reviertr the events.
Moreover, the Soviets had no submanuclear missiles in Cuba as well as Castro's motives rine-launched missiles and were at a seven-to-one for accepting them. disadvantage in long-range bombers.
It naturnlly "" tonrtented our leatlership a great Following the Bay of Pigs invasion, tl're Soviets deal.
Because zue rL)ere actualltl stfuject to a posshared Castro's conviction that the United States sible attack of American missile forces, and aaiawould use force to snuff out communism in Cuba. tion.forces, and ute had nothing ruith rohich to They believed that nuclear weapons would be a por.trespond'"" erful deterrc.nt to a United States in'r'asion of the island.
N Khrushchea, sort of -sergei However, Klrrushchev also hclped to address the P r emie r N iki t n Kh r u shchea imbalance of nuclear forces betureen the superpo\t/ers. \in1962, the United States could claim a decisive edge Khrushchev believed that placing the missiles in over the Soviet Union both in sheer numbers of Cuba would address the nuclear inrbalance.
The misnuclear warheads (which contains the explosive desiles would be within strikirrg distance of many major r,'icc') and in the number of missiles.
In addimissiles based on land, long-range bombers loaded tion, they could be used as bargaining chips to with nuclear weapons, and submarine-launchecl misnegotiate a withdrawal of United States nuclear forces from siles.
United States in nuclear missile technology. nuclear imbalance was Khrushchev's primary motive Concern about a ""missile gap"" created anxiety jn ttre for placing missiles in Cuba.
Under Presiclents Dwight Eisenhower and John Former Soviet officials and scholars have conKennedy, additional funding went towat:d strengthfirmed that Khrushchev felt Soviet missiles in Cuba ening the country's nuclear capability.
United States policymakers carne to realize that many of missiles in T'urkey.
Newly eign missiles at our doorsttp."" discovered evidence suggests that their fears were jusAlekseyea, Soztiet Amhassador to -Aleksandr tified.
According to the head of operational planning Cuba during the crisis for the Soviet General Staff rn1962, General Anatoly Gribkov, nuclear warheads had indee.d re.ached Cuba Aleksandr Alekseyev, Soviet Arnbassador to in the weeks before the rnissile crisis erupted in the inCuba during the crisis, suggests that Khrushchev simternational arena.
The Soviet warheads (as many as ply had not considered the possibility that the United 1,62 of them) were designed to be delivered by shortStates would react as strongly as it did. range, tactical nuclear missiles.
Yc't, meeting in Havana, Gribkov said that the missiles Castro unhesitatirrgly welcomed the missiles, not only could have been launched by the Soviet cornmander because he thought they would deter a United States attack of in Cuba without authorization from Moscow.
No one should belieae that a United States force noting, first of all, that this assured an improaecould haae heen attscked hy tactical nuclenr ment in the socialist cAntp's defense capabilities, zu arh e a tJs ttti tltou t r esp on di n g w i th ltu cl e ar nnd that if the socinlist cnmp uttzs prepared to warheads.
Castro may have even been to invade Cuba, had feared an invasion could prclvoke flatterrec{ by Khrushchev's offer to tnake Cluba the first a nuclear response.
Gribkov's revelation proved his communist country, other than the Sclrrit't LJtriotr, in tvorries \t/ere rvcII-founded. which Soviet nuclear missile.s r,r'ould be deplclyed.
In it, the Cuban leader expressed his belief that the would invade his island in the coming days and called on Khrushchev to launch at the United States in response to the expected 10.
Since the end of the Cold War, participants and scholars have met several times to discuss the Cuban missile crisis.
