It was against the background of the arms race that Cuba became a major flashpoint of the Cold War.
This was going to be real test of the USA’s policy of containment.Key Players:John F Kennedy • Born 1917 • Died November 3 1963 • President of the USA between 1961-1963 • He was the first Catholic and the youngest President ever of the United States.
However this did not occur due to a military coup by General Fulgencio Batista.
Attempts at Containment 1959 – 1961 • For two years Cuba and the USA maintained a frosty relationship but without any direct confrontation.
They were met by 20,000 Cuban troops armed with tanks and modern weapons.
Results of Bay of Pigs Invasion • Loss of prestige within the United States and the rest of the world for Kennedy.
The CIA and Castro The CIA carried out numerous assassination attempts against Castro.
Stories about plots against Castro include exploding cigars, poison in milkshakes, training his ex-girlfriend to shoot him, and, as confirmed in recently published CIA documents, hiring the Mafia to kill Castro.
However, Fidel Castro has gone on to survive ten United States Presidents.I think he did it because of the Bay of Pigs.
He thought that anyone who was so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be beaten; and anyone who got into it and didn’t see it through, had not guts.
I believe there is no country in the world…whose economic colonisation, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, partly as a consequence of United States policy during the Batista regime.
I believe that, without being aware of it, we conceived and created the Castro movement, starting from scratch.
What is more interesting is that the USSR did not make any attempt at all to camouflage the sites, and even allowed the missiles to travel on open deck.
To test the USA In the strained atmosphere of Cold War politics the missiles were designed to see how strong the Americans really were – whether they would back off or face up.
Khrushchev wanted the Americans to find them and be drawn into a nuclear war.
To get the upper hand in the arms race Khrushchev was so concerned about the missile gap between the USSR and the USA that he would seize any opportunity he could to close it.
October 1962 • On Sunday 14th October 1962, a United States spy plane flew over Cuba.
October 1962 Aerial photograph of missiles in Cuba, issued by the United States Embassy in London on 23 October 1962Kennedy’s Options On Tuesday 16th October 1962, President Kennedy was informed for the discovery.
The USA could still destroy the Soviet Union so – the argument went – the USSR would never use these missiles.
The biggest danger to world peace would be to overreact to this discovery.
An immediate selected air attack to destroy the nuclear bases themselves.
All-out invasion of Cuba by air and sea • For • An invasion would not only get rid of the missiles but Castro as well.
A ban of the Soviet Union bringing in any further military supplies to Cuba, enforced by the United States navy who would stop and search Soviet ships.
Crisis Timeline • Tuesday 23 October • Kennedy receives a letter from Khrushchev saying that Soviet ships will not observes the blockade.
Then suddenly, at 10:32am, the 20 Soviet ships which are closest to the zone stop or turn around.
He also decides to ignore the second Khrushchev letter, but accepts the terms suggested by Khrushchev on 26th October.
He says that if the Soviet Union does not withdraw, an attack will follow.
Results of the Crisis • For the USA • Kennedy’s personal prestige increased.
It shocked the United States into realising the fragility of its own personal security, and increased the United States focus on building up military strength.
The Caribbean Crisis was a triumph of Soviet foreign policy and a personal triumph in my own career.
Khrushchev’s Memoirs in 1971Reflections of the Crisis President Kennedy will be remembered as the President who helped to bring the thaw in the Cold War.
That crisis left its mark on him; he recognised how frightening were the consequences of misunderstandings between East and West.
President Kennedy’s obituary in the British Newspaper, The Guardian Even after it was all over made no statement attempting to take credit for himself or for his administration for what had occurred.
He instructed all that no interview should be given, no statement made, which would claim any kind of victory.
He respected Khrushchev for properly determining what was in his own country’s interests and in the interests of mankind.
