SSOP, Warhington, DC 20'102.9328 ISBN 0-945274-23-8 Foreword This study launches the Naval Historical The 1958 Taiwan Strait crisis, Atlantic Fleet Center's new series entitled The United States Navy in diplomatic ship visits to European ports, the the Modern World.
The purpose of the series is 1991 disaster relief operations i n Bangladesh, to inform today's naval personnel and other the maritime embargo of Iraq i n Desert readers of the contributions made by the naval Storm, the Inchon amphibious landing in Koservice to the nation, in war and peace, since rea, and the evolution of naval cruise missiles 1945.
The United States Navy and the Cuban Missile ashore, strengthened regional alliances, and Crisis, by Curtis A Utz of our Contemporary fostered the growth of democratic and free History Branch, lead off our new series.
Introduction I n the fall of 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union came as close as they ever would to military power in such a way that the president did not have to resort to war to protect vital Western interDennison was responsible for readying Army, Air Force, Marine, and Navy assault forces for a possible invasion global nuclear war.
He also served as the correct what he saw as a that his missile and bomber Commander in Chief, United States Atstrategic imbalance with the forces were no match for the lantic Fleet.
The aircraft carUnited States, Soviet Premier Navy's powerful Polaris ballisriers, cruisers, destroyers, Nikita S Khrushchev began tic missile-firing submarines and Marine forces of the subsecretly deploying medium and the Air Force's land-based ordinate Second Fleet, under range ballistic missiles nuclear delivery systems once Vice Admiral Alfred G Ward, and intermediate these American arms became were poised to launch air, range ballistic missiles fully operational.
Naval forces naval gunfire, and amto Fidel Castro's under the United States Atlantic Comphibious strikes from the sea Cuba.
Once operational, these mand, headed by Admiral against Soviet and Cuban nuclear-armed weapons could Robert L Dennison forces ashore.
With speed and have been fired against cities ,steamed out to efficiency, other fleet units reand military targets in most sea, intercepting not only merinforced the Marine garrison of the continental United chant shipping en route to a t Guantanamo on Cuba's States.
Before this happened, Cuba, but Soviet submarines southeastern tip and evacuhowever, United States intelligence disoperating in the area as well. ated American civilians. covered Khrushchev's brash United States destroyers and frigates, Dennison also coordinated the maneuver.
In what became kept on station through undermaritime support operations known as the Cuban Missile way replenishment by oilers carried out by Canadian, Crisis, President John F and stores ships, maintained British, Argentine, and Kennedy and an alerted and a month-long naval ""quaranVenezuelan forces. aroused American governtine"" of the island of Cuba.
Khrushchev, faced with the ment, armed forces, and Radar picket ships supported armed might of the United public compelled the Soviets by Navy fighters and airborne States and its allies, had little to remove from Cuba not only early warning planes assisted choice but to find some way their missiles but all of their the United States Air Force's Air out of the difficult situation in offensive weapons.
Defense Command in preparwhich he had placed himself The United States Navy played a ing to defend American and his country.
President pivotal role in this crisis, airspace from Soviet and Kennedy did not press the addemonstrating the critical imCuban forces.
Navy aerial vantage that the strength of portance of naval forces to naphotographic and patrol United States and allied naval and tional defense.
The Navy's aircraft played a vital part military forces gave him. operations were in keeping not only in observing the Thus, the Soviet leader was with its strategic doctrine, deployment of Soviet offensive able to peacefully disengage which is as valid today as it weapons into Cuba but his nation from this most was in late 1962.
The Navy, in monitoring their withdrawal serious of Cold War confrontacooperation with the other by sea. tions.
United States armed forces and with As the unified commander America's allies, employed for the Caribbean, Admiral U.S.-Soviet Conflict in the Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev emphasizes a point by striking a table during a Paris press conference in May 1960.
The Soviet Union of dictator Joseph Stalin and his successors sidering the likeihood that the United States would discover the ploy and respond by threatening war.
Seated next to Khrushchev is Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, the Soviet Defense Minister.
Communists and anti-Communists in what came to be forced the nations of eastern and in Asia. known as the Cold War.
RelaEurope to establish ComThe United States, a power tions between the Soviet munist governments and supwith global responsibilities Union and the United States, ported insurgency movements after the war, responded to allies against the Axis powers in the eastern Mediterranean these Soviet actions by Cold War strengthening threatened naCommand fielded an range, surface-launched ballistions with economic assisarray of medium and longtic and cruise missiles.
In tance, like that embodied in range bombers capable of addition, the ability of a the Marshall Plan for western devastating the major Soviet missile to lift the SputEurope.
In addition, military and urbadindustrial nik satellite into orbit around Washington sponsored centers in the Soviet Union. the globe in October 1957 military assistance to and alIn addition, the Navy demonstrated Moscow's growliances with anti-Communist equipped several dozen Navy ing technological prowess. governments as part of a carrier squadrons with Lacking adequate intelligence global ""Containment aircraft that could drop of Soviet strength in these Strategy"" intended to prevent nuclear bombs.
The Navy also strategic systems, some in the the spread of Soviet power commissioned several subAmerican national security esand communist ideology. marines that carried the surtablishment worried that the Serious clashes of interest face-launched, nuclear-armed United States no longer held between the United States Regulus cruise missile.
At the the edge in the nuclear realm. and the Soviet Union ocend of the decade, the United The issue took on national curred over Berlin in 1948, States brought on line prominence during the China in 1949, Korea in the nuclear-armed intercontinenpresidential election of 1960 early 1950s, Laos in the late tal ballistic missiles when many Americans be1950s, and Berlin again at the based in the United States came convinced of a ""missile end of the decade.
The Soviets and submarine launched balgap"" between the United supported Chinese, Korean, listic missiles taken States and the USSR. and Vietnamese Communist to sea in the Navy's new Even though this issue guerrillas and conventional George Washington-class helped Senator John F. military forces fighting ships.
In addition, with the Kennedy defeat Vice-President against the United States and other concurrence of the North AtRichard M Nixon, soon after non-Communist governments. lantic Treaty Organization his inauguration in January The Soviets killed few allies, the United 1961, the new president Americans themselves, but beStates deployed IRBMs to learned from intelligence sourcause Moscow was the power Great Britain, Italy, and ces that the United States behind international comTurkey.
The power of the United States had far more nuclear weapon munism and the patron of nuclear arsenal was tremendelivery systems and waranti-American action around dous.
This the globe, United States leaders tack, to quote a Navy officer conclusion was based on the regarded the USSR as their recounting a SAC briefing on earlier surveillance missions prime antagonist.
In the 1950s, the Navy also developed several tant Secretary of Defense United States Air Force's Strategic Air submarines to carry shortRoswell L Gilpatric made a Thomas Edison underway in the Atlantic in 1962.
This submarine and speech proclaiming that the in a threatening public stateher sisters of the Ethan Allemclass each only ""missile gap"" which exment was, he felt, a personal carried 16 Polaris ballistic missiles and isted was in favor of the and political afront. were a key component of the United States strategic deterrent force.
Khrushchev country a t odds with the These improved ties eventualknew the true balance of United States.
By the spring ly resulted in the Cuban Mispower, but to have it revealed of 1962, the Soviet premier sile Crisis.
Two W ith only ninety miles dependence, the United of water separating States ousted Spain from the years later this group landed them, Cuba and the Caribbean and took possesnear Santiago, Cuba, hoping United States shared much sion of Cuba and Puerto Rico. to inspire a rebellion against history.
Batista's solland in the Caribbean, was the creation of a new governdiers killed most of the rebels, colonized by Spain soon after ment in Havana, the Republic however, and forced Castro Christopher Columbus of Cuba. and a dozen fellow insurgents opened the Western HemiDuring the next half-cento flee into the Sierra Maestra sphere to Europe in 1492.
By tury, the United States came Mountains. the late nineteenth century, to dominate Cuban foreign From his mountain redoubt, Cuba had become the world's and domestic policy.
An act of Castro sparked the revolution largest sugar producer and a Congress, the Platt Amendthat many Cubans then key economic asset of Spain. ment, until repealed in 1934, longed for.
He dispatched That European kingdom, then provided for United States military insmall guerrilla units that amin economic and political tervention into Cuba to bushed and harassed decline, needed the income protect American interests.
At addition, United States companies ly, revolutionaries in the cities the same time, the United largely controlled the Cuban distributed propaganda, States had developed imporeconomy, especially the sugar recruited more rebels, and tant economic interests in industry.
Cubans increasingly blew up government buildCentral America and the resented this strong American ings.
On New Year's Day Caribbean, and staked its presence in their country.59, with his domain claim as the preeminent The government of the reduced to a few pockets of power in the Western HemiRepublic of Cuba was a resistance, Batista fled into sphere.
Corrupt politicians exile in the Dominican States and a decrepit Spain and military strongmen Republic. headed for a clash. stifled democracy and underOn 8 January, Castro and In 1895, long-simmering cut repeated attempts at his supporters entered Cuban opposition to the rule reform.
General Fulgencio Havana to the cheers of the of the Spanish monarchy Batista, who seized power in capital's jubilant populace.
Many 1952, proved to be one of the tially, the new leader did not Americans were sympathetic most ruthless of Cuban publicly embrace any social or to the Cuban insurrectionists. leaders.
He held onto power political ideology, but stressed When the battleship Maine, through graft and the suppreshis credentials as a Cuban on a port visit to Havana in sion of dissent. nationalist.
He promised the 1898, exploded and sank, the One of Batista's early opCuban people prosperity, United States Congress blamed the ponents was Fidel Castro.
On equality, justice, and personal Spanish authorities and 26 July 1953, the former liberty through the efforts of declared war.
Years later, exlawyer and political extremist his revolutionary movement. amination of the wreck sugled a small band of supporters Castro and his gested that the American in an attack on the Moncada revolutionaries improved warship had suffered an interarmy barracks.
Castro estabsunk by a Spanish torpedo or lowers were captured and lished an increasingly mine, as first suspected. thrown into prison.
Photo Interpreters first discovered mlssile sites west of Havana, near the towns of San Cristobal and Guanajay.
Lnter, U-2 photography also revealed MRBM and IRBM sites on the northern coast of central Cuba, close to the towns of Sagua La Grande and Remedios. ponents but even former supporters.
Moreover, Castro began a n agrarian reform program that involved the expropriation of over $1 billion worth of American holdings.
The trend of events in Cuba appalled United States President Dwight D Eisenhower and the leaders of his administration.
The American government first pressed Castro to moderate his behavior and Cuban leader Fidel Castro meets with when this brought no genuine Soviet Premier Khrushchev at the United response strongly criticized throw of Castro's government.
Mindful of United States support The president directed the the United States prompted increased for the deposed Batista Central Intelligence Agency Soviet and Cuban cooperation in the poregime and America's long to plan, support, and litical, economic, and military spheres. domination of the Cuban oversee an invasion of Cuba economy, Castro did not take by anti-Castro guerrillas. kindly to Washington's inWith the endorsement of the desperately needed reinforcevolvement.
He publicly and incoming Kennedy adments and ammunition. vehemently railed against the ministration, the United States nationCastro's ground forces sealed United States government for al security establishment off the beachhead and then interfering in Cuban affairs. bent to the task.
Washington responded by 1961, with ships of the United States The survivors were herded off placing an embargo on nearly Second Fleet steaming just to prison. all of Cuba's goods. over the horizon, the 1,300Not only did the Bay of Pigs Of greater significance for man Brigade 2506 stormed fiasco strengthen United States hosUS.-Cuban relations, Castro ashore a t Playa Larga and tility toward Castro and his approached the Soviet Union Playa Giron, the Bay of Pigs. movement but it prompted for economic, political, and For the next two days, the the Cuban dictator to openly military support.
In Septemanti-Castro Cubans fought to and wholeheartedly embrace ber 1959, he signed a treaty break out of the beachhead. the Soviet Union and Marxistwith Moscow for the Soviet They were hampered by the Leninist ideology.
In his May importation of Cuban sugar, lack of adequate training, Day 1961 address, Castro anformerly a valued United States imweapons, and equipment.
The next year, he readdition, President Kennedy thousands of his compatriots quested and received Soviet refused to provide them with assembled in Havana that the military equipment.
On 3 air support for fear of making Cuban revolution was a January 1961, President United States involvement in the ""socialist"" revolution.
Free United States diplomatic relations with from opposition, Castro's tiny Cuba. air force sank two of the inEven before that event, the vading force's ships, and Eisenhower administration drove the rest out to sea, began to consider the overthereby denying the brigade Rising Tensions in the Caribbean T he Soviet military buildup in Cuba soon followed.
As with other third world nations like Egypt provided a stable platform for specially designed cameras.
The Soviet downing of Francis Gary Powers' U-2 over the planes photographed Soviet and bloc ships as they neared Cuba.
Photographic interpreters often could tell the and Indonesia, Soviet arms Ural Mountains in 1960 with type and amount of military shipments to Cuba came in SA-2 surface-to-air missiles material being transported by stages, starting with small restricted the planes' noting if the merchantman arms and ending with aircraft operational flexibility, but the was high or low in the water and warships.
Corps observation of Soviet Throughout the spring and The CIA obtained much of merchant vessels.
Turkeysummer of 1962, these its information on this buildbased Navy detachments and sources reported the arrival in up from the monthly flights of Sixth Fleet air patrol units Cuba of large numbers of U-2 aircraft over Cuba. photographed Soviet and EastSoviet ""technicians,"" who Developed in the mid-1950s to ern Bloc vessels in the traveled under common RusI gather intelligence on the Bosporus Strait and in the sian names to deceive United States inSoviet Union and the ComMediterranean, while Navy telligence.
For instance, f munist countries of eastern patrol squadrons based a t Marshal Sergi Biryuzov apEurope, the U-2 flew a t Naval Station , Bermuda, peared on one passenger list I 70,000 feet, where Soviet and Naval Air Station , as ""the engineer Petrov."" fighters could not operate efJacksonville, Florida, overThese men were sent to fectively.
The aircraft also had flew ships in the Atlantic. remote parts of the island, tremendous range and Coast Guard and Marine where they selected and I NHC 5-446-B A Navy patrol plane photographed the Soviet freighter Krasnogradas she steamed for Cuba in September 1962, probably carrying S S 4 missiles.
Later that doubled t h e number of 0-2 1 U-2s, Crusaders, and Voodoos T h e intelligence provided by U,S, reconnaisat the height of the c~isia, sance aircraft was vital to President Kennedy's Bavy and Marine aviators Byina the Vought s u ~ e s s f umanagement l of the Cuban Misails FSU-IP Cmsader camied out many of the vital.
The aircrafk was a good plakforrn for positions onto each role af f lm, producing a medium s r high-altitude aerial photogaphie stereo image 18by $85 inches.
The resolutrtion of w o ~ kbstrt , its carn~$~ras groved less thsn satiafwthe p h o t o ~ a p h produced s was ~emarkabltory for low-levellwork.
Force carried oaxt the %carer.Balf of the production ma wag divePt~dxo msmentsus f 4 October flight and mbsequent the Air Force so the RF-101s could be equipped missile crisis Bights, g5-2 pilot Major Rudolf with some of the best cameras then a~ailable, Anderson, USAF, paid the dkimate price for his Air Farce tactical remnnaissance squadrons brawry and dedication t s d ~ t over y Cuba.
This aircraft, while ungainly in appearance, was able to fly long distances at great speed and altitude.
Indeed, the wings were so delicate that they needed wheeled supports, called ""pogos,"" when the aircraft was on the ground. missions to two per month.
Naval intelligence also formation, the Pentagon orThese flights, however, did reported on the sighting of a dered Navy Fighter Squadron not confirm the presence of Soviet-built Komar-class 41 to NAS Key West, any missiles. guided missile boat off the Florida.
Using the best Navy pilots and naissance discovered nothing the U-2 photography taken 29 equipped with state-of-the-art untoward, Cuban agents and August, the Americans conF4H-1 Phantom IIs, VF-41 refugees began reporting that firmed the presence of 13 was one of the best intercepSoviet SA-2 antiaircraft misSoviet-built patrol vessels tor squadrons in the U.S. siles might be in Cuba. there, including seven Navy.
These vessels subDevelopments in other McCone concluded that SA-2s stantially improved the coastrouble spots of the world would soon be deployed on the tal defense capabilities of the heightened SovietUnited States tenisland, and on 22 August so small Cuban Navy, which presions.
In late August, a U-2 informed the president. viously put to sea only a few aircraft unintentionally Kennedy ordered another U-2 old World War I1 frigates and entered Soviet airspace over mission, which the CIA exesubchasers.
When the Even these older vessels, USSR's Pacific coast. information from this flight however, were not toothless.
The Kenadded to the growing internaHavana that would soon acnedy administration lodged a tional anxiety.
Analysts diplomatic protest with Cuba, a midterm Congressional elecdecided that these sites were stating that in the future, tion, Senator Kenneth Keating the beginnings of an overall, United States armed forces would ,although having no ofintegrated air defense net""employ all means necessary ficial access to intelligence, work for Cuba, not just for their own protection."" publicly stated his belief that defenses for specific locations.
Castro personally denied there were Soviet SAMs and McCone concluded that the Cuban involvement in the troops in Cuba.
Keating principal target for the SAMs episode but also used the ocaccused the Kennedy adminiwould be his U-2s.
The 29 casion to remind the world stration of covering up this August images also revealed a that Cuba's airspace had been information.
Other members missile site that overlooked violated numerous times by of Congress called for a U.S. several possible amphibious foreign military aircraft; this blockade of Cuba to compel landing areas near the city of was an obvious reference to Soviet withdrawal from the Banes in eastern Cuba.
Some Democratic leadmission flown on 5 September ber mission, flown over easters demanded even more located additional sites near ern and central Cuba, also aggressive action by Kennedy. likely landing areas.
Intelrevealed the presence of firstFaced with challenges in ligence analysts eventually line, Soviet-made MiG-21 the domestic and internationdeduced that these installafighters.
These planes had the al political arenas, and in postions contained SS-2-C coaspotential to shoot down a U-2. session of the most recent tal defense missiles.
In response to this new inaerial intelligence, Kennedy A newspaper map of military and naval lnstallatlonsIn Cuba, October 1962.
LC Geography and Map Divisim responded to the Cuban probground missiles.
In statements to the reminded Dobrynin that the Security Advisor McGeorge press on 4 and 13 September, United States monitored Bundy argued that the inforthe president revealed that Soviet activity in Cuba closemation obtained from the misthe United States knew ly, and that the deployment of sions was not worth the Soviet-supplied SAMs and offensive missiles on the ismilitary and political risks. other defensive weapons had land would cause severe reperEven though the CIA Deputy been deployed to Cuba.
In a meeting with Director, Army Major General plied that the United States Adlai Stevenson, the United States AmMarshall ""Pat"" Carter and could tolerate their presence. bassador to the United NaRobert Kennedy disagreed He also stated that there was tions , Dobrynin again strongly, the president no substantive evidence of ofaffirmed that no offensive directed that the missions fensive weapons in Cuba.
The weapons would be placed in over Cuba be stopped and president added sternly, Cuba. that henceforth the U-2s fly ""were it to be otherwise, the Dobrynin's communications out of harm's way over the sea gravest issues would arise."" were part of a program of and parallel to the Cuban During the first week of deception orchestrated from coastline.
These flights along September, Soviet AmbasMoscow to reduce United States the periphery brought back litsador Anatoly Dobrynin met suspicions.
Khrushchev kept tle useful information and with several members of the Dobrynin in the dark about revealed nothing about operaKennedy administration.
Acthe action long after approvtions in the interior of the isting on directions from ing deployment of the offenland.
Navy reconnaissance of Attorney General Robert F Despite Robert Kennedy's Soviet merchantmen, howKennedy, the president's statement regarding the conever, continued to pay younger brother, that the tinued close surveillance of dividends.
An aerial Soviet buildup in Cuba was of Cuba, the presence there of photograph of the Soviet no significance.
He assured SAMs and fighters increased freighter Kasimov showed ten Kennedy that no offensive the danger to the U-2s.
T mt .-4,d United States ~ i l i t a Preparations r~ 'm he president was not Cuba but never examThe Joint Chiefs of Staff in the fall of 1962, IeR to rlght: Gen.
Cuds E Leready to sound the ined his military's various May, Air Force Chief of Staff; Army Gen. alarm over Soviet acplanning documents or asked Maxwell D Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Of -ft; GeorgeWAnder, tions i n the Caribbean.
Cerprobing questions about how Adma son, Chief of Naval Operations; and tainly, he was not planning to combat operations would unen.
Given Soviet activity lished in the Atlantic and a case the president activated there, however, prudence dicsingle ship stood watch in the any of the CINCLANT contintated that adequate preparaStraits of Florida. gency plans, the Joint Chiefs tions be made.
Anti-Submarine Warfare of Staff instructed Admiral In 1961, after the Bay of Forces, Atlantic, led by Vice Dennison to deploy naval Pigs disaster, the Joint Chiefs Admiral Edmund B Taylor, forces off eastern Florida.
The of Staff had directed Admiral conducted regular antisubmaaircraft carrier Independence Dennison's Atlantic Command rine hunter-killer op, with Carrier Air to develop several Cuban conerations.
In supof a specific type (e.g., a SAM port of the HUK groups were site); one for attacks on all long-range P2V, P3V, and sites of one type (e.g., all SAM P5M patrol aircraft based a t sites); and one for a broad, naval stations and facilities large-scale air assault.
Navy, situated t o cover the Atlantic Marine, and Air Force units and the Caribbean.
They inwould be involved in these opcluded Argentia, Newfounderations, as appropriate.
Norfolk on the 11th accompaAdmiral Dennison's Army s u m a b l e ~to bases in Florida nied by destroyers English and Air Force components and its Tactical Air Command , Hank , also enhanced their readiness trained intensively.
In addition, Maber of Army units heightened rine Aircraft Wing 2 deployed their alert status and preposielements of Marine Aircraft tioned supplies i n the southAn A3D-2 Skywarrior of Heavy Attack Groups 1 4 and 32 to NAS Key ern United States.
The Air Squadron 11, Det., lands on board West and NS Roosevelt Roads Force moved selected squadIndependence,20 October 1962.
Essex, whose crew is unaware of the crisis brewing in Washington, heads for Guantanamo, Cuba, and a training evolution in mid-October 1962.
This ship was a key component of the fleet's antisubmarine warfare force, as shown by the presence on the flight deck of the Grumman S2F Tracker, Grumman WF-2 Tracer airborne early warning aircraft, and Sikorsky HSSP Sea King hellcopters of CVSG-60.
A Gallant Old Lady T h e antisubmarine warfare support carembarked CVSG-60 off Quonset Point, Rhode Isrier Essex was the oldest carrier in the land, and headed for Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
OrThe ship, with many new crewmen and new dered in 1940, she was the lead ship of a carrier equipment aboard, was scheduled for six weeks class of 24 vessels.
She saw extensive action in the Pacific, suffering a steamed into Guantanamo on Friday, 19 Ockamikaze attack off the Philippines.
Unaware of the crisis that was then breakdecommissioned in 1947 but brought back into ing, Captain Gerard S Bogart set aside Sunday service during the Korean War and received four the 21st as a liberty day for part of the crew. battle stars for her contributions.
Modernized in At 0330 on the 21st, the order ""reveille, 1955 with an angled flight deck and other imreveille, all hands"" echoed throughout the carprovements, she served as an attack carrier rier.
Radiomen strained a t ship to an ASW support carrier. their receivers to pick up any news, official or In mid-1962, Essex was overhauled in the New otherwise.
New electrical and dent would make an important address the next sonar equipment made her one of the most night.
When a radio broadcast of that speech anmodern ASW support carriers in the Navy. nounced the quarantine of Cuba, cheers rose These improvements included the installation of from all decks. a bow-mounted SQS-23 sonar, an Iconorama tacFor the next 26 days, until 15 November, tical display, and new electronic counterEssex operated a t sea.
Led carrier's aircraft and sonar and her escorting by Commander Robert L Severns, the air group destroyers tracked a submarine contact-Soviet included two antisubmarine squadrons, an Foxtrot-class submarine F945--finally forcing it antisubmarine helicopter squadron, and a to the surface. detachment of a n airborne early warning Even though manned by a new crew using squadron.
VS-34 and VS-39 flew Grumman S2F complex new equipment, the ship operated with Trackers, while HS-9 operated Sikorsky HSS-2 great effectiveness.
Detachment 9 of VAW-12 flew Grumtrained officers and bluejackets of the United States Navy man WF-2 Tracers, planes which could now be can adapt to changing situations.
For their outoperated from Essex because of new data link standing performance during the Cuban Missile gear installed during the 1962 refit.
The ""Milk Run"" U-2 Mission of E vents in the Caribbean Ground crews removed the and the people in them.
Art took a dramatic turn film from his aerial camera Lundahl, NPIC's director, on 14 October, when and put it on a plane bound passed the information to his American aircraft resumed for Washington.
Navy specialsuperiors a t CIA headquarflights over Cuba rather than ists processed the film and ters, who i n turn alerted Naaround the island's periphery the following day took i t to tional Security Advisor For the first time, United States Air the CIA's National PhotoMcGeorge Bundy.
Magraphic Interpretation Center ately arranged a meeting jor Richard S Heyser, one of for analysis. with the president at the only two Air Force pilots In the afternoon, following White House for the next checked out on the CIA-modimany hours of close scrutiny, morning, 16 October. fied U-2, took off from members of the joint-service Beginning just before noon, Edwards Air Force Base, and CIA team made a discovLundahl briefed the president California, flew over western ery that immediately turned and his chief national security Cuba, and landed a t McCoy the routine ""milk run"" misadvisors.
Havsion into an intelligence coup. to identify and describe the ing encountered no MiGs or The photo interpreters discovMRBM site located on the SAM activity over the Comered a new missile site meant 14th.
Based on additional munist island, when the mafor Soviet SS-4 MRBMs-ofanalysis completed by the jor landed he described the fensive weapons capable of inphoto interpreters the night mission as ""a milk run."" cinerating American cities before, Lundahl also pointed NHC 5-446-B This aerial photo was one of several captured by an Air Force U-2 plane from an altitude of 14 miles on 14 October 1962.
The CIA's skilled photo interpreters, using special light tables and stereoscopes, verified that the Soviets had this MRBM site under construction.
Kennedy listened to discovered that Soviet military personnel were hard at work the presentation calmly.
But, on the island of Cuba constructing a launch site to accommoaccording to Army General date nuclear-armed, medium range ballistic missiles Maxwell D Taylor, only re.
The Cuban Missile point only 90 miles from Florida, were a different matter.
DurCrisis had begun in earnest. ing the summer of 1962, the Soviets carried out Khrushchev's To gather more information plan to secretly transport SS-4 Sandal missiles to Cuba. on Soviet activities in Cuba, Forty-two arrived by October, and intelligence officers estiSecretary of Defense Robert mated that each Sandal carried a two or three-megaton nuS McNamara ordered the execlear warhead, devices sixty times more powerful than the cution not only of additional bombs dropped on Japan in 1945.
The SS-4s could strike high-level U-2 flights but lowwithin two miles of a target from 1,020 nautical miles away. level reconnaissance.
Chief of This put a t risk the entire southeastern United States, includNaval Operations ,Ading the cities of Dallas, Texas; St.
Louis, Missouri; and Washmiral George W Anderson, ington, D.C.-the nation's capital.
In addition, the Sandal concurred with Art Lundahl's could hit the Panama Canal, all of Central America, and part obsel-vation that the Navy's of northern South America.
Light Photographic Squadron Even more threatening to the United States and her neigh62 was best suited for bors in the Western Hemisphere were the Soviet SS-5 Skean the latter mission.
VFP-62, intermediate range ballistic missiles for which four launching based at NAS Cecil Field outsites were being side Jacksonville, Florida, built in Cuba when the crisis unfolded.
The Central Intelliwas then perhaps the finest gence Agency estimated that these weapons each carried a low-level photoreconnaissance three to five-megaton warhead that was several hundred organization in the United States militimes more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb.
The men of the Navy could reach out to 2,200 nautical miles and impact within two squadron were especially miles of its intended target.
Hence, from Cuba, the Soviets skilled in navigation, instrucould devastate any city or military site as far north as ment flying, and intelligenceHudson Bay, Canada, and as far south as Lima, Peru.
Fortucollection techniques, and nately, none of these weapons reached Cuba.
However, even their aircraft, F8U-1P Crusadas Kennedy announced establishment of the quarantine, the ers, were equipped with speSoviet freighter Poltava, with launch rings for the SS-5 cial cameras.
Admiral stowed on her deck, and perhaps missiles in her holds, was en Anderson alerted the squadroute to the island.
Khrushchev might have been less willing ron to ready a detachment for to compromise if his deception was discovered after these leoperations over Cuba.
By the thal weapons had become operational. l % h , the squadron had deployed six F8U-1P Crusaders along with ground support personnel to NAS Key West.
Several days later, a detachment from Marine Composite Reconnaissance Squadron 2 joined VF'P-62 at Jacksonville.
Meanwhile, the president assembled in Washington a group of defense, intelligence, and diplomatic officials, and other trusted advisors to assist him in handling the crisis.
The Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or EXCOM, included Rusk, McNamara, McCone, Bundy, General Taylor, Robert Kennedy, former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, and Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, as well as other specialists.
This high-powered group discussed the various options and recommended certain courses of action, but President Kennedy made the key Based in Cuba, Soviet SS-4 Sandal MRBMs could hit targets in the southern and eastdecisions. ern regions of the U.S., while the even more fearsome SS-5 Skean IRBMs could strike The president weighed sites in most of North America and northern South America. three options regarding the United States response to Krushchange for United States concessions. sole military officer present. cheds opening gambit.
Taylor did not press hood that these operations Feeling Khrushchev had for the military option, as would be followed by the amwillfully deceived them over some of the chiefs of staff phibious and airborne landthe missiles, the president might have had they been preings laid out in OPLAN 3 16. and most of his advisors imsent.
In any case, the majorThe second option suggested mediately rejected the third ity of the EXCOM members the combined use of military option.
The military action were cautious about launchpressure and diplomatic negohad several adherents, paring combat operations.
No one tiation, compelling the Soviticularly McCone, Acheson, could predict how the Soviets ets to remove their offensive and Taylor.
The and several others feared that this stage, however, the group third choice was a different the air strikes would cause a did not rule out a military recombination of force and negolarge number of civilian and sponse.
As Chairthat the second option held on inducing the Soviets to man of the Joint Chiefs of the most promise that the withdraw their weapons in exStaff, General Taylor was the United States use military pressure, short of outright hostilities, to force Khrushchev to back down.
As the EXCOM analyzed the pros and cons of various actions, new intelligence reached them that raised the anxiety level.
The U-2missions flown on 17 October revealed construction activity in a n area, just west of Havana, that ~ h o t intemreters o soon ideniified as a launching site LC LC-U9-8639 On 18 October, the president met with for Soviet SS-5 Skean IRBMs.
Soviet Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei These weapons were more acGromyko at the White House. curate and powerfd than the In the diplomatic arena, on Kennedy was in possession of photos SS-4 and had twice the range.
October, the president met revealing the construction of Soviet balThe following day, NPIC conwith Ambassador Dobrynin listic missile sites in Cuba, but he was not yet ready to confront Gromyko with firmed that the Soviets had and Soviet Foreign Minister this evidence.
Gromyko assured the president that the Soviet Union had not and would not introduce offensive weapons into Cuba.
Gerald L Coffee and Arthur R Day, two VFP-62 naval aviators, discuss aerial photographic operations as RAdm.
Because of its skilled personnel, excellent planes, and advanced cameras, military leaders considered the squadron firstrate.
United States Forces Converge as the W hether the president task groups, a n underway United States moved toward ordered air, amreplenishment group, shoretheir staging areas and ~hibious.or airborne based Fleet Air Wing 11, and prepared to fulfill the roles asattacks against duba, global Marine Aircraft Group 32 stasigned them in contingency measures against the Soviet tioned a t NS Roosevelt Roads. plans.
Several aircraft wings Union, nonhostile activities, That same day Dennison orof the Air Force's TAC flew to or a combination of actions, dered the A3J heavy attack Tyndall, McCoy, and HomesUnited States naval forces would be aircraft of Carrier Air Group 6 tead Air Force Bases in vital.
The Air Defense Comreorganized its command them, twenty Marine A4D mand also moved F-104 interteam.
The 1st and 2nd Inordered Vice Admiral Horacio close air support strikes than fantry Divisions prepared for Rivero, Jr., to fill Ward's the A3Js.
Commander Second action, and the 1st Armored former billet a s Commander Fleet also deployed alerted Division's Task Force Charlie Amphibious Forces, Atlantic squadrons from two carrier started moving to its embarkaFleet.
Dennison, who not only air groups in the Jacksonville tion point, Savannah, Georcommanded the unified Atlanarea. gia.
The Army also ordered tic Command but its naval To help deter Khrushchev Hawk missile battalions and component, the United States Atlantic from launching a surprise atantiaircraft automatic weapFleet, also continued to tack on the United States, or ons battalions to southern deploy ship and aircraft units if that failed, to unleash Florida to defend air bases into the Atlantic and the nuclear devastation on the there.
Soviet Union, the Joint Chiefs Marine Corps units also Enterprise, with Carrier Air of Staff alerted American Group 6 embarked, sortied strategic forces.
These in""USS Proteus,"" watercolor by George from Norfolk on 19 October. cluded SAC bombers and Gray.
A submarine tender provides Navy spokesmen stated that ICBMs of the Air Force and alongside support to a Polaris fleet balshe sailed to escape the efthe ballistic missile sublistic missile submarine at Holv Loch.
Navy Art Collection #470 ricane Ella, but the press was By mid-October, six of the skeptical because no other Navy's new Polaris subships left port a t the same marines, based a t Holy Loch, time.
Enterprise stood out for Scotland, had deployed to the waters north of the their battle stations deep Bahamas.
On the West Coast, takes on fuel from the aircraft carrier InCuba contingency plans.
By this method of resupply, called underway replenishthe East Coast, I1 Marine Exactivation of the Fifth Marine ment, smaller ships of the fleet were peditionary Force, under comExpeditionary Brigade.
Comable to remain on station throughout the mand of Major General posed of four battalions from crisis.
Frederick L Weiseman, got the 1st Marine Division, this ready to embark in the ships brigade would embark in the of Amphibious Group 4.
This ships of Amphibious Group 3 readied themselves for Cuban force included four BLTs and which would then transit the operations. armored and antitank supPanama Canal into the CaribTo prepare for an invasion port units of the 2nd Marine bean Sea.
Additional Marine of Cuba, if that became necesDivision and Marine Aircraft aviation and support units sary, the services held a number of landing exercises in America's closest allies of the the quarantine force.
The men had lished several guidelines for That evening, Admiral trouble moving inland bethe quarantine.
The group eastern-most point of land in wanted to prevent further Cuba.
Adand economic support, and miral Ward codenamed this persuade Khrushchev to line ""Walnut."" reverse his earlier decision to As these decisions were base missiles on the island. made, Destroyer Squadron As so often in modern interna16, based at Mayport, cantional crises, sea power celed all leave and alerted provided a solution-a naval sailors to return to their blockade.
Over the next three marines, surface warships, days, Bigelow , Wiland patrol aircraft could exliam.
C Lawe , Mcecute that mission without Caffery , and Forrest firing a shot.
Moreover, no Royal left port for government's permission was their stations on the ""Walnut"" required to deploy a powerful line.
Cruisers, other United States fleet into the Atlantic or destroyers, and support ships the Caribbean to establish a sailed from the naval bases at naval cordon around the isNorfolk; Charleston, South land of Cuba.
Carolina; and Newport, That same day, the presiRhode Island. dent ordered the Navy to stop On the 2 lst, Admiral and search any ship Anderson briefed the EXCOM suspected of transporting ofon his operational concept for fensive weapons into Cuba. the quarantine.
He explained On the recommendation of his in great detail how United States waradvisors, however, he labeled ships would locate, signal, the operation a ""quarantine,"" and if necessary use force RAdm.
Edward J O'Donnell, comagainst suspect ships refusing mander of the naval base at Guanbecause a blockade is an act tanamo, briefs Chief of Naval Operations of war in international law. inspection.
George W Anderson on the defenKennedy directed the State munication, he had dissive strengths and weaknesses of his Department to inform patched Russian linguists to Navy-Marine garrison.
Marlne PFC Wilbur Martln sets up a TPS 21 air searah radar atop ""Suicide Ridge"" on the perimeter at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. force included many of the destroyers and cruisers that had put to sea during the previous days, as well as the Essa ASW group, and a logistic force of two oilers, an ammunition ship, and two destroyers.
As war clouds gathered, Admiral Dennison took action to strengthen Naval Base, Guantanamo, perched on a vulLC Gwgrapny and Map Division A map of the Caribbean Basin in the early 1960s.
The quarantine lines were both located east of the Bahamas and north of Puerto Rico, in the upper center of the map.
The carrier task force operated in the waters around Jamaica. nerable few acres of land near the southeastern tip of Cuba.
The United States Navy had operated from ""GITMO"" since acquiring the former coaling station from Spain in 1898.
The garrison consisted of a relatively small force of three Marine rifle companies, backed by limited artillery and air support.
Navy bluejackets ashore, organized into additional rifle companies after the Bay of Pigs, supported the main line of resistance.
Marine infantry from one of the two battalion landing teams airlifted by Air 7 manned perimeter positions Force C-135 transports to Leeward Point and served 8 1 mm mortars, air facility prepare to reinforce other Maand a t least forty Cubans rines and sailors manning the perimeter from the base work force at Guantanamo.
Navy nurses, on the staff of Guantanamo Naval Hospital, volunteered to serve as shared the dangers of service at this ""second man"" on police American outpost on the southern end patrols of the facility.
On 22 October, United States naval patrol planes operating over the the defenders of Guantanamo, broad Atlantic from their air facility in commanded by Rear Admiral the Azores discovered the rendezvous Edward J O'Donnell, would of a Soviet Zulu-class submarine and the tanker Terek. be hard pressed to hold the base if Castro sent strong ground forces against it.
Collins, USMC, had arrived on 20 October to take USN 1068403 A Navy bluejacket helps Guantanamo dependents disembark from USNS Upshur at Norfolk, Virginia.
In one day, 22 October, four Navy ships evacuated the 2,400 dependents from the threatened base in Cuba. who soon were the only American women on the base.
As the Marine and Navy combatants came ashore, civilian dependents headed in the other direction.
Male hospital patients, women, and children moved to the base air facility and the piers for transportation to Norfolk.
Seaplane tender Duxbury Bay , tank landing ship Desoto County , stores ship Hyades , and transport USNS Upshur embarked the majority of evacuees from Guantanamo.
By 1630 on the evening of 22 October, all four ships had cleared the harbor.
Meanwhile, Admiral Dennison ordered all attack submarines in the Atlantic Fleet to load for wartime operations and to disperse to waters north of Charleston.
In WashNHC S-OD-A Collection ington, Admiral Anderson asked the Canadian, British, charge, under O'Donnell, of would bring in another BLT and several Latin American the ground forces at Guanand Battery C of the 3rd navies for help locating Soviet tanamo.
The next day, Air Marine Light Anti-Aircraft ships and submarines in the Force Military Air Transport Missile Battalion equipped Atlantic.
On ly, a n Air Force (2-135 day, the Navy forwarded to the 22nd, Amphibious transport delivering ammuniWashington worrisome inforSquadron 8 put another tion to the base crashed, killmation.
The amphibious ships brought in Navy medical Azores spotted the Soviet immediately left for teams to augment the base tanker Terek refueling a ZuluMorehead City, North hospital staff.
That staff inclass submarine in nearby Carolina, to embark another cluded ten members of the waters.
Soviet Defense Minister ~ o d i o n Malinovsky put all Soviet forces in a higher state of alert and postponed the release from service of Strategic Rocket Force personnel and submarine crewmen.
Castro placed his regular military and naval forces on the highest level of alert and called out the militia, which converged on Guantanamo.
Calming one United States concern, Soviet forces in East Germany, the Mediterranean, and the Far East made no visible preparaA Royal Canadian Air Force Argus patrol plane and a United States Navy P2v ~eptuneovemy tions for operations against the vast Atlantic Ocean in search of Soviet warships and merchantmen.
The invohfethe NATO nations and Amerment of Canadian air and surface units in the ~tlanticpatrol effort was instrumen ica's Asian allies. to the successful resolution of the CubanI Missile Crisis.
The president's address also raised the alarm in Latin tion, with the Uruguayans abfered to provide naval forces American capitals.
On the staining due only to a lack of for the quarantine, and an23rd, representatives of the instructions from their governother six nations volunte Organization of American ment.
The seat for Cuba's repuse of their airfields and States , composed of the resentative was empty ports.
United States and twenty This vote of the OAS, rarely Canadian armed force Latin American countries, unified on any issue, reflected with some British units gathered in Washington to the seriousness with which tached, also joined in t h chart a course of action.
Secrethe member nations viewed fense of the hemisphere. tary Rusk personally led the the external threat to the Royal Canadian Air Force United States delegation.
The elements of the North organization to support a Kennedy administration was American Air Defense Comquarantine of Cuba and to surprised but pleased by the mand went to the Canadian join the United States in deorganization's vote.
Khrushequivalent of Defense Con manding the removal of Sochev was dismayed.
He tion 3 on 24 October. viet strategic missiles from thought that long-standing Additionally, this alert level the island.
In a series of anti-American feeling in some mandated the establishment short, pointed statements, the other representatives strongly endorsed the proposed United States acLatin American countries would prevent concerted OAS action.
In fact, Argentina, the of an antisubmarine patrol barrier in the Atlantic. mally, that line would have exor-. tions.
The final vote was 19 to Dominican Republic, Guatetended from Greenland to 0 in favor of the United States proposimala, and Venezuela even ofIceland and then to the United Kingdom-the sowest of the Azores.
The conten United States and two British sublanding. centration of United States naval forces marines, HMS Alderney and Later i n the crisis, Canain southern waters during OcHMS Astute, the latter boats dian Rear Admiral Kenneth tober 1962, however, left too under Canadian control, Dyer agreed to Admiral Tayfew units available to set up a helped form that barrier. lor's request that Argus patrol GIUK barrier.
As a result, AdOverhead were United States Navy planes take over the Quonset miral Taylor, Commander P2V Neptunes and RCAF' ArPoint Patrol east of Rhode IsAnti-Submarine Forces, Atlangus patrol aircraft.
Because of land so American planes tic Fleet, established a patrol their greater range, the Canaline further south in the Atdian aircraft overflew the far Willard Keith cuts through the waters of the Atlantic during 1962.
Cuba under Task Force 136, a nounced t h a t the quarantine 'I%monitor submarine moveformidable armada of a n ASW of Cuba would begin at 1000 ments and the flow of mercarrier, two cruisers, 22 deEDT on 24 October.
Internachant shipping to and from stroyers, a n d two guided mistional shipping was advised to Cuba, Admiral Dennison essile frigates.
This included avoid t h e waters around tablished a Quarantine Plot the Newport-based Destroyer Cuba.
The ship also carries a pair of Allen M Sumner or Gearing Mark 32 lightweight, triple-tube antisubmarine class destroyers. weapons placed between the stacks (hidden in Both classes were built as part of the 2,200this photo by the support for the starboard 3ton destroyer program of 1942.
The ships were inch gun) which replaced the old quintuple bank capable of 32 knots.
They originally carried six of 21-inch tubes. dual-purpose, 5-inch guns, 10 21-inch torpedo The destroyer's fire controls include a Mark 37 tubes, two stern racks and six side launchers for gun director with a Mark 25 antenna dish for depth charges, and 12 40mm and 1120mm anthe 5-inch guns, Mark 56 and 63 directors for tiaircraft guns.
Willard Keith operates an SPSlength of the Gearing class, which allowed them 6 air search radar and an SPS-10 surface search increased fuel storage and, therefore, greater radar.
Under the com1962, displays the changes made during the mand of Commander Claude L Tyler, Willard 1950s.
She retains all of her 5-inch guns, but six Keith served on quarantine duty until 15 Novemmore-modern, 3-inch, rapid-fire guns have ber 1962.
Tyler and his crew received the Armed replaced her 20mm and 40mm antiaircraft guns.
Forces Expeditionary Medal for their service Only one stern rack of fast-sinking depth charduring the crisis.
Supporting these warships same instructions to the The day witnessed another were the tanker Terek, a reguided missile cruiser Candramatic development.
Air frigerator ship, and the intelliberra , then steaming Force General Thomas S. gence trawler Shkval. to intercept Kimovsk, another Power, commander of SAC, Because Soviet submarines suspected weapons carrier. put his forces on Defense Conconstituted the greatest By the afternoon of 24 Octodition 2, one step short of genthreat to the United States Atlantic ber, information obtained eral, global war.
One out of Fleet, Admiral Anderson orfrom Navy patrol ships and every eight B-52s went on airdered that their activities be aircraft, and other intelliborne alert, and all ICBMs closely monitored.
Because more, United States naval units would that 16 of the Soviet ships in SAC headquarters sent out be prepared to sink the Soviet the Atlantic were dead in the the alert messages in the ships on command from water or had come about and clear, Soviet officials knew imhigher authority. were steaming for home.
The ship tanker Bucharest, obviously claimed that they were uncarried as many as thirteen 11carrying no weapons, pressed aware of the heightened SAC 28 Beagle bombers crated and on toward Cuba.
American intelliby the Pentagon, Admiral International tension gence determined that anWard positioned destroyers to mounted on 25 October as other seven ships probably intercept her.
The Kennedy, concluding that sentatives came to grips in large hatch and spacious hold Khrushchev wanted to avoid the United Nations.
Soviet of one of these vessels, Pola confrontation on the line, Ambassador Valerian Zorin tava, made her ideally suited however, directed the Navy to challenged United States Ambassador to transporting missiles below shadow the ship but not stop Adlai Stevenson to present decks.
Eventually, Bucharest evidence of Soviet offensive patrol aircraft also discovered identified herself to the demissiles in Cuba.
The usually that the ship carried as deck stroyer Gearing and slowed restrained Stevenson recargo strange rings mounted down so the Americans could sponded, ""Do you, Ambassaon trucks.
Intelligence specialvisually inspect and photodor Zorin, deny that the ists soon decided that these graph her.
The Soviet vessel USSR has placed and is placobjects were support rings for was then allowed to proceed ing medium and intermediaterange missiles and sites in merged, was heading east.
The United States representative one of the merchantmen makthe merchantman's captain. then displayed to a hushed ing for Cuba t o demonstrate The American sailors reSecurity Council enlarged phoAmerican resolve.
They seviewed the ship's manifests tos of the Soviet installations lected the Lebanese-flagged and inspected the cargo.
The evidence of freighter Marucla, contracted ing no contraband onboard, Soviet activity, and,deception, t o carry Soviet goods to Cuba. the United States command allowed was clear to the assembled Because United States intelligence speMarucla to continue her pasdiplomats. cialists knew that the Soviet sage to Cuba.
More imporMeanwhile, on the quarangovernment did not move tantly, the point was made tine line, HUK Task Group weapons in Western or neuthat the United States 83. , tral ships, the EXCOM felt intended to enforce the formed around ASW carrier this boarding was unlikely to quarantine.
Planes from Essex Also that day, American destroyers, had located anlocated the ship, while deships and patrol planes other Soviet submarine.
ASW miles outside the exclusionary J r , closed her posiTask Group Alfa located one, zone and although subtion. labeled (2-20, well inside the USN 711187 A boat bearing a boarding party makes its way from the destroyer Joseph P Kennedy, Jr. , named for the president's older brother killed in World War II, to the Lebanese freighter Marucla.
The Kennedy administration chose to board and search this merchantman on 26 October as a demonstration to Moscow that any ship en route to Cuba was subject to inspection by the quarantine force.
Navy Photoreconnaissance Mission S o o n after U-2 high-flying aircraft brought officer, Commander Bob Koch, also known as back the startling information that Khrushchev ""Daddy Photo,"" supervised the development and intended to install offensive missiles in Cuba, initial interpretation of the pictures and later the president's chief advisors called for more dispatched them to Washington. detailed intelligence of Soviet and Cuban forces Still in his plane, Ecker was ordered to and activities on the island.
At Washington's proceed immediately to the nation's capital. direction, Admiral Robert L Dennison, ComFlying at Mach .8, the F8U-1P soon arrived at mander in Chief, United States Atlantic Command, orAndrews Air Force Base outside Washington.
Two-plane sections of the appeared and ushered him into the JCS meeting squadron normally served on each of the Atlanroom, the ""tank."" tic Command's five attack aircraft carriers.
Crusaders piloted by Ecker and five other down."" naval aviators took off from the naval facililty on Thereafter, Ecker described to the assembled the 23rd for the first mission.
Flying in three, chiefs his firsthand impressions of the site he two-plane ""loose deuce"" sections, the detachment and Wilhemy had overflown.
He observed that traversed the treacherous Florida Strait in ten the Cubans apparently had not fired at his minutes and entered Cuban airspace.
Ecker and planes and that there was a mass of equipment, his wingman, Lieutenant Bruce Wilhemy, quickmuch of it camouflaged, at the site.
Ecker recomly checked to make sure their navigation was acmended that they wait for the film to get more curate and headed for the targets assigned them. information.
The president and his streaked over the target area, their onboard advisors received timely information on the locaequipment recorded the scene below, and they tion, installation status, and later the removal of banked for home. missiles and bombers from the island.
In recogniThe aerial photographic mission, however, tion of the squadron's stellar performance during was far from over.
Instead of landing at Key the crisis, President John F Kennedy personally West, the six aircraft set down further north at presented Ecker with the Navy Unit Commendathe squadron's permanent base, Naval Air Station.
I n addition, Ecker, along with 11other tion, Cecil Field, Florida, near Jacksonville.
The VFP-62 pilots and four attached Marine Corps pilots surrendered their film to waiting aviators, received the Distinguished Flying photographer's mates who rushed it to nearby Cross for their flights over Cuba. facilities for processing.
The squadron executive NAH, Cuba Ops.62 Navy photographer's mates of VFP-62 remove film from the cameras of an FEU1P Crusader aerial reconnaissance plane that has just returned from a mission over Cuba.
In a matter of hours, the film will be processed, evaluated by skilled photo interpreters, and whisked to Washington, D.C., for the use of military and civilian analysts. quarantine line just southeast ence in Cuba of Soviet FROG such low-level missions and of the Bahamas, but headed instruction in use of the to the northeast.
Although Navy's state-of-the-art designated C-21, was picked only short-range weapons, the cameras. up east of Jamaica by a carFROGs would pose a threat to The atmosphere was even rier i n Task Force 135.
Admiany American amphibious inmore charged in Washington ral Ward deployed the carrier vasion force.
John Scali, the State force to the shallow waters FROGs could carry a nuclear Department correspondent for south of Jamaica where it was warhead, their existence on ABC News, met with Alexespecially difficult for the Sothe island did not raise undue andr Fomin, the chief officer viet sub to break contact with concern a t the time in of Soviet intelligence her pursuers.
Fomin mander also reinforced this The Navy also helped preasked Scali to relay a mesforce with another five depare Air Force units for lowsage to the latter's ""contact"" stroyers. level aerial photographic (understood to be Secretary As the units of Task Forces missions.
VFP-62 flew its first missions over the island the day after the president's address to the nation.
Ground crewmen at NAS Cecil Field used stencils depicting a fat Castro and a dead chicken to paint a photo mission ""victory"" on every returning plane.
An especially successful Hudson, USMCR, for ""chalking up another chicken"" after a successful photo flight.
VFP-62 mission occurred on Hudson was one of four Marine pilots of Marine Composite Reconnaissance Squadron 2 assigned to the Navy squadron.
Behind the pilots is an FEU-1P stenciled with a 25 October, when squadron likeness of Castro and a number of chickens, each of which depicts a successful aeraircraft confirmed the presial reconnaissance mission over Cuba. exchange for President Kenline.
Washington feared that Plot command center in the nedy's promise not to invade Moscow intended to test the Pentagon.
As expected, Scali quarantine with this ship, for additional instructions afpassed on the information. which Navy patrol planes had ter ordering his destroyers to Other developments that picked up the previous day load their weapons.
Anderson replied that gation warned the White the seaborne search effort and the quarantine instructions House that the Soviets were deployed them to the naval plainly stated that if a ship burning documents at their station on Bermuda.
On the continued to proceed after the embassy in Washington and morning of the 27th) one of proper warnings, the U.S. their UN enclave on Long Isthe RB-47s crashed on takewarships would stop her by land.
The burning of diplooff, killing the four-man crew, shooting away the vessel's matic and other secret papers but one of the other planes rudder.
McNamara heatedly often, in the past, meant war spotted Groznyy north of the informed Anderson that the was imminent.
Virgin Islands and heading Navy would take no such acAround 1800 EDT, for Cuba.
After radioing the lotion against Soviet ships withPresident Kennedy received a cation of the tanker, the RBout his and the president's message from Premier 47 made simulated bombing authorization.
The Soviet runs on the ship to stop herweek of high tension, nerves leader proposed in a lengthy to no avail.
Groznyy also were taut all around. statement that his governfailed to respond when a A climax to the crisis apment would withdraw the ofNavy destroyer, vectored to proached on the morning of fensive missiles and destroy the tanker, signaled her to Saturday, 27 October, when their launch sites in Cuba if stop. the EXCOM met to consider the United States would lift The tension rose when Adthe president's response to the blockade and agree not to miral Dennison ordered United States Khrushchev's communication. invade the island.
This mesships on the scene to load McCone and Lundahl opened sage, of course, was similar to their five-inch guns with live the meeting with a sobering the one Scali received. ammunition.
CINCLANT report that all of the MRBM The EXCOM was unsure soon ordered the destroyers to sites were now operational, how to interpret these two clear their guns by firing that work continued at a furicommunications.
Even them into the sea away from ous pace at the IRBM sites, though Khrushchev appeared the tanker.
Still, there was ets continued working on the tion rounds close aboard the consensus that a positive remissile sites in Cuba.
The president and his chief radioed Moscow for instrucThen, a second message advisors kept the message to tions, his ship put about and from Khrushchev arrived that themselves and awaited furleft the quarantine zone. cast a shadow over the EXther developments.
This time, the mercuThe US.-Soviet confrontaat sea during this episode but rial Soviet leader demanded tion at sea came to a head on in Washington.
Both Admiral that United States missiles be with27 October when the tanker Anderson and Secretary drawn from Turkey in exGroznyy, carrying ammonia, McNamara monitored the inchange for similar Soviet approached the quarantine cident from the Navy's Flag action with regard to Cuba.
Some EXCOM members felt with Soviet Ambassador DoCapping the day's events that Khrushchev might be losbrynin late that evening.
The and indicating the gravity of ing control of the Kremlin, or attorney general informed Dothe situation, the ships of that the hard-liners wanted brynin that the United States Task Group Alfa closed in on more concessions from government would accept a Soviet submarine (contact CKennedy.
Soon after receipt of the secthe missiles from Cuba and in To signal the undersea vessel ond troubling message, more return would make a public that American naval forces bad news arrived at the pledge not to invade Cuba. were aware of her presence, White House.
The Air Force Robert Kennedy emphasized sailors on the destroyer Cony informed the president that a that if the Soviet government dropped five hand grenades U-2 on a routine air sampling agreed to the American proover the side.
The sound from mission accidently flew over posal, it must do so quickly, these exploding grenades northeastern Siberia.
The Sootherwise the United States could be easily picked up by viets immediately scrambled would be compelled to remove the submarine's sonar.
Esther heightened tensions in United States IRBMs from Turkey and corted by several United States warMoscow and Washington. that this would occur i n the ships, the submarine The morning continued to near future.
Over eastern Cuba, eral made it clear, however, easterly heading into the open a SAM battery shot down a n that the removal of the misAtlantic.
Air Force U-2, killing the pisiles in Turkey was not public As the sun rose on Sunday, lot, Major Rudolf Anderson. information, and if the Sovi28 October, the armed might This seemed to signal another ets violated this ""secret"" of the United States was prechange i n Soviet policy.
Anagreement, the entire deal pared for all likely contingenother report stated that was off.
Polaris submarines and Cubans had fired on the Kennedy was suggesting that SAC bombers and ICBMs low-level photo missions that the United States was makstood ready to incinerate the day. ing its final offer to settle the Soviet Union if its leaders With these developments a s crisis. launched a direct attack on a backdrop, that afternoon That same day, corresponthe United States.
United States Atlanthe Joint Chiefs proposed that dent John Scali had his sectic Fleet carrier, surface, and not later than Monday, 29 Ocond meeting with KGB offlcer attack submarine forces, with tober, the United States initiFomin.
Scali accused Fomin Canadian naval units in supate air strikes against Cuba. of a ""stinking double cross,"" port, were deployed in Then, seven days later, the stalling for time, and playing strength in the Atlantic and United States armed forces would inhim for a fool.
Air Force, Navy, vade the island by air and sisted that the offer he had and Marine Corps tactical sea. transmitted was legitimate fighter and attack squadrons With the prospect of conflict and that he would contact remained on alert a t bases in increasing dramatically, KenMoscow directly.
According to the southern United States. nedy decided to respond to one historian of the crisis, Army airborne, infantry, and Khrushchev's first communiScali's outburst helped conarmored divisions, as well as cation, the more reasonable of vince Khrushchev that the Marine Corps landing forces, the two.
At the president's reAmericans would not brook awaited a n order to start the quest, his brother Robert met further delay or posturing. invasion of Cuba.
Unknown to the communication arrived in pended U-2flights over the isUnited States intelligence, tactical nuseveral parts, the opening land after Anderson's loss, clear warheads for the Lunas paragraphs made it clear that Navy and Air Force reconnaishad been stockpiled i n Cuba.
Khrushchev had accepted the sance aircraft, with heavily The Soviet military compresident's proposal.
The Soviarmed fighters flying in supmander i n Cuba was authorets would withdraw their port off the Cuban coast, conized to use the short-range missiles from Cuba.
The liketinued to execute low-level weapons to defeat an arnphibilihood of war, either a global photo missions. ous invasion by American nuclear conflagration or a devAlso at full alert were Soforces.
I n addition to the Soastating Caribbean conflict, viet and Cuban forces on the viet units, the Cubans fielded was greatly diminished. island.
Cecil personnel carriers, antitank message started coming in and patrol planes never lost missiles, and Luna from Moscow.
Even though contact with the submarine, however, finally forcing the Soviet boat to surface for a battery recharge.
T he crisis had passed The situation remained naval intelligence still was and the world soon tense at sea.
Because the submarine international confrontation cated and stayed on top of a did not submerge again once would not end until both sides submerged Soviet submarine free of the quarantine area, carried out their ends of the , despite the the normal practice, the agreement.
And, until the end best efforts of the boat to Americans concluded that the of October, Washington was evade her pursuer.
Finally, vessel had suffered a serious not certain that the Soviets after enduring thirty-five mechanical failure.
Low-level reconhours of constant surveillance the boat shaped a northnaissance revealed that while with active sonar, the Foxtroteasterly course on the surface, some missile erectors were class boat surfaced and United States naval vessels and taken from the launch pads, proceeded due east.
Patrol aircraft had ample opporthe construction and aircraft shadowed and tunity to photograph and obcamouflaging of support photographed the vessel, idenserve their maritime facilities and equipment tified as Soviet submarine opponent. proceeded.
The subretrenchment and opposition Washington considered offenmarine's crew had painted out to the terms of the U.S.-Soviet sive weapons. the numbers on her sail, but understanding.
Castro stated that agreements between the Aerial photographs resulting Washington considered it esUnited States and the Soviet Union did from that day's low-level sential, given Khrushchev's not apply to Cuba.
He reconnaissance missions over earlier duplicity, to verlfy the threatened to shoot down any the island revealed an removal of Soviet offensive United States reconnaissance aircraft astonishing number of chanweapons from Cuba.
Overnight, the Soviets was vital that the United Moreover, in contrast to the had removed many of the misStates be confident that all Soviets, the Cubans would not siles and erectors, crated their missiles, Beagle bombers, allow on-site inspection of the launching stands, and even and other systems were missile sites in their country begun the destruction of the withdrawn.
Clearly, the tially dangerous Soviet subCastro would agree to was a Soviets were complying with marines still prowled the 30 October visit to Havana by the Kennedy-Khrushchev waters near the quarantine U Thant, Secretary General of agreement.
Furthermore, line and in the Atlantic and the United Nations. despite Castro's hostile had to be closely watched.
In As Washington analyzed rhetoric, his forces did not fire this effort, which lasted the Soviet and Cuban reacon the Navy, Marine, and Air through the end of November, tions to the Kennedy-KhrushForce photoreconnaissance the United States Navy was a prominent chev understanding, naval planes. player. forces maintained their vigil While these developments Khrushchev's reprein the Atlantic and the Caribwere encouraging, sentatives at the United bean.
United States and Canadian units continued to monitor the broad expanse of the Atlantic.
On 31 October, the destroyer escort Calcaterra took over from Mills the shadowing of Soviet tanker Terek.
In addition, to lower the number of ships needed at sea, Admhal Dennison ordered the fleet to move the quarantine line closer to Cuba.
Finally, on 1 November, Navy, Marine, and Air Force avlators discuss their low-level reconnaissancemi* American intelligence gained sions over Cuba, reflecting the multiservice nature of operations during the missile indications that the Soviets crisis.
Joseph O'Grady, commander of the Air Force's and the Cubans would adhere 29th Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron; Cdr.
John I Hudson of Marine Reconnaissance Composite Squadron 2. to the terms of the KennedyBehind them is the nose of an Air Force RF-101 Voodoo and the forward section of a Khrushchev understanding.
Nations reported that the ber, Navy, Marine, and Air through the quarantine area Soviets had deployed 42 Force low-level reconnaisbut in the Mediterranean and MRBMs to the island but that sance planes flew numerous even the Black Sea.
Admiral establishment of the United States missions over the Cuban Anderson wanted to make quarantine had stopped the launch sites, roads to the sure he could tell the delivery of any IRBMs.
These president that all the missiles regard to verifying the disflights clearly recorded the were ""back in Russia."" mantling of the weapon sysmovement of the MRBMs and Most Soviet merchant ship tems and their withdrawal by related equipment to the captains cooperated with the sea, the diplomats stated that ports and the loading of surveillance and inspection Soviet authorities would asSoviet merchantmen. regime, but some tested the sist the United States surveillance efOn 5 November, the first system.
In short order, the Soviet ships sailed from master of freighter Bratsk Soviets supplied a list of ships Mariel, and during the tried unsuccessfully to avoid carrying the missiles from remainder of the week, the alongside inspection area.
Cuba and their departure another seven Soviet ships In another instance, the dates.
Furthermore, the carrying missiles did the master of the freighter VolSoviets promised to carry the same.
While several vessels goles refused several requests missiles as deck cargo and did not depart when United States offito remove tarpaulins covering allow United States Navy ships and cials were told they would, missiles stowed on his deck aircraft to move in close for acthere was no way for the when United States destroyer Vesole curate observation.
Vesole's commanding officer, formed the Soviets of selected United States naval surface and air ""alongside"" points where United States units observed each of the Soviet freighter Bratsk, photographed Navy ships would inspect the missile-carrying ships closely. near the Bahamas by Lt.
Kelsey Goodman from his HSS-2 helicopter of outgoing Soviet freighters.
The Navy monitored the ships Wasp's Helicopter Anti-Submarine Beginning in early Novemnot only on their passage Squadron 3, carries military vehicles and covered missiles aft of the lifeboats.
Cuba Om.62 An Air Force RF-101 Voodoo, whose shadow can be seen at the bottom of this aerial photo, overflies a Soviet freighter, probably Fin'k Kurchatovk, in Casilda Port, Cuba, on 6 November 1962.
By such means, U.S. intelligence verified the removal of Soviet offensive weapons from the island.
USN 711204 As a Navy P2V Neptune armed with general purpose bombs overflies the scene, U.S. destroyer Vesole steams alongside the Soviet freighter Volgolesto get a close look at her deck cargo.
Only after United States authorities contacted Soviet representatives at the UN did the master of this freighter have his crewmen remove the tarpaulins to reveal dismantled mi?-ilnel, ' . ,'&Pi A P2V Neptune of Patrol Squadron 18 and another United States plane fly past the starboard quarter of Soviet freighter Okhotsk in December 1962.
Later in the operation, a helicopter from Wasp intercepted the Soviet ship Captain Richard S White 111, immediately dispatched a message reporting this development through the naval command structure.
It soon reached the United Nations, where Soviet representatives suggested that after a short period of time the destroyer captain again contact Volgoles.
When Vesole next signaled the Soviet ship, her crewmen promptly uncovered the missiles.
In another incident, guided missile destroyer Biddle steamed so close to Leninsky Komsomol to photograph the ship that the Destroyers of the multinational quarantine force sortie from Trinidad, West Indies, on 12 November.
Although listed by the Soviets as a missile carrier, Alapayevsk carried only support vehicles on deck.
Nonsailors, probably missile technicians, were on the deck sunning themselves.
Crewmen of the American aircraft exchanged pleasantries with the Soviets and one officer even lowered a line to which if""# was fastened his Navy tie clasp.
The arrival of additional naval forces in the quarantine area made it even less likely Capt.
Middleton, Chief of Staff to Commander Carrier Division 4, holds the bottle of vodka he received from the crew of Soviet freighter A/& payevsk.
John M Wondergem, pilot of the helo and Commanding Officer of Helicopter Anti-Submarine Squadron 3. that Soviet merchantmen could avoid close inspection.
Beginning on 12 November, a multinational destroyer force, designated Task Force 137, operated out of the United States Navy base a t Trinidad.
Completing one mission before the end of the quarantine, the task force patrolled the eastern Caribbean looking patrol planes tracked the Castro, or risk reheating the Holding up his end of the Soviet tug Pamir as she renconfrontation.
The Soviets agreement with Khrushchev, dezvoused with the disabled soon agreed to remove the Kennedy disavowed any intensub F 945, the latter already bombers a s well a s the tion to invade Cuba and drew under watch by United States missiles. down United States forces deployed to destroyer Keppler.
Pamir For several weeks after 15 the southern United States in crowded Keppler, trying to November, when President readiness to attack the island. keep the American ship away Kennedy ended regular lowThe president also relaxed the from the submarine.
After level reconnaissance missions alert posture of the Polaris several evasive maneuvers by over Cuba, United States photographic and SAC strategic deterrence Keppler, Pamir's captain gave planes periodically overflew forces.
In this nedy completed the ""secret"" stayed within 2,500 yards of way, United States leaders ensured part of the agreement and the crippled Soviet sub. that the Soviets lived up to withdrew American IRBMs Not only such occurrences their agreement and removed from both Turkey and Italy. a t sea but differing interpretathe bombers.
America's allies from politicalfensive weapons and their Admiral Dennison ordered his ly neutral international special representative to the Atlantic Fleet ships to return waters.
Navy's ballistic missile subundoubtedly influenced naval forces valuable not only marine fleet, and the Air decision making in Moscow for deterring nuclear or conForce's land-based ballistic and Havana.
Navy carriers ventional conflict, but for enamissile and bomber units, posloaded with fighter and attack bling him to manage a crisis sessed overwhelming power aircraft, cruisers and without resorting to aggresfor destruction.
The fleet's presence on the Polaris submarines virinch and 5-inch guns, and amthe seaward approaches to tually invisible and invulphibious ships crowded with Cuba allowed him to place the nerable as they awaited Marines and their weapons onus of any military escalalaunch orders under many stood ready to bring war to tion on Khrushchev.
Reinforced did not need the permission of they could maneuver close to by Navy ships and Air Force any multinational organizathe enemy homeland before transport aircraft, Marine tion or single nation to deploy unleashing their terrible units already ashore at Guanthese forces.
The existence and tanamo were prepared to supeffectiveness of the United States naval readiness of this strategic arport any invasion.
And, no quarantine, however, made it senal clearly helped President more than a few hundred militarily and politically acKennedy dissuade the Soviets miles away in southern ceptable for member states of from brandishing their much Florida and other staging the OAS to join the effort. weaker nuclear sword.
United States aircraft carriers, attack submarines, cruisers, destroyers, frigates, and shore-based patrol squadrons so dominated the waters of the Atlantic and the Caribbean that Soviet surface warships remained in their home waters.
William L Taylor, a VFP-62 pilot, the Distinpart would have been guished Flying Cross for his execution of low-level reconnaissance flights over suicidal.
Freedom of the sea also alassure Kennedy that the patrol squadrons and surface lowed Canadian and British United States had a decided ships enabled Washington to naval units to take part in the edge over the Soviet Union in verify Soviet compliance with surveillance effort without terms of nuclear weapons. the terms of the Kennedynegotiating a political agreeCIA and Air Force U-2s unKhrushchev understanding ment.
Moreover, the fleet was masked Khrushchev's ploy to that resolved this most terrifyable to remain on station-lnestablish Cuba as a launching ing crisis of the Cold War. dependence operated for 54 pad for medium and interThe president and the nadays at sea-because of conmediate-range missiles and tion were grateful for the tinuous replenishment by bombers.
They earned the Armed Forces Excluding that done by the also monitored the dismanpeditionary Medal.
As AdNavy, proved to be another tling, transportation to ports, miral Anderson promised, the vital resource for the president and loading onto merchantNavy did not let the president in his management of the men of the worrisome down.
The Frasher, typesetter, Naval Aviation News staffs of the Prints and Photographs Division Branch; Chuck Haberlein and Ed Finney, and the Map and Geography Division, both of Photo Section; Gina Akers, John L Hodges, the Library of Congress, and the National ArKathleen M Lloyd and Mike Walker, Operachives Still Picture Branch provided critical tional Archives; John C Reilly, Jr., and Doreen materials for the project.
I am especially grateT German, Ships' History Branch; Ella Narful to Dr.
History; Captain Clete Wise, USN, Deputy DiHelm, Navy Department Library; John rector; and Dr.
William S Dudley, Senior HisBarnett, Navy Art Collection Branch; and torian, for their continued support of this Steven D Hill, Naval Aviation History project.
Marolda, provided immeasurable assistance The advice, information, and comments ofand support in preparing this first volume of a fered by my colleagues in the Contemporary new series.
Betty Miller Unterberger of the Secretary of Cressman, Richard A Russell, Robert J. the Navy's Advisory Committee; Commander Schneller, and Gary E Weir-were of inestimaJoseph F Bouchard, USN; Captain William B ble value.
Most importantly, I want to thank Ecker, USN ; Sean Maloney; Dino A my wife, Ruth, herself a historian.
Despite the Brugioni; and Beatriz Betancourt Hardy for proximity of our wedding date, she generously their comments and advice.
My coworkers in reviewed and commented on the early drafts, the Naval Historical Center also provided tresubstantially improving and clarifying the mendous assistance in their various specialauthor's sometimes arcane account.
About the Author Curtis A Utz is currently a historian in the Naval Historical Center's Contemporary History Branch.
He served as a historical interpretation technician with the National Park Service and a n intern at the Srnithsonian's National Air and Space Museum.
