The lessons of that critical moment and of the events which led up to it are as valid now as they were a quarter of a century ago.
One can only wish the present administration had studied them before it embarked on its ill-conceived adventure in Nicaragua.
The Cuban people, the CIA assured him, would flock to join the invaders.
Doubtless there was disgruntlement in Cuba, just as there is in Nicaragua today, but the great majority of Cubans rallied to Castro's banner against what was perceived as an American mercenary force.
As the contras also have the aura of a CIA army and lack popular support, they face the same fate.
During the 1962 missile crisis, he placed his faith not in a puny mercenary force, but in the power of the United States itself.
Having violated international norms at the Bay of Pigs, he adhered to them scrupulously during the missile crisis.
Despite the extreme tensions of the moment, he so directed the United States response that not a single international convention or juridical precept was violated.
Having relied on secrecy and the weapons of deceit during the 1961 debacle, he eschewed them during the missile crisis, instead keeping the American people fully informed, consulting the Congress and briefing our allies.
United States security was threatened not by little Cuba, but by Soviet missiles and he was determined to remove that threat.
It was a message the American people, and United States allies, could understand.
How differently the Reagan administration has handled the Nicaraguan problem.
It has printed assassination manuals, illegally mined harbors, consistently violated international law, rejected the jurisdiction of the World Court, misrepresented the facts to the American people, deceived and flouted the will of the Congress, and ignored the advice of our allies.
We stand divided at home on this issue, and not only isolated abroad but condemned by the World Court and by United Nations resolutions.
He forced the withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons systems and gained Chairman Khrushchev's promise that they would not be reintroduced.
Ever since, United States security needs with respect to Cuba have rested on the KennedyKhrushchev understanding.
It has never been violated and is as vital and effective today as it was then thus exploding Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams's assertion that agreements with communists never work.
No Soviet bombers fly out of Cuban airfields, no Soviet submarines operate from its ports.
Indeed, no nuclear or missile submarine has even been in a Cuban port since 1974.
Knowing the United States meant business, that it was ready to use its full might to enforce the 1962 understanding, the USSR and Cuba have respected it.
But when the United States warned that it would view this as a violation of the understanding with all that might entail Moscow backed down.
What we need in Nicaragua is a similar understanding, only one with more precise means of verification and which includes a no-export-of-revolution provision, as the Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding negotiated under extreme crisis conditions did not.
In return, the United States wou ld withdraw its forces from Honduras, halt all aid to the contras, and cease any other acts of aggression against Nicaragua.
Washington would, however, emphasize that if Nicaragua violated the terms of the agreement, the United States would react with its own force s, not with the discredited and insufficient instrument represented by the contras.
Having thus made it clear that we meant business, that the full might of the United States was behind the agreement, we would almost certainly never have to use that might, just as we have not in the case of the 1962 understanding.
It is a timorous and ineffective policy which is beneath the dignity of a great nation.
Before leaving the Foreign Service, Wayne Smith was chief of the United States Interests Section in Havana, 197982, and was regarded as the State Department's leading expert on Cuba.
Of course, Soviet Union is no more and the tenets of Communism no longer pose threat to Capitalism, but the West is still not in chummy terms with Russia and her allies.
Enmity does not die easily and against such a scenario the world remembers the October Crisis in 1962 when apocalypse was not too far away or impossible to imagine.
Deemed as the ultra-tense moment for the West, the thirteen days episode in October 1962 goes down in history as a period when the superpowers came precipitously close to unleashing a nuclear war.
Of course, as the fifty years of that incident is commemorated, a war of such magnitude now seems rather far-fetched.
In fact, the Cuban Missile crisis, which prompted the USA and the Soviet Union on a confrontational course, now appears out of context.
Perhaps, Cuba is no longer a major player in global politics but the distrust between two major powers still linger with each side unwilling to bow to the other's perspective.
It's in that unwillingness to compromise lies the legacy of the almost fateful event fifty years ago.
And, not surprisingly, political analysts are looking at 1962 to look for a hint which may permit them to make a successful prognosis of the present incident.
Sadly, much of the understandings of the event is heavily coloured by propaganda.
Firstly, it's wrongly believed that it was the United States which came out as the winner since Soviet Missiles placed in Cuba and directed at the USA were removed at the end of the crisis.
This is indeed true but very few know that, in return, USA also had to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey and Italy.
The truth is that Soviet missiles were placed in Cuba because only a few months earlier, the United States made a botched attempt to overthrow the Castro regime by sending in an invading force, which is known in history as the infamous Bay of Pigs invasion.
Going a bit further to the past, in 1960, a United States U-2 spy plane was shot by the Soviets while it was taking photographs of Soviet military installations.
While initially the United States denied this, the production of the pilot before the world, captured alive, and the wreckage were irrefutable evidence which embarrassed the Eisenhower administration.
To cut out all diplomatic euphemisms, it was the United States which was on the wrong.
Again, in 1962, the mobilisation of missiles in Cuba in October was done as a precaution against further United States attempts at invasion after the failed one in August.
So, just getting a fraction of the whole event and then using that to form an idea would be imprudent.
The truth is, no one won in 1962; it was a tactical compromise on both sides.
The famous line used by the US that it was eyeball to eyeball and the other guy blinked is, in the end, an ego-inflating myth.
But that event has become significant 50 years on because Russia and the United States are now on two opposite sides over Syria.
No, missiles are not aimed at any country anymore but the 1962 standoff is translated once more with another country used as a cause.
Looking back in retrospect and going beyond western propaganda, it was not a victory for Kennedy just a relief because declassified documents now reveal that Soviet submarines, armed with nuclear missiles, were deployed near Cuba and had one side pressed the button, the world would have crumbled.
Today, U-2 planes are not in service but United States drones are seen entering Pakistan airspace, firing at possible extremist targets which have also resulted in civilian casualties.
Once more, this is infringement of the sovereignty of another state and the rationale that radicals need to be exterminated cannot be used to defend entry into another country without permission.
Be that as it may, Cuba is still the last bastion of Communism and Castro can be dubbed the only unscathed victor from the whole 1962 episode because while USA in the following years tried fair and countless unfair tactics to overthrow Communism regimes, topple elected leaders and foment insurgencies , she never made any move towards Cuba.
Hence, not too far away from the citadel of Capitalism, a flamboyant Communism revolutionary zeal survived.
Of course, Cuba also needs to do some reforms and come out of its rigid Communist ideals because many die hard Communist states have astutely blended Capitalism and Communism to fuel an economic boom.
That a lot of Cubans are leaving the island secretly and defecting to the United States can be the satisfaction for the latter.
However, this writer would like to think that it was Cuba who came out as the eventual winner of the 1962 stand-off and since there isn't a popular uprising in the island nation it can still be accepted that a majority of the people prefer the way things turned out for them.
Old cars ply the street, income is low, modern technology is beyond the buying capacity of the people and yet, there is something appealing about the country.
After all, rumour has it that just before the Bay of Pigs invasion, White House ordered a large shipment of Cuban cigars to be bought and stacked.
A pina colada, a cigar and a sun-set happiness does not have to be too complicated.
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com Co pyrig ht 20 12 Dhaka Co urie r, via HT Me dia ltd.
Kennedy wanted to deal with the Soviets by removing United States missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba, according to the transcript of nearly five hours of Executive Committee discussions.
To do otherwise, Kennedy argued, would seem unreasonable and would not enlist much world support.
Toward the end of the discussions, which took place during three meetings on Oct., 1962, Kennedy was joined by Vice President Lyndon B Johnson and Undersecretary of State George Ball.
The 82-page transcript of the tapes was prepared by McGeorge Bundy, then special assistant to the president for national security affairs.
Much of what is on the transcript has already been revealed in memoirs and histories of the Cuban missile crisis.
Just before Kennedy met with his advisers, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had publicly offered to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if the United States would remove its medium-range Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The day after the meeting, Khrushchev announced that the Soviets would remove the missiles after receiving assurances from Kennedy that the missiles would be removed from Turkey within five months.
According to the transcript, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara favored removing the missiles from Turkey only as a prelude to a United States invasion of Cuba -in effect, denying the Soviets a retaliation target.
But Johnson and Ball argued that if the missiles were to be removed from Turkey it would be wise to trade them for a removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
In the first place, we last year tried to get our missiles out of there because they're not militarily useful.
We're going to be forced to take action that might seem, in my opinion, not a blank check, but a pretty good check (for the Soviets to respond by taking) action in Berlin on the grounds that we were wholly unreasonable.
His handling of the failed invasion of Cuba in April 1961 -in which he refused additional American military support for anti-Castro forces -convinced his Soviet counterpart that the United States president was weak and indecisive, a view reinforced at a summit between the two leaders in Vienna.
Under intense stress, Kennedy was on numerous medications at the time, including steroids for his colitis, procaine for his back pain, testosterone to increase his weight and antibiotics to prevent the return of an old venereal infection.
When the missile crisis erupted, Kennedy had to navigate conflicting advice from his divided cabinet, with hawks pushing for an invasion of Cuba and more cautious aides advocating negotiation.
His generals recommended a massive bombing campaign and Air Force chief General Curtis LeMay told the president the decision to impose a naval blockade was akin to appeasing Hitler.
But Kennedy had grown skeptical of the military's advice after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, and despite pressure from lawmakers and a series of alarming incidents, he finally reached a compromise with Moscow.
But the accounts glossed over the often confused atmosphere inside the United States government and how plots Kennedy had authorized to sabotage and overthrow Castro's regime helped pave the way for Moscow's actions.
A relieved Kennedy displayed his characteristic black humor after the crisis.
His decision to station nuclear missiles in Cuba came out of anger over United States warheads near his country's borders and an urge to punch back at the Americans.
But he made the gamble without a plan if the United States discovered the weapons before they were armed and operational.
As a result, he faced a stark choice -pulling back the missiles or fighting a nuclear war.
The bald, rotund Khrushchev was known for his shoe-pounding antics and his threat to ""bury"" the capitalist system, but he was a far more multi-faceted character than his cartoonish image in the West.
The gentler side of the man known at home as Nikita Sergeyevich revealed a peasant who risked his life to denounce Stalin and who softened the edges of the Soviet system, opening the door to some Western-style products and freedoms.
Hitherto unseen books were published and jazz records filled store shelves.
But -far more importantly to Russians -so did toilet paper and sausages.
The one-time miner was ousted in a well-coordinated conservative pushback in 1964, replaced by the no-nonsense Leonid Breshnev, and he lived out his days in obscurity at a Moscow dacha.
Khrushchev and the elderly men running the Soviet Union were enamored of the bearded revolutionary, who had defied the mighty United States and repulsed a botched invasion by Cuban emigres bankrolled by the CIA in April 1961.
Born August 13, 1926 to a prosperous Spanish immigrant landowner, Castro became a communist icon, an unrepentant anti-American leader who managed to hold on to power even after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
He led a revolt in 1953 against the Batista regime but his attack on the Moncada barracks in Santiago de Cuba failed, landing him and his brother Raul in prison.
After two years, he was exiled to Mexico, where he built up a guerrilla force and rallied popular support in Cuba against Batista's corrupt rule.
One he toppled Batista, his sweeping Marxist land and economic reforms failed miserably.
He turned to the Soviet Union for help and by buying up Cuba's sugar and other subsidies Moscow helped keep Castro's regime afloat despite a strict United States embargo that is still in place to this day.
A survivor of numerous CIA plots and assassination attempts, the long-winded Castro tightly orchestrated public life from January 1959 until he suffered a health crisis in 2006 and delegated his duties to his brother Raul Castro.
In a letter to Khrushchev, he advised Moscow to launch a nuclear attack on the United States before what he believed was an imminent invasion of Cuba.
When he learned of the compromise deal between Khrushchev and Kennedy that required Moscow to withdraw its nuclear missiles from the island, Castro was enraged.
Feeling betrayed and humiliated by his Soviet comrades, who did not consult him about the agreement beforehand, Castro unleashed a torrent of curses on hearing the news, kicking a wall and breaking a mirror, according to historical accounts.
A hair-raising account yesterday by a former Russian naval officer described how, on October 27, 1962, an American destroyer dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine without realising that it was carrying a nuclear weapon.
It was the day that the crisis appeared to be spinning out of control, according to declassified documents that have been pored over by an extraordinary array of former Cold War warriors at a conference in Havana marking the 40th anniversary of the period's most dangerous episode.
They include President Castro, the Cuban leader, and Robert McNamara, John F Kennedy's Defence Secretary.
In the middle of the rapidly escalating tensions, the USS Beale was dropping depth charges on the submarine, B59, off the coast of Cuba.
Hours earlier an American U2 spy plane had been shot down and the United States military Joint Chiefs of Staff had recommended to President Kennedy a Cuban airstrike and invasion.
The United States military ""did not have a clue that the submarine had a nuclear weapon on board,"" Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archive, said.
Vadim Orlov, the submarine's signals intelligence officer, told the conference in a written account how close his colleagues had come to ordering the launch of a torpedo tipped with a nuclear warhead.
The crew believed that war had begun and were on the verge of launching the submarine's nuclear weapon.
The submarine had been authorised to fire its nuclear torpedo with the approval of three officers on board.
Mr McNamara told the conference that a nuclear attack on an American ship could easily have escalated into a full-scale nuclear exchange between the two superpowers.
The crisis began on the morning of October 15, 1962, when an American spy plane spotted Soviet missiles that had been secretly deployed in Cuba.
It led to 13 days of white hot tension between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, and by October 27 war was looking increasingly likely.
On that day new surveillance photographs showed that the missile sites had become fully operational, said Dino Brugioni, the former CIA analyst who interpreted the first U2 spy plane photographs that showed missiles in Cuba.
Another U2 strayed into Soviet airspace and Soviet MiG fighter jets scrambled to intercept it.
Mr Brugioni said that on October 27 his superior at the CIA returned from briefing President Kennedy on the new spy plane photographs.
The following day the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw the missiles and order ships heading for Cuba back to Russia, in return for America promising not to invade Cuba.
The conference is also being attended by Arthur Schlesinger, one of Kennedy's closest aides, and William Ecker, the pilot whose photographs triggered the crisis.
Theodore Sorenson, President Kennedy's speechwriter, said that it sent ""a good message"" to a world on the verge of war.
In 1962, it was communism, not terrorism, that struck fear in the hearts of Americans.
Imagine then the alarm of Kennedy and his advisors when, in October 1962, a military plane photographed missile sites being built in communist Cuba.
The Soviets were about to install missiles just 90 miles off the coast of the United States.
Enemy ships bearing the space-age weapons were already en route across the Atlantic.
Prevent public panic, but get the missiles out of the Western Hemisphere before the situation exploded into nuclear war.
Like Khrushchev, they will also be speaking in forums in conjunction with the ""On the Brink"" exhibition.
Military leaders like General Curtis LeMay wanted to attack Cuba, but the president struggled to find another solution.
The film also includes interviews with JFK and TV news footage from the time.
Another close advisor to the president was his brother, Robert F Kennedy, who was United States Attorney General at the time.
The exhibition includes notes that the president and his brother made as the National Security Council debated a course of action.
The public will also be able to see the original military photograph that precipitated the crisis, the one that revealed the missile sites under construction in Cuba.
The president decided to authorize a naval blockade which would prevent the Soviet ships from reaching Cuba with their deadly cargo.
Technically, such a quarantine could have been regarded by the Soviet Union as an act of war.
Instead, much to the relief of everyone, the Soviet ships turned around and went home.
The Soviet Union could not afford to look weak in the eyes of the communist world.
Somehow the superpowers reached an agreement that allowed them to save face.
He says that's the point he will try to make when he speaks at the JFK Library on Oct., in a forum introduced by Caroline Kennedy.
Now an American citizen, Sergei Khrushchev says the United States's strong reaction to the missiles was a surprise to the Soviets.
He insists that shipping missiles to Cuba was essentially an effort to get respect from their communist ally.
While in this country schoolchildren were sent home early and people considered entering bomb shelters, ""we had no panic in Russian streets.
Khrushchev says he does not consider himself a pacifist, ""because there are so many aggressive people in the world, and you have to respond to threats.
But many Americans still remember those days in October when the world seemed about to end.
Visitors to ""On the Brink"" are sure to be flooded with emotion as they remember what happened.
Bush's approval ratings have soared from 51 percent in August to 86 percent in the latest Gallup/CNN polls, the largest jump in Gallup's history, beating his father's old record approval-rating increase of 18 points during the Persian Gulf War.
To give further context to the younger Bush's approval ratings, Franklin Roosevelt's approval ratings jumped from 72 to 84 percent after Pearl Harbor.
Jimmy Carter's polls rose from 38 to 51 percent at the start of the hostage crisis.
Americans favored President Reagan's invasion of Grenada by nearly 2 to 1 and his bombing of Libya by more than 3 to 1.
A poll done by the San Jose Mercury News found that even in the liberal San Francisco Bay area, 90 percent of voters would support military action against terrorists and 70 percent were willing to commit American troops to combat, even at the risk of substantial causalities.
All this from a metropolitan area where residents voted for Michael Dukakis in 1988 at a higher percentage than the entire state of Massachusetts shows the depth of popular outrage.
If anti-aircraft batteries fired at the photo planes, the fighters were instructed to take them out, which would have sparked a dramatic escalation in an already-tense conflict.
Meanwhile, in Moscow, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev wanted desperately for the crisis to end.
As his son, Sergei, explained to The Herald, Khrushchev was angry and worried that a Soviet surface-toair missile had shot down a United States U-2 the previous day.
That had happened without Moscow's knowledge or approval, and now Khrushchev wondered if it would be possible for a nuclear missile to be fired from the distant Caribbean island without his permission.
A short time later, John Kennedy received the full text of Khrushchev's remarks over Radio Moscow, which included a lengthy commentary on Cuban exiles.
Khrushchev said exiles' commando raids were one of the main reasons Soviets had originally put the missiles in Cuba.
He thought it unthinkable that a ""pirate ship"" could fire on Havana without all of the United States ships in the area noticing.
The Soviet leader said he was ordering the missiles dismantled and removed based on Kennedy's promise the previous day that the United States would not attack Cuba.
At the Pentagon, however, many military leaders believed that the United States had blown a chance to crush the Soviets.
Curtis LeMay suggested that Khrushchev's message be ignored and that the United States ""go in and make a strike"" against the missile sites.
Khrushchev had not consulted him in advance, and the Cuban leader learned the news by radio.
The announcement stunned both Cubans and many of the 42,000 Soviet soldiers on the island.
In Miami, meanwhile, Cuban exile leaders were as unhappy as Castro was.
In fact, Operation Mongoose was soon stopped, and the United States began clamping down on independent exile groups such as Alpha 66 and Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo's Segundo Frente.
The heady feel of victory during the missile crisis was one basic reason Washington decided to intensify the conflict against the communists in Vietnam, which would become a bitter quagmire for the next decade.
Communism was to remain a strong force for the next quarter-century, eventually collapsing from within, without any United States military assistance.
And the ""Toothless Tiger"" remains today the undisputed Maximum Leader in Cuba.
For the past three decades, a steady flow of Cubans, from all walks of life, has been arriving here, as well as other Latin Americans fleeing turmoil in their own countries.
These Latins have changed Miami into an international city that has attracted many other immigrants.
More than half of Dade County is now Hispanic, and 45 percent of the residents are foreign-born.
The effect has spilled over into the rest of South Florida, which at the time of the missile crisis had virtually no Hispanics or foreign-born residents.
According to the 1990 census, 16 percent of Broward County residents are foreign-born.
Even as the United States was celebrating, 30 years ago today, the Soviet Union had already begun the task of winning Castro back.
No one envisioned a time when Sergei Khrushchev, son of the late Soviet leader, would be a fellow at a Rhode Island think tank, driving a Buick and applying for a green card.
He takes an upbeat view, believing it served as a beneficial learning experience.
Both the Soviets and the Americans, he says, decided they had come too close to nuclear holocaust in October 1962.
At the time, the United States had about 3,000 nuclear war-heads, the Soviets about 300.
After the crisis, the number of warheads increased, until each side had 25,000 nuclear bombs.
Robert McNamara, defense secretary at the time, wonders why everyone was worried about the missiles in Cuba.
It was the first time these remarks, originally made during a closed academic conference in January, were broadcast in public.
The 65-year old Cuban leader indicated he had no intention of resigning at the moment, despite the multiple problems resulting from the disappearance of the former Soviet Union, Cuba's main ally and economic supplier for three decades.
The Cuban leader denied the current crisis had caused any serious splits in the government.
He revealed new details of Cuba's 30-year relationship with the Soviet Union, saying that on many occasions Moscow criticized the Cuban government's actions.
He rejected views held by many western analysts that the Soviet Union directed Cuba to support revolutionary movements and left-wing governments.
Castro added that the Soviet Union also had misgivings about Cuba sending troops to support the leftwing MPLA government in Angola in 1975.
It is most certainly of grave concern that the 20 Soviet nuclear warheads that were deployed in Cuba at the time could have been launched at American cities within a few hours However, while, as you say, ``frank communication is absolutely essential in crisis situations,'' this alone is not enough to prevent nuclear war.
For vast changes have taken place in the world's nuclear arsenals since 1962.
To begin with, there are now somewhere near 50,000 nuclear weapons in existence, many times the number necessary to annihilate both the superpowers.
Moreover, in 1962 response time was measured in terms of hours, while now we have minutes at best.
In a 1986 article in the Journal of Peace Research, the most optimistic estimate of ``clean and informed decision time'' for a Soviet SLBM attack on the United States was given as 5. minutes; for a United States SLBM attack on Russia, this time was given as 1 minute.
The danger continues to increase today as the weapons produced a chieve greater accuracy and shorter delivery times.
The 50 percent reduction in strategic nuclear weapons now under consideration will do little, in and of itself, to alter this disastrous situation.
The new administration must urgently and diligently negotiate for the elimination of any nuclear weapons that would tend to render the present face-off between the superpowers destabilizing.
After President Kennedy confronted Premier Khrushchev over the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba, the Soviet leader told President Kennedy that all such weapons had been removed from the island.
It was not true, according to authors Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali, who attained access to Soviet files to write their book ""One Hell of a Gamble,"" which will soon be published in the United States.
At the same time President Kennedy was triumphantly telling the American people that the crisis was over, Khrushchev still had 98 tactical nuclear missiles hidden on the island.
The book also tells how the Soviets slipped troops and weapons into Cuba.
Khrushchev asked President Kennedy to stop flying reconnaissance planes over Soviet ships in the area, to which the American president agreed.
The waters were then free for the Soviets to sneak in the missiles and troops.
Cuban Premier Fidel Castro badly wanted the missiles, but the Soviets took them away when Moscow found that Cuba could not keep the secret.
If the information is correct, it is chilling to think what might have occurred.
Had President Kennedy known the Soviet leader was lying, the consequences could have been devastating.
All that mattered was a game that ignites passion and unites the people of two nations locked in a 40year dispute.
On Monday, it was Cuba's turn to beam as its all-star team beat the Baltimore Orioles 12-6 at Camden Yards.
In an earlier exhibition game at Havana's Latin American Stadium March 28, the Orioles defeated the Cuban team.
This was Cuba's first chance to test its baseball mettle against United States major league talent in 40 years.
For American baseball, it was an opportunity to see what the Cubans, considered the world's best amateur baseball players, are all about.
For the people of two nations that stopped speaking to each other almost 40 years ago, Monday night was a chance to find some common ground.
But it did overshadow the game with subplots that seemed to come out of the Cold War.
Baseball scouts, communist officials and United States immigration agents roamed the field, keeping an eye out for possible defectors.
They had instructions to point to the nearest police officer if a Cuban player approached them about deserting.
Surprisingly, no defections occurred, even though Cuban players earn, on the average, $18 a month compared to the mega salaries of the major leagues.
Demonstrators did not disrupt the game, although one man provided a moment of suspense when he charged the playing field with an anti-Castro sign and was wrestled to the ground by Cuban umpire Cesar Valdes.
Despite a heavy police presence, it was the thousands of Camden Yards fans who kept order by booing several attempts by protesters to interrupt the game.
Many demonstrators, the majority Cuban exiles from Florida and New Jersey, had complained about strict security rules which banned them from displaying political signs and sitting in blocs inside the stadium.
Banner planes were prohibited from flying directly over the baseball field.
Cuban-Americans should not view the outcome of the Orioles-Cuba game as a victory for Fidel Castro.
The now-retired Air Force lieutenant colonel piloted a U-2 spy plane back then.
On Oct., 1962, he took the photos that President Kennedy called ""unmistakable evidence"" of ballistic-missile launching sites that the Soviet Union was building in Cuba.
Heyser's name, though, is forever linked to the missile-site pictures, but he thinks 10 other Air Force U-2 pilots who also flew over Cuba during the crisis should share the credit.
Heyser's flight was just the first of many dangerous missions they flew while the world stood on the brink of nuclear war.
On Oct., eight days after Heyser's photos were taken, Kennedy announced to the world what the U-2 photos had shown him -the Soviet Union was building secret sites for nuclear-tipped missiles 90 miles south of Key West.
The United States immediately put up a naval blockade to prevent more missiles from being shipped to Cuba.
Soviet and United States nuclear forces were put on alert, and some American military leaders urged Kennedy to bomb the missile sites and invade Cuba.
The crisis ended Oct. when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles.
Most of the U-2 pilots, all stationed at Laughlin Air Force Base, Texas, later reported that they had been shot at, said Jim Long, chairman of the Laughlin Heritage Foundation in nearby Del Rio, Texas.
Photos taken earlier by CIA U-2s had disclosed surface-to-air missile, or SAM, sites in Cuba.
The SAMs obviously were there to protect something valuable, and the Air Force U-2 pilots were ordered to find out what it was, Long said.
The U-2, nicknamed Dragon Lady, still is flying 50 years after the first one rolled out of Lockheed Martin's ""Skunk Works"" in Palmdale, Calif.
With an 80-foot wingspan, it is essentially a powered glider flying at 70,000 feet -more than 13 miles above Earth's surface.
Too fast and the wings would curl and break off; too slow and it would stall and crash, Heyser said.
The difference was only 7 miles per hour, and the speeds change as the plane gains or loses altitude.
Accidents killed one of Laughlin's U-2 pilots shortly before the missile crisis and another the next year.
Heyser, Anderson and John Campbell had gone to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., that February to train with the CIA's more advanced U-2Cs.
Campbell was killed March 1, 1962, during a night aerial refueling mission.
While returning from a Cuba flight Nov., 1963, Joe Hyde had an oxygen problem and died when his U2 crashed off Key West.
Heyser took off from Edwards in a U-2C borrowed from the CIA for the first of the five flights he made over Cuba in nine days.
He approached Cuba from the south and landed 6 hours, 50 minutes later at McCoy Air Force Base, now Orlando International Airport.
Subsequent flights were made from Laughlin, McCoy and Barksdale Air Force Base, La., Long said.
Heyser's wife, Jackie, said he called every night but couldn't say where he was or what he was doing.
President Kennedy later invited Heyser to the White House and asked if there was anything extraordinary about that first flight.
Curtis LeMay, then the Air Force's chief of staff, had accompanied Heyser.
I hope you don't mind, we're going to make Anderson the hero,' "" Heyser recalled.
Anderson posthumously was awarded the first Air Force Cross ever presented.
Heyser and the other U2 pilots received the lesser Distinguished Flying Cross.
Heyser said his biggest worry was war breaking out with nuclear weapons.
In 1946 he was aboard a plane over the South Pacific when retired United States and captured Japanese warships were targeted during an underwater atomic bomb test.
Castro's comments, which came in an interview with ABC's ''20/20'' program, coincided with a conference here bringing together Cubans and Americans who played roles during the real life Cold War drama.
ABC, which will broadcast the interview Friday, made the transcript public Wednesday.
The crisis began in mid-October 1962 as Kennedy became convinced that there were Soviet nuclear warheads on the island just 90 miles south of the Florida coast.
As President Bush musters support to oust Saddam Hussein, former members of the Kennedy administration are heading to the Cuba conference to revisit that earlier standoff.
In his ABC interview with Barbara Walters, Castro said his country did not agree to accept the missiles out of fear, and ''we would have rather not had them in order to preserve the prestige'' of Cuba.
Still, Castro indicated respect for Khrushchev and his support of the Cuban revolution.
The crisis, marking the Cold War's tensest moments, was defused when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.
Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, an organizer of the conference, was an army commander when Castro put 400,000 soldiers in position to repel a possible invasion of the island.
As Kennedy's words clicked onto the paper rolling off the teletype machine at military headquarters Oct.
Earlier that day, about 2,500 relatives of United States forces stationed at Guantanamo Bay were given 15 minutes to pack a bag each before evacuated to Norfolk, Va.
Most Americans invited to the conference, including McNamara, Schlesinger, former Kennedy speechwriters Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen and ex-CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, will arrive Thursday.
Along with the gathering, Cuba will release some formerly classified documents about the days known here as the Crisis of October.
During a similar conference last year, Cuban organizers worked with the National Security Archive to release a wealth of United States and Cuban documents about the unsuccessful CIA-backed Bay of Pigs invasion.
The missile crisis conference will feature seminars on Friday and Saturday.
