Batista was supported by the USA as he opposed communismFedel Castroled a communist revolution that took over Cuba in the late 1950s.
He also created an alliance with the Soviet UnionFedel Castro facts1. charming, intelligent and ruthless2. excellent propagandist3. had a better vision for Cuba 4. guerilla fighter​Cuban Revolution A successful armed revolt by Fidel Castro that overthrew the U.S.-backed Cuban dictator BatistaFedel Castro reformsIndustry was nationalised​Land was redistributed among peasants​Free healthcare for all​Americans and Mafia forced to leave​""If you don't know, learn.
Cuban exiles in the USA formed powerful pressure demanding actions against Castro2. took over America's owned business and distributed it to Cuban-supporters peasants3.
Diplomatic boycott​5. criticism of castroBay of Pigs1. cuban exiles funded and trained by CIA2.
Castro asked Krushchev to help Cuba from another American backed attack 3.
Kennedy feared other countries might become Communist and enemies of the USA.5.
It initiated once the USSR placed missiles on CubaBeginning of missile crisis 19621.
After the Bay of Pigs Khrushchev gave Castro large amounts of military equipment 2.
By July 1962 Cuba had the best -equipped army in Latin America.Discovering of Soviet missiles in Cuba1962an american spy plane flew over cuba.
Surgical air attackForDestroy the missiles before they became operationalAgainst-The United States airforce could not guarantee to destroy all the missiles.
Diplomatic pressureto involve the United Nations and other international organisations to resolve the dispute ForInvolvement of other countries might force the Soviets to remove the missiles without using violence Against-It was very unlikely that diplomacy would cause Khrushchev to give way, so this option was seen as very weak.
BlockadeUS navy to stop Soviet ships delivering any further weapons to Cuba, along with a demand for missiles already in Cuba to be removed.
ForThis would show firm action by the USA without using immediate force.
It would give Khrushchev time to consider his next actions, and the USA the option of an air strike or invasion later if the blockade did not work.
Kennedy was under serious pressure from United States military leaders to bomb and invade Cuba immediately.
Kennedy tried to give himself and Khrushchev a means of solving the crisis without immediate conflict.
Kennedy used the opportunity of Khrushchev's first letter to explore ways to solve the crisis whilst at the same time convincing the Soviets that he was prepared for war.October crisis timeline16.10.62kennedy was infromed about the missile build up.
Ex-comm formed20.10BLOCKADE22.10 Blockade was announced to the public23.10Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev refusing to obey to the blocklade and denying the presence of nuclear weapons24.10Blockade began. soviet ships containing missiles turned around25.10pictures revealed that missiles in cuba were developing quickly26.10Khrushchev admitted the presence of the missiles in a long personal letter sent to kennedy.
Cold war-Helped stabilise the relationship between USA and USSR and helped them take action to reduce the risk of a nuclear war: It became clear that despite the USSR had fewer weapons or technology, they could still threaten USA as it would have been enough to cause great damage.
Cuban exiles in the USA formed powerful pressure demanding actions against Castro\n2. took over America's owned business and distributed it to Cuban-supporters peasants\n3.
Castro asked Krushchev to help Cuba from another American backed attack \n3.
Kennedy feared other countries might become Communist and enemies of the USA.\n5.
After the Bay of Pigs Khrushchev gave Castro large amounts of military equipment \n2.
America became increasingly worried about the Soviet military build-up in Cuba.\n3.
Khrushchev wanted to produce more nuclear warheads and close the \""missile gap\"" between the USA and USSR. \n2.
The USA had missiles in Western Europe and Turkey, well within range of the USSR. \n3.
The USSR had many more cheap, medium-range missiles than the USA so a launch site in Cuba, close to the United States coast, was an ideal place to put missiles. \n4.
Soviet missiles in Cuba would strengthen Khrushchev's bargaining power against the USA. \n5.
Kennedy also realised that he needed to give Khrushchev a way out without appearing to humiliate the Soviet leader-that is why, in private, he agreed not to invade Cuba and later removed United States missiles from Turkey. \n4.
Ex-comm formed\n20.10BLOCKADE\n22.10 Blockade was announced to the public\n23.10Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev refusing to obey to the blocklade and denying the presence of nuclear weapons\n24.10Blockade began. soviet ships containing missiles turned around\n25.10pictures revealed that missiles in cuba were developing quickly\n26.10Khrushchev admitted the presence of the missiles in a long personal letter sent to kennedy.
