The accidental intrusion into Soviet air space by a U-2 belonging to the Strategic Air Command on October 27, 1962, is still classified top secret by the Air Force and has received little attention from missile crisis historians.
Both the Soviet Union and the United States were conducting nuclear tests in the atmosphere in October 1962.
In order to monitor the Soviet tests at Novaya Zemlya, the United States sent U-2 planes to the North Pole to collect high altitude radioactive air samples.
The atmospheric nuclear tests and the air sampling missions continued throughout October 1962 even as the two superpowers prepared to go to war over Cuba.
His return mission to the North Pole was scheduled to last eight hours.
A Duck Butt air rescue plane accompanied him as far as Barter Island off the northern coast of Alaska.
Half way to the North Pole, Maultsby was blinded by the aurora borealis, or northern lights and had trouble taking fixes with the stars.
At the time that he should have been landing back at Eilson AFB-noon EDT--he penetrated the borders of the Soviet Union.
According to a chart found by Dobbs at the John F Kennedy library, Mig fighters were scrambled from Pewek air base off the northern coast of Chukotka at 1556 GMT--1156 EDT--in an attempt to intercept Maultsby.
They accompanied him as he flew south over Soviet territory, but were unable to shoot the U-2 down.
A chart found by Dobbs in the records of the State Department Executive Secretariat at the National Archives shows the MiGs tracking Maultsby as he turned eastwards back toward Alaska.
Former SAC pilots and SAC headquarters staff told Dobbs that the United States was able to track both Maultsby, and the Soviet Migs attempting to shoot him down, by intercepting Soviet air defense traffic.
But they were unable to share this information with the pilot, as the United States eavesdropping capabilities were a closely guarded national secret.
Navigators guided Maultsby out of Soviet air space by ordering him to turn left until he could see Orion's Belt off his right wingtip.
With the constellation observable to his south, Maultsby would be flying westwards, back home toward Alaska.
The Alaska Air Defense Command scrambled a pair of F-102 interceptors armed with nuclear warheads from Galena AFB to guide Maultsby home and intercept the Soviet Migs.
Maultsby ran out of fuel as he exited Soviet air space, gliding for nearly an hour before landing at an airstrip at Kotzebue on the western tip of Alaska.
With events in Cuba consuming everybody's attention, neither the Pentagon nor the White House had considered the possibility that a U-2 might go missing over the Soviet Union on the most dangerous day of the crisis.
Des Portes had his hands full with the simultaneous shootdown of a U-2 over Cuba.
Pentagon and White House records show that defense secretary Robert McNamara was not informed that the U-2 was missing over the Soviet Union until 1.41m.
EDT, more than an hour and a half after Maultsby entered Soviet air space.
McNamara rushed out of a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Tank and informed the president by telephone four minutes later, at 1.45m.
The Pentagon informed the State Department at 1.47m, according to a contemporaneous State Department memo.
According to a 1975 oral history interview with Air Force General David Burchinal, McNamara rushed out of the Pentagon meeting yelling hysterically ""this means war with the Soviet Union.
Burchinal probably embroidered this acount ssomewhat as the Washington-Moscow hotline was only installed after the missile crisis.
EDT after a flight of 10 hours, 25 minutes, the longest ever recorded for a U-2, as reported in this SAC memorandum.
McNamara promptly ordered the recall of a second U-2 plane that had followed him on yet another air sampling mission to the North Pole, according to a Pentagon memo.
He also ordered the cancellation of all U-2 air sampling missions and a full Air Force investigation into the causes of the accident.
The Kennedy administration ordered the temporary grounding of all U-2 missions, but hushed up the incident as best it could.
Forty-six years later, the results of the Air Force investigation have still not been published.
If you have Google Earth installed on your computer, you can follow Maultsby's overflight of the Soviet Union through precise coordinates and photographs by downloading this Google Earth layer and opening it in the free Google Earth application.
More information on Maultsby's overflight of the Soviet Union, including the pilot's personal account of his ordeal, is available in One Minute to Midnight, available through Amazon.com.
