Pages using ISBN magic links, Articles with content from Wikipedia, People excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church, and 3 more Atheists Religion and Politics Heads of state Fidel Castro View source History Talk Fidel Castro in 2003.
Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz was a Cuban politician, one of the primary leaders of the Cuban Revolution, the Prime Minister of Cuba from February 1959 to December 1976, and then the President of the Council of State of Cuba until his resignation from the office in February 2008.
His political career continued with nationalist critiques of Fulgencio Batista, and of the United States' political and corporate influence in Cuba.
He gained an ardent, but limited, following and also drew the attention of the authorities.
He eventually led the failed 1953 attack on the Moncada Barracks, after which he was captured, tried, incarcerated, and later released.
He then traveled to Mexico to organize and train for an assault on Batista's Cuba.
He and his fellow revolutionaries left Mexico for the East of Cuba in December 1956.
Castro came to power as a result of the Cuban revolution that overthrew the U.S.-backed dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista, and shortly thereafter became Prime Minister of Cuba.
In 1976 he became President of the Council of State as well as of the Council of Ministers.
He also held the supreme military rank of Comandante en Jefe of the Cuban armed forces.
Castro has been portrayed as a dictator in spite of his disapproval of dictatorships.
Following intestinal surgery from an undisclosed digestive illness believed to have been diverticulitis, Castro transferred his responsibilities to the First Vice-President, his younger brother Raúl Castro, on July 31, 2006.
On February 19, 2008, five days before his mandate was to expire, he announced he would neither seek nor accept a new term as either president or commander-in-chief.
On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly elected Raúl Castro to succeed him as the President of Cuba.
Other countries 5 Religious beliefs 6 Succession 7 Public image 8 Family 9 Controversy and criticism 9.
Allegations of wealth 10 Legacy 11 Authored works 12 References and footnotes 13 External links Childhood and education Fidel Alejandro Vittore Castro Ruz was born on a sugar plantation in Birán, near Mayarí, in the modern-day province of Holguín – then a part of the now-defunct Oriente province.
He was the third child born to Ángel Castro y Argiz, a Galician immigrant from the impoverished northwest of Spain who became relatively prosperous through work in the sugar industry and successful investing.
Castro also acknowledged having some Marrano ancestry.His mother, Lina Ruz González, was a household servant.
Angel Castro was married to another woman, Maria Luisa Argota, until Fidel was 15, and thus Fidel as a child had to deal both with his illegitimacy and the challenge of being raised in various foster homes away from his father's house.
Castro had two brothers, Ramón and Raúl, and four sisters, Angelita, Juanita, Enma, and Agustina, all of whom were born out of wedlock.
He also had two half siblings, Lidia and Pedro Emilio who were raised by Ángel Castro's first wife.
Fidel was not baptized until he was 8, also very uncommon, bringing embarrassment and ridicule from other children.
Castro was formally recognized by his father when he was 17, when his surname was legally changed to Castro from Ruz, his mother's name.Although accounts of his education differ, most sources agree that he was an intellectually gifted student, more interested in sports than in academics, and spent many years in private Catholic boarding schools, finishing high school at El Colegio de Belén, a Jesuit school in Havana in 1945.
There are persistent rumors that Castro was scouted for various [[United States of America U.S.]] baseball teams, but there is no evidence that this ever actually happened.
He became immediately embroiled in the political culture at the university, which was a reflection of the volatile politics in Cuba during that era.
He returned to the university from a brief hiatus to involve himself fully in the various violent battles and disputes which surrounded university elections, and was to be implicated in a number of shootings linked to Rolando Masferrer's MSR action group.
A charismatic figure, Chibás attracted many Cubans with his message of social justice, honest government, and political freedom.
Chibás was running for president against the incumbent Ramón Grau San Martín who had allowed rampant corruption to flourish during his term.
It aimed to instill a strong sense of national identity among Cubans, establish Cuban economic independence and freedom from the United States, and dismantle the power of the elite over Cuban politics.
Though Chibás lost the election, Castro, considering Chibás his mentor, remained committed to his cause, working fervently on his behalf.
In 1951, while running for president again, Chibás shot himself in the stomach during a radio broadcast.
Castro was present and accompanied him to the hospital where he died.During 1948, Castro was twice linked to political assassinations.
He was suspected of Manolo Castro's assassination that took place on February 22.
Dying Oscar Fernandez and other witnesses identified Castro as the assassin.
In 1948, Castro joined an anti-American demonstration trip to Bogotá, Colombia, paid by Argentinean army colonel and President Juan Perón.
Castro joined mob violence and property destruction, and later sought refuge in the Argentinean embassy.
Decision for revolution In 1948, Castro married Mirta Díaz Balart, a student from a wealthy Cuban family through which he was exposed to the lifestyle of the Cuban elite.
Castro also received a $1,000 wedding gift from Fulgencio Batista, the ex-President who was a friend of both families.
In 1950 he graduated from law school with a Doctor of Laws degree and began practicing law in a small partnership in Havana.
By now he had become well known for his passionately nationalist views and his intense opposition to the United States.
Batista was supported by establishment elements of Cuban society, powerful Cuban agencies, and labor unions.
Cuban Revolution Attack on Moncada Barracks As discontent over the Batista coup grew, Castro abandoned his law practice and formed an underground organization of supporters, including his brother, Raúl, and Mario Chanes de Armas.
They collected guns and ammunition and finalized their plans for an armed attack on Moncada Barracks, Batista's largest garrison outside Santiago de Cuba.
The attack proved disastrous and more than sixty of the one-hundred and thirty-five militants involved were killed.
Castro and other surviving members of his group managed to escape to a part of the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains east of Santiago where they were eventually discovered and captured.
Although there is disagreement over why Castro and his brother, Raúl, were not executed on capture as many of their fellow militants were, there is evidence that an officer recognized Castro from his university days and treated the captured rebels compassionately, despite the 'illegal' unofficial order to hae the leader executed.
Others, such as Angel Prado, military commander of the 26th of July Movement, say that on the night of the attack Castro's driver got lost and he never reached the barracks.
That night was the night of “El Carnaval de Santiago” and the streets of Santiago de Cuba were filled with party goers.
Castro was tried in the fall of 1953 and sentenced to up to fifteen years in prison.
I know that the regime will try to suppress the truth by all possible means; I know that there will be a conspiracy to bury me in oblivion.
While he was being held at the prison for political activists on Isla de Pinos, he continued to plot Batista's overthrow, planning upon release to reorganize and train in Mexico.
After having served less than two years, he was released in May 1955 due to a general amnesty from Batista who was under political pressure, and went as planned to Mexico. 26th of July Movement Once in Mexico, Castro reunited with other Cuban exiles and founded the 26th of July Movement, named after the date of the failed attack on the Moncada Barracks.
Castro had learned from the Moncada experience that new tactics were needed if Batista's forces were to be defeated.
This time, the plan was to use underground guerrilla tactics, which were used by the Cubans the last time they attempted a populist overthrow of what they considered an imperialistic regime.
The Cuban war of Independence against the Spanish was Cuba's introduction to guerrilla warfare, about which they read once the Cuban campaign ended but was taken up by Emilio Aguinaldo in the Philippines.
In Mexico Castro met Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, a proponent of guerrilla warfare.
Since regular contacts with a KGB agent named Nikolai Sergeevich Leonov in Mexico City had not resulted in the hoped for weapon supply, they decided to go to the United States to gather personnel and funds from Cubans living there, including Carlos Prío Socarrás, the elected Cuban president deposed by Batista in 1952.
Back in Mexico, the group trained under a Spanish Civil War Veteran, Cuban-born Alberto Bayo who had fled to Mexico after Francisco Franco's victory in Spain.
On November 26, 1956, Castro and his group of 81 followers, mostly Cuban exiles, set out from Tuxpan, Veracruz, aboard the yacht Granma for the purpose of starting a rebellion in Cuba.The rebels landed at Playa Las Coloradas close to Los Cayuelos near the eastern city of Manzanillo on December 2, 1956.
In short order, most of Castro's men were killed, dispersed, or taken prisoner by Batista's forces.
While the exact number is in dispute, it is agreed that no more than twenty of the original eighty-two men survived the bloody encounters with the Cuban army and succeeded in fleeing to the Sierra Maestra mountains.
The group of survivors included Fidel Castro, Che Guevara, Raúl Castro, and Camilo Cienfuegos.
They regrouped in the Sierra Maestra in Oriente province and organized a column under Fidel Castro's command.
The strongest was in Santiago formed by Frank País.In the summer of 1957, País's organization merged with the 26th of July Movement of Castro.
As Castro's movement gained popular support in the cities and countryside, it grew to over eight hundred men.
Castro and Matthews were followed by the TV crew of Andrew Saint George, said to be a CIA contact person.
In 1957, Castro also signed the Manifesto of the Sierra Maestra in which he agreed to call elections under the Electoral Code of 1943 within the first 18 months of his time in power and to restore all of the provisions of the Constitution of 1940 that had been suspended under Batista.
While he took steps to implement some of the measures in the Manifesto upon coming into power, Cuba failed to have elections, the most important part of the program, within the allotted time.
In February 1958, Castro published in Coronet Magazine a famous statement of the goals of the movement.
He stated that ""we are fighting to do away with dictatorship in Cuba and to establish the foundations of genuine representative government"" and promised to ""prepare and conduct truly honest general elections within twelve months"" after success.
He also justified his attacks on Cuba's economy as the only way to bring down the Batista dictatorship.
Despite his denouncement of dictatorships, Castro himself has been described as a dictator.
Operation Verano In May 1958, Batista launched Operation Verano aiming to crush Castro and other anti-government groups.
Although on paper heavily outnumbered, Castro's guerrilla forces scored a series of victories, largely aided by mass desertions from Batista's army of poorly trained and uncommitted young conscripts.
During the Battle of La Plata, Castro's forces defeated an entire battalion.
During the Battle of Las Mercedes, Castro's small army came close to defeat but he managed to pull his troops out by opening up negotiations with General Cantillo while secretly slipping his soldiers out of a trap.
When Operation Verano ended, Castro ordered three columns commanded by Guevara, Jaime Vega and Camilo Cienfuegos to invade central Cuba where they were strongly supported by rebellious elements who had long been operating in the area.
Here, they were supported by Huber Matos, Raúl Castro and others who were operating in the easternmost part of the province.
On the plains, Castro's forces first surrounded the town of Guisa in Granma Province and drove out their enemies, then proceeded to take most of the towns that had been taken by Calixto García in the 1895-1898 Cuban War of Independence.
Battle of Yaguajay In December 1958, the columns of Che Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos continued their advance through Las Villas province.
They succeeded in occupying several towns, and then began preparations for an attack on Santa Clara, the provincial capital.
Guevara's fighters launched a fierce assault on the Cuban army surrounding Santa Clara, and a vicious house-to-house battle ensued.
They also derailed an armored train which Batista had sent to aid his troops in the city while Cienfuegos won the Battle of Yaguajay.
The provincial capital was captured after less than a day of fighting on December 31, 1958.
Collapse of the Batista regime After the loss at the Battle of Santa Clara, expecting betrayal by his own army and having lost all backup from the previously supportive United States government, Batista boarded a plane and fled to the Dominican Republic in the early hours of January 1, 1959.
Eulogio Cantillo, recently the commander in Oriente province, the center of the Castro revolt.
Carlos Piedra, the oldest judge of the Supreme Court, as provisional President of Cuba as specified in the Constitution of 1940.
Castro refused to accept the selection of Justice Piedra as provisional President and the Supreme Court refused to administer the oath of office to the Justice.The rebel forces of Fidel Castro moved swiftly to seize power throughout the island.
At the age of 32, Castro had successfully masterminded a classic guerrilla campaign from his headquarters in the Sierra Maestra and ousted Batista.
New government ""Power does not interest me, and I will not take it"" Fidel Castro in Cuba, January 1959 On January 8, 1959, Castro's army rolled victoriously into Havana.
The black and red flag of the 26th of July Movement waved on automobiles and buildings.
Urrutia, former judge of the Urgency Court of Santiago de Cuba, be installed as the provisional President instead.
The Cane Planters Association of Cuba, speaking on behalf of the island's crucial sugar industry, issued a statement of support for Castro and his movement.
Law professor José Miró Cardona created a new government with himself as prime minister and Manuel Urrutia Lleó as president on January 5.
The United States officially recognized the new government two days later.
Castro himself arrived in Havana to cheering crowds and assumed the post of Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces on January 8.
In February professor José Miró Cardona had to resign because of Castro's attacks.
Professor Miró soon went into exile in the United States, and would later participate in the Bay of Pigs Invasion against Castro's form of government.
President Manuel Urrutia Lleó wanted to restore elections, but Castro opposed free elections.
The new government began expropriating property and announced plans to base the compensation on the artificially low property valuations that the companies themselves had kept to a fraction of their true value so that their taxes would be negligible.
Between April 15 and April 26, Castro and a delegation of industrial and international representatives visited the United States of America. as guests of the Press Club.
Castro hired one of the best public relations firms in the United States for a charm offensive visit by Castro and his recently initiated government.
Castro answered impertinent questions jokingly and ate hot dogs and hamburgers.
His rumpled fatigues and scruffy beard cut a popular figure easily promoted as an authentic hero.
Castro himself resigned as Prime Minister of Cuba and later that day appeared on television to deliver a lengthy denouncement of Urrutia, claiming that Urrutia ""complicated"" government, and that his ""fevered anti-Communism"" was having a detrimental effect.
Castro's sentiments received widespread support as organized crowds surrounded the presidential palace demanding Urrutia's resignation, which was duly received.
On July 23, Castro resumed his position as premier and appointed Osvaldo Dorticós as the new president.
Years in power As early as July 1959, Castro's intelligence chief Ramiro Valdés contacted the KGB in Mexico City.
Subsequently, the USSR sent over one hundred mostly Spanish speaking advisors, including Enrique Líster Forján, to organize the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution.
When the U.S.-owned refineries in Cuba refused to process the oil, they were expropriated, and the United States broke off diplomatic relations with the Castro government soon afterward.
To the concern of the Eisenhower administration, Cuba began to establish closer ties with the Soviet Union.
United States disappointment with their lack of power in Cuban decision making fueled Castro's fears leading to increasing Cuban dependence on USSR support.
On May 1, 1961, Castro declared Cuba as socialist state and officially abolished multiparty elections.
Critics noted that Castro feared elections would eject him from power.In June 1960, Eisenhower reduced Cuba's sugar import quota by 7,000,000 tons, and in response, Cuba nationalized some $850 million worth of United States property and businesses.
The new government took control of the country by nationalizing industry, redistributing property, collectivizing agriculture and creating policies that would benefit the poor.
While popular among the poor, these policies alienated many former supporters of the revolution among the Cuban middle and upper-classes.
Over one million Cubans later migrated to the United States of America., forming a vocal anti-Castro community in Miami, Florida, actively supported and funded by successive United States administrations.
By the early autumn of 1960, the United States government was engaged in a semi-secret campaign to remove Castro from power.In September 1960, Castro created Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, which implemented neighborhood spying in an effort to weed out ""counter-revolutionary"" activities.
By the end of 1960, all opposition newspaper had been closed down and all radio and television stations were in state control, run under the Leninist principle of Democratic Centralism.
He was accused of keeping about 20,000 dissents held captive and tortured under inhuman prison conditions every year.
Loyalty to Castro became the primary criteria for all appointments in the island.
In the 1961 New Year's Day parade, Castro exhibited Soviet tanks and other weapons.
Bay of Pigs Invasion The Bay of Pigs Invasion , was an unsuccessful attempt by a US-trained force of Cuban exiles to invade southern Cuba with support from United States government armed forces, to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro.
The plan was launched in April 1961, less than three months after John F Kennedy assumed the presidency in the United States.
The Cuban armed forces, trained and equipped by Eastern Bloc nations, defeated the exile combatants in three days.
The invasion is named after the Bay of Pigs, which is just one possible translation of the Spanish Bahía de Cochinos.
The main landing at the Bay of Pigs specifically took place at the beach named Playa Girón.
In a nationally broadcast speech on December 2, 1961, Castro declared that he was a Marxist-Leninist and that Cuba was adopting Communism.
On February 7, 1962, the United States imposed an embargo against Cuba.
This embargo was broadened during 1962 and 1963, including a general travel ban for American tourists.
Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing missiles in Cuba as a deterrent to a possible United States invasion and justified the move in response to United States missile deployment in Turkey.
After consultations with his military advisors, he met with a Cuban delegation led by Raúl Castro in July in order to work out the specifics.
It was agreed to deploy Soviet R-12 MRBMs on Cuban soil; however, American Lockheed U-2 reconnaissance discovered the construction of the missile installations on October 15, 1962 before the weapons had actually been deployed.
The United States government viewed the installation of Soviet nuclear weapons 90 miles south of Key West as an aggressive act and a threat to United States security.
As a result, the United States publicly announced its discovery on October 22, 1962, and implemented a quarantine around Cuba that would actively intercept and search any vessels heading for the island.
Nikolai Sergevich Leonov, who would become a General in the KGB Intelligence Directorate and the Soviet KGB deputy station chief in Warsaw, was the translator Castro used for contact with the Russians during this period.
In a personal letter to Khrushchev dated October 27, 1962, Castro urged him to launch a nuclear first strike against the United States if Cuba were invaded, but Khrushchev rejected any first strike response.
Soviet field commanders in Cuba were, however, authorized to use tactical nuclear weapons if attacked by the United States.
Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for a United States commitment not to invade Cuba and an understanding that the United States would secretly remove American MRBMs targeting the Soviet Union from Turkey and Italy, a measure that the United States implemented a few months later.
Assassination attempts Fabian Escalante, who was long tasked with protecting the life of Castro, estimated the number of assassination schemes or attempts by the CIA to be 638.
Some such attempts allegedly included an exploding cigar, a fungal-infected scuba-diving suit, and a mafia-style shooting.
One of these attempts was by his ex-lover Marita Lorenz whom he met in 1959.
She allegedly agreed to aid the CIA and attempted to smuggle a jar of cold cream containing poison pills into his room.
When Castro realized, he reportedly gave her a gun and told her to kill him but her nerve failed.
According to the Family Jewels documents declassified by the CIA in 2007, one such assassination attempt before the Bay of Pigs invasion involved Johnny Roselli and Al Capone's successor in the Chicago Outfit, Salvatore Giancana and his right-hand man Santos Trafficante.
It was personally authorized by then United States attorney general Robert Kennedy.Giancana and Miami Syndicate leader Santos Trafficante were contacted in September 1960 about the possibility of an assassination attempt by a go-between from the CIA, Robert Maheu, after Maheu had contacted Johnny Roselli, a member of the Las Vegas Syndicate and Giancana's number-two man.
Maheu had presented himself as a representative of numerous international business firms in Cuba that were being expropriated by Castro.
According to the files, it was Giancana who suggested using a series of poison pills that could be used to doctor Castro's food and drink.
These pills were given by the CIA to Giancana's nominee Juan Orta, whom Giancana presented as being an official in the Cuban government who was also in the pay of gambling interests, and who did have access to Castro.After a series of six attempts to introduce the poison into Castro's food, Orta abruptly demanded to be let out of the mission, handing over the job to another, unnamed participant.
Later, a second attempt was mounted through Giancana and Trafficante using Dr.
However, it is unknown how far the second attempt went, as the entire program was cancelled shortly thereafter due to the launching of the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
United States embargo Jose Maria Aznar, former Spanish Prime Minister, wrote that the embargo was Castro's greatest ally, and that Castro would lose his presidency within three months if the embargo was lifted.
Castro retained control after Cuba became bankrupt and isolated following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
The synergic contraction of Cuban economy resulted in eighty-five percent of its markets disappearing, along with subsidies and trade agreements that had supported it, causing extended gas and water outages, severe power shortages, and dwindling food supplies.In 1994, the island's economy plunged into what was called the ""Special Period""; teetering on the brink of collapse.
Cuba legalized the United States dollar, turned to tourism, and encouraged the transfer of remittances in United States dollars from Cubans living in the USA to their relatives on the Island.
After massive damage caused by Hurricane Michelle in 2001, Castro proposed a one-time cash purchase of food from the United States while declining a United States offer of humanitarian aid.The United States authorized the shipment of food in 2001, the first since the embargo was imposed.
Castro was able to build a formidable military force with the help of Soviet equipment and military advisors.
Castro's alliance with the Soviet Union caused something of a split between him and Guevara.
In 1966, Guevara left for Bolivia in an ill-fated attempt to stir up revolution against the country's government.
On August 23, 1968, Castro made a public gesture to the USSR that caused the Soviet leadership to reaffirm their support for him.
Two days after the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia to repress the Prague Spring, Castro took to the airwaves and publicly denounced the Czech rebellion.
In return for his public backing of the invasion, at a time when many Soviet allies were deeming the invasion an infringement of Czechoslovakia's sovereignty, the Soviets bailed out the Cuban economy with extra loans and an immediate increase in oil exports.
In 1971, despite an Organization of American States convention that no nation in the Western Hemisphere would have a relationship with Cuba , Castro took a month-long visit to Chile, following the re-establishment of diplomatic relations with Cuba.
The subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 had an immediate and devastating effect on Cuba.
Fidel Castro, 2002 On November 4, 1975, Castro ordered the deployment of Cuban troops to Angola in order to aid the Marxist MPLA-ruled government against the South African-backed UNITA opposition forces.
Moscow aided the Cuban initiative with the USSR engaging in a massive airlift of Cuban forces into Angola.
Cuban troops were also sent to Marxist Ethiopia to assist Ethiopian forces in the Ogaden War with Somalia in 1977.
In addition, Castro extended support to Marxist Revolutionary movements throughout Latin America, such as aiding the Sandinistas in overthrowing the Somoza government in Nicaragua in 1979.
It has been claimed by the Carthage Foundation-funded Center for a Free Cuba that an estimated 14,000 Cubans were killed in Cuban military actions abroad.
Castro never disclosed the amount of casualties in Soviet African wars, but one estimate is 14,000, a high number for the small country.Juan Antonio Rodríguez Mernier, a former Cuban Intelligence Major who defected in 1987, says the regime made large amounts of money from drug trafficking operations in the 1970s.
Norberto Fuentes, a defected member of the Castro brothers' inner circle, has provided details about these operations.
According to him, an operation conducted in cooperation with the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine helped Cuban intelligence to steal one billion by robbing banks in Lebanon during the 1975-76 civil war.
Gold bars, jewelry, gems, and museum pieces were carried in diplomatic pouches via air route Beirut-Moscow-Havana.
Castro personally greeted the robbers as heroes.Cuba and Panama restored diplomatic ties in 2005 after breaking them off a year prior when Panama's former president pardoned four Cuban exiles accused of attempting to assassinate Cuban President Fidel Castro in 2000.
The foreign minister of each country re-established official diplomatic relations in Havana by signing a document describing a spirit of fraternity that has long linked both nations.
Cuba, once shunned by many of its Latin American neighbours, now has full diplomatic relations with all but Costa Rica and El Salvador.Although the relationship between Cuba and Mexico remains strained, each side appears to make attempts to improve it.
In 1998, Fidel Castro apologized for remarks he made about Mickey Mouse which led Mexico to recall its ambassador from Havana.
He said he intended no offense when he said earlier that Mexican children would find it easier to name Disney characters than to recount key figures in Mexican history.
Mexican president Vicente Fox apologized to Fidel Castro in 2002 over statements by Castro, who had taped their telephone conversation, to the effect that Fox forced him to leave a United Nations summit in Mexico so that he would not be in the presence of President Bush, who also attended.At a summit meeting of sixteen Caribbean countries in 1998, Castro called for regional unity, saying that only strengthened cooperation between Caribbean countries would prevent their domination by rich nations in a global economy.
On a visit to South Africa in 1998 he was warmly received by President Nelson Mandela.
President Mandela gave Castro South Africa's highest civilian award for foreigners, the Order of Good Hope.
In 1998, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien arrived in Cuba to meet President Castro and highlight their close ties.
He is the first Canadian government leader to visit the island since Pierre Trudeau was in Havana in 1976.
In December 2001, European Union representatives described their political dialogue with Cuba as back on track after a weekend of talks in Havana.
The EU praised Cuba's willingness to discuss questions of human rights.
However, trade with individual European countries remains strong since the United States trade embargo on Cuba leaves the market free from American rivals.In 2005, EU Development Commissioner Louis Michel ended his visit to Cuba optimistic that relations with the communist state will become stronger.
Cuba's imprisonment of 75 dissidents and the execution of three hijackers have strained diplomatic relations.
However, the EU commissioner was impressed with Fidel Castro's willingness to discuss these concerns, although he received no commitments from Castro.
Cuba does not admit to holding political prisoners, seeing them rather as mercenaries in the pay of the United States.Castro is seen as an icon by leaders of recent socialist governments in Latin America.
Hugo Chávez of Venezuela is a long-time admirer and reached agreements with Cuba to provide subsidized petroleum in exchange for Cuban medical assistance.
Religious beliefs Castro was raised a Roman Catholic as a child but did not practice as one.
In Oliver Stone's documentary Comandante, Castro states ""I have never been a believer"", and has total conviction that there is no afterlife.Pope John XXIII excommunicated Castro in 1962 on the basis of Pope Pius XII's Decree against Communism, a 1949 decree forbidding Catholics from supporting communist governments.
Pope John Paul II visited Cuba in 1998, the first visit by a reigning pontiff to the island.
Castro and the Pope appeared side by side in public on several occasions during the visit.
Castro wore a dark blue business suit in his public meetings with the Pope and treated him with reverence and respect.
Cubans were again allowed to mark Christmas as a holiday and to openly hold religious processions.
The Pope sent a telegram to Castro thanking him for restoring Christmas as a public holiday.Castro attended a Roman Catholic convent blessing in 2003.
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I consecrated a cathedral in Havana and bestowed an honor on Fidel Castro.
His aides said that he was responding to the decision of the Cuban Government to build and donate to the Orthodox Christians a tiny Orthodox cathedral in the heart of old Havana.After Pope John Paul II's death in April 2005, an emotional Castro attended a mass in his honor in Havana's cathedral and signed the Pope's condolence book at the Vatican Embassy.
He had last visited the cathedral in 1959, 46 years earlier, for the wedding of one of his sisters.
Succession According to Article 94 of the Cuban Constitution, the First Vice President of the Council of State assumes presidential duties upon the illness or death of the president.
Raúl Castro was the person in that position for the last 32 years of Fidel Castro's presidency.
On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly of People's Power unanimously chose his brother, Raúl Castro, as Fidel's successor as President of Cuba.
Public image By wearing military-style uniforms and leading mass demonstrations, Castro projected an image of a perpetual revolutionary.
He was mostly seen in military attire, but his personal tailor, Merel Van 't Wout, convinced him to occasionally change to a business suit.
Large throngs of people gathered to cheer at Castro's fiery speeches, which typically lasted for hours.
Many details of Castro's private life, particularly involving his family members, are scarce as the media is forbidden to mention them.
Castro's image appears frequently in Cuban stores, classrooms, taxicabs, and national television.
Family By his first wife Mirta Díaz-Balart, whom he married on October 11, 1948, Castro had a son named Fidel Ángel ""Fidelito"" Castro Díaz-Balart, born on September 1, 1949.
Díaz-Balart and Castro were divorced in 1955, and she remarried Emilio Núñez Blanco.
After a spell in Madrid, Spain, Díaz-Balart reportedly returned to Havana to live with Fidelito and his family.
Díaz-Balart's nephews are Republican United States Congressmen Lincoln Diaz-Balart and Mario Diaz-Balart, vocal critics of the Castro government.
Antonio, Alejandro, Alexis, Alexander ""Alex"" and Ángel Castro Soto del Valle.While Castro was married to Mirta, he had an affair with Natalia ""Naty"" Revuelta Clews, born in Havana in 1925 and married to Orlando Fernández, resulting in a daughter named Alina Fernández-Revuelta.
Alina left Cuba in 1993, disguised as a Spanish tourist, and sought asylum in the United States.
Fidel had another daughter, Francisca Pupo the result of a one night affair.
Pupo and her husband now live in Miami.His sister Juanita Castro has been living in the United States of America since the early 1960s.
When she emigrated, she said ""I cannot longer remain indifferent to what is happening in my country.
My brothers Fidel and Raúl have made it an enormous prison surrounded by water.
In 1959, according to Gonzalez, Castro established ""Fidel's checking account"", from which he could draw funds as he pleased.
Gonzalez asserts that the Comandante's reserves have been linked to counterfeiting business empires and money laundering.As early as 1968, a once-close friend of Castro's wrote that Castro had huge accounts in Swiss banks.
Gonzalez believes that Cuba's paucity of trade with Switzerland contrasts oddly with the National Office of Cuba's relatively large office in Zurich.
Among other things, he asserted that Castro had a personal guard of more than 9,700 men and three luxurious yachts.In 2005, American business and financial magazine Forbes listed Castro among the world's richest people, with an estimated net worth of $550 million.
The estimates, which the magazine admitted were ""more art than science"", claimed that the Cuban leader's personal wealth was nearly double that of Britain's Queen Elizabeth II, despite anecdotal evidence from diplomats and businessmen that the Cuban leader's personal life was notably austere.
This assessment was drawn by making economic estimates of the net worth of Cuba's state-owned companies, and used the assumption that Castro had personal economic control.Forbes magazine later increased the estimates to $900 million, adding rumors of large cash stashes in Switzerland.
The magazine offered no proof of this information, and according to CBS news, Castro's entry on the rich list was notably brief compared to the amount of information provided on other figures.Castro, who had considered suing the magazine, responded that the claims were ""lies and slander"", and that they were part of a United States campaign to discredit him.
Whether his legacy will be interpreted in a positive or negative light is frequently debated in political circles.
Those who supported his government generally state that Cuba has one of the world's highest literacy rates and most effective healthcare systems, low wealth inequalities, a stable government, and record of supporting international populist struggles in Africa.
His detractors point out Cuba's bleak human rights record, authoritarian state, stagnant economy, and repression of political dissent.
In October 2009, Castro was named ""World Hero of Solidarity"" by the United Nations General Assembly.
Cuba Marks 50 Years Since 'Triumphant Revolution' by Jason Beaubien, NPR All Things Considered, January 1, 2009 ↑ Encyclopedia Britannica entry for Fulgencio Batista ↑ 7.07.
Cuba the Pursuit of Freedom523-524 ↑ Sweig 2002 ↑ Bardach, Ann Louise : Cuba Confidential.
An Empire of Liberty in an Age of National Liberation, Jules R Benjamin, 1992,131 ↑ 24.024.124.224.324.424.524.624.
Fidel Castro's Revolutionary Propaganda ↑ snopes.com: Che Guevara, economist ↑ A videotape of Fidel Castro denying his support of communism was re-aired on NBC ""Meet the Press"" on November 25, 2007.
An earlier version was published in a slightly edited form as The Defiant One, in The Guardian, Friday Review, 8 June 2001.
Categories Categories Pages using ISBN magic links Articles with content from Wikipedia People excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church Atheists Religion and Politics Heads of state Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted.
