Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Asalam u alaikum Everyone, This is Ayesha Younas here.
I have come up with a revised edition of the IR Notes that first came out on 11/5/2015.
They became quite famous all across Pakistan, so I just thought I'd come up with another treat for you guys.
I have been working a lot on International Relations since then so thought of updating the Notes for the general CSS Apirants.
Well, the reason behind such drastic result of IR in 2017 had largely been lack of writing practice and lack of development of an analytical mindset.
Knowledge Base Level 2: Conceptual Clarity Level 3: Application Level 4: Analysis Most of the Candidates remain at Level 1, where the hardly know the knowledge base.
The candidates need to have a conceptual claritye. they need to be able to differentiate between National interest and National Power for instance.
Secondly, under conceptual clarity they need to be able to explain every concept in simple words and need to have its characteristics on their fingertips.
Then is the Application LEVEL 3, in this level, the candidate is able to apply the knowledge along with clearly defined concepts to real life situations, current events, and or historical traditions.
They need to explain the concept with the help of examples, statistics and figures.
However, the highest numbers are gained by those who have an analytical approach.
Those with analytical approach need to be able to explain the concepts/theories/etc., apply them to current events and be able to dig deeper.
The raising of questions leads you to an analytical approach where you are able to develop strong arguments along with its justification.
You need to understand this and practice past papers with a LEVEL 4 Approach.
Only reading or attending lectures are not going to prepare you for CSS as you final destination is a written exam so make sure you are prepared accordingly.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C Syllabus Division Well, I personally divide syllabus into FIVE Areas.
Concepts The Definition and Scope of International Relations The Nation-State System Evolution of International Society Conceptualization of security in the Twenty-First century Power.
Determinants, Decision Making and Analysis Sovereignty and National Interest Diplomacy International Law Nationalism Internationalism* Globalization War: Causation of War, Total War, Limited War, Asymmetric Warfare, Civil War, Guerilla Warfare Terrorism Strategic Culture: Determinants of Pakistani Strategic Culture.
Theories of Imperialism, Dependence and Interdependence discourse A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C iii.
Theories and Approaches Realism and Neo-realism Idealism/Liberalism and Neo-liberalism The Scientific Revolution-Behavioral Approach, System Approach* Post-modernism, Critical Theory, Feminism, Constructivism* 3.
Russian Revolution, Fascism, League of Nations, Second World War Cold War: Decolonization in Asia and Africa, Rise of United States and Soviet Union, Era of Tight Bipolarity, Detente and Loose Bipolarity, Revival of Cold War Post Cold War: End of History, Clash of Civilizations, Terrorism, Globalization, Unipolarity and Revival of Multi-Polarity 4.
Foreign Policy of Selected Countries USA, UK, EU Russia, China, India, Pakistan 5.
Overview of agreements and accords, Indus Water Treaty; Composite Dialogue; Sir Creek & Siachen border.
Analytical overview of peace processes between/among the states of South Asia especially between India and Pakistan. ii.
Cold war theatre; Soviet Invasion and Mujahedeen; Geneva Accord; Post Cold War situation—Rise of Taliban, AL-Qeada & 9/11; Operation Enduring Freedom; The Bonn ProcessWithdrawal Organizations United Nations ii.
Discuss its scope and importance of the study of International Relations. -Do you agree that in contemporary International Relations, International Economic and Trade linkages are being used as pressure tactics in inter-State Relations.
The modern states act and behave as member of the international community.
The relations between the sovereign states of the world are becoming one of the most important aspects of contemporary life.
Explain the importance of International Relations in the Nuclear age. -Define International Relations.
Identify and explain its continuously changing and expanding nature and subject matter? -Discuss the development of the study of "" International Relations"" and define its core influential factors and define its role in the post cold war era? -Discuss evolution and development of the discipline of International Relations; define the dominant factors responsible for and explain their role in the post-cold war era.
Explain the future of Disarmament with reference to the foreign policy Of major Powers.
Define "" Economics as an instrument in foreign policy"" and explain its fundamental characteristic which can help to achieve state's objectives.
Carry out a comparative analysis of United States foreign policy towards South Asia during and after the Cold war.
How far the super powers have been responsible for the proliferation of Nuclear weapons.
International Law and International Morality Short Notes: International Law International system creates interactions among states through diplomacy, international law, and economic relations.
Do you believe its prospects are threatened because of the current economic crises in general and third world economies in particular.
Also narrate the implications of the ""War on Terrorism"" for International Law.
Discuss an appropriate response to Domestic and International terrorism.
Describe interactions among Nations through diplomacy for establishing balance of power to preserve their National Interest.
Critically discuss the concept of Balance of power in the light of Hans Morgenthau's thought.
Explain the concept of Balance of Power in international relations and evaluate its relevance after the demise of Soviet Russia.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 16-COLD WAR Critically discuss the origin and developments of the cold war and its consequences on world politics.
Discuss the strategic importance of ""Indian ocean"" in the post cold war scenario and analyze the role of the United States and China in the region.
Also identify vital political,economic,and strategic interests of both great powers in the contemporary geopolitical situation.
Explain diplomatic means which can help to resolve disputes and conflicts in the world.
International system creates interactions among states through diplomacy, international law, and economic relations.
The emergency of sovereign state as a primary actor was just the beginning of the evolution of modern International System.
Assess the pace of change in International Relations from 1815 to 1914.
What are the major demands of the SOUTH against the NORTH for a New International Economic Order.
Economics realities compelled the members of the developing world to demand for the establishment of New International Economic Order.
Substantiate 20UNITED NATIONS How effective arc international organizations in dealing with the global problems.
The two great wars had dismantled colonialism and created Third World and Non-Alignment Movement.
Discuss the significance and increasing role of International Society in the classically sovereign domains of state with reference to United Nations.
SEATO Short Notes: NAM Short Notes: WTO OIC has failed to foster Pan Islamic unity and solidarity to meet the challenges faced by the Ummah in a spirit of cooperation and collective action.
Indeed it is an important forum that needs complete overhauling/restructuring.
Substantiate Critically discuss ""Pakistan's participation in SEATO and CENTO "" and explain political, strategic, and economic causes and define its potential disadvantages for the country's foreign policy and diplomacy.
Critically evaluate the joining of Western Alliances by Pakistan and explain its political, economic and strategic consequences for the state's policy.
Describe and discuss the concept of Nation-State and evaluate its future in the light of certain recent developments.
Evaluate the Sino-Pak nexus in the light of changing geo-politico-economic scenario of the region.
Critically discuss ""Pakistan's participation in SEATO and CENTO "" and explain political, strategic, and economic causes and define its potential disadvantages for the country's foreign policy and diplomacy.
Explain the impact of India-Pakistan nuclearisation on strategic stability in South Asia.
Since South Asia has been dominated by the antagonism between India and Pakistan, what impact do nuclear weapons have on the balance of power in the region.
Analyze and elaborate the changes in Chinese foreign policy since the death of Mao zedong.
Critically Define "" American interests in Afghanistan"" and explain its political strategic failure in the region and its unnecessary pressure on Pakistan to ""do more"" which can destabilize the regional scenario rather than stabilizing the situation.
Also discuss the serious impact of the American war on terror on the Pakistan's state.
The introduction of the concepts of Unilateralism and pre-emptive Strike by President Bush has eroded the basis of International law and Diplomacy, in inter state relations.
Palestine Problem State the conditions for the 'Road Map' of the Palestinian state.
Impediments to Middle East peace process Future prospects and peace efforts.
Western concept of Nationalism Islamic concept Discuss ""Nationalism"" and define its silent features in the post cold war situation and explain its grave consequences with reference to eastern Europe, African continent and South Asian tragic incidents.
Also debate whether the UN and superpowers played any role in preventing bloodbath in the regions.
In the light of this statement discuss in detail the nature the attributes of national power.
The post Cold War, World Order promised Peace, Security, Democracy, Nuclear Non-proliferation and Human Rights protection.
Assess its repercussions at present confronted by the world community in the context of Terrorism, Nuclear Proliferation, Globalization and erosion of Human Dignity.
Explain the socio-economic and Political Compulsions which led to the formation of Regional Blocs.
Evaluate the general view the peace of Westphalia as the founding moment for modern state system.
How for was Germany responsible for the outbreak of war in 1914 Explain, with examples, the main principles of the NEO-REALIST SCHOOL OF THOUGHT in International Relations.
Explain, with examples, the main principles of the NEO-LIBERAL SCHOOL OF THOUGHT in International Relations.
Identify the main arguments of the Realism and Liberalism in International Relations.
De-colonization Short Notes: Crisis Management Short Notes: Euro Communism , Short Notes: Limited War Short Notes: congress of Vienna.
Hostile Embargo Short Notes: Entente Short Notes: Co-existence Short Notes: Human rights violations; A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Short Notes: Politics of environmental protection.
Visualize the post-Taliban scenario in Afghanistan and discuss implications for Pakistan.
Pak-china relations are historic and times tested, have developed a momentum of their own and are continuing.
The phenomenon of terrorism has occupied central stage in world's today.
Discuss the issue of terrorism in backdrop of what is happening in Afghanistan, Palestine and Kashmir.
Discuss the economic and strategic importance of Gawadar port of Pakistan and for the region.
Define its main characteristics and explain its devastating consequences on different leading civilizations of the nations.
Explain its essential features and justify its offensive gesture which maintained the national and regional strategic balance.
Critically discuss whether or not Pakistan participates in the newly formed military alliance against Terrorism and explain its political, socio-cultural and strategic implications on the country.
Q 3 The positivist and post-positivist debate offers a striking contrast in terms of approach and methodology of the study of International Relations.
Describe, compare and critically evaluate the divergence between the two debates.
Q 4 The nation-state system is in a flux with an independence referendum in Scotland and another projected for Catalonia in September 2017.
Critically evaluate reasons as to why the modern nationstate in Europe faces internal challenges to its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Q 5 The rise of China is being heralded as a return of 'balance of power' politics in International relations.
As the world moves towards multi-polarity, account for the essential features of the international security architecture and its evolving dynamics.
Q 6 Define globalization and its attendant manifestations in global politics.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Q 7 Critically evaluate the strategically competitive dynamics of Pakistan-India relations in the context of Pakistan's growing ties with China and India's increased alignment with the United States.
What strategies can the United Nations and major powers implement in order to ensure peace and security in Iraq and Syria.
At its best it is an objective and systematic approach to those problems"" Palmer and Perkins ii.
The term international was used by Jeromy Bentham in the later 18th century with regards to laws of nations iii.
From a broader perspective, IR may refer to all forms of interactions between members of separate societies, whether govt sponsored or not.
Hoffman ""IR is concerned with the factors and activities which affect the external policies and the powers of the basic units into which the world is divided"" V The study of IR includes analysis of foreign policies or political processes between nations, and also focuses on international trade and civil society interaction 2) Ingredients of IR The nature and principal forces of international organizations ii.
The political, social, economic organization of political life, psychological, social, pol science, economics aspects are considered in order to understand what is happening iii. elements of national power-political dynamics, every nation is interested in other country's political conditions iv.
Instruments available for promotion of national interest-how national power is attained and what is its effect on the international level V Limitations and control of national power (china vs United States in Taiwan case due to capitalist vs communism theories vi.
Historical ingredients as a background for other factors 3) International Politics and International Relations IR is wider in scope than IP ii.
IP focuses on various styles of politics; politics of violence, persuasion , hierarchical policies and pluralistic politics iii.
IR embraces the totality of relations among people and groups of people in global society 4) Relevance of International Institutions in IR Contemporary international institutions in which groups of states or other actors can participate include INGOs or the UN system ii.
EU, NATO, SAARC or ASEAN are examples of regional grouping with multiple functions 5) Scope of International Relations Historically, only concerned with the study of diplomatic history. ii.
Field of study widened after the creation of League of Nation as study of international organizations also included. iv.
Post World War II Scenario further widened the scope due to emergence of two super powers, new states coming into society of nations, danger of thermo-nuclear war, rising expectations of underdeveloped states.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT vi.
Modern scholars not willing to treat IR as an independent discipline as it lacks unity of subject matter, unanimity regarding scope and degree of objectivity. viii.
IR has a descriptive-historical approach which leads to immense data but a theoretical framework is required for ordering and interpreting the facts, which new theories are beginning to provide.
Organski ""...within next few decades the basic foundations of a new discipline will be laid"" 6) Significance of Study It enables us to understand the basic motives underlying the policies of various states. ii.
Helping to understand that narrow nationalism is bane to humanity, poses serious threats iv.
Various states view problems subjectively and give preference to national interest V Traditional concept of national sovereignty has become out-dated and requires modification vi.
Avoid policy of confrontation and instead focus on peaceful co-existence, policy of cooperation, and universal brotherhood.
The principle of dominance solves the collective goods problem by establishing a power hierarchy in which those at the top control those below. iii.
The Nation-State System 1) Introduction A nation denotes a common ethnic and cultural identity shared by a single people, while a state is a political unit with a governance system controlling a territory and its inhabitants. ii.
The nation promotes emotional relationship amongst its members, while states provide political and legal foundation for the identity of its citizens. iii.
The term nation-state has been used by social scientists to denote the gradual fusion of cultural and political boundaries after a long control of political authority by a central government. iv.
Palmer ""the nation-state system is the pattern of political life in which people are separately organized into sovereign states that interact with one another in varying degrees and in varying ways"" 2) Historical Background The treaty of Westphalia in 1648 created the modern nation-state.
Switzerland consists of half German and half French but their identity is Swiss, plus after partition Indian Muslims are separate than A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Pakistani Muslims) It has to organize the different national identities into one, many grievances with state at times.
The treaty established the principle of internal sovereignty (preeminence of rulers from other claimants to power) and external sovereignty iii.
England, Spain and France obtained independence from dominance by the Holy Roman Empire. iv.
Scholars like Machiavelli , Bodin and Grotius defended the authority of the state and provided justification for the secular state independent from the authority of the pope.
A more subjective than objective approach, seeking to supplement notions of nationalism and patriotism with interethnic interaction and education processes to explain creation of a common identity. ii.
Further Evolution of the Nation-State State systems underwent further evolution on account of rise of representative governments, the industrial revolution, the population explosion, independence of developing countries, economic growth and growth of multi-lateral organizations.
It evolved in the 16th century in France during the conflict between the state and the church. iii.
Hobbes focused on its absolutist aspect, while Austin focused on legalistic or juristic notions of sovereignty. iv.
The modern doctrine of popular sovereignty has transferred the source of absolute power from the monarch to the people.
V The notion of sovereignty is important but it can become rigid unless applied to the evolving pattern of inter-state relations. ii.
Nationalism in IR Nationalism implies elevation of nation above all other values. ii.
States usually control the mass media to propagate their foreign policy objectives and centralize their education systems to popularize nationalistic values. iii.
The economic output, size, population and military strength of a state are tangible and quantifiable aspects.
V Power also rests on intangible factors like quality of leadership, ideology, morale and manipulative or diplomatic strength. vi.
This long run objective to achieve power also requires exertion of power.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT iii.
Ingredients of National power Force-the explicit threat or use of military, economic, nuclear and other instruments of coercion by one state against another.
Influence-using instruments of persuasion by one state to alter or maintain the behavior of another state. iii.
Authority-voluntary compliance with directives and orders of a state by other states out of respect, solidarity, or in recognition of expertise.
Legal Equality of the States; UN Charter; in reality this principle has become a farce; a state which had general interest and could protect those interests in all spheres was considered a great power.
Creation of regional blocs lead to dilution of nation-state concept iv.
Rise of nuclear weapons; blow to concept of equality of states V Growing role of public opinion alters foreign policy objectives vi.
Introduction The basic structures and principles of international relations are deeply rooted in historical developments. ii.
It is the central concept of the 'English School' of International Relations. iv.
Although originally coined to refer to relations among European states, the term may be applied to many different sets of political arrangements among distinct political communities.
Historical Background Elements of international society may be found from the time of the first organized human communities. ii.
Early forms of diplomacy and treaties existed in the ancient Middle East. iii.
Relations among the city-states of ancient Greece were characterized by more developed societal characteristics, such as arbitration. iv.
Ancient China, India, and Rome all had their own distinctive international societies.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT V Medieval Europe's international society was a complex mixture of supranational, transnational, national, and subnational structures vi.
The Catholic Church played a key role in elaborating the normative basis of medieval international society. vii.
Islam developed its own distinctive understanding of international society.
Evolution of International Society The main ingredients of contemporary international society are the principles of sovereignty and non-intervention and the institutions of diplomacy, the balance of power, and international law. ii.
These took centuries to develop, although the Peace of Westphalia was a key event in their establishment throughout Europe. iii.
The Napoleonic Wars were followed by a shift to a more managed, hierarchical, international society within Europe and an imperial structure in Europe's relations with much of the rest of the world. iv.
World Wars I and II dominated the 20th century, yet they seem to offer contradictory lessons about the utility of hardline or conciliatory foreign policies.
V The League of Nations was an attempt to place international society on a more secure organizational foundation. vi.
For nearly 50 years after World War II, world politics revolved around the East-West rivalry of the Cold War.
This bipolar standoff created stability and avoided great power wars, including nuclear war, but turned states in the global South into proxy battlegrounds. vii.
The United Nations was intended to be a much improved League of Nations but the cold war prevented it from functioning as such. viii.
The post-Cold War era holds hope of growing peace and great-power cooperation despite the appearance of new ethnic and regional conflicts ix.
Decolonization led to the worldwide spread of the European model of international society.
Globalization poses serious problems for a sovereignty-based international society. xii.
These include the challenges emanating from new forms of community, failing states in Africa, American hyperpower, growing resistance to Western ideas, and global poverty and environmental issues.
The meaning of security has been broadened to include political, economic, societal, environmental, and military aspects.
Differing arguments exist about the tension between national and international security.
Different views have also emerged about the significance of 9/11 for the future of international security.
Debates about security have traditionally focused on the role of the state in international relations.
The 'security dilemma' is seen by some writers as the essential source of conflict between states. iii.
Trust is often difficult between states, according to realists and neo-realists, because of the problem of cheating. iv.
Realists and neo-realists also point out the problem of 'relative gains' whereby states compare their gains with those of other states when making their decisions about security.
V Neo-realists reject the significance of international institutions in helping many to achieve peace and security.
Liberal Institutionalism Contemporary politicians and academics, who write under the label of Liberal Institutionalism see institutions as an important mechanism for achieving international security. ii.
Liberal Institutionalists accept many of the assumptions of Realism about the continuing importance of military power in international relations, but argue that institutions can provide a framework for cooperation which can help to overcome the dangers of security competition between states.
Globalization can be seen in the fields of economic development, communications, and culture.
Global social movements are also a response to new risks associated with the environment, poverty, and weapons of mass destruction. ii.
The 'fracture of statehood' is giving rise to new kinds of conflict within states rather than between states which the state system cannot deal with.
This has helped encourage an emerging politics of global responsibility. iii.
There are disputes about whether globalization will contribute to the weakening of the state or simply to its transformation, and over whether a global society can be created which will usher in a new period of peace and security.
Main National, Institutional and epistemic advocates in Asia were US, SEATO, and Five Power Defence Arrangements.
In the 1960s Comprehensive Security started due to Domestic politics and regime legitimation.
Non-traditional security is protection of a state's institutions and governing capacity from non-military threats.
Common/Cooperative Security in 1970s/1980s due to Ideational prior, institutions; Common Security is security with a potential or actual adversary realized through transparency, mutual confidence and conflict resolution measures and mechanisms.
Inclusive security, the third element, emphasizes the need for mutual trust, and rejects exclusive military alliances (reference to United States alliances with Japan, South Korea and other Asia Pacific countries) which are targeted against other countries Cooperative security, implies that security is to be achieved through cooperation, which would involve mutually beneficial partnerships and leads to a ""win-win"" situation for all involved.
Evolving security, it states that the understanding of security by China and other nations is not static, or dependent on short-term calculations or single incident, but a long-term process subject to changes that will overcome historical animosities.
The rise of China, India and Japan is unlikely to change this equation, although China, driven by domestic concerns, is striving to achieve a balanced mix between national and nontraditional security.
It seems to be dealing with its North East Asian neighbours in mainly national security terms, while adopting a primarily non-traditional security approach towards Southeast Asians.
Human security, the most direct opposite of national security, remains a distant prospect in Asia.
War as a national security referent is not dead, but its effects would reverberate ever more than before across national and sub-regional, even regional boundaries.
In Asia today, the prevailing security paradigm consists of no single concept, but an interplay of national, non-traditional and human security ideas and approaches.
Elements of National Power 1) Introduction I The concept of power politics is far more useful in describing a dynamic world in which power is a means by which the demands for change and resistance to change are advanced.
Political power; a psychological relation between those who exercise it and those over whom it is exercised.
It gives the former control over certain actions of the latter through the influence which the former exerts on the latter's mind.
Whatever the ultimate aim of international politics, power is always the immediate aim.
There are Four key distinctions; Power influence:g., an advisor can have influence but not power to impose his will. ii.
Geography; large size of a country leads to more power; territory swallows the conqueror ; helps in developing effective defense, typography Himalayas china india.
Natural Resources Technology; industrial, communications and military Population National Character and Morale; National morale is the degree of determination with which a nation supports the home and foreign policies of its government in times of peace or war.
Balance between resources and policy formulation leading to its execution by the government, while ensuring people's participation, through political institutions.
Morgenthau says ""it is the quality of a nation's diplomacy which gives 'direction and weight' to other elements of national power.
All states are expected to observe universally accepted moral code of conduct.
International Law; formation of arrangements called collective security by a group of nations to oppose collectively.
IPS: Balance of Power 1) Definitions of Balance of Power The equilibrium of power among members of the family of nations as will prevent anyone of them from becoming sufficiently strong to enforce its will upon the others.
Formed opinion The distribution of existing power between states is based on an assessment of each state's relative power capabilities.
The Concert of Europe is also a good example of major European states striving to balance power.
The increasing power of Germany began seeing bipolar sets of alliances leading to World Wars, and followed by the Cold War.
Simple BoP requires parity between powers but in more complex situations competing powers can achieve balance from additional sourcesg. alliance.
BoP based on appearances is subjective and fragile whereas that based on actual capabilities is objective and more stable.
Fortuitous Bop is not based on particular policies (on luck or chance) whereas Contrived BoP is based on conscious policies of either or both sides.
Rising power gains strength, challenges previously superior state and, given newness of capacities, war occurs because each side thinks it can win. ( to acquire more power states constantly engage in war) 8) Morton Kaplan's Rules of BOP All states act to increase capabilities but prefer to negotiate rather than fight.
All states fight rather than pass up an opportunity to increase their capabilities.
All states stop fighting rather than eliminate an essential state.(destroy a state completely) A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT All states act to oppose any coalition or single state which tends to assume a position of dominance within the system.
All states act to constrain states who subscribe to supranational (having power or influence that transcends national boundaries) organizing principles.( who try to impose it on others) All states permit defeated or constrained states to re-enter the system as potential partners.
Ideological positioning makes switching sides very difficult in the multi-polar world.
Everyone has their own ideology and they consider it superior among others.
No foreign policy — no matter how ingenious — has any chance of success if it is born in the minds of a few and carried in the hearts of none.
It is the The policy of a sovereign state in its interaction with other sovereign states iii.
Agenda setting: A problem or issue rises to prominence on the agenda. ii.
Official discussions typically involving high-level political and military leaders and focusing on ceasefires, peace talks, and treaties and other agreements. iii.
Unofficial dialogue and problem-solving activities aimed at building relationships and encouraging new thinking that can inform the official process, academic, religious, and NGO leaders and other civil society actors.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT iv.
People-to-people diplomacy undertaken by individuals and private groups to encourage interaction and understanding between hostile communities and involving awareness raising and empowerment within these communities, meetings and conferences, generating media exposure, and political and legal advocacy for marginalized people and communities.
It is often communicated through an informal intermediary or through a third party. vi.
Multitrack diplomacy; A term for operating on several tracks simultaneously, including official and unofficial conflict resolution efforts 5) Approaches to Foreign Policy There are few kinds of approaches of foreign policy, which help in understanding the foreign policy but they are used in different period of history. ii.
Historical or Traditional Approaches; these approaches have been adopted for the study of diplomatic events of a particular period with accuracy, precision, so as to learn lesson for future on the basis of past experience. iii.
Legalistic Approach This approach lays emphasis on the study of foreign policy in legalistic terms.
Efforts are made to study the external relations of the states in the light of international law, treaties, constitutional provisions etc. iv.
Descriptive Approach The scholars adopting this approach pick up some specific problems or conceptual framework, using their own judgement on the weighing of various factors.
V Analytical Approach This approach differs from all other approaches of study not only with regards to the method but also in of international politics. vi.
Comparative Approach The comparative approach for the study of foreign policies is of relatively recent origin and draws inspiration from the study of comparative government.
Ideological Approach This approach tries to analyze foreign policy as an expression of the prevailing political, social or religious beliefs.
Thus, the policies are classified as democratic or authoritarian; liberal and socialistic, peace-loving or aggressive.
However, the study of foreign policy purely on ideological basis is not possible because when there is clash between ideology and rational interests, the former is abandoned.
States take action because people in governments, decision makers, choose those actions iii.
Decision making is a strong process in which adjustments are made as a result of feedback from the outside world iv.
In this decision makers set goals, evaluate their relative importance, calculate the costs and benefits of each possible course of action, then choose the one with the highest benefits and lowest costs.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C V Alternative to this is organizational process model.
In this, foreign policy decision makers generally skip the labor-intensive process of identifying goals and alternative actions, relying instead for most decisions on standardized responses or standard operating procedures. vi.
One more alternative is government bargaining model, in which foreign policy decisions result from the bargaining process among various government agencies with somewhat divergent interests in the outcome.
Leaders and people of countries with small territory and population do not expect their country to carry great weight in international affairs and vice versa ii.
Geography Geography including its fertility, climate, location in relation to their land masses , and water ways influence this ii.
Culture and History Generally people possessing a unified common culture and historical experience can pursue an effective foreign policy because of the support of all sections of society who share the same values and memories. iv.
Economic Developments Generally, the industrially advanced countries feel more deeply involved in relation with other countries because they have to import different kinds of raw materials and commodities from other countries.
Countries which possess advance technology are able to provide technical know-how to less developed and developing nations and thus exert necessary influence on their foreign policies vi.
National Capacity It depends on its military preparedness, its technological advancements and economic development vii.
Social Structure A society which is sharply divided on the basis of wealth, religion, regional imbalances can't pursue effective Foreign policy on account of division and lack of co-operation among various groups. viii.
Public mood It usually follows rather than guides the top leading to progress ii.
It can exercise a lot of influence on the determination of a foreign policy if the basic realignment in the prevailing great power structure takes place and the state becomes more involve/isolated from world's affairs. ix.
Political organization A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Generally under authoritarian system, quick foreign policy decisions are possible because the decision making power rests with an individual assisted by his clique. ii.
Under this system undesirable opposition can be suppressed through censorship and promulgation of regulations.
X Role of Process It does so by supplying factual information on the basis of which the people take decision by publishing specialized articles on current international developments which enable the people to understand the significance of developments in their country in relation to the past developments and by analyzing the policy of the government in regard to foreign affairs. xi.
Political Accountability Generally in an open political system, the demands of citizen and group get articulated and transmitted to foreign policy formulation xii.
Confusion regarding the concept due to these factors Sovereignty is in fact a relatively recent innovation connected to the emergence of the nation-state as the primary unit of political organization. ii.
A number of contemporary issues have placed increasing limits on the exercise of sovereign authority.
It means the possession of absolute authority within a bounded territorial space.
Exclusiveness; There cannot exist another sovereign state within the existing sovereign state.
Originality; the sovereign wields power by virtue of his own right and not by virtue of anybody's mercy.
Hobbes focused on its absolutist aspect, while Austin focused on legalistic or juristic notions of sovereignty.
The notion of sovereignty is important but it can become rigid unless applied to the evolving pattern of inter-state relations.
This agreement allowed the ruler to determine the religion within his borders.
As Europe colonized much of the rest of the world from the fifteenth through the nineteenth centuries, the state system spread around the globe, sovereign authority was clearly not extended to non-Europeans, the process of drawing boundaries to clearly demarcate borders would be critical for defining sovereign states during decolonization.
The post-war period also saw the growth of intergovernmental organizations to help govern interstate relations in areas ranging from trade and monetary policy to security.
V Granting former colonies independence and recognizing them as sovereign states, they joined intergovernmental organizations and were ostensibly the equals of European states.
Now, sovereignty also entitles developing states to development assistance.
As a result, in many instances, these post-colonial states have lacked the internal dimension of sovereignty.
Economic Globalization; The growth of multinational corporations and the free flow of capital have placed constraints on states' ability to direct economic development and fashion social and economic policy.
The Growth Of Supranational Institutions being partially driven by economic integration and the cause of human rights; supranational organizations have emerged as a significant source of authority that, at least to some degree, place limits on state sovereignty.
Origins Of National Interest The word 'interest' is derived from Latin and means 'it concerns, or it makes a difference to' A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT In 1930 Charles Bears wrote the first book on national interest.
In IR, national interest describes the underlying rationale for the behavior of states in a threatening global environment, which preserves and protects one's values against another.
Statesmen who are responsible for and to their separate publics, and who operate in an uncertain milieu, often have little choice but to put the interest of their own entity above those of others.
National interest is understood to mean a state of affairs valued solely for its benefit to the nation.
National interest often becomes synonymous with national egoism, with its disposition of transferring self love onto the national group, One cannot speak about national interest without reference to values, even if they are a culmination of those held by some or all members of a given society.
Some put self-preservation (territorial integrity, political independence and fundamental government institutions) at the head of the list.
Other categories of national interest focus on self-sufficiency, prestige and aggrandizement.
Charles Bear focused on the notion of territory and commerce as being the defining features of national interest.
Morgenthau says that a country's national interests should be proportionate to its capacities, (e.g.
Britain and France after WWII had superpower ambitions, not commiserate to their capacities) the sun never sets on the british raj.
If one country's ideology is liberal-democratic, it will make policies supporting democratic governments and movements and oppose totalitarian ones.
The imperative to act honestly and make decisions in accordance with international laws.
Each organization tends to exaggerate its specific funding request, and to argue in the name of national interest rather than its own interest.
To equate the success of one's own political party with an entire nation's success.
National Interest defined in terms of an ethnic or racial minority or majority.
A particular class will defend its interests while defining national interest.
Preservation of physical, political and cultural identity of the nationstate.
Protection of citizens abroad and ensuring diplomatic immunity of foreign missions.
Long-term interests of strategic, ideologoical or economic nature which do not change easily, for example with changes in domestic policies.
Short term interests vary with cross-currents of personalities, public opinion, partisan politics, sectional interests etc Complementary Interests: Though not identical, these interests can serve as basis for agreement on specific issuese us pak security cooperation Conflicting Interests: Interests which bring countries at odds with each other.
Yet these interests can also undergo change due to varying internal circumstances and a changing external scenario.
Involve a large number of nations, such as economic interests or diplomatic norms Specific Interests : Location and issue specific interests emerging from more general interests Identical Interests: Interests held in common by different states(e.g. climate protection concerns) 6.
Indirect so they don't infringe directly on other sovereign nations (e.g. embargos, boycotts, severing diplomatic relations) or Direct (e.g. seizure of property of offending state, suspension of treaties), and if the other state responds with escalating moves.
Common interests are most effectively perpetuated by means of diplomacy.
Also useful in negotiating conflicting national interests without resorting to coercive means.
National Interest and Foreign Policy Defense of the state is naturally the primary concern of foreign policy.
Promotion of economic interest, including securing favorable conditions of trade, is a vital objective of foreign policy-makers.
Maintenance of international peace, respect for international law, pacific settlement of international disputes and strengthening of the system of international organization.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT There are some world leaders who believe that their foreign policy must be committed to a certain ideology, such as propagation of Fascism or communism or the containment of communism.
Global Interests Given the complexities of International politics, Morgenthau for example opposes state action based on universal principles.
Instead he advocates a pragmatic approach of acting based on national interests.
Yet, issues of global concern like growing inequalities and environmental problems require world leaders to think beyond the narrow ambit of national interests.
Approaches to Peace: Diplomacy 1) Introduction I Every foreign policy has two sides—one is the making of the policy, and the other its implementation.
If national interest is associated with the formulation part, diplomacy is linked with the implementation part of a foreign policy.
Diplomacy tries to achieve the maximum objectives with a minimum of costs in a system of politics where war remains a possibility.
During the middle ages the scope of diplomacy did not grow much and diplomats were mostly confined to maintaining archives rather than negotiating them.
In the late middle ages, in Genova, the Duke of Milan established the first foreign mission.
But this was still diplomacy of the court rather than that of the people.
V After the American and French revolutions, diplomacy became more democratic and less aristocratic. vl.
The Congress of Vienna laid down procedures for diplomatic immunities and defined diplomatic hierarchies.
Diplomacy is bilateral in character but as a result of growing international and regional organizations, it is becoming increasingly multi lateral in character.
Diplomacy is one of the instruments for the application of foreign policy.
In that sense, diplomacy as a concept is narrower in scope than foreign policy. ii.
Diplomacy is the method and process by which foreign policy is pursued but it is not a policy onto itself, iii.
Modern Diplomacy Traditional diplomacy assumed that major European powers had special responsibility for maintaining world peace and the colonies had no more significant diplomatic role than that of satellites. ii.
Traditional diplomacy was professional but secretive and relied on a limited cadre rather than extended diplomatic channels. iii.
Modern diplomacy is more open and democratic; it requires reciprocal bargains and compromises so it is not possible for diplomats to spell out a given stance in advance. iv.
Multilateralism is increasingly evident in the practice of modern diplomacy, with behind the scenes preparations by diplomatic officials.
Foreign office officials include career diplomats and political diplomats appointed by home governments. iii.
Ambassadors head foreign missions and serve as the personal representative of the home state in host country iv.
Councilors of embassies rank second to the ambassador and they are career diplomats.
V Secretaries, with first, second and third rankings are mid-career officials implementing foreign policies of their home countries. vi.
Credentials of diplomatic envoys are approved by host countries where they are to be appointed.
Presentation of credentials and assuming charge in host country involves interaction with the host governments. ii.
Diplomatic missions and personnel enjoy certain immunities and privileges like the rights of extraterritoriality and inviolability, (safety, the rules on diplomats are the same as that of their country) iii.
Home states can dismiss diplomats or they can be declared persona-non-grata by host countries.
Their main duties are to implement the foreign policies of their governments and to protect the national interests of their countries in the alien land.
For exercising their duties successfully, they have to cultivate social contacts on foreign land.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ii.
Negotiating includes transmission of messages between foreign ministries of host and home states and the pursuit of agreements by compromise and direct contact. iii.
Reporting socio-cultural, economic and political conditions of host country for formulating diplomatic strategies and foreign policies (Economic, military attaches and political officers are sent to get feedback to frame foreign policy); iv.
Protection of the interests of the nation and its citizens in foreign lands; As per provisions of different bilateral and international treaties and agreements, a diplomat shall protect the interests of his nation and its citizens in a foreign land.
So, for a very large period diplomatic activities were conducted secretly.
From the first half of the twentieth century, the demand for open diplomacy gained ground.
Woodrow Wilson, the former United States President, was an ardent supporter of open diplomacy iv.
Features of open diplomacy; rejection of the conclusion of secret treaties; Conducting of diplomatic negotiations in full public glare.
Economic diplomacy avoids political differences, and places greater emphasis on strengthening friendship through economic cooperation. iii.
In a changed international order after the Cold War, economic diplomacy gradually gained momentum in different parts of the world. iv.
The Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan or the Warsaw Pact were forms of economic diplomacy in some way or the other.
By the 1980s, third world countries had started liberalizing their economies.
This liberalization programme had presented an unprecedented opportunity to the developed world to engage in economic diplomacy with the third world countries A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 13) Future of Diplomacy In an age of spectacular development of information technology, the role and importance of professional diplomats are coming under scrutiny. ii.
With the spread of democratic ideals and growing demands for open diplomacy, the traditional form of diplomacy is also facing a crisis.
Democratic institutions like the Parliament, media and peoples 'organizations are trying to influence the process of diplomacy. iii.
The world of diplomacy is, therefore, no longer the exclusive domain of the professional diplomats only; science and technology and democratic ideals have made deep inroads into this exclusive world. iv.
The groundwork and issues for talks between heads of different states have to be prepared by the diplomats, because the politicians are not always very well acquainted with every detail of foreign policies.
Foreign policy objectives must be defined in terms of national interest and supported by adequate power, to enable diplomats to negotiate effectively. iii.
Diplomats must be able to realize the objectives and interests of other nations as well. iv.
Nations must be willing to show flexibility on issues not vital to them or else diplomacy will be in vain.
International Law 1) Introduction States have strong incentives to free themselves from the insecurities of international anarchy.
States face common coordination and collaboration problems, yet cooperation remains difficult under anarchy. ii.
We are concerned with fundamental institutions, of which international law is one of the most important. iii.
The quest for global governance is pushing international law into new areas, raising questions about whether international law is transforming into a form of supranational law. iv.
Individuals, and to some extent collectivities, are gradually acquiring rights and responsibilities under international law, establishing their status as both subjects and agents under international law.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT V Non-governmental actors are becoming increasingly important in the development and codification of international legal norms.
International laws are rules which relate to the functioning of individuals, institutions and states in the international arena. ii.
International law has various ingredients including general principles of law and justice, which are equally suited to regulating the conduct of individuals, organizations within a state and states themselves.
Early rulers had made international rules to safeguard emissaries, initiation and cessation of hostilities and arrangement of truces, and maritime laws. iii.
To aid governance, the Romans devised principles of just gentrium or law of the people.
By the time the Roman Empire fell, application of these laws was widely accepted. iv.
European states also contributed to international laws at a later stage in history.
Hugo Grotius, for example, produced a momentous work on laws concerning war and peace, emphasizing the independent nature of law.
V During the eighteenth century, three prominent schools of thought concerning international law were evident; the positivists, the naturalists and the Grotians. vi.
The positivists focused on practicalities and the consensual nature of these laws.
In the past century, the League and the UN system, and subsequently the International Court of Justice have made important contributions to international law.
Other institutions like IMF or WTO influence laws concerning trade economic laws.
Procedural laws define types of permitted behavior whereas substantive laws concern territorial rights of states. iii.
There are laws governing behavior of states in a state of war and those meant to prevent outbreak of violence and promote peace. iv.
General or universal laws are applicable to all sovereign states, whereas particular laws are defined by bilateral or regional agreements.
Those of coordination regulate relations amongst members of the same group.
Laws of reciprocity refer to the intermediary interaction which implies mutual benefit.
Positivists argued that only those international laws had validity, which were adopted by consent of sovereign states.
Based on principles of universal acceptability, some natural laws are applicable across the world. iii.
Based on the implicit or explicit consent of states, customary laws are mainly based on customs or treaties. iv.
General laws defined with reference to terms like justice or rights, enables jurists to fill in the gaps left by positivist laws.
V Legal commentaries help clarify, elaborate upon and apply the broad nature of laws to specific circumstances 7) Formulation & Implementation of International Laws There is no formal institution to make international laws, so they are made outside of formal institutions.
If a sufficient number of states follow a customary practice, it becomes an international custom. iii.
The International Court of Justice , which is composed of UN member states recommended by the Security Council, has an advisory capacity to interpret treaties, but it lacks the authority of national courts. iv.
International tribunals also lack the authority of national judicial institutions.
Prior to the French Revolution, in the 'Age of Absolutism', law was understood principally as the command of a legitimate superior, and international law was seen as a command of God, derived from natural law.
In the modern period law has come to be seen as something contracted between legal subjects, or their representatives, and international law has been seen as the expression of the mutual will of nations. iii.
Because of its historical roots, the modern institution of international law has a number of distinctive characteristics, informed largely by the values of political Liberalism. iv.
The most distinctive characteristics of the modern institution of international law are its multilateral form of legislation, its consent-based form of legal obligation, its language and practice of justification, and its discourse of institutional autonomy.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 9) International Law and Views of Different Theories Realists argue that international law is only important when it serves the interests of powerful states. ii.
Neo-liberals explain how self-interested states come to construct dense networks of international legal regimes. iii.
Constructivists treat international law as part of the normative structures that condition state and non-state agency in international relations.
Like other social norms, they emphasize the way in which law constitutes actors' identities, interests, and strategies. iv.
New Liberals emphasize the domestic origins of state preferences and, in turn, international law.
Within international law, they stress the need to disaggregate the state to understand transnational legal integration and interaction, and they prioritize international humanitarian law.
V Critical legal studies concentrate on the way in which the inherent Liberalism of international law seriously curtails its radical potential.
As international humanitarian law evolves, issues of global justice are permeating the international legal order. ii.
Placing limits on the legitimate use of force is one of the key challenges of the international community, and the laws of war have evolved to meet this challenge. iii.
The laws of war have traditionally been divided into those governing when the use of force is legitimate, jus ad bellum, and how war may be conducted, jus in bello. iv.
Laws governing when war is legally permitted have changed dramatically over the history of the international system, the most notable difference being between the nineteenth-century view that to wage war was a sovereign right to the post-1945 view that war was only justified in self-defence or as part of a UN mandated international peace enforcement action.
While individuals rarely have recourse to self-help within nations, states rely on selfhelp as a matter of norm lest they are bound by a treaty of some sort. iii.
With the passage of time, international laws are becoming more accepted and complex and sanctions and international censure ensure states to oblige to them.
It influences and channels bilateral or even multilateral economic, social and political cooperation. iii.
It provides the normative background based on which independent states can make their decisions.
International political community: Nationalism 1) Introduction ""This term is used in two related senses.
In the first usage, nationalism seeks to identify a behavioral entity the nation and thereafter to pursue certain political and cultural goals on behalf of it.
In the second usage, nationalism is a sentiment of loyalty toward the nation which is shared by people."" ii.
Nationalism claims that the nation exists and should form the basis of the political order. iii.
Nationalism can be considered as ideology, as sentiments, and as politics. iv.
There are different typologies of nationalism, such as ethnic/civic, elite/mass, statestrengthening/state-subverting.
V The most important debates on nationalism concern whether it is cause or consequence of nation, the relative importance of culture, economics and politics, and the different roles played by internal and external factors.
Therefore, nation-state will be defined largely in terms of its self-description and that of the international community. ii.
There is no simple sequence leading either from nationalism to nation-state formation to changes in the global political order or the other way round. iii.
Instead it can take ethnic, civic, and other forms, be elite or popular, strengthen or subvert existing states. iv.
At the start of our history global conflict is shifting power to extensive middle classes in Britain and France, and the national idea justifies demands for reforms which challenge 'top-down' ideals of power based on religion, monarchy, and privilege. ii.
British victory over France popularizes its liberal, constitutionalist nationalism which is taken up in imitative form by elites elsewhere.
These elites are able, especially when linked to modernizing states like Prussia, Japan, and the North in the American Civil War, to form powerful nationstates. iii.
These states take up illiberal, imperialist nationalism to challenge British hegemony.
Such imperialist nationalism provokes colonial societies to develop counter-nationalism.
State-subverting nationalism usually cannot on its own defeat imperial powers.
Also important is that those powers are weakened in global conflict with each other.
Therefore the ability of state-subverting nationalism to form nation-states is based on a combination of its own social base and political organization, the power and policy of the state it confronts, and a favourable international situation.
V The sacrosanct principle of state sovereignty was weakened with the end of the cold war, new nation-state formation, and new economic and cultural forms of globalization. vi.
This provoked a first wave of state-subverting ethno-nationalisms which could lead to violence and ethnic cleansing. vii.
However, international recognition for new states as civic, territorial entities, along with new forms of intervention and pressure, put pressure on nationalism to move away from this ethnic and statesubverting character.
This nationalism can paradoxically get stronger the more the nation-state is weakened. ii.
However, perhaps more important is the shift of nationalism away from a state focus towards concerns with devolution, cultural recognition, and transnational linkages.
Nationalism, once again, is showing how adaptive it is to changes in the nature of global politics.
International political community: Globalization 1) Introduction Globalization is evident in the growing extensity, intensity, velocity, and deepening impact of worldwide interconnectedness. ii.
Globalization denotes a shift in the scale of social organization, the emergence of the world as a shared social space, the relative deterritorialization of social, economic, and political activity, and the relative denationalization of power. iii.
Globalization can be conceptualized as a fundamental shift or transformation in the spatial scale of human social organization that links distant communities and expands the reach of power relations across regions and continents. iv.
Globalization is to be distinguished from internationalization and regionalization.
V The contemporary phase of globalization has proved more robust in the aftermath of 9/11 than the sceptics recognize.
Contemporary globalization is a multidimensional, uneven, and asymmetrical process. vi.
Globalization is transforming but not burying the Westphalian ideal of sovereign statehood.
Ecological commons A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ii.
Closeness of identification and values, Cultural similarities, Symbols of politics and organization.
Reform of the United Nations, New round of negotiations in WTO, Governance by international conferences iii.
Policies to protect the environment vs. global environmental pollution and warming iv.
The good and bad sides of the information society 6) Globalization and Global Politics Globalization requires a conceptual shift in our thinking about world politics from a primarily geopolitical perspective to the perspective of geocentric or global politics—the politics of worldwide social relations. ii.
Global politics is more accurately described as distorted global politics because it is afflicted by significant power asymmetries. iii.
Globalization creates a double democratic deficit in that it places limits on democracy within states and new mechanisms of global governance which lack democratic credentials. iv.
Global politics has engendered its own global political theory which draws upon cosmopolitan thinking.
V Cosmopolitanism offers an account of the desirability and feasibility of the democratization of global politics. vi.
Distorted global politics can be interpreted as expressing a contest between the forces of statism and cosmopolitanism in the conduct and management of world affairs.
Because of expectations of war, states have tried to persuade their citizens to place obligations to the 'national community' ahead of duties to other associations.
Most forms of political community in human history have not represented the nation or the people.
The idea that the state should represent the nation is a European development which has dominated politics for just over two hundred years. iii.
War and capitalism are two reasons why the nation-state became the dominant form of political community. iv.
The extraordinary power of modern states—the growth of their 'intensive' and 'extensive' power—made global empires possible.
V States have been the principal architects of global interconnectedness over the last five centuries.
The global spread of the state and nationalism are key examples of global interconnectedness. vi.
Citizenship rights developed by way of reaction to the growing power of modern states. vii.
The demand to be recognized as a free and equal citizen began with struggles for legal and political rights to which welfare rights were added in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. viii.
The stability of modern forms of political community has owed a great deal to the fact that citizens won these rights.
Indeed, some modernization theorists in the 1960s believed that liberal democracies had largely solved the social conflicts of earlier centuries.
Modernization theory also assumed that non-Western societies would emulate Western paths of development.
It was linked with the belief that liberal democracies belong to a unique sphere of peace.
Liberaldemocratic states recognize that their citizens value their membership of many communities alongside the nation-state. ii.
Some liberals have argued that globalization promises a new era of peace between the great powers.
This is a condition in which more cosmopolitan political communities may develop. iii.
Many realists have argued that the war on terror and the renewed risk of nuclear proliferation indicate that globalization will not alter the basic features of world politics. iv.
Huntington's notion of the Clash of Civilizations challenged the idea that globalization will lead to a world moral and political consensus.
V Cosmopolitan approaches which envisage an international system in which all individuals are respected as equal have flourished in the contemporary phase of globalization. vi.
Communitarians argue that most people value their membership of a particular political community; they are unlikely to shift their loyalty from the nation-state to the human race. vii.
Post-structuralists argue that all forms of political community contain the danger of domination or exclusion.
Ethnic fragmentation is one reason for the failed state in Europe as well as in the Third World, but demands for the recognition of cultural differences exist in all political communities. iii.
Globalization theorists have defended cosmopolitan democracy on the grounds that national democracies are unable to influence the global forces which affect them. iv.
The apex of nationalism in relations between the great powers occurred in the first half of the twentieth century.
V Nationalism remains a powerful force in the modern world but globalization and fragmentation have led to discussions about the possibility of new forms of political community.
Internationalism • Internationalism is a political principle which transcends nationalism • advocates a greater political or economic cooperation among nations and people • Internationalists believe that the people of the world should unite across national, political, cultural, racial, or class boundaries to advance their common interests • the governments of the world should cooperate because their mutual long-term interests are of greater importance than their short-term disputes.
Analysis of Internationalism • a liberal internationalist strand of political thought epitomized by Richard Cobden and John Bright.
Strategic Approach to International Relation: War 1) Introduction 2) The Changing Character Of War War has been a central feature of human history.
Since the end of the cold war both the frequency and lethality of war has shown a sharp decline. ii.
War between the great powers in particular has become much more unlikely than in previous eras.
Changes in the international system may be changing the character of war. iii.
The nature of war remains constant, but its form reflects the particular era and environment in which it occurs.
Dramatic technological advances mean that a revolution in military affairs may be underway.
Opponents with little or no access to RMA technology are likely to use 'asymmetric warfare' to fight the war on their own terms. viii.
Most recent conflicts have been characterized by the kind of ferocity that was typical of 'modern' war, but overall casualty levels have been much lower.
In fact, there are many different types of wars, which can be classified according to which people actually fight, the intensity of the conflict, and the extent of combatants' use of violence, among other factors. ii.
Total war A total war is a war in which combatants use every resource available to destroy the social fabric of the enemy. ii.
Total wars are highly destructive and are characterized by mass civilian casualties because winning a total war often requires combatants to break the people's will to continue fighting.
World Wars I and II were total wars, marked by the complete destruction of the civilian economy and society in many countries, including France, Germany, the Soviet Union, Italy, Great Britain, and Japan. iii.
Limited war A limited war is a war fought primarily between professional armies to achieve specific political objectives without causing widespread destruction. ii.
Although the total of civilian casualties may be high, combatants do not seek to completely destroy the enemy's social and economic frameworks. iii.
The Persian Gulf War of 1990-1991 was a limited war in which the United States and its allies forcibly removed Iraqi troops from Kuwait. iv.
Guerrilla war A guerrilla war is a war in which one or both combatants use small, lightly armed militia units rather than professional, organized armies. ii.
Guerrilla fighters usually seek to topple their government, often enjoying the support of the people. iii.
These wars are often very long but also tend to be successful for the insurgents as evidenced by Mao Zedong's victory over Chiang Kai-shek in China in the 1940s, the Vietcong's victory over the United States in the Vietnam War, and the Mujahideen's victory over the Soviet Union in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
V Civil war A civil war is a war fought within a single country between or among different groups of citizens who want to control the government and do not recognize another group's right to rule. ii.
Civil wars are almost always total wars because each side feels compelled to destroy the enemy's political support base. iii.
Regional rifts, such as the American Civil War between the North and the South, characterize some civil wars, whereas other civil wars have been fought among ethnic rivals, religious rivals, and rival clans.
Proxy war A proxy war is a war fought by third parties rather than by the enemy states themselves.
Many of the militarized conflicts during the Cold War, such as the Korean War and the Vietnam ii.
War, can be interpreted as proxy wars between the United States and the Soviet Union, neither of which wanted to fight each other directly. vii.
Categorizing Wars A war can often be a limited war, a guerrilla war, and a civil war all at the same time. ii.
The United States sent trainers, money, and weapons to Afghan rebels to fight against the invaders, making it a low-intensity, limited conflict from the United States point of view.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C The Afghan resistance mostly relied on guerrilla tactics.
Intervention Intervention is a fairly common way for a third-party state to get involved in a civil war or a war between two or more other states. ii.
A state intervenes when it sends troops, arms, money, or goods to help another state that is already at war. ill.
During the Cold War, the term intervention was used to describe one of the superpowers becoming involved in a smaller country's war (often a developing country). iv.
This type of intervention occurs when a country sends military forces into another state to act as peacekeepers or to block other forces from attacking.
Sometimes these interventions are organized or conducted by the United Nations or another international governmental organization.
The United States, along with other NATO nations, sent troops into the former Yugoslavia on a number of occasions to protect people from war.
A successful example of this peaceful intervention occurred during the 1999 United States bombing campaign in Kosovo, which helped stop a slaughter of Kosovars by attacking Serbs. ix.
X 'New wars', following state collapse, are often conflicts over identity as much as territory.
The new wars in fact follow a pattern of warfare that has been typical since the late 1950s.
Such conflicts typically occur in countries where development is lacking and there is significant economic insecurity xi.
Asymmetric War Asymmetric warfare can describe a conflict in which the resources of two belligerents differ in essence and in the struggle, interact and attempt to exploit each other's characteristic weaknesses. ii.
Such struggles often involve strategies and tactics of unconventional warfare, the weaker combatants attempting to use strategy to offset deficiencies in quantity or quality.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT V a disrupted structure of expectations, vi. a will-to-conflict. vii.
It is aggravated by; sociocultural dissimilarity, cognitive imbalance, status difference, coercive state power. viii.
It is inhibited by; sociocultural similarity, decentralized or weak, coercive state power. ix.
Terrorism • TERRORISM The meaning of terrorism is socially constructed. • terrorism lies the word terror.
Approximately 15,000 Roman soldiers were killed and hundreds more slain after being taken prisoner.
For the Romans, such Barbarian resistance would have been considered terrorism.
The Sicarii's most fundamental justification was that all means were legitimate to achieve political and religious liberation.
New terrorism is terrorism that is indiscriminate; it causes as many casualties as possible.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • Another major feature of new terrorism is the increasing readiness to use extreme indiscriminate violence.
While old terrorism was mainly secular in its focus and drive, new terrorism works hand-in-glove with religious fanaticism.
COMPARISON BETWEEN OLD AND NEW TERRORISM • For Ganor , the comparison between old and new terrorism can be articulated through the differences between classical, modern, and postmodern terrorism.
The damage is fairly low because the terrorist acts are perpetrated to achieve a specific political objective.
Although conventional weapons are used in modern terrorism, they are used to create mass fatalities.
FOUR WAVES OF TERRORISM • The comparison between old and new terrorism can also be explained through the evolution of terrorism in four waves, the Fourth Wave being new terrorism.
The Fourth Wave is symbolized by religious justification for killing, international scope, unparalleled gory tactics and weapons, and dependence on technologies of modernity.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C RACTICE MAKES PERFE( • The factors that motivate people to join and remain in terrorist groups can be religious, economic, social, psychological, retaliatory, and so forth.
Religion • religious fanaticism is an extreme sense of ideological zeal complemented by a focused and unrelenting set of activities that express the high dedication of one or more people to their own belief system.
Radical religious Islamism has been identified as a root cause of terrorism.
For example, in the U.S., radical Christian killers have been involved in abortion-clinic bombings and militia actions.
Likewise, in Northern Ireland, Catholics and Protestants have perpetrated terrorist acts.
Qppression • terrorism can be the result of groups' portrayal of governments as oppressive.
In autocratic societies, military-occupied areas, or even in the international arena where political expression is limited, groups opposing the current state of affairs may engage in terrorism as a principal method of expression and not as a last resort. • case of nationalist-separatist movements , terrorists often invoke the unfairness of their treatment by governments that deprive them of identity, dignity, security, and freedom as the main reason for joining terrorist groups.
Historical Grievances • terrorists target governments and groups they view as responsible for historical injustices.
Violation of International Law A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • The international rule of law is the standard by which all nations are subject to and bound by supranational legal covenants.
Enduring conduct such as extended military occupation or foreign domination in violation of United Nations resolutions may be a major cause.
Relative Deprivation • multiple scholars have found a strong link between poverty and terrorism.
In view of the 70% adult unemployment rate in Gaza, the GDP of less than $1,000 throughout the Palestinian Territories, the very limited economic opportunities due to the unsettled Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and the cultural prominence of the male wage earner role, it is easy to allude to the possibility that relative deprivation has helped trigger Palestinian terrorism.
Hatred Towards Global Economic Hegemony • countries that express hatred toward the global economic hegemony will produce more terrorist groups.
The background that gave birth to Al Qaeda, namely Afghanistan and Pakistan, symbolizes this notion.
The loss is of the same degree as that caused by Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and the California earthquake of 1994.
Generally, corporate hostage taking in Central and South America, and hostage taking by the Abu Sayyaf group in the Philippines, happens more out of a desire to earn a ransom than achieving political goals.
Racism • racism can be a powerful method for dehumanizing adversaries and accomplishing moral disengagement.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C Guilt by Association • for terrorists, you are the company that you keep.
One of the motives was Spain's involvement in the Iraq War, where the country had troops.
Determine the role and efficacy of military force in interstate political affairs Strategic culture is a useful concept for explaining the profile and behavior of the security policymakers of a state.
It conditions their worldview, interpretation of political and military developments, perception of the adversary, and selection of policy options.
A strong distrust of India and a history of acrimonious Indo-Pakistani relations reinforced by the historical narratives of the pre-independence period and the troubled bilateral interaction in the post-independence period.
Aversion to an India-dominated regional power arrangement for South Asia.
An active search for security to maintain its independence in deciding about foreign policy options and domestic policies.
A close nexus between Islam and strategic thinking, leading to connections between Islamic militancy and foreign policy.
Realism and organizational imperatives have influenced their outlook and decisions on many occasions.
At times, the dictates of different approaches conflict with each other and the policymakers may be unwilling or unable to make a clear-cut choice.
This is the case with the approach of Pakistan's security managers towards the militant Islamic groups in the post-9/11 period.
It highlights the impact of ideological and other societal variables on policymaking It offers a better understanding of the socio-cultural and political context within which the policymakers function.
Any study of a state's strategic profile and the possible reaction to security pressures requires, inter alia, a good appreciation of the strategic culture of the country concerned.
This facilitates communication between the security policymakers and the outside actors,e., individuals, states, and organizations, on security-related issues and helps to identify ways and means to change their policy outputs.
This is quite important for promoting arms control in conventional and nonconventional fields.
The Missile Defence Systems and their impact on global strategic environment 10.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Components of Deterrence • 1 Capability • 2 The intention to employ it • 3 The ability to communicate both capability and resolve.
Assumptions of Deterrence Theory • Decisions by both defender and the challenger will be based on rational calculations of costs and gains.
NUCLEAR PROGRAM OF PAKISTAN Pakistan's nuclear program has been under the scope of the international community for a very long time.
International overblown concerns that Pakistani nuclear weapons or components might fall into the wrong hands.
It is true that Pakistan acquired a lot of its nuclear capabilities through a clandestine program by importing crucial technologies from the Western World, but it is equally true that the all the other nuclear powers have acquired their capabilities through their own clandestine programs.
Pakistan has effectively dismantled the Abdul Qadeer Khan Network and has enhanced security mechanisms inside their nuclear facility.
Islamabad has taken a number of steps to improve its nuclear security and to prevent further proliferation of nuclearrelated technologies and materials.
A number of important initiatives, such as strengthened export control laws, improved personnel security, and international nuclear security cooperation programs have improved Pakistan's security situation in recent years.
Thus, it is safe to conclude that international concerns regarding Pakistan's nuclear program are overblown and Pakistan's nuclear program is very safe.
In the mid-1970s Pakistan embarked upon the uranium enrichment route to acquire a nuclear weapons capability.
Pakistan conducted nuclear tests in May 1998, shortly after India's nuclear tests, declaring itself a nuclear weapon state.
Plutonium stocks are expected to continue to increase as Pakistan brings more production reactors online at its Khushab facility.
The Khan Research Laboratories greatly increased its HEU production capacity by employing more efficient P-3 and P-4 gas centrifuges.
Initial steps toward the development of Pakistan's nuclear program date to the late 1950s, including with the establishment of the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission in 1956.
After the December 1971 defeat in the conflict with India, Bhutto issued a directive instructing the country's nuclear establishment to build a nuclear device within three years.
India's detonation of a nuclear device in May 1974 further pushed Islamabad to accelerate its nuclear weapons program, although the PAEC had already constituted a group in March of that year to manufacture a nuclear weapon. ii.
Khan, a metallurgist working at a subsidiary of the URENCO enrichment corporation in the Netherlands, returned to Pakistan to help his country develop a uranium enrichment program.
Having brought centrifuge designs and business contacts back with him to Pakistan, Khan used various tactics, such as buying individual components rather than complete units, to evade export controls and acquire the necessary equipment.
Khan would later assert that the country had acquired the capability to assemble a first-generation nuclear device as early as 1984.
Beginning in the late 1970s Beijing provided Islamabad with various levels of nuclear and missile-related assistance, including centrifuge equipment, warhead designs, HEU, components of various missile systems, and technical expertise.
Eventually, from the 1980s onwards, the Khan network diversified its activities and illicitly transferred nuclear technology and expertise to Iran, North Korea, and Libya.
The Khan network was officially dismantled in 2004, although questions still remain concerning the extent of the Pakistani political and military establishment's involvement in the network's activities.
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif decided to test, and Pakistan detonated five explosions on 28 May and a A Project of CSS Writing Club c\»^c Compiled by Ayesha Younas sixth on 30 May 1998.
In a post-test announcement Sharif stressed that the test was a necessary response to India, and that Pakistan's nuclear weapons were only ""in the interest of national self-defense... to deter aggression, whether nuclear or conventional."" ii.
With these tests Pakistan abandoned its nuclear ambiguity, stating that it would maintain a ""credible minimum deterrent"" against India.
In 1998, Pakistan commissioned its first plutonium production reactor at Khushab, which is capable of yielding approximately 11 kg of weapons-grade plutonium annually.
Based on analysis of the cooling system of the heavy water reactors at Khushab, Tamara Patton, of the Vienna Center for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation, estimates the thermal capacity and thus the plutonium production capacity of Khushab-2 and Khushab-3 to be ""IS kg and ""'19 kg per annum respectively. ill.
Construction of a fourth plutonium production reactor at Khushab is ongoing and is estimated to be more than 50% complete based on satellite imagery analysis.
Associated facilities and their associated security perimeters are also being expanded, including the plutonium separation facilities at New Labs, Pakistan Institute of Science and Technology, to reprocess spent fuel from the new reactors at Khushab. iv.
Islamabad has yet to formally declare a nuclear doctrine, so it remains unclear under what conditions Pakistan might use nuclear weapons.
Pakistanis argue that in the face of India's increasing conventional capability, it is unreasonable to expect Pakistan to cap its fissile materials production.
Furthermore, they argue that the FMCT legitimizes India's fissile material stocks.
At the Conference on Disarmament in January 2011, Pakistan reiterated its opposition to the commencement of negotiations towards an FMCT. ii.
While declaring its opposition to the FMCT in its current format at the CD in January 2010, Islamabad called for the CD's agenda to be enlarged to consider A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT aspects of regional conventional arms control and a regime on missile-related issues, while also maintaining its opposition to a treaty that did not cover fissile stocks retroactively. iii.
In general, Pakistan's position on nuclear disarmament is that it will only give up nuclear weapons if India gives up its own nuclear arsenal, and in 2011 the National Command Authority ""reiterated Pakistan's desire to constructively contribute to the realization of a world free of nuclear weapons."" iv.
However, given Islamabad's objective of balancing India's conventional military and nuclear superiority, Pakistan is unlikely to consent to a denuclearization agreement.
Islamabad has also consistently refused to sign the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty , and from 2009 to 2010 official Pakistani statements indicated that even if India signed the treaty, Islamabad would not necessarily follow suit.
V Pakistan is a member of some multilateral programs, including the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
Islamabad has also put into place more stringent export control mechanisms, including the 2004 Export Control Act and the establishment of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs' Strategic Export Control Division to regulate exports of nuclear, biological, and missile-related products. vi.
Pakistan acceded to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material in 2000.
Additionally, Pakistan has been involved in the United States government's Secure Freight Initiative through the stationing of systems at Port Qasim to scan containers for nuclear and radiological materials, Nuclear Weapons Security The security of Pakistan's nuclear weapons has been of significant concern to the international community in recent years, with increased terrorist and insurgent violence and expanded geographical areas of the country under Taliban control.
Senior Al Qaeda leaders have also expressed an interest in coopting Pakistan's nuclear weapons.
Such developments increase the likelihood of scenarios in which Pakistan's nuclear security is put at risk.
Since 2007, Taliban-linked groups have successfully attacked tightly guarded government and military targets in the country.
Militants carried out small-scale attacks outside the Minhas Air Force Base in 2007, 2008, and 2009, and gained access to the site during a two-hour gunfight in August 2012. ii.
Pakistani officials have repeatedly denied claims that the base, which houses the Pakistan Aeronautical Complex, is also used to store nuclear weapons, and a retired army official asserted that Pakistan's nuclear weapons are stored A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT separately from known military bases.
However, several Pakistani nuclear facilities, including the Khushab facility and the Gadwal uranium enrichment plant, are in proximity to areas under attack from the Taliban.
Additionally, there have been some attempts to kidnap officials and technicians working at nuclear sites in western Pakistan, although it is not clear who was responsible or what their intentions were. iii.
Nevertheless, Islamabad has consistently asserted that it has control over its nuclear weapons, and that it is impossible for groups such as the Taliban or proliferation networks to gain access to the country's nuclear facilities or weapons.
Khan network, Pakistan has taken measures to strengthen the security of its nuclear weapons and installations and to improve its nuclear command and control system. iv.
The National Command Authority , composed of key civilian and military leaders, is the main supervisory and policy-making body controlling Pakistan's nuclear weapons, and maintains ultimate authority on their use.
In November 2009, Pakistani ex-President Asif Ali Zardari announced that he was transferring his role as head of the National Command Authority to the ex -Prime Minister, Yusuf Gilani.
The Strategic Plans Division is the secretariat of the NCA, and is responsible for operationalizing nuclear doctrine and strategy, managing nuclear safety and security, and implementing the command and control system.
V Pakistan has also strengthened its personnel reliability program to prevent radicalized individuals from infiltrating the nuclear program, although various experts believe that potential gaps still exist.
Pakistani analysts and officials state that they have developed their own version of ""permissive action links"" or PALs to safeguard their warheads, and have not relied on United States assistance for this technology.
Satellite imagery also shows increased security features around Khushab-4.
In recent years, the United States has provided various levels of assistance to Pakistan to strengthen the security of its nuclear program. vi.
According to reports in April 2009, with the expansion of Taliban control in western Pakistan, Islamabad shared some highly classified information about its nuclear program with Western countries in order to reassure them of the country's nuclear security.
Civilian Nuclear Cooperation Pakistan has been critical of the U.S.-India nuclear cooperation agreement, but at the same time has periodically sought a similar arrangement for itself, a demand Washington has so far turned down.
In 2008 Islamabad pushed for a criteria-based exemption to the rules of the Nuclear Suppliers Group , which unlike the country-based exception benefiting only India could have made A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Pakistan eligible for nuclear cooperation with NSG members.
Despite its reservations about the India special exception, Islamabad joined other members of the Board of Governors in approving India's safeguards agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency in August 2008. ii.
At the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington in April 2010, Islamabad again sought ""non-discriminatory access"" to civilian nuclear technology, while also offering nuclear fuel cycle services covered by IAEA safeguards to the international community.
At the Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague in 2014, Pakistan called for its inclusion in international export control regimes, Recent Development and Current Status In response to the U.S.-India deal, Pakistan has sought to increase its civilian nuclear cooperation with China.
Under a previous cooperation framework China had supplied Pakistan with two pressurized water reactors, CHASNUPP-1 and CHASNUPP-2, which entered into commercial operation in 2000 and 2011 respectively.
These reactors are currently under construction at the Chashma Nuclear Complex and will also be placed under IAEA safeguards.
CHASNUPP-3 and CHASNUPP-4 are expected to be completed by 2016 and 2017, respectively.
China, a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group since 2004, did not pursue an exemption to NSG guidelines for Pakistan, instead arguing that Chashma 3 and 4 are ""grandfathered in"" under the pre-2004 Sino-Pakistan nuclear framework.
In November 2013, Pakistan announced the construction of two additional Chinese-supplied 1,100 MW reactors, KANUPP-2 and KANUPP-3, under a $9 billion agreement. iii.
As of early 2014, the Pakistani government has begun a bid for three additional nuclear power plants, reportedly to be built in the Muzaffargarh district, Punjab province.
At a cost of approximately USD 13 billion, this bid could enable Pakistan to meet its 2030 goal of generating 8,800 MW of nuclear energy to solve its chronic power shortages.
Retributive Measures A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 1.
The Hague treaties and the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty Justifications for Armament vs.
Disarmament • Arms and arms races are costly and potentially very bloody.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT History of Disarmament • Disarmament attempts can be traced back to the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, which stipulated against the need for building fortifications.
Both Conferences called upon military and naval experts to propose reducing military expenditures through disarmaments, but the major powers were not ready for such moves in practice.
Disarmament after WWl • The devastation caused by WWl impelled statesmen of the world to give serious thought to disarmament.
A permanent advisory commission was established in the League, • The Council of the League appointed another commission in 1920, the Temporary Mixed Commission, with a fixed four year mandate and comprised primarily of civilians.
Disarmament after WW2 • The devastation unleashed by WW2 again led to calls for disarmament • The UN Charter laid much emphasis on the need for disarmament.
Atoms for Peace Plan • In 1953, Eisenhower proposed establishing a pool of fissionable materials, donated by nuclear states to the Atomic Energy Commission, to be provided to other countries strictly for peaceful purposes.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • The Soviets opposed this plan arguing that an agreement on prohibiting nuclear weapons was necessary prior to disseminating nuclear technology.
UN Disarmament Efforts • UN Atomic Energy Commission included all 5 SC members and Canada.
Ultimately, the USSR pulled out of both Commissions due to China's representation on them.
Other Notable Efforts • Many disarmament and arms control efforts were undertaken through bilateral means between United States and USSR, the biggest proliferations of armaments in the post WW2 period (NTBT, NPT, SALT I AND II) • In 1985 six nation summits in New Delhi was indicative of the growing concern amongst developing countries about nuclear weapons.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • In 2004, following up a proposal made by its Director General in October 2003, the International Atomic Energy Agency initiated a study of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle.
In late June 1968, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko asked that discussions on limiting both offensive and defensive weapons begin on 30 September; unfortunately, Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces intervened in Czechoslovakia in August, causing Johnson to postpone the talks.
The treaty called for verification by national technical means (satellite reconnaissance, electronic monitoring) without interference, and established a U.S.-Soviet Standing Consultative Commission to considering questions about such issues as compliance and interference.
SALT I and II Negotiations • a quantitative limit on both intercontinental ballistic missiles —1,054 for the United States, 1,618 for the Soviets—and submarine-launched ballistic missiles , but no limits on warheads.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • After ratification of SALT I, the second phase focused on ""quantitative"" limits, with delegates meeting at Geneva to seek ""qualitative"" restrictions on the capabilities of weapons systems, a very difficult assignment; each side should be limited to 2,400 ICBMs, SLBMs, and long-range bombers, of which 1,320 could have multiple warheads.
INF Proposals • the Reagan administration offered its ""zero option"" concept—the United States would cancel its scheduled deployment in the unlikely event the Soviets withdrew their intermediate-range missiles with 1,100 warheads.
To carry out the on-site inspections that would verify compliance with treaty provisions, the United States created a new umbrella organization, the On-Site Inspection Agency.
START I and II Negotiations • On 9 May 1982, Reagan outlined his plan for the ""practical, phased reduction"" of strategic nuclear weapons in two-stages.
In phase I, warheads would be reduced by a third, with significant cuts in ballistic missiles; in phase II, a ceiling would be put on ballistic missile throw weights and other elements.
The Soviets, and many NATO allies, opposed SDI because it threatened the existing mutual nuclear deterrent system.
Although the Geneva summit made little progress, both men agreed to work for a 50 percent reduction in strategic forces.
This agreement further reduced the number of strategic nuclear warheads to be held by each party on 1 January2003 to no more than 3,500.
Belatedly, the program was expanded to provide financial and technical assistance in A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT disposal of chemical weapons and of fissile material extracted from nuclear warheads.
Nuclear Test Bans and Nonproliferation • The nonnuclear states' search for a comprehensive test ban was closely linked to the major nuclear powers' desire to restrict the spread of nuclear weapons through a nonproliferation treaty.
Limited Test Ban • The spread of radioactive fallout resulting from atmospheric nuclear tests aroused public protests in the 1950s; When a 1957 Gallup Poll revealed that 63 percent of the American people favored banning tests, compared with 20 percent three years earlier, the president initiated the tripartite test ban negotiations.
His sobering encounter with Khrushchev at Vienna in 1961 and the subsequent Berlin crisis, however, derailed his plans.
Washington's emphasis on the ""safeguard"" continued to be used to justify testing after the Cold War ended.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty • The People's Republic of China's first nuclear test on 16 October 1964, focused President Lyndon B Johnson's attention on the dangers of nuclear proliferation.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • In 1965 both the United States and Soviet Union responded to the UN call to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons by submitting their own draft treaties to ENDC, 18 Nation Disarmament Committee and, after resolving a few differences, became identical by 1967.
Comprehensive Test Ban • The comprehensive test ban issue was dormant during the early years of Richard Nixon's presidency, largely so it would not interfere with U.S.-Soviet negotiations on strategic arms limitations.
The pact provided, for the first time, on-site inspections under certain circumstances.
Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty • The Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty is a proposed international treaty to prohibit the further production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other explosive devices.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • The treaty has not been negotiated and its terms remain to be defined.
Neither proposal would prohibit the production of fissile material for non-weapons purposes, including use in civil or naval nuclear reactors.
On May 29, 2009, the CD agreed to establish an FMCT negotiating committee, • However, Pakistan has repeatedly blocked the CD from implementing its agreed program of work, despite severe pressure from the major nuclear powers to end its defiance of 64 other countries in blocking international ban on the production of new nuclear bomb-making material, as well as discussions on full nuclear disarmament, the arms race in outer space, and security assurances for non-nuclear states.
Since negotiations have not yet begun, it is unclear if scope of the treaty will include pre-existing stocks of fissile material.
The designation FMT, used by the International Panel on Fissile Materials , makes this disagreement explicit.
The United States submitted a draft treaty to the CD in 2006, and the IPFM released its own draft treaty in 2009.
Flas robust command and control system under NCAfor safety, nonproliferation etc. iii.
Strategic Plans Division in 2000 to improve the control of nuclear operations, iv.
PNRA that collaborates with IAEA V Export Control Act 2004 to regulate nuclear exports vi.
Member CERN 37/300 Pakistani scientists; India is not even a member, vii.
Flas four-decade long experience of safe and secure nuclear power plants, viii.
Benefits for Pakistan of Joining NSG Pakistan's energy thirst can be quenched by civil nuclear energy projects giving boost to economy and industry simultaneously. ii.
Import for civil nuclear and save domestic stock for military purpose. iv.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT V Strengthen expertise of civil and electrical work as well as vocational and training. vi.
China largest nuclear trade partner with two dozen nuclear power plants.
Countries such as France and South Korea will be able to trade with Pakistan. viii.
India's membership may result in regional instability owing to its hegemonies. iv.
V India will accrue larger benefits than Pakistan in access of nuclear materials. vi.
Exception for India means exception for other nations which should not be the case. vii.
Strategic stability cannot be achieved with India ONLY membership. viii.
Discriminatory approach for membership may halt regional peace and security. ix.
Credibility and effectiveness of group can be damaged if India as member uses veto against any group objective.
Militarization and Weaponization of Space The United Nations Outer Space Treaty provides the basic framework on international space law, saying that space should be reserved for peaceful uses.
Militarization of Space • There are no weapons deployed in space or terrestrially meant to attack space objects, such as satellites; nor are satellite weapons deployed against terrestrial targets.
T • United States plans to place the ""SBIRS Low"" network of two dozen infrared missile-tracking satellites for ""TMD"" and ""NMD"" (Theater Missile Defense and National Missile Defense) in this region.
Globalstar's 48 satellites providing mobile communications and telecommunications; Orbcom's 35 mobile communications satellites A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • It is this LEO region, closest to earth, which will be most vulnerable in the near future to earthbased ASATs, ""Anti-Satellite"" weapons , currently under development by several states.
These circulate easterly, precisely 35786 kilometers above the Equator with a period of 24 hours; hence they remain stationary with respect to any given position on the surface of the earth.
At present only China, France, India, Japan, Russia, Ukraine, and the United States possess such rocketry.
Terrestrial and satellite based ASATs would be intended to target enemy ASATs as well as the opponent's militarily relevant satellites.
I • Opponents in such a race would be able to threaten the United States with nuclear weapon carrying ICBMs while also endangering its early warning satellites.
Though an overwhelming majority of nations in the UN have expressed support for a treaty Preventing an Arms Race in Outer Space , such a treaty by itself would not be sufficient.
There would always be fear of surreptitious weaponization of space by the opponent.
Major Challenges to Non-Proliferation • a lessening of commitment to non-proliferation • shown by the non-compliance cases Iraq, Romania, DPRK, Libya, Iran, Syria and now.
North Korea • as well as political ambivalence by many governments or at least their diplomats • benefits of non-proliferation not always recognised too often seen as a ""North-South"" issue • the spread of sensitive nuclear technologies • particularly through an active black market including even nuclear weapon designs • practical limits to the IAEA's verification capability detecting undeclared nuclear programs presents a major challenge.
Global Political Economy Topic 18: International Political Economy; Theories in IPE: Mercantilism, Economic Liberalism, and NeoMarxism 1) Introduction 2) Evolution of International Political Economy Immediately after the Second World War international institutions were created to facilitate cooperation in the world-economy. ii.
The onset of the cold war postponed the operation of these institutions, as the United States stepped in directly to manage the reconstruction of Europe and the international monetary system based on the dollar. iii.
The Bretton Woods system of managed exchange rates and capital flows operated until its breakdown in 1971 when the USA announced it would no longer convert the dollar to gold. iv.
The 1970s were marked by a lack of international economic cooperation among the industrialized countries, which floated their exchange rates and indulged in new forms of trade protectionism.
V Developing countries' dissatisfaction with the international system came to a head in the 1970s when they pushed unsuccessfully for a new international economic order. vi.
Trade negotiations were broadened to include many new areas but this led to later resistance from emerging economies. vii.
In 2007 a power shift became more obvious in the global economy, with emerging economies such as China and India playing a more prominent role in negotiations in trade, finance, and development assistance.
Institutionalists apply rational choice to states in their interactions with other states in order to explain international cooperation in economic affairs. iii.
Constructivist approaches pay more attention to how governments, states, and other actors construct their preferences, highlighting the role of identities, beliefs, traditions, and values in this process. iv.
Neo-Gramscians highlight that actors define and pursue their interests within a structure of ideas, culture, and knowledge which itself is shaped by hegemonic powers.
Institutionalists argue that international institutions will play an important and positive role in ensuring that globalization results in widely spread benefits in the worldeconomy.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT V Realists and neo-realists reject the institutionalist argument on the grounds that it does not account for the unwillingness of states ever to sacrifice power relative to other states. vi.
Constructivists pay more attention to how governments, states, and other actors construct their preferences, highlighting the role that state identities, dominant beliefs, and ongoing debates and contestation plays in this process.
In particular, the emergence of global capital markets means that all governments have to be cautious in their choice of exchange rate and interest rate policies. ii.
On other issues of economic policy, wealthier and more powerful countries are less constrained by globalization than is portrayed by the globalists.
This is because the firms and investors whom governments are keen to attract are not solely concerned with levels of taxation and wages.
They are equally concerned with factors such as the skills of the workforce, the provision of infrastructure, and proximity to markets. iii.
At the international level the more powerful states in the system get to set (and enforce) many of the rules of the new global economy.
It was believed that national strength could be maximized by limiting imports via tariffs and maximizing exports. ii.
Beginning around 1650, the British government pursued a policy of mercantilism in international trade. iii.
Mercantilism stipulates that in order to build economic strength, a nation must export more than it imports. iv.
To achieve this favorable balance of trade, the English passed regulatory laws exclusively benefiting the British economy.
V These laws created a trade system whereby Americans provided raw goods to Britain, and Britain used the raw goods to produce manufactured goods that were sold in European markets and back to the colonies. vi.
As suppliers of raw goods only, the colonies could not compete with Britain in manufacturing.
English ships and merchants were always favored, excluding other countries from sharing in the British Empire's wealth. ii.
Triangular Trade British mercantilism manifested itself in the form of the triangular trade.
Trade routes linked the American Colonies, West Indies, Africa, and England.
New England rum was shipped to Africa and traded for slaves, which were brought to the West Indies and traded for sugar and molasses, which went back to New England.
Other raw A Project of CSS Writing Club c\»^c Compiled by Ayesha Younas goods were shipped from the colonies to England, where they were swapped for a cargo of manufactured goods. ii.
Mercantilism and the triangular trade proved quite profitable for New England tradesmen and ship builders.
But in the Southern Colonies, where the Navigation Acts vastly lowered tobacco prices, economies suffered.
The triangular trade also spurred a rise in the slave population and increased the merchant population, forming a class of wealthy elites that dominated trade and politics throughout the colonies. iii.
That every little bit of a country's soil be utilized for agriculture, mining or manufacturing.
That all raw materials found in a country be used in domestic manufacture, since finished goods have a higher value than raw materials.
That all export of gold and silver be prohibited and all domestic money be kept in circulation.
That where certain imports are indispensable they be obtained at first hand, in exchange for other domestic goods instead of gold and silver.
That opportunities be constantly sought for selling a country's surplus manufactures to foreigners, so far as necessary, for gold and silver.
That no importation be allowed if such goods are sufficiently and suitably supplied at home.
It includes a spectrum of different economic policies, such as freedom of movement, but it is always based on strong support for a market economy and private property in the means of production. iii.
Although economic liberalism can also be supportive of government regulation to a certain degree, it tends to oppose government intervention in the free market when it inhibits free trade and open competition. iv.
However, economic liberalism may accept government intervention in order to remove private monopoly, as this is considered to limit the decision power of some individuals.
V While economic liberalism favours markets unfettered by the government, it maintains that the state has a legitimate role in providing public goods, vi.
Economic liberalism is most often associated with support for free markets and private ownership of capital assets, and is usually contrasted with similar ideologies such as A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT social liberalism and social democracy, which generally favor alternative forms of capitalism such as welfare capitalism, state capitalism, or mixed economies. vii.
Economic liberalism also contrasts with protectionism because of its support for free trade and open markets. viii.
Historically, economic liberalism arose in response to mercantilism and feudalism.
Today, economic liberalism is also generally considered to be opposed to non-capitalist economic orders, such as socialism and planned economies 7) Neo-Marxism Neo-Marxism is a pretty loose term, and tends to encompass most of the trends of Marxist philosophy arising from the New Left. ii.
There is certainly no unified ideology of Neo-Marxism in the way that there is in orthodox Marxism, and many of the former's currents are in fact not in agreement with one another. iii.
Broadly, Neo-Marxism seeks to answer questions traditional or orthodox Marxism cannot, especially in light of technological advances and economic and political developments that Marx and Engels did not address or foresee. iv.
The most influential and important current in Neo-Marxist thought is the Frankfurt School, which founded the Institute for Social Research in 1923.
V The Frankfurt School is critical of both capitalism and Soviet state communism, and sought to rectify the inadequacies of traditional Marxist theory.
To do so, they draw from other schools of thought, such as antipositivist sociology, Weberian sociology, psychoanalysis, and existentialism. vi.
Beyond the ISR, the original Frankfurt School thinkers were only loosely affiliated as a group, but they shared a common philosophical approach, and a belief that a different path of socio-economic development from Soviet communism was needed. vii.
The current of Neo-Marxist thought that is probably the most important and influential historically and today is Dependency Theory, which originated with the work of Hans Singer and Raul Prebisch. viii.
In Dependency Theory, economic processes are largely defined as external and based on a core-periphery model of a world economy, rather than the internal approach of orthodox Marxism that sees economic exploitation occurring on a nation-state scale. ix.
Much of the work in the Dependency Theory school was done on Latin America and the decolonizing world by scholars such as Andre Gunder Frank and Samir Amin.
X Today, Dependency Theory has evolved into World Systems Theory, whose originator and leading scholar is Immanuel Wallerstein. xi.
World Systems Theory expands on many of the basic ideas of Dependency Theory, but is an even more macro approach to economic and social change, arguing that nationstates should not be the basic unit of socio-economic analysis at all, but rather that international economic systems themselves are the key.
IPE: Theories of Imperialism, Dependence and Interdependence discourse 1) Introduction a policy of extending a country's power and influence through colonization, use of military force, or other means. ii.
Its name originated from the Latin word ""imperium"", which means to rule over large territories. iii.
The term imperialism has been applied to Western political and economic dominance especially in Asia and Africa in the 19th and 20th centuries.
It is a central contention of dependency theory that poor states are impoverished and rich ones enriched by the way poor states are integrated into the ""world system"". ii.
The theory arose as a reaction to modernization theory, an earlier theory of development which held that all societies progress through similar stages of development, that today's underdeveloped areas are thus in a similar situation to that of today's developed areas at some time in the past, and that therefore the task in helping the underdeveloped areas out of poverty is to accelerate them along this supposed common path of development, by various means such as investment, technology transfers, and closer integration into the world market. iii.
Dependency theory rejected this view, arguing that underdeveloped countries are not merely primitive versions of developed countries, but have unique features and structures of their own; and, importantly, are in the situation of being the weaker members in a world market economy. iv.
Dependency theory no longer has many proponents as an overall theory, but some writers have argued for its continuing relevance as a conceptual orientation to the global division of wealth. ii.
Premises of Dependency Theory A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Poor nations provide natural resources, cheap labour, a destination for obsolete technology, and markets for developed nations, without which the latter could not have the standard of living they enjoy. ii.
Wealthy nations actively perpetuate a state of dependence by various means.
This influence may be multifaceted, involving economics, media control, politics, banking and finance, education, culture, and sport. iii.
State-owned companies have higher rates of corruption than privately owned companies. ii.
By subsidizing in-country industries and preventing outside imports, these companies may have less incentive to improve their products, to try to become more efficient in their processes, to please customers, or to research new innovations. iii.
Industries reliant on government support may not be sustainable for very long particularly in poorer countries and countries which largely depend on foreign aid from more developed countries. iv.
Subsidies on domestic industries come out of state coffers and therefore represent money not spent in other ways, like development of domestic infrastructure, seed capital or need-based social welfare programs.
At the same time, the higher prices caused by tariffs and restrictions on imports require the people either to forgo these goods altogether or buy them at higher prices, forgoing other goods.
Imperialism is simply a manifestation of the balance of power and is the process by which nations try to achieve a favorable change in the status quo.
The purpose of imperialism is to decrease the strategic and political vulnerability of a nation.
Imperialism is necessary to preserve the existing social order in the more developed countries.
It is necessary to secure trade, markets, to maintain employment and capital exports, and to channel the energies and social conflicts of the metropolitan populations into foreign countries.
There is a very strong ideological and racial assumption of Western superiority within this body of thought.
Imperialism is a policy choice, not an inevitable consequence of capitalism.
Increasing concentration of wealth within the richer countries leads to underconsumption for the mass of people.
Overseas expansion is a way to reduce costs (and thereby increase or maintain profit levels) and to secure new consumption.
Imperialism also arises because increased concentration of wealth leads to undeconsumption.
However, since the state represents the capitalist interest it is not possible to reduce underconsumption effectively through liberal strategies.
Both strategies involve taking away money from the bourgeoisie and Marx and Lenin did not view this strategy as possible.
Ultimately, according to Lenin, the world would be completely divided up and the rich countries would then fight over the redivision of the world.
Imperialism is objectless expansion, a pattern simply learned from the behavior of other nations and institutionalized into the domestic political processes of a state by a ""warrior"" class.
This warrior class is created because of the need for defense, but, over time, the class will manufacture reasons to perpetuate its existence, usually through manipulation of crises. iii.
These theories have been updated and modified by theorists who see an alliance between the warrior class and corporate interests.
Theories The Classical Approaches-Realism 1) Introduction Realism emphasizes and assumes that all nation-states are motivated by national interests, or, at best, national interests disguised as moral concerns ii. national interest must be defined in terms of power iii.
National power has an absolute meaning since it can be defines in terms of military, economic, political, diplomatic, or even cultural resources. iv.
The unifying theme around which all realist thinking converges is that states find themselves in the shadow of anarchy such that their security cannot be taken for granted.
Realism continues to attract academicians and inform policy-makers, although in the period since the end of the cold we have seen heightened criticism of realist assumptions.
The Twenty Years' Crisis: 1919-1939 V Hans j Morgenthau: Politics among nations Six Principles of realism as explained by Hans J Morgenthau Politics is governed by objective laws which are based on human nature and psychology. ii.
Concept of national interest in terms of power, understood only on rational basis. iii.
Universal moral principles cannot be applied to state's actions and these must be modified according to the circumstances of time and place.
V Morgenthau does not find any identity between moral aspirations of a nation and the moral law which govern the universe and asserts that political actors pursue their national interests. vi.
Political sphere is as autonomous as the spheres of the economist, or the lawyer or the moralist.
First, for the theorist, the state is the pre-eminent actor and all other actors in world politics are of lesser significance.
Second, state 'sovereignty' signifies the existence of an independent political community, one which has juridical authority over its territory.
Statism is flawed both on empirical (challenges to state power from 'above' and 'below') and normative grounds (the inability of sovereign states to respond A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT to collective global problems such as famine, environmental degradation, and human rights abuses). ii.
Realism tries to describe politics rationally, not on the basis of morality, but there is no universally acceptable definition of power. iii.
The primary objective of all states is survival; this is the supreme national interest to which all political leaders must adhere.
All states have to rely upon their own resources to secure their interests, enforce whatever agreements they may have entered into with other states, or maintain a desirable domestic and international order. vi.
No other state or institution can be relied upon to guarantee your survival.
Self-help is not an inevitable consequence of the absence of a world government; self-help is a logic that states have selected.
Moreover, there are historical and contemporary examples where states have preferred collective security systems, or forms of regional security communities, in preference to self-help. vii.
Realists also think that there is a constant struggle of power as power is the ultimate aim for all states, which is not necessarily the case 7) Vulnerability: imbalance between strong and weak actors Military ii.
Neoclassical realists bring individual and unit variation back into the theory.
Wrongly assumes that all men and states seek their national interests in terms of power iii.
Wrongly assumes that power is the most important goal that nations pursue iv.
Theory defective in so far it treats the world as static unit in which power is permanent guiding factor.
Political sphere not autonomous A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C RACTICE MAKES PERFEC 10) Conclusion Still it holds advantages; it is persuasive, supported by historical evidences. ii.
More reliance on realist perspectives The Classical Approaches-ldealism/Liberalism 1) Introduction Liberalism is generally considered the second great body of theory in contemporary international politics ii.
The liberal tradition in political thought goes back at least as far as the thinking of John Locke in the late seventeenth century.
From then on, liberal ideas have profoundly shaped how we think about the relationship between government and citizens.
Unlike Realism, which regards the 'international' as an anarchic realm.
Liberals seek to project values of order, liberty, justice, and toleration into international relations. ii.
The high-water mark of liberal thinking in international relations was reached in the inter-war period in the work of Idealists who believed that warfare was an unnecessary and outmoded way of settling disputes between states. iii.
Domestic and international institutions are required to protect and nurture these values.
But note that these values and institutions allow for significant variations which accounts for the fact that there are heated debates within Liberalism. iv.
Liberals disagree on fundamental issues such as the causes of war and what kind of institutions are required to deliver liberal values in a decentralized, multicultural international system.
V An important cleavage within Liberalism, which has become more pronounced in our globalized world, is between those operating with a positive conception of Liberalism, who advocate interventionist foreign policies and stronger international institutions, and those who incline towards a negative conception, which places a priority on toleration and non-intervention.
Prescriptively, Enlightenment liberals believed that a latent cosmopolitan morality could be achieved through the exercise of reason and through the creation of constitutional states.
In addition, the unfettered movement of people and goods could further facilitate more peaceful international relations.
Although there are important continuities between Enlightenment liberal thought and twentieth-century ideas, such as the belief in the power of world public opinion to tame the interests of states, liberal Idealism was more programmatic.
For idealists, the freedom of states is part of the problem of international relations and not part of the solution.
Second, states must be part of an international organization, and be bound by its rules and norms. ill.
Central to Idealism was the formation of an international organization to facilitate peaceful change, disarmament, arbitration, and enforcement.
The League of Nations was founded in 1920 but its collective security system failed to prevent the descent into world war in the 1930s. iv.
Membership was near universal and the great powers were able to prevent any enforcement action from taking place which might be contrary to their interests.
V In the post-1945 period, liberals turned to international institutions to carry out a number of functions the state could not perform.
This was the catalyst for integration theory in Europe and Pluralism in the United States.
By the early 1970s Pluralism had mounted a significant challenge to Realism.
It focused on new actors (transnational corporations, non-governmental organizations) and new patterns of interaction . vi.
Neo-liberalism represents a more sophisticated theoretical challenge to contemporary Realism.
Neo-liberals explain the durability of institutions despite significant changes in context.
In their view, institutions exert a causal force on international relations, shaping state preferences and locking them into cooperative arrangements. vii.
Prime objective is world peace V The growth of international organizations and international laws vi.
Promotion of universal human rights and conflict prevention in the United Nations vii.
Domestic and international reforms must be linked A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ix.
X Neo-conservatism under the late Clinton and Bush administrations owes much to liberal idealism.
They explain observable government behavior on the basis of concepts like balance of power, national interest, diplomacy etc.
Traditional realists try to understand and resolve the clashing interests that inevitably lead to war They regard ir as a sub-discipline of history and political science There are historical, philosophical and legal variants to the traditional approach 2) Scientific Approach Scientific scholars challenged the traditionalist, arguing that IR is too broad and complex a field to be a sub-discipline of political science.
They began constructing conceptual frameworks and partial models of international systems, and tried to collect and analyze data to refute or validate a formulated hypothesis.
It focuses on understanding the reasons behind the action/behavior of states and other international actors.
Values are connected with politics This approach has contributed to understanding how people and organizations of different cultures interact, the effects of propaganda and stereotypical views on conflict situations and IR. (propaganda is a tool to convince othersg.
Nazi propaganda that convinced people to kill Jews) It is difficult to determine the behavior of states, which is the aggregate behavior of a large number of individuals and of superimposing authorities.
This approach can be used to test the validity of idealist's hypothesis for example to see if democratic or authoritarian states are more likely to be engaged in internal conflicts.
It does so by focusing on international systems which are interdependent and interrelated.
These systems range from small systems to intermediate and large systems.
More than just theories, neo-realism and neo-liberalism represent paradigms or conceptual frameworks that shape individuals' images of the world and influence research priorities and policy debates and choices. iii.
Rational choice approaches and game theory have been integrated into neo-realist and neo-liberal theory to explain policy choices and the behaviour of states in conflict and cooperative situations.
Neo-realist and neo-liberal theories are status quo-oriented problem-solving theories.
They share many assumptions about actors, values, issues, and power arrangements in the international system.
Neorealists study security issues and are concerned with issues of power and survival.
Neo-liberals study political economy and focus on cooperation and institutions.
Waltz claims that the structure of the international system is the key factor in shaping the behaviour of states.
However, he agrees with traditional Realists when he states that major powers still determine the nature of the international system. ii.
Structural realists minimize the importance of national attributes as determinants of a state's foreign policy behaviour.
To these neorealists, all states are functionally similar units, experiencing the same constraints presented by anarchy. iii.
They believe that force remains an important and effective tool of statecraft and balance of power is still the central mechanism for order in the system. iv.
Joseph Grieco represents a group of neo-realists or modern realists who are critical of neo-liberal Institutionalists who claim states are mainly interested in absolute gains.
Grieco claims that all states are interested in both absolute and relative gains.
V Scholars in security studies present two versions of neo-realism or modern realism.
Like traditional Realists, they believe that conflict is inevitable in the international system and leaders must always be wary of expansionary powers.
Defensive realists are often confused with neo-liberal Institutionalists.
They recognize the costs of war and assume that it usually results from irrational forces in a society.
However, they admit that expansionary states willing to use military force make it impossible to live in a world without weapons.
Cooperation is possible, but it is more likely to succeed in relations with friendly states.
In the policy world, neo-liberalism is identified with the promotion of capitalism and Western democratic values and institutions. ii.
Contemporary neo-liberalism has been shaped by the assumptions of commercial, republican, sociological, and institutional Liberalism. iii.
Commercial and republican Liberalism provide the foundation for current neo-liberal thinking in Western governments.
These countries promote free trade and democracy in their foreign policy programmes.
Neo-liberal Institutionalism, the other side of the neo-neo debate, is rooted in the functional integration theoretical work of the 1950s and 1960s and the complex interdependence and transnational studies literature of the 1970s and 1980s.
V Neo-liberal Institutionalists see institutions as the mediator and the means to achieve cooperation in the international system.
Regimes and institutions help govern a competitive and anarchic international system and they encourage, and at times require, multilateralism and cooperation as a means of securing national interests. vi.
Neo-liberal Institutionalists recognize that cooperation may be harder to achieve in areas where leaders perceive they have no mutual interests. vii.
Neo-liberals believe that states cooperate to achieve absolute gains and the greatest obstacle to cooperation is 'cheating' or non-compliance by other states.
They share an epistemology, focus on similar questions, and agree on a number of assumptions about international politics.
Neo-liberal Institutionalists and neo-realists study different worlds of international politics.
Neo-liberal Institutionalists focus on political economy, environmental issues, and, lately, human rights issues. iii.
Neo-realists explain that all states must be concerned with the absolute and relative gains that result from international agreements and cooperative efforts.
Neo-liberal Institutionalists are less concerned about relative gains and consider that all will benefit from absolute gains. iv.
Neo-realists are more cautious about cooperation and remind us that the world is still a competitive place where self-interest rules.
V Neo-liberal Institutionalists believe that states and other actors can be persuaded to cooperate if they are convinced that all states will comply with rules and cooperation will result in absolute gains. vi.
This debate does not discuss many important issues that challenge some of the core assumptions of each theory.
For example, neorealism cannot explain foreign policy behaviour that challenges the norm of national interest over human interests.
Transnational social movements have forced states to address critical international issues and in several situations that have supported the establishment of institutions that promote further cooperation, and fundamentally challenge the power of states. ii.
Neo-realists think that states are still the principal actors in international politics.
Globalization challenges some areas of state authority and control, but politics is still international. iii.
Neo-realists are concerned about new security challenges resulting from uneven globalization, namely, inequality and conflict.
Globalization provides opportunities and resources for transnational social movements that challenge the authority of states in various policy areas.
Neo-realists are not supportive of any movement that seeks to open critical security issues to public debate.
Eventually, all states will benefit from the economic growth promoted by the forces of globalization.
They believe that states should not fight globalization or attempt to control it with unwanted political interventions. vi.
Some neo-liberals believe that states should intervene to promote capitalism with a human face or a market that is more sensitive to the needs and interests of all the people.
New institutions can be created and older ones reformed to prevent the uneven flow of capital, promote environmental sustainability, and protect the rights of citizens.
As a rough guide, explanatory theories tend to be foundational and constitutive theories tend to be anti-foundational.
One thing that they do share is a rejection of the core assumptions of rationalist theories.
Its central focus is with how societies develop the forms that they do.
It is basically a study of the interactions between states, classes, capitalism, and war.
He argues that the decisive reason was the ability of the national state to fight wars.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 10) Liberal feminism looks at the roles women play in world politics and asks why they are marginalized.
They look into the ways in which masculinity and femininity get constructed.
Lyotard defines post-modernism as incredulity towards metanarratives, meaning that it denies the possibility of foundations for establishing the truth of statements existing outside of discourse.
He looks at how texts are constructed, and proposes two main tools to enable us to see how arbitrary the seemingly 'natural' oppositions of language actually are.
Social Constructivisim 1) Constructivists are concerned with human consciousness, treat ideas as structural factors, consider the dynamic relationship between ideas and material forces as a consequence of how actors interpret their material reality, and are interested in how agents produce structures and how structures produce agents.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 7) Power can be understood not only as the ability of one actor to get another actor to do what she would not do otherwise but also as the production of identities and interests that limit the ability of actors to control their fate.
Feminism 1) Feminism is a movement dedicated to achieving political, social, and economic equality for women.
Feminists believe that we cannot separate knowledge from political practice and that feminist knowledge should help improve women's lives.
Gender is a set of socially constructed characteristics that define what we mean by masculinity and femininity.
It is possible for women to display masculine characteristics and vice versa.
IR feminists build on other IR theories, such as liberalism, critical theory.
They claim that we must look more deeply at unequal gendered structures in order to understand women's subordination.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 10) Feminist critical theory examines how both ideas and material structures shape people's lives.
IR feminist critical theorists show how changes in the meaning of gender have changed the practices of international organizations over time.
Elisabeth Prugl shows us how these ideas shaped the framing of international legal conventions.
They suggest that men have generally been seen as knowers and as subjects of knowledge.
They suggest that women's subordination must be differentially understood in terms of race, class, and geographical location, and that all women should be seen as agents rather than victims.
In today's wars, women and children are being killed and injured in large numbers.
This image is being challenged by an increasing number of women in militaries around the world.
There is a debate among policy-makers and in militaries, and even among some feminists, as to whether women should fight in military combat.
It makes it difficult for women's voices to be seen as legitimate, particularly in matters of security policy.
The national security of states, defined in masculine terms that emphasize military strength, can cause a trade-off with the physical and economic security of individuals.
This gender-sensitive perspective helps us see how women's relative disadvantage is due to the gendered division of labour.
The role distinction between workers in the public and private spheres has an effect on the kind of work that women do in the public sphere.
Women do more subsistence agriculture than men and men more often work with advanced agricultural technologies.
When it is not paid, household labour is invisible in economic analyses.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C RACTICE MAKES PERFE( 22) We must not overgeneralize about the negative effects of the gendered division of labour.
The Paris Peace settlement failed to address the central problems of European security, and in restructuring the European state system created new sources of grievance and instability.
The rise of Hitler posed challenges that European political leaders lacked the ability and will to meet.
The German attack on the Soviet Union extended the scope and barbarity of the war from short and limited campaigns to extended, large-scale, and barbaric confrontation, fought for total victory.
Debate persists about whether the atomic bomb should have been used in 1945, and about the effect that this had on the cold war.
European powers adopted different attitudes to different regions/countries.
For example, British withdrawal from Asia came much more quickly after 1945 than from Africa.
X The process of decolonization was relatively peaceful in many cases; it led to revolutionary wars in others , whose scale and ferocity reflected the attitudes of the colonial power and the nationalist movements.
The struggle for independence/national liberation became embroiled in cold war conflicts when the superpowers and/or their allies became involved, for example Vietnam.
Whether decolonization was judged successful depends, in part, on whose perspective you adopt—that of the European power, the independence movement, or the people themselves.
There are disagreements about when and why the cold war began, and who was responsible.
Distinct phases can be seen in East-West relations, during which tension and the risk of direct confrontation grew and receded.
Some civil and regional wars were intensified and prolonged by superpower involvement; others may have been prevented or shortened.
The end of the cold war has not resulted in the abolition of nuclear weapons.
Agreements on limiting and controlling the growth of nuclear arsenals played an important role in Soviet-American relations.
Various international crises occurred in which there was the risk of nuclear war.
Judging how close we came to nuclear war at these times remains open to speculation.
The revolution happened in stages through two separate coups, one in February and one in October.
The new government, led by Vladimir Lenin, would solidify its power only after three years of civil war, which ended in 1920.
Although the events of the Russian Revolution happened abruptly, the causes may be traced back nearly a century.
Nicholas II—the tsar who led Russia in the years leading up to the revolution—had personally witnessed revolutionary terrorists assassinate his grandfather and, subsequently, his own father respond to the assassination through brutal oppression of the Russian people.
When Nicholas II himself became tsar in 1894, he used similarly severe measures to subdue resistance movements, which were becoming bolder and more widespread every year.
These concessions continued gradually until Nicholas ll's grip on power became very tenuous.
As Nicholas II grew weaker, Vladimir Lenin rose to prominence as the most powerful figure in Russia.
Although this famous leader of the October Revolution was not even in Russia for the February Revolution—he had lived in self-imposed exile in Europe since 1900 and returned to Russia only in April 1917—he nonetheless exerted tremendous influence.
Whatever history's judgment of him, few other Russian revolutionaries possessed Lenin's decisiveness and strength of vision for Russia's future.
Born in 1870 in the provincial town of Simbirsk as Vladimir llich Ulyanov, the young Lenin was profoundly affected by his older brother Alexander'sl887 execution for being involved in a plot to assassinate the tsar.
As a young adult, Vladimir joined the A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT resistance movement himself and took the pseudonym Lenin but swore that he would never engage in the sort of ""adventurism"" that had ended his brother's life.
Nevertheless, his actions would one day become very adventurous indeed.
Although the new government would prove to be at least as repressive as the one it replaced, the country's new rulers were drawn largely from the intellectual and working classes rather than from the aristocracy—which meant a considerable change in direction for Russia.
V The revolution opened the door for Russia to fully enter the industrial age.
Prior tol917, Russia was a mostly agrarian nation that had dabbled in industrial development only to a limited degree.
By 1917, Russia's European neighbors had embraced industrialization for more than half a century, making technological advancements such as widespread electrification, which Russia had yet to achieve.
After the revolution, new urbanindustrial regions appeared quickly in Russia and became increasingly important to the country's development.
Education also took a major upswing, and illiteracy was almost entirely eradicated.
The Russian Revolution also had considerable international consequences.
Lenin's government immediately pulled Russia out of World War I, changing the balance of forces for the remaining participants.
During the ensuing civil war in Russia, several nations, including the United States, sent troops to Russia in hopes of keeping the chaos from spreading beyond Russia's boundaries.
Over the next several decades, the Soviet Union actively sponsored and assisted Communist movements and revolutions around the world in an effort to broaden its sphere of influence.
The country also played a fundamental role in the defeat of Nazi Germany during World War 11.
Threatened by the possibility of revolutions in their own lands, the governments of many Western nations viewed Communism as a spreading threat and moved to isolate the Soviet Union as much as possible.
Following World War II and the advent of the nuclear age, a confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States took center stage.
As this Cold War got under way, the two countries emerged as superpowers with much of the rest of the world falling in behind one or the other.
A protracted nuclear arms race between the United States and Soviet Union would last until the USSR finally collapsed in 1991.
The common features of this movement were their hostility of democracy and socialism and the aim of establishing dictatorships. iii.
They succeeded in many countries of Europe, such as Hungary, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Germany and Spain.
Their success in Italy and Germany had the most serious consequences. iv.
It was first used from the movement which started in Italy under the leadership of Benito Mussolini.
Lawrence Britt has examined the fascist regimes of Hitler , Mussolini , Franco , Suharto and several Latin American regimes.
Flags are seen everywhere, as are flag symbols on clothing and in public displays. ii.
The people tend to look the other way or even approve of torture, summary executions, assassinations, long incarcerations of prisoners, etc. iii.
V Rampant Sexism The governments of fascist nations tend to be almost exclusively male-dominated.
Divorce, abortion and homosexuality are suppressed and the state is represented as the ultimate guardian of the family institution. vi.
Controlled Mass Media Sometimes to media is directly controlled by the government, but in other cases, the media is indirectly controlled by government regulation, or sympathetic media spokespeople and executives.
Obsession with National Security Fear is used as a motivational tool by the government over the masses. viii.
Religion and Government are Intertwined Governments in fascist nations tend to use the most common religion in the nation as a tool to manipulate public opinion.
Religious rhetoric and terminology is common from government leaders, even when the major tenets of the religion are diametrically opposed to the government's policies or actions. ix.
Corporate Power is Protected The industrial and business aristocracy of a fascist nation often are the ones who put the government leaders into power, creating a mutually beneficial business/government relationship and power elite.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT X Labor Power is Suppressed Because the organizing power of labor is the only real threat to a fascist government, labor unions are either eliminated entirely, or are severely suppressed. xi.
Disdain for Intellectuals and the Arts Fascist nations tend to promote and tolerate open hostility to higher education, and academia.
It is not uncommon for professors and other academics to be censored or even arrested.
Obsession with Crime and Punishment Under fascist regimes, the police are given almost limitless power to enforce laws.
The people are often willing to overlook police abuses and even forego civil liberties in the name of patriotism.
There is often a national police force with virtually unlimited power in fascist nations. xiii.
Rampant Cronyism and Corruption Fascist regimes almost always are governed by groups of friends and associates who appoint each other to government positions and use governmental power and authority to protect their friends from accountability.
It is not uncommon in fascist regimes for national resources and even treasures to be appropriated or even outright stolen by government leaders. xiv.
Fraudulent Elections Sometimes elections in fascist nations are a complete sham.
Other times elections are manipulated by smear campaigns against or even assassination of opposition candidates, use of legislation to control voting numbers or political district boundaries, and manipulation of the media.
Fascist nations also typically use their judiciaries to manipulate or control elections.
League of Nations 1) structure of League of Nations The League of Nations was the predecessor to the United Nations.
It represented a major attempt by the great powers after the First World War to institutionalize a system of collective security, and its founding Covenant was formulated as part of the Treaty of Versailles . ii.
The first meeting was held in Geneva in 1920, with 42 states represented.
Over the next 26 years, a total of 63 states were represented at one time or another. iii.
Like the United Nations, the League consisted of an Assembly, a Council, and a Secretariat.
The Assembly, consisting of every member state, convened annually in Geneva.
The Council was composed of several permanent members (France, Britain, Italy, Japan, and later Germany and the Soviet Union) and some nonpermanent members elected by the Assembly.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT V It met more often than the Assembly to consider political disputes and to focus on the reduction of armaments.
Several other organizations were associated with the League such as the World Court and the International Labour Organization.
To some extent, the League was an extension of liberal, parliamentary practice to international relations.
It was based on the idea that political compromise arrived at by open discussion was the best means to promote political stability, an idea deeply held by one of the main architects of the League, United States President Woodrow Wilson. vii.
Like so many international organisations, the League was also designed in light of the alleged lessons of the First World War, of which three were particularly important.
It was believed that in future wars it would be easy to decide who was the aggressor, a decision that was meant to trigger a range of collective countermeasures, ranging from diplomatic boycotts to the imposition of sanctions and ultimately war. ii.
Second, the system for the prevention of conflicts rested on the assumption that war could be prevented by the application of reason based on legal principles.
The idea that power could be subordinated to law was a common assumption among many idealists of the interwar period. iii.
Third, the speed of political developments in 1914 led to the implementation of several mechanisms of delay to slow down unilateral decision-making in a crisis.
Only after a period of three months subsequent to bringing a dispute to the Council was resort to war legal.
It was based on the Fourteen Points of the United States President Woodrow Wilson. ii.
It was created to ensure that there would be no repeat of the First World War. iii.
It was suppose to keep the peace by encouraging nations to negotiate over disputes rather than resorting to war. iv.
V Article 10 promised collective security whereby members agreed that if one member were attacked all other members would come to their protection. vi.
Initially 42 members joined which later grew to 59 members by the 1930s. vii.
The USA despite the fact Wilson's had founded it refused to join the League.
It should be noted that the League was never fully representative of the international community. iii.
The United States Senate did not ratify the treaties and did not become a member of the League. iv.
V The Soviet Union was not invited to Versailles, and did not join the League until 1934. vi.
Few South American states were represented, and only China, Japan, and Thailand represented Asia. vii.
Germany was missing from the start in light of its alleged responsibility for the First World War. viii.
Because the League was primarily a European body, the number of states that were able to carry out any police action against an aggressor was effectively limited to France and Britain.
Without their consent, of course, no decision was likely to be carried out, and France in particular was determined to use the League to contain Germany in Europe. ix.
The ultimate failure of the League to maintain international peace and security was a product of its limited membership, its preservation of a territorial settlement that humiliated Germany, and its faith in the willingness of great powers to subordinate their short-term national interests to the preservation of international peace.
X Confronted with the rise of fascism in Italy, Germany, and Japan in the 1930s a powerful bloc of states that glorified war and embarked on a sustained rearmament programme to achieve their aim to reconfigure the global balance of power in their favour the League was impotent. xi.
Indeed, it was established during a period in which powerful states continued to rely on war as a means of resolving conflict, and when new forms of nationalism not only undermined some European empires but also justified new patterns of imperial domination. xii.
In light of the rapid shifts in power that were taking place in the first half of the twentieth century, combined with the diplomatic isolation of the United States and the Soviet Union, it is hardly surprising that the League participated in rather than prevented the decline of Europe. xiii.
During 1938, Britain and France tried a new policy 'appeasement' (negotiating directly with Flitler); this failed in 1939 when Flitler invaded Czechoslovakia. xiv.
When war broke out in 1939, the League closed down; its headquarters in Geneva remained empty throughout the war.
In 1943 at a Conference in Tehran America, Britain and Russia agreed to set up a new international organisation when the war finished. xvi.
On 12 April 1946, the League met in Geneva and formally abolished itself.
Start an inquiry by the Council, Provide a hearing by an impartial neutral country.
V International suspicions and rivalries between countries continued. vi.
Economic sanctions especially without United States support proved very ineffective. viii.
It had to uphold the Treaty of Versailles, which was increasingly viewed as unfair. ix.
Second World War 1) Introduction I World War II , also known as the Second World War, was a global war that lasted from 1939 to 1945, though related conflicts began earlier.
In a state of ""total war"", the major participants threw their entire economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind the war effort, erasing the distinction between civilian and military resources.
Marked by mass deaths of civilians, including the Holocaust (in which approximately 11 million people were killed) and the strategic bombing of industrial and population centres (in which approximately one million were killed, and which included the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki), it resulted in an estimated 50 million to 85 million fatalities.
British victory in Battle of Britain forces Hitler to postpone invasion plans.
Singapore falls to the Japanese in February around 25,000 prisoners taken.
American naval victory at Battle of Midway, in June, marks turning point in Pacific War.
Allied victory in North Africa enables invasion of Italy to be launched.
Truman becomes President of the United States on Roosevelt's death, and Attlee replaces Churchill.
After atomic bombs are dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan surrenders on 14 August.
This was a line of steel and concrete fortifications stretching from Belgium to Switzerland and was called 'a gate without a fence' because Germany would be able to avoid it and invade France via Belgium.
Britain was sympathetic towards Germany and even signed an Anglo German naval Treaty allowing Germany's navy to be 35% of the size of the Royal Navy.
Hitler used his new found arms to support Franco in the Spanish Civil War Hitler sent the Condor Legion of the Luftwaffe to bomb Guernica on 26th April, 1937.
Guernica was razed to the ground and Franco went on to conquer the Basque areas of Spain.
The Remilitarization of the Rhineland Having broken the Treaty of Versailles once.
Hitler risked doing it a second time by marching 30,000 troops into Cologne on 7th March 1936.
France, with A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 250,000 troops mobilised, remained passive because Britain would not support her.
Britain took the view that Germany was 'marching into her own back yard.' ii.
He went on to build his own defensive fortification, the Siegfried Line.
Originally Mussolini did not want to be Hitler's ally and in 1935 talks were held with Britain and France at the Stresa Front, but these came to nothing when Anthony Eden of Britain threatened oil sanctions against Mussolini during the Abyssinian crisis.
Neville Chamberlain became British Prime Minister on 28th May 1937, and followed the policy of appeasing Germany, believing that all Hitler wanted to do was unite German speaking people.
Hitler would break the Treaty of Versailles but Chamberlain did not believe Hitler would cause war.
Austrian Fascists wanted to unite with Germany but Schuschnigg, the Austrian Chancellor, wanted Austria to be independent.
He was unable to gain support from abroad so agreed to meet Hitler in Berlin.
He was persuaded to accept Hitler's henchman Seyss-Inquart as Minster of the Interior.
Rioting in Vienna increased under Seyss-Inquart's leadership and Schuschnigg resigned.
Seyss-Inquart invited Hitler to assist him and on 13th March, 1938 troops from the Wermacht entered Austria.
In a plebiscite on the Anschluss a vote of 99.75% in favour was recorded.
Hitler made it seem that he had been invited into Austria, in fact he had incited the union.
Hitler Gained the Sudetenland The Sudetenland was lost by Austria in the Treaty of St.
Germain (10th September 1919) and hereby Czechoslovakia gained 3 million German speaking people.
After the Anschluss the Sudeten German leader, Konrad Henlein, demanded a union with Germany.
Unable to receive help from France, the Czech Premier, Benes, mobilised alone.
Fearing war, Chamberlain met Hitler on three occasions at Berchtesgaden, Godesburg and at Munich.
Hitler could take the Sudetenland the following day without a plebiscite, Hungary and Poland could take border districts from Czechoslovakia, Britain and Germany would never go to war.
The Fall of Czechoslovakia In March 1939, Hitler forced Lithuania to give him Memel where most people spoke German.
So far Hitler had only taken German speaking territory, so Chamberlain could still appease Hitler.
However, in March 1939, Hitler threatened to bomb Prague, so the Czechs surrendered.
Chamberlain realised appeasement had failed, so he began to rearm Britain and guarantee peace in Poland.
Nazi-Soviet Pact The Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact By the summer of 1939, Hitler's plans to invade Poland were complete.
He realised that to invade Poland mighty cause Britain to attack him from the West but he was more concerned to avoid a Russian attack from the east.
Therefore to avoid a war on two fronts, he arranged the Nazi-Soviet Pact, which said that if either country went to war the other would remain neutral. ii.
Hitler gained the chance to invade Poland with a war on one front, if Britain supported Poland. iii.
Stalin of USSR gained time to rearm in case Hitler attacked him later, and the chance to gain the eastern half of Poland.
German tanks invaded West Prussia and Posen on the 1st September 1939 using blitzkrieg tactics.
Chamberlain sent an ultimatum saying that if Hitler did not withdraw from Poland by 11am, 3rd September 1939, Britain would declare war.
On 3rd September, Britain, followed by France, declared war on Germany.
To unite German speaking people (using NSD which had been denied at the Treaty of Versailles.
He wanted lebensraum in order to gain selfsufficiency He wanted to dominate Europe and the World To achieve any of these aims would involve breaking the Treaty of Versailles , and this could lead to war.
The aggression of Hitler's Allies Italy Mussolini wanted a Fascist-Roman empire in the Mediterranean and Africa Japan Japan wanted a Nipponese empire in the Pacific, extending into China and Australia (e.g.
Germany, Italy and Japan were hostile to Communism , and this way a cause of war and vice versa.
Democratic powers were passive USA-Isolated A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ii.
France France was unlikely, and reluctant, to intervene against Germany, because she could not rely on Britain's and America's support. iii.
Britain Between 1934 and 1937, Britain was sympathetic to German recovery.
Cold War: Decolonization of Asia and Africa 1) Introduction The decolonization of Asia and Africa was the gradual growth of independence movements on the Asian and African continent, leading ultimately to the retreat of foreign powers and the creation of a number of nation-states in the region. ii.
A number of events were catalysts for this shift, most importantly the Second World War. iii.
Prior to World War II, some countries such as the Philippines during 1898 had proclaimed independence from Spain. iv.
The first state to be de-colonised was the Philippines in 1898, and the last was Macau in 1999.
During the decades of imperialism, the industrializing powers of Europe viewed the African and Asian continents as reservoirs of raw materials, labor, and territory for future settlement. ii.
In most cases, however, significant development and European settlement in these colonies was sporadic.
Flowever, the colonies were exploited, sometimes brutally, for natural and labor resources, and sometimes even for military conscripts. iii.
In addition, the introduction of colonial rule drew arbitrary natural boundaries where none had existed before, dividing ethnic and linguistic groups and natural features, and laying the foundation for the creation of numerous states lacking geographic, linguistic, ethnic, or political affinity. iv.
During World War II Japan, itself a significant imperial power, drove the European powers out of Asia.
V After the Japanese surrender in 1945, local nationalist movements in the former Asian colonies campaigned for independence rather than a return to European colonial rule.
In many cases, as in Indonesia and French Indochina, these nationalists had been guerrillas fighting the Japanese after European surrenders, or were former members of A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT colonial military establishments.
In many others, independence was achieved only after a protracted revolution. iii.
A few newly independent countries acquired stable governments almost immediately; others were ruled by dictators or military juntas for decades, or endured long civil wars. iv.
Some European governments welcomed a new relationship with their former colonies; others contested decolonization militarily.
V The process of decolonization coincided with the new Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States, and with the early development of the new United Nations. vi.
Decolonization was often affected by superpower competition, and had a definite impact on the evolution of that competition.
It also significantly changed the pattern of international relations in a more general sense. vii.
The creation of so many new countries, some of which occupied strategic locations, others of which possessed significant natural resources, and most of which were desperately poor, altered the composition of the United Nations and political complexity of every region of the globe 4) European powers and decolonization In the mid to late 19th century, the European powers colonized much of Africa and Southeast Asia. ii.
During the decades of imperialism, the industrializing powers of Europe viewed the African and Asian continents as reservoirs of raw materials, labor, and territory for future settlement.
In most cases, however, significant development and European settlement in these colonies was sporadic. iii.
However, the colonies were exploited, sometimes brutally, for natural and labor resources, and sometimes even for military conscripts.
After the Japanese surrender in 1945, local nationalist movements in the former Asian colonies campaigned for independence rather than a return to European colonial rule.
While the United States generally supported the concept of national selfdetermination, it also had strong ties to its European allies, who had imperial claims on their former colonies. vi.
The Cold War only served to complicate the United States position, as United States support for decolonization was offset by American concern over communist expansion and Soviet strategic ambitions in Europe.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT vii.
Several of the NATO allies asserted that their colonial possessions provided them with economic and military strength that would otherwise be lost to the alliance.
Nearly all of the United States' European allies believed that after their recovery from World War II their colonies would finally provide the combination of raw materials and protected markets for finished goods that would cement the colonies to Europe. viii.
Whether or not this was the case, the alternative of allowing the colonies to slip away, perhaps into the United States' economic sphere or that of another power, was unappealing to every European government interested in postwar stability. ix.
This might serve to shift the international balance of power in favor of the Soviet Union and remove access to economic resources from United States allies. ii.
Events such as the Indonesian struggle for independence from the Netherlands (194550), the Vietnamese war against France , and the nationalist and professed socialist takeovers of Egypt and Iran served to reinforce such fears, even if new governments did not directly link themselves to the Soviet Union.
Thus, the United States used aid packages, technical assistance and sometimes even military intervention to encourage newly independent nations in the Third World to adopt governments that aligned with the West. iii.
The Soviet Union deployed similar tactics in an effort to encourage new nations to join the communist bloc, and attempted to convince newly decolonized countries that communism was an intrinsically non-imperialist economic and political ideology. iv.
Many of the new nations resisted the pressure to be drawn into the Cold War, joined in the ""nonaligned movement,"" which formed after the Bandung conference of 1955, and focused on internal development.
In 1946, there were 35 member states in the United Nations; as the newly independent nations of the ""third world"" joined the organization, by 1970 membership had swelled to 127. iii.
These new member states had a few characteristics in common; they were non-white, with developing economies, facing internal problems that were the result of their colonial past, which sometimes put them at odds with European countries and made them suspicious of European-style governmental structures, political ideas, and economic institutions.
These countries also became vocal advocates of continuing decolonization, with the result that the UN Assembly was often ahead of the Security Council on issues of selfgovernance and decolonization.
V The new nations pushed the UN toward accepting resolutions for independence for colonial states and creating a special committee on colonialism, demonstrating that even though some nations continued to struggle for independence, in the eyes of the international community, the colonial era was ending.
Cold War 1) Introduction I The Cold War refers to the phenomenon that overshadowed world politics from the end of WWII until the fall of the former Soviet Union.
The Cold War was waged on political, economic, and propaganda fronts and had only limited recourse to weapons.
It was first used in the United States by the American financier and presidential adviser Bernard Baruch in a speech at the State House in Columbia, South Carolina, in 1947.
V The Cold War did result in an arms race, diplomatic confrontation, proxy warfare, ideological competition which engulfed the entire world order.
The Cold War resulted in formation of eastern and western power blocks and corresponding alliances and institutions under the Communist and Capitalist power blocks.
The United States accused the Soviet Union of seeking to expand their version of communism throughout the world.
The Soviets, meanwhile, charged the United States with practicing imperialism and attempting to stop revolutionary activity in other countries.
Cold War tensions increased the likelihood of a third world war, which could have led to devastating consequences due to the possibility of nuclear conflict.
The Korean War, the Vietnam War and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan were some of the violent conflicts indirectly fueled by the Cold War.
Indeed, it was far from certain that a global nuclear war wouldn't result from smaller regional wars, which heightened the level of concern for each conflict.
This tension shaped the lives of people around the world almost as much as the actual fighting did.
In the war between the U.S.S.R. and U.S.A. a major arena was the strategy of technology.
This cold war also involved covert conflict, through acts of espionage.
One major hotspot of conflict was Germany, particularly the city of Berlin.
The Wall isolated West Berlin from East Berlin and the territory of East Germany, which completely surrounded it and was supported by the Soviets.
Formation of Power Blocks The eastern power block led by the Soviets and the western power block by the United States also formed alliances.
The common ownership of means of production and distribution provided the political and economic basis for the spread of communism, based on Marx""s philosophy of empowering the proletariat.
Communism in practice resulted in dominance of a single political party and centralized decision making.
The bureaucracy became the new bourgeoisie under communism in practice.
Capitalism is based on the notion of individual liberty and the right to own private property.
At the political level, capitalism emphasized the need for democratic government, multiparty politics, the independence of the judiciary, and freedom of press.
In practice capitalism has caused problems for minorities, growing inequalities and arguments concerning the role of the state in managing the economy.
Neither side ever fought the other the consequences would be too appalling but they did 'fight' for their beliefs using client states who fought for their beliefs on their behalfg.
South Vietnam was anticommunist and was supplied by America during the war while North Vietnam was pro-Communist and fought the south using weapons from communist Russia or communist China.
In Afghanistan, the Americans supplied the rebel Afghans after the Soviet Union invaded in 1979 while they never physically involved themselves thus avoiding a direct clash with the Soviet Union.
By 1948 the Soviets had installed left-wing governments in the countries of eastern Europe that had been liberated by the Red Army.
The Americans and the British feared the permanent Soviet domination of eastern Europe and the threat of Soviet-influenced communist parties coming to power in the democracies of western Europe.
The Soviets, on the other hand, were determined to maintain control of eastern Europe in order to safeguard against any possible renewed threat from Germany, and they were intent on spreading communism worldwide, largely for ideological reasons.
The Cold War had solidified by 1947-48, when United States aid provided under the Marshall Plan to western Europe had brought those countries under American influence and the Soviets had installed openly communist regimes in eastern Europe.
In this period the Soviets unsuccessfully blockaded the Western-held sectors of West Berlin ; the United States and its European allies formed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , a unified military command to resist the Soviet presence in Europe ; the Soviets exploded their first atomic warhead , thus ending the American monopoly on the atomic bomb; the Chinese communists came to power in mainland China ; and the Soviet-supported communist government of North Korea invaded U.S.-supported South Korea in 1950, setting off an indecisive Korean War that lasted until 1953.
From 1953 to 1957 Cold War tensions relaxed somewhat, largely owing to the death of the longtime Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin in 1953; nevertheless, the standoff remained.
A unified military organization among the Soviet-bloc countries, the Warsaw Pact, was formed in 1955; and West Germany was admitted into NATO that same year.
The United States and the Soviet Union began developing intercontinental ballistic missiles, and in 1962 the Soviets began secretly installing missiles in Cuba that could be used to launch nuclear attacks on United States cities.
This sparked the Cuban missile crisis , a confrontation that brought the two superpowers to the brink of war before an agreement was reached to withdraw the missiles.
The two superpowers soon signed the Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty of 1963, which banned aboveground nuclear weapons testing.
But the crisis also hardened the Soviets' determination never again to be humiliated by their military inferiority, and they began a buildup of both conventional and strategic forces that the United States was forced to match for the next 25 years.
Throughout the Cold War the United States and the Soviet Union avoided direct military confrontation in Europe and engaged in actual combat operations only to keep allies from defecting to the other side or to overthrow them after they had done so.
For its part, the United States helped overthrow a left-wing government in Guatemala , supported an unsuccessful invasion of Cuba , invaded the Dominican Republic and Grenada , and undertook a long and unsuccessful effort to prevent communist North Vietnam from bringing South Vietnam under its rule.
A major split had occurred between the Soviet Union and China in 1960 and widened over the years, shattering the unity of the communist bloc.
In the meantime, western Europe and Japan achieved dynamic economic growth in the 1950s and '60s, reducing their relative inferiority to the United States.
Less-powerful countries had more room to assert their independence and often showed themselves resistant to superpower coercion or cajoling.
The 1970s saw an easing of Cold War tensions as evinced in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks that led to the SALT I and II agreements of 1972 and 1979, respectively, in which the two superpowers set limits on their antiballistic missiles and on their strategic missiles capable of carrying nuclear weapons.
That was followed by a period of renewed Cold War tensions in the early 1980s as the two superpowers continued their massive arms buildup and competed for influence in the Third World.
But the Cold War began to break down in the late 1980s during the administration of Soviet leader Mikhail S Gorbachev.
He dismantled the totalitarian aspects of the Soviet system and began efforts to democratize the Soviet political system.
When communist regimes in the Soviet-bloc countries of eastern Europe collapsed in 1989-90, Gorbachev acquiesced in their fall.
The rise to power of democratic governments in East Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia was quickly followed by the unification of West and East Germany under NATO auspices, again with Soviet approval.
In late 1991 the Soviet Union collapsed and 15 newly independent nations were born from its corpse, including a Russia with a democratically elected, anticommunist leader.
The Soviet Union""s ambitions were checked by the rise of fascism in Italy and Germany.
At the end of WWII however, tensions grew between the former Allies over dividing the spoils of war.
The Soviets were reluctant to grant Poland independence and did not want to vacate their troops from eastern Germany.
The Cold War intensified in the next few years and the Soviets managed to install Communist regimes in Bulgaria, Hungary and in Romania.
Thereafter, Albania, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia also came under the influence of the Soviets and Finland""s coalition government was also dominated by the Communists.
The post-WWII outbreak of conflict in Greece between the government and the Communist guerillas was a turning point in United States foreign policy, when President Truman vowed to check the Soviet influence and to actively protect its foreign interests abroad.
The Truman Doctrine was meant to fill the vacuum in power politics created by the weakening of Britain so as to prevent the global domination of Communism.
The Marshal Plan was an extension of the Truman Doctrine to protect Europe from economic collapse and communist domination.
Aid under the Marshal Plan was used to reconstruct war ravaged Europe and it became the basis for lending for development to newly independent countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The disposed Chiang Kai Sek government was exiled to Formosa, which is now Taiwan.
The spread of Communism to China also lent support to North Korea, where the United States backed the South Koreans.
Soviet support to the North Vietnamese led to more serious United States engagement in the conflict, due to the fear that Cambodia, Laos, Burma and Thailand could also become Communist.
Despite sending up to 600,000 troops to Vietnam by 1965, the North Vietnamese won the battle with support of China and the Soviets.
In the M.E, the United States provided active support to the Israelis but the Soviets were not able to influence the ME conflict to its advantage.
In Latin America, the Soviet influence in Cuban and Nicaragua made the United States very nervous and it supported brutal regimes like that of Pinochet in Chile to prevent its fall to communist influence.
The Congo, Ghana and Gold Coast got military and financial aid from the Soviets, which also led the United States to take counter measures in Africa.
In South Asia, besides Indian leaning towards the Soviet and the Pakistani inclination towards the US, the invasion of Afghanistan became a major Cold War arena for a proxy war between the Superpowers.
Khrushchev and Eisenhower yet at Camp David and commenced the trend towards disarmament.
From 1969 to 1978, a period of detente remained, where both sides accepted the status quo in view of the mutually assured destruction capacity of the superpowers and as the realization concerning costs of nuclear arsenals was becoming apparent.
Nixon visited USSR and signed a Limitation on Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, indicating adoption of a defensive rather than offensive posture by both superpowers.
The United States proposed ban on using mobile land sites and the superpowers also reached an agreement on a Seabed Treaty, banning use of sea-beds as nuclear launch sites 11) Resurgence of tensions I The invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 fanned the embers of the Cold War again.
The USSR""s interference in Angola was also another irritant and the new United States administration was also less tolerant and it wanted to begin building bridges with China, which Soviets were now opposed to, these moves simultaneously ended the period of detente.
The Soviets in turn banned the LA Olympics in 1984 and shot down a South Korean air liner and by 1983 they pulled out completely from bilateral arms talks with the United States after the Cruise and Pershing 2 missiles were found deployed by three west European countries.
The overthrow of the Shah of Iran in 1979 also impelled the United States to secure bases in Oman, Kenya and Somalia to obtain a strategic stronghold and protects its interests around the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean.
V On the other hand, the Soviets, Cubans, Nicaraguans and even the Ethiopians were accused by the United States of supplying arms to insurgents El Salvador in Central America.
While the Cold War ended practically with dismantling of the 35 km Berlin Wall in 1989, it wasn""t until the London Summit a few years later that the Cold War was formally announced to be over London Summit.
The London Summit emphasized the need for the United States to reduce the number of nuclear weapons it had deployed in Europe.
It obtained a pledge to withdraw the 1470 nuclear tipped artillery shells from West Germany and for the Soviets to withdraw troops from Central and Eastern Europe.
It redefined NATO""s new role from strength seeking alliance to a peace keeping mission.
It led to the Malta Summit between President Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev in 1989.
The Washington Summit in 1990 between the same leaders resulted in signing of number of nuclear, chemical and conventional arms reduction agreements.
Enormous defense spending by America (the implications of which were first hinted at by President Eisenhower's speech on the Military-industrial complex) under President Ronald Reagan is often seen as a major factor in the end of the war.
According to this A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT theory, the robust Western economies could absorb the expenses of programs such as the Star Wars missile defense but the Eastern bloc countries crippled themselves trying to match them.
However, Reagan's policy towards the Soviet Union defined Eastern bloc governments as ""totalitarian"", under a doctrine which denied that such regimes could ever undergo internal transformation towards democracy.
Thus Reagan's foreign policy was never intended to bring about the changes which actually occurred in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
Corrupt governments and citizens' desire for greater personal freedom and greater individual wealth were also major factors in the collapse of the Soviet Union and its satellite countries.
There is certainly evidence that the CIA played up Soviet military power through the 1980s.
Unresolved conflicts, in Korea, Vietnam and Germany, complicated by the interference of the superpowers came to a quick end.
A new world order emerged at the end of the Cold War, which was influenced by multilateralism and a unilateral superpower.
The end of the Cold War called for a new focus in IR which could better analyze and anticipate the realties of a new world order.
The end of communism also had economic implications which boosted the legitimacy of the market mechanism.
At the political level, capitalism emphasized the need for democratic government, multiparty politics, independence of the judiciary, and freedom of press.
I The United States believed that the Soviet Union's expansion threatened the developing nations of the world.
So, in 1949 President Truman and Congress approved nearly $400 million for technical development programs in Latin America, Asia, and Africa.
The goal of this Point Four Program was to modernize and strengthen developing nations and discourage the growth of communism.
Gorbachev's policy of Glasnost eliminated the strict censorship practiced for hundreds of years.
Glasnost stands for openness, and Soviet citizens were now allowed to speak openly about their country's problems.
Perestroika, or ""restructuring,"" was Gorbachev's attempt to end the inefficiency and corruption in government.
The United States and other Western nations decided to form alliances against possible Soviet attempts to extend their sphere of influence.
In April 1949 the United States A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C RACTICE MAKES PERFE( signed the North Atlantic Treaty.
Members agreed that an attack on one of them would be considered an attack on all of them.
The Soviets later formed an opposing alliance known as The Warsaw Pact.
Because of the arms race many countries in the world now own nuclear weapons.
February Joe McCarthy begins Communist witch hunt 1950: June Korean War begins 1951: January 12 Federal Civil Defense Administration established 1953: June 19 Rosenberg executions 1953: July Korean War ends 1954: March KGB established 1954 CIA helps overthrow unfriendly regimes in Iran and Guatemala 1954: July Vietnam split at 17th parallel 1955: May Warsaw Pact formed 1956: October November Rebellion put down in Communist Hungary.
Egypt took control of Suez Canal; United States refused to help take it back.
Post Cold War: Unipolarity and Revival of Multi-Polarity 1) From The Cold War to the War On Terror I The cold war was a complex relationship that assumed competition but remained cold in large part because of the existence of nuclear weapons.
Most experts assumed the cold war would continue and were surprised when it came to a peaceful conclusion.There is no academic consensus as to why the cold war came to an end when it did or why it did.
The end of the cold war divided—and still divides—International Relations scholars into mainstream realists and ideas-oriented constructivists.
The term 'globalization' was rarely used before 1989 but became one of the most popular ways of defining international politics after the cold war.
Though globalization is a much disputed term, analysts agree that it describes a one-world system where all actors have to play by the same economic rules.
Globalization has become the master discourse of governments around the world.
Globalization has produced many winners and a large number of losers, but there would appear to be no escaping its competitive logic.
Most experts did not anticipate—and some did not look forward to—the new American hegemony following the end of the cold war.
In spite of the spread of A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT democracy and globalization, most United States policy-makers still viewed the world as a threatening and dangerous place during the 1990s.
After the fiasco in Somalia the majority of Americans were reluctant to use United States forces abroad.In spite of the break-up of former Yugoslavia, Europe benefited as much from the end of the cold war as the United States.
Europeans after the cold war were divided over a series of key issues, most notably the degree of European integration, economic strategy, and the foreign policy aspirations of the European Union.
The European Security Strategy of 2003 was one of the first serious efforts by the EU to think about its international role under conditions of globalization.
Many issues face Europe, including Turkish membership of the EU, the position of Europe's Muslims, and China's economic challenge.
The first Russian President, Boris Yeltsin, sought a new partnership with the West but was often accused by his domestic enemies of not defending the Russian national interest.
Vladimir Putin, his successor, has pursued more authoritarian policies at home, brought Russia's economic assets back under state control, and pursued a more nationalist foreign policy abroad.
A new cold war between the West and Russia is unlikely because of the important economic and political changes that have occurred in Russia since the collapse of the USSR in 1991.
X Compared to Europe after 1945, the international relations of East Asia during the cold war were highly volatile, marked by revolutions, wars, and insurgencies.
The end of the cold war left many issues in its wake and led Aaron Friedberg to conclude that Asia was primed for further rivalry.
One of the defining areas of instability during the cold war was the Third World.
With the end of the cold war the term 'Third World' has been challenged by many analysts.
China and India are prime examples of countries where globalization has produced high levels of development.
Inequality creates security challenges in the form of migration, refugees, and in certain instances, political violence directed against the more powerful West.
September 11 effectively brought the post-cold war era to an end and in the process transformed United States foreign policy.
The war to remove Saddam Flussein was sold as part of the war on terror; very few analysts, however, saw a connection between Iraq and 9/ll.The reasons for going to war have been much disputed, though most people now believe it was a strategic error.
The longer-term impact of the Bush doctrine could very easily weaken America's global position over the long term.
With the breakup of the Soviet Union into separate nations, and the re-emergence of the nation of Russia, the world of proUnited States and pro-Soviet alliances broke down.
Different challenges presented themselves, such as climate change and the threat of nuclear terrorism.
Regional powerbrokers in Iraq and Saddam Hussein challenged the peace with a surprise attack on the small nation of Kuwait in 1991.
Bush organized a coalition of allied and Middle Eastern powers that successfully pushed back the invading forces, but stopped short of invading Iraq and capturing Hussein.
As a result, the dictator was free to cause mischief for another twelve years.
After the Gulf War, many scholars like Zbigniew Brzezinski claimed that the lack of a new strategic vision for United States foreign policy resulted in many missed opportunities for its foreign policy.
The United States mostly scaled back its foreign policy budget as well as its cold war defense budget during the 1990s, which amounted to 6.5% of GDP while focusing on domestic economic prosperity under President Clinton, who succeeded in achieving a budget surplus for 1999 and 2000.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the post-Cold War world was widely considered as unipolar, with the United States the sole remaining superpower.
The Cold War also marked the apex of peacetime military-industrial complexes, especially in the United States, and large-scale military funding of science.
These complexes, though their origins may be found as early as the 19*^ century, have grown considerably during the Cold War.
The military-industrial complexes have great impact on their countries and help shape their society, policy and foreign relations.
The most widely discussed application of the phrase of recent times came at the end of the Cold War.
The most widely discussed application of the phrase of recent times came A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT at the end of the Cold War.
Furthermore, when no weapons of mass destruction were found after a military conquest of Iraq, there was worldwide skepticism that the war had been fought to prevent terrorism, and the continuing war in Iraq has had serious negative public relations consequences for the image of the United States.
While the United States remains a strong power economically and militarily, rising nations such as China, Pakistan, India, Brazil, and Russia as well as a united Europe have challenged its dominance.
And if they can avoid war, the coming decades can be peaceful and productive provided there are no misunderstandings or dangerous rivalries.
The confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union defined the Cold War period.
The collapse of the European imperial system, the emergence of new states and a struggle between the Soviets and Americans for domination and influence also defined the confrontation.
There were, of course, many other aspects and phases of the confrontation, but in the end, the Cold War was a struggle built on Europe's decline.
Many shifts in the international system accompanied the end of the Cold War.
The Maastricht Treaty was formulated, creating the structure of the subsequent European Union.
A vast coalition dominated by the United States reversed the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
The second was the rise of China as the center of global industrial growth based on low wages.
The third was the re-emergence of Europe as a massive, integrated economic power.
Meanwhile, Russia, the main remnant of the Soviet Union, reeled while Japan shifted to a dramatically different economic mode.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT V The initial phase of the post-Cold War world was built on two assumptions.
The first assumption was that the United States was the dominant political and military power but that such power was less significant than before, since economics was the new focus.
The second phase still revolved around the three Great Powers — the United States, China and Europe — but involved a major shift in the worldview of the United States, which then assumed that pre-eminence included the power to reshape the Islamic world through military action while China and Europe single-mindedly focused on economic matters.
Like the Japanese economic miracle before it, the Chinese economic miracle is drawing to a close and Beijing is beginning to examine its military options.
The United States is withdrawing from Afghanistan and reconsidering the relationship between global pre-eminence and global omnipotence.
Europe primarily defined itself as an economic power, with sovereignty largely retained by its members but shaped by the rule of the European Union.
But now this untenable idea has reached its end and Europe is fragmenting.
One region, including Germany, Austria, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, has low unemployment.
The other region on the periphery has high or extraordinarily high unemployment.
Germany wants to retain the European Union to protect German trade interests and because Berlin properly fears the political consequences of a fragmented Europe.
But as the creditor of last resort, Germany also wants to control the economic behavior of the EU nation-states.
Berlin does not want to let off the European states by simply bailing them out.
But the member states do not want to cede sovereignty to a German-dominated EU apparatus in exchange for a bailout.
In the indebted peripheral region, Cyprus has been treated with particular economic savagery as part of the bailout process.
V China's economy couldn't possibly continue to expand at the same rate.
Leaving aside all the specific arguments, extraordinarily rapid growth in an export-oriented economy requires economic health among its customers.
It is nice to imagine expanded domestic demand, but in a country as impoverished as China, increasing demand requires revolutionizing life in the interior.
It is interesting to recall the extravagant claims about the future of Japan in the 1980s.
Westerners did not see the hollowing out of the financial system as growth rates were sustained by cutting prices and profits.
Japan exists, but behaves differently than it did before; the same is happening to China.
Both Europe and China thought about the world in the post-Cold War period similarly.
Each believed that geopolitical questions and even questions of domestic politics could be suppressed and sometimes even ignored.
They believed this because they both thought they had entered a period of permanent prosperity.91-2008 was in fact a period of extraordinary prosperity, one that both Europe and China simply assumed would never end and one whose prosperity would moot geopolitics and politics.
Periods of prosperity, of course, always alternate with periods of austerity, and now history has caught up with Europe and China.
Europe, which had wanted union and sovereignty, is confronting the political realities of EU unwillingness to make the fundamental and difficult decisions on what union really meant.
For its part, China wanted to have a free market and a communist regime in a region it would dominate economically.
Its economic climax has left it with the question of whether the regime can survive in an uncontrolled economy, and what its regional power would look like if it weren't prosperous.
However attractive military intervention is, it always looks easier at the beginning than at the end.
The greatest military power in the world has the ability to defeat armies.
A Great Power manages the routine matters of the world not through military intervention, but through manipulating the balance of power.
Rather, it is that even with the power the United States had in 2001, it could not impose its political will — even though it had the power to disrupt and destroy regimes — unless it was prepared to commit all of its power and treasure to transforming a country like Afghanistan.
X The United States has emerged into the new period with what is still the largest economy in the world with the fewest economic problems of the three pillars of the post-Cold War world.
But it has emerged far more mature and cautious than it entered the period.
Economies rise and fall, there are limits to the greatest military power and a Great Power needs prudence in both lending and invading.
For example, the Cold War era meandered for decades, during which U.S.-Soviet detentes or the end of the Vietnam War could have seemed to signal the end of the era itself.
Now, we are at a point where the post-Cold War model no longer explains the behavior of the world.
First, the United States remains the world's dominant power in all dimensions.
It will act with caution, however, recognizing the crucial difference between pre-eminence and omnipotence.
Second, Europe is returning to its normal condition of multiple competing nation-states.
While Germany will dream of a Europe in which it can write the budgets of lesser states, the EU nation-states will look at Cyprus and choose default before losing sovereignty.
Russia is giving preferential terms for natural gas imports to some countries, buying metallurgical facilities in Hungary and Poland, and buying rail terminals in Slovakia.
Russia has always been economically dysfunctional yet wielded outsized influence — recall the Cold War.
The deals they are making, of which this is a small sample, are not in their economic interests, but they increase Moscow's political influence substantially.
V Fourth, China is becoming self-absorbed in trying to manage its new economic realities.
Without prosperity, it has little to offer beyond a much more authoritarian state.
And fifth, a host of new countries will emerge to supplement China as the world's lowwage, high-growth epicenter.
Latin America, Africa and less-developed parts of Southeast Asia are all emerging as contenders.
While the United States has committed many errors, the fragmentation of Europe and the weakening of China mean the United States emerges more powerful, since power is relative.
It was said that the post-Cold War world was America's time of dominance.
Its two great counterbalances are losing their ability to counter United States power because they mistakenly believed that real power was economic power.
The United States had combined power — economic, political and military — and that allowed it to maintain its overall power when economic power faltered.
And while China is reaching for military power, it will take many years to produce the kind of power that is global, and it can do so only if its economy allows it to.
The United States defeated the Soviet Union in the Cold War because of its balanced power.
Europe and China defeated themselves because they placed all their chips on economics.
The campaign's official purpose was to eliminate al-Qaeda and other militant organizations.
The two main military operations A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT associated with the War on Terror were Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq.
The phrase ""War on Terror"" was first used by United States President George W Bush on 20 September 2001.
The Bush administration and the Western media have since used the term to denote a global military, political, legal, and ideological struggle targeting organizations designated as terrorist and regimes accused of supporting them.
It was typically used with a particular focus on Al-Qaeda and other militant Islamists.
Although the term is not officially used by the administration of United States President Barack Obama, it is still commonly used by politicians, in the media, and officially by some aspects of government, such as the United States' Global War on Terrorism Service Medal.
The United States supported the Islamist mujahadeen guerillas against the military forces of the Soviet Union and the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.
In May 1996 the group World Islamic Front for Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders , sponsored by Osama bin Laden and later reformed as al-Qaeda, started forming a large base of operations in Afghanistan, where the Islamist extremist regime of the Taliban had seized power that same year.
In February 1998, Osama bin Laden, as the head of alQaeda, signed a fatwa declaring war on the West and Israel, and later in May of that same year al-Qaeda released a video declaring war on the United States and the West.
The Taliban demanded evidence of bin Laden's link to the 11 September attacks and, if such evidence warranted a trial, they offered to handle such a trial in an Islamic Court.
Subsequently, in October 2001, United States forces invaded Afghanistan to oust the Taliban regime.
On 7 October 2001, the official invasion began with British and United States forces conducting airstrike campaigns over enemy targets.
The remaining al-Qaeda and Taliban remnants fell back to the rugged mountains of eastern Afghanistan, mainly Tora Bora.
It is believed that Osama bin Laden escaped into Pakistan during the battle.
Iraq had been listed as a State Sponsor of Terrorism by the United States since 1990, when Saddam Flussein invaded Kuwait.
Iraq was also on the list from 1979 to 1982; it had been removed so that the United States could provide material support to Iraq in its war with Iran.
Flussein's regime proved a continuing problem for the United Nations and Iraq's neighbors due to its use of chemical weapons against Iranians and Kurds.
In October 2002, a large bipartisan majority in the United States Congress authorized the president to use force if necessary to disarm Iraq in order to ""prosecute the war on terrorism.
The Bush administration stated that the invasion was the ""serious consequences"" spoken of in the UNSC Resolution 1441.
The Bush administration also stated that the Iraq War was part of the War on Terror, a claim that was later questioned.
Baghdad, Iraq's capital city, fell in April 2003 and Saddam Hussein's government quickly dissolved.
On 1 May 2003, Bush announced that major combat operations in Iraq had ended.
However, an insurgency arose against the U.S.-led coalition and the newly developing Iraqi military and post-Saddam government.
The insurgency, which included al-Qaeda affiliated groups, led to far more coalition casualties than the invasion.
Iraq's former president, Saddam Hussein, was captured by United States forces in December 2003.
Post Cold War: End of History, Clash of Civilizations 12) End of History: I One was Francis Fukuyama's ""end of history"" thesis, first outlined in an article in the National Interest in 1989 then elaborated in a book published in 1992.
It pronounced total victory for Western capitalism and liberal democracy over all other competing ideologies and even predicted a boring future of peace and tranquility.
This article was written in 1989, in a period of unpredictable changes in the history.
In this newly occurring situation, he wrote his article, without examining this process in detail and with its multi-dimensional aspects.
At the beginning of this article, he briefly summarizes his main argument as follows; victory of economic and political liberalism occurred at the end of the 20th century.
The victory of the West and Western idea is evident firstly with the collapse o f systematic alternatives to Western liberalism.
He states that, in the past decade, there have been important changes in the intellectual climate of the world's two largest communist countries and reform movements have begun in both.
But as we see from the beginning, he states his arguments without a strong basis and with a lack of evidence.
After expressing his main arguement, he makes some references to Marx, Hegel and Kojeve.
He says that his main concept 'the end of history', is not an original concept.
According to Hegel, history is a dialectical process, with a beginning, a middle and an end.
On the other hand, Marx, believes that, the direction of historical development was a purposeful one and would come to an end with the achievement of a communist Utopia that would finally resolve all prior contradictions.
According to this perspective, mankind has progressed through a series of primitive stages of consciousness, on his path to the present.
Hegel believes that, at the end, rational form of society and state became victorious.
According to Hegel, history came to an end in 1806 with Napoleon's defeat of the Prussian monarchy at the Battle of Jena which symbolised the victory of the ideals of the French Revolution.
At that point, the vanguard o f humanity actualized the principles of the French Revolution.
But particular regimes in the real world might not implement these ideas fully.
According to him, the state that emerges at the end of history is liberal, democratic, recognizes and protects man's universal right to freedom through a system of law.
Fukuyama, also makes references to Kojeve, who is a modern French interpreter of Hegel.
Fukuyama explains the evolution process of human history as follows; human history was based on the existence of contradictions; as it can be seen in the primitive man's search for mutual recognition, contradiction between master and slave.
But in the universal homogeneous state, all prior contradictions are resolved and all human needs are satisfied.
There is no conflict over large issues and no need for generals or statesmen, what remains is primarily economic activity.
So he states that, main contradictions of human history will come to end with the end of history.
Fukuyama, also tries to improve the inefficiency of materialist theories and support Hegel's idealist perspective.
He gives examples about Far Eastern societies; he emphasizes their cultural heritage, the etrnc of work, family and other moral qualities which are important in explaining their economic performance.
I The Samuel Huntington's ""clash of civilizations"" thesis was first presented in a Foreign Affairs article in 1993 and then in a book published in 1996.
He was decidedly pessimistic, predicting that the end of the U.S.-Soviet rivalry would be followed by a new wave of conflict fueled by civilizational competition and animosity.
Three years later the book with the same title, now without the question mark, appeared.
The appeal of Huntington's theory is his attempt to develop an all-encompassing construct A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT that explains not only the conflicts of the present and future, but also the key features of the international political system.
Since it also touches upon intrastate conflicts, its implications reach beyond international relations.
There have been a number of 'world images' of international politics predicted for the twenty-first century.
On the one hand, some of the more optimistic students of globalization and the alleged spread of democracy see the world's peoples coming closer together in economic, political, and cultural terms.
On the other hand, more pessimistic analyses have focused on the gap between 'zones of peace and war' and clashes between emerging great powers in a multipolar era.
V Huntington's diagnosis belongs in the pessimistic camp, although it is distinctive in its focus on civilizations as the main unit of analysis.
Huntington argues that the world is divided into a number of such civilizations.
They are Western, Latin American, African, Islamic, Sinic, Hindu, Christian Orthodox, Buddhist, and Japanese.
Within some of these civilizations, there is a core state, often possessing nuclear weapons.
Sinic civilization has China as its core; Japan has its own civilization.
Western civilization has linked cores in the United States, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom.
In contrast, Islam lacks a core state, as does Latin America and Africa.
Orthodox versus Western Christianity and Islam; Muslim versus Hindu; Sinic versus Hindu.
Huntington defines a civilization as the broadest grouping of people beyond the level distinguishing humans from other species.
A civilization is defined by common objective elements language, history, religion, customs, and institutions as well as by people's self-identification.
Huntington is particularly concerned about the challenge that Islam poses to the West, both because its birthrate is higher than that of other civilisations and because of the resurgence of its popularity at the end of the twentieth century.
Moreover, its rejection of Western values and American influence means that these two civilizations are bound to clash at some point.
If China allies with Islamic states against the United States, the danger of war will be very high.
Huntington offers some guidelines or rules of conduct to avoid such a fate.
The core states should abstain from intervening in the internal affairs of other civilizations; they must mediate disputes that could turn into wars on fault-lines between civilizations; and all civilizations should work to identify shared values.
X As for the West, Huntington urges the United States to strengthen its alliances with others in the Western bloc, and avoid weakening its distinctive cultural values.
Huntington is no supporter of multiculturalism and the politics of respect among different minorities.
XL Criticism A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT First, it has been pointed out that to reduce the number of civilizations to eight or nine does not seem serious.
What Huntington lumps together as Western civilization has considerable internal fractures.
Some, for example Islam, are defined primarily by their religious inspiration; in others, such as the Confucian civilization, the relationship between the religion inspiring them and the political force they exert is less clear. ii.
Catholic or Protestant versions of Christianity form part of the cultural landscape, although citizens of Western states are deeply divided with regard to religious beliefs.
In each of Huntington's civilizations there are trends of thought that follow confessional lines, and others that follow secular lines a subject of lively debate today in countries such as Turkey and Italy. ill.
Besides religion, cultural splits make it difficult to look at civilizations as politically compact blocs.
Huntington talks of Latin American culture but ignores, for example, the division between the Spanish and Indian cultures. iv.
There are also considerable splits between social groups that benefit from the international economic system and those it discriminates against.
On the African continent, oligarchies share Western values and cultural preferences while other groups make do with socially devalued lifestyles far removed from modernity.
V The second major criticism levelled at Huntington's argument is that the relationship between states and civilizations remains unclear.
Furthermore, Huntington's own analysis of alignments between, say, China and Islam explicitly crosses civilizational boundaries and reflects the interests of powerful states.
One might then argue that military power and the balance of power among states could overwhelm the influence of culture and religion. vi.
Finally, critics have argued that Huntington underestimates the enduring strength of Western civilization, global capitalism, and interdependence.
Whilst his vision does alert us to the ways in which cultural values can exacerbate particular conflicts (e.g. between the former Soviet Union and Afghanistan, and during the wars in the Gulf in 1991 and in Yugoslavia over the past decade), it remains flawed in some important respects.
I Two major prophecies about international order emerged as the Cold War ended.
Both Fukuyama and Huntington might claim vindication in the recent turn of events.
Many have interpreted the emergence of the Islamic State as evidence of the truth of A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Huntington's ""clash of civilizations"" thesis.
On the other hand, in an article last year in the Wall Street Journal and in his book, ""Political Order and Political Decay"" Fukuyama who foresaw the end of great power rivalry but continued strife in the Third World, claims that his ""end of history"" thesis remains ""essentially correct"" even as he acknowledges that liberal democracies and civil liberties might suffer from ""decay,"" as may be happening in the United States.
Despite my respect for the intellect of their protagonists, I argue that the two big ideas of the post-Cold War era have been proven to be not only mostly wrong, but also wrong-headed.
Islam and the Islamic world have played a significant role in disproving and discrediting these ideas and not necessarily in the most predictable ways.
This was an ironic claim, since the defeated alternatives to Western liberalism, namely fascism and communism, were still Western ideas.
So the end of history was really the victory by one set of Western ideas over another.
For him, only ""large states still caught in the grip of history"" can produce and sustain big ideologies to challenge Western liberalism and thereby cause ""large-scale conflict"" in the international system.
The only candidates for offering such a challenge after the end of the Cold War would be Russia and China, but both were embracing Western-style markets and even, to some degree, political openness, thus moving out of said grips of history.
V Yet Russia and China might signal the ""return of geopolitics"" in the international system.
Fukuyama dismissed the potential of Islam to offer a political alternative to either liberalism or communism.
Certainly Islam, without a large or great power in its ranks, could pose no traditional Realpolitik challenge to liberalism.
There are 49 Muslim majority countries in the world, about one fourth of the total United Nations membership.
The world's Muslim population, at 1. billion, constitutes 23 percent of the total world population, with significant growth among its youth.
Indeed, these demographic facts feature prominently in Huntington's list of reasons for the clash of civilizations between Islam and the West.
Adding China's 1.35 billion to the equation means that about a third of the world's population theoretically remain outside of the West's triumphant ideology.
Even an ardent believer in democracy, such as this author, finds Fukuyama's claims that there are no ""real alternatives"" to Western style liberal A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT democracy and that ""we should have no doubt as to what kind of society lies at the end of History"" too sweeping, arrogant and deterministic.
The impetus for the Arab Spring came mainly from within Arab societies and had little to do with Western help.
There is no direct link between the downfall of Saddam Hussein and the Arab Spring.
By now, it is also clear that the Arab uprisings were more of a protest against corrupt and repressive regimes than a call for the establishment of Western style liberal democratic institutions.
If they were, they have certainly failed in most places except Tunisia.
While it would be wrong to say that a single or consistent Islamic world view runs through Muslim states and societies, it is equally wrong to assume that they simply identify with or adopt Western liberalism.
This should not be confused with an acceptance of the Hungtingtonian clash of civilizations.
The vast majority of Muslims and Muslim nations who do not accept Western liberalism similarly have no sympathy for al-Qaeda or the Islamic State or other form of Islamic extremism.
X Huntington's clash of civilizations has gained support in recent years as the new paradigm of global conflict replacing the Cold War and identifying the threat against which the United States and the West could focus and mobilize its strategic response.
It reinforced the fear of Islam and might have offered an implicit justification for the United States invasion of Iraq.
However, like Fukuyama's, Huntington's thesis has flunked its test in the Islamic world and elsewhere.
Bush presidency invaded Iraq in 2003, but this was because the invasion flouted international norms and disdained the UN Security Council.
Now, some of the most prominent Islamic countries have joined hands with the United State to fight the Islamic State and other terrorist groups in Syria, Iraq and Yemen.
While some point to the conflicts in Middle East and Ukraine as proof of Huntington's pessimism—and bearing in mind that Fukuyama too believed that conflicts other than those among the great powers would persist—recent and long-term trends in violence may come as a surprise.
The Armed Conflict Survey conducted by the International Institute for Strategic Studies paints a more negative picture, estimating a rise in the number of fatalities from major conflicts from 56,000 in 2008 to 180,000 in 2014.
Even if one assumes that these two conflicts are civilizational in nature—rather than social, economic or political causes like repression—the evidence of a world on fire A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT caused by a clash of civilizations is still limited at best.
The MSS survey also confirmed that the overall conflict numbers in the world is still going down, from 63 in 2008 to 42 today.
More damning for the Huntington thesis is the fact that the overwhelming majority of the targets and victims of violence perpetrated by Islamic extremist groups are Muslims.
Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan, all with Muslim-majority populations and epicenters of the War on Terror.
Contrary to Huntington's thesis, the violence that occurs in the Islamic world is mainly a clash within a civilization.
Some of the long-term causes of international stability, according to the Human Security Report, include the end of colonialism and the Cold War, international norms against the use of military force except in self-defense or authorized by the UN, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and ""peacemaking"" operations to prevent and stop wars, enhanced state capacity in securing resources to promote economic development and address grievances in the Third World, and growing economic interdependence among nations.
One other factor identified by the Report is ""inclusive democratization"" in previously authoritarian countries that contributes to non-violent conflict resolution and hence internal stability within these states.
It is clear that many of these factors, which are unlikely to disappear, cut across civilizational fault lines.
They are not uniquely the result of Western ideologies and leadership but are actively supported by both Western and non-Western states and societies.
For example, China and other authoritarian nations of East Asia led the way in building state capacity and economic growth and fostering economic interdependence.
Countries such as India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Indonesia are among the world's largest contributors to UN peacekeeping.
Peace in today's world is possible because civilizations can and do learn from each other and cooperate.
The only history that is rapidly ending is that of the relatively short period of Western dominance in the long march of civilization.
Post Cold War: Globalization A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 1) The principal characteristics of the contemporary order that give it its distinctive quality are difficult to discern.
There is often a tension, for example, between state-centred concepts of order and those that promote individual values.
For instance, policies based on the balance of power might lead to support for regimes with bad human rights' records.
It was the Soviet Union's marginalization from processes of globalization that revealed, and intensified, its weaknesses.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 22) Globalization is often associated with a 'borderless world' in which the old Westphalian order no longer applies.
Some of this is generated by the feeling that traditional democracy does not offer effective representation in the global order.
If this were the case, ideas of international order would be much less relevant to our concept of order.
This leads to the idea of a globalized state as a state form, and introduces an insideout element.
In this case, there is no contradiction between the norms and rules of a state system operating alongside globalized states.
Rules of sovereignty and non-intervention are undergoing change as symptoms of this adaptation.
Foreign Policies Foreign policy of Russia 1) The Post-Cold War Dilemma I The Russian Federation, the largest country in the contemporary world, emerged after the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991.
It is one of the fifteen independent countries created from the former Soviet Union.
Today's Russian Federation is twice as big as the United States and China, and six times bigger than India.
Russia has retained permanent seat in the UN Security Council, and inherited a large portion of nuclear arsenals from the Soviet Union.
Russia is now an emergent economy, a multiparty democracy, and very rich in energy resources.
So it is believed to have all the capabilities of emerging as an important power in world politics.
The present foreign policy of Russia is geared to take up the 'big power' role in international politics.
After the end of the Cold War, with the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia entered the Commonwealth of Independent States along with eleven other former Soviet republics.
However, immediately after the Cold War, it was struggling to find its proper role in world politics.
During this period (199199), it concentrated more on domestic political and economic reconstruction, and pursued a modest, not-too-ambitious foreign policy, unlike the former Soviet Union.
The Yeltsin administration had to give more time to build the 'new look'Russian Federation, which was passing through a transitional phase after the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
Yeltsin tried to give a new dimension to Russian foreign policy as he made major departures from the preceding Gorbachev era.
In early 1992, Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev announced that Russian foreign policy would differ from foreign policy under Gorbachev's 'New Thinking'because now democratic principles would drive it instead of the earlier 'socialist' principles.
These new democratic principles would give Russia the opportunity to engage itself in the global peace process in a new international order after the Cold War.
Kozyrev also emphasized that the basis for the new foreign policy would be Russia's national interests rather than the so-called class interests of the workers of the world that theoretically dominated Soviet foreign policy for a long time.
For two years (199293), Russian foreign policy was generally low key and conciliatory towards the West with endorsement of many Western positions in world politics.
Pressing domestic problems faced by the Yeltsin government were determining factors behind this 'low key'foreign policy.
But this departure from the traditional socialist policies, and conciliatory attitude of the Yeltsin government towards the West, raised severe public debates.
Ultranationalists and communists criticized the new foreign policy as detrimental to Russian national interests.
Some of them argued that Russia should not follow a lowkey foreign policy with a 'soft'attitude towards the West.
Foreign policy issues, along with other pressing domestic problems, were troubling the Yeltsin government immediately after the end of the Cold War.
In response, the Yeltsin government came up with a comprehensive foreign policy document in 1993 to allay criticisms that the government's initial foreign policy measures were sketchy and lacked imagination.
This document, approved by the Russian Parliament in April 1993 and named as the 'Foreign Policy Concept', was the first major official foreign policy document of the Russian Federation.
The 1993 Foreign Policy Concept declared Russia as a great power with several foreign policy priorities.
The FPC also called for enhanced ties with Asia-Pacific countries to balance relations with the West.
Through the FPC, the Yeltsin government placed greater emphasis on the protection of Russia's vital interests.
The FPC of 1993 was Yeltsin's answer to his critics and an attempt to place Russia as a great power in the new international order.
During his first term in office, Yeltsin was rather unsure about the role Russia would take in international politics.
Fie began in 1991 with a conciliatory foreign policy that manifested a soft attitude towards the United States and the West; but soon changed his position—as the FPC of 1993 makes evident—under increasing criticism from his rivals in Russian politics.
From 1993-94, he started to espouse Russian nationalism and began to talk in terms of Russia as a great power.
In his first State of the Federation Address to the Russian Parliament in February 1994, Yeltsin noted that as a great country, Russia was capable of preventing any global war, cold or hot, and Russia would also prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
What is worth notable here is Yeltsin's emphasis on Russia as the single main actor to prevent future global wars.
V Through his reference to the possibility of global war, Yeltsin tried to appease the Russian military and other conservatives within Russia that the United States and the West still remained a threat.
He also opposed the expansion of the NATO to include Central European states leaving out Russia.
He put emphasis on making the CIS an economic union with a common market and a common security system with guarantees on human rights.
He warned that Russia would not tolerate any harm to its national interests.
The nationalist rhetoric of 1993-94 mellowed down in favour of conciliatory policies again in 1995-96.
In his State of the Federation Address of February 1995, Yeltsin highlighted a cooperative and conciliatory foreign policy for Russia.
He announced Russia's sincere intention to adhere to arms control agreements and hinted at possible reductions in Russian armed forces.
Yeltsin, however, continued with Russia's objection to the enlargement of the NATO and called it a threat to European security.
He also announced that in 1995-96 Russian foreign policy would be peaceful and committed to the principle of 'real partnership in all directions'with the US, Europe, China, India, Japan and Latin America.
Russian foreign policy, Yeltsin declared in his address, would be guided by a 'balance of interests'with respect to the CIS and the Western world including the United States.
During his second term in office, Yeltsin was troubled by recurring health problems, domestic political turmoil, more intense separatist movements in Chechnya, and a weak economy.
As a result, he had to continue with conciliatory policies towards the West with occasional outbursts of Russian nationalism.
For instance, during the 1999 Kosovo war, he strongly opposed NATO military operations and warned of possible Russian intervention and a resumption of the Cold War, if NATO deployed ground troops to Kosovo.
He also had differences of opinion with the American President Bill Clinton over Moscow's military intervention in Chechnya which, according to the American President, resulted in huge civilian casualties.
Clinton requested him to stop military operations in Chechnya, which he refused.
But at the same time Yeltsin relied heavily on the Americans and US-supported financial organizations for the reconstruction of the Russian economy.
He sought help from the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank, and from the United States Treasury Department for Russia's economic revival.
During his presidency, Russia received more than United States $40 billion from international financial organizations.
His government was also accused of embezzling these funds, and other financial corruptions.
Yeltsin's foreign policy, like his domestic policies, was marked by inconsistency and incoherence.
Russia was searching for its proper identity and place in world politics during the Yeltsin presidency.
Although it inherited the legacy of the former Soviet Union, Russia was unsure of its status in the new international order.
It wished to bask in the superpower glory, and wanted to play a bigpower role in international politics.
However, the world at large, and Russia itself, was sceptic about its big-power status in international politics.
With a struggling economy, a nascent and weak democracy, pressing domestic problems, and an ailing but obstinate President, Russia's transition from a socialist political system to a liberal democracy was arduous.
It had to take conciliatory policies towards the West, yet wanted to pursue big-power ambitions.
These incoherent policies did not help Russia to assume the leading role that it wished to follow in international politics during the Yeltsin period.
This observation could be substantiated by the progress of the Russian economy, considerable domestic political stability, and a more focused and assertive foreign policy.
During Putin's eight years as the President, Russian economy grew at an average 7 per cent, making Russia the seventh largest economy in the world in terms of purchasing power.
The country's GDP increased six-fold between 2000 and 2008, and the poverty level decreased from 30 per cent in 2000 to 14 per cent in 2008.
Putin enjoyed a very high approval rating from the Russians, an average of 65 per cent during his presidency, the highest enjoyed by any leader in the world (as per public opinion surveys), because he was credited with bringing political stability to the country and restoring rule of law.
In international affairs, Putin firmly placed Russia as a leading state and earned respect for it; a dream that his predecessor Yeltsin nurtured, but failed to achieve.
This was possible through an assertive foreign policy backed by a A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT resurgent economy.
During his presidency, Russia emerged as an able competitor to the United States and Europe.
The theoretical foundation of Putin's foreign policy was laid in the 'Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation', approved and issued by the President on 28 June 2000.
This sixteen-page document clearly stated the foreign policy objectives of the Putin government, and Russia's priorities in the new international order in the twenty-first century.
There is a growing trend towards the establishment of a unipolar structure of the world with the economic and power domination of the United States.
In solving principal questions of international security, the stakes are being placed on western institutions and forums of limited composition, and on weakening the role of the United Nations Security Council.
Russia shall seek to achieve a multi-polar system of international relations that really reflects the diversity of the modem world with its great variety of interests.
By naming the United States as the power wishing to perpetuate its dominance in international affairs, Putin's FPCRF denounced such tendencies and said that Russia was in favour of a multipolar world.
These pronouncements sounded like resumption of the Cold War by the Putin administration, although it was proved later on that Putin was not interested in another Cold War; rather he wanted Russia to be strong and resilient, both in economic and security terms.
Russia conveyed its opinions clearly without antagonizing other important powers.
For instance, Putin condemned American attacks on Iraq in 2003 and called for removing economic sanctions from Iraq.
Before the Iraq war, Putin allowed coalition military bases in Central Asia during the US-led military operations in Afghanistan in 2001, despite objections from the ultranationalists in Russia.
This instance showed that Putin's opposition to the United States was issue-based, and not chronic.
Fie signed the very important 'Strategic Offensive Reduction Treaty' with Bush in Moscow on 26 May 2002.
According to the treaty, both the United States and Russia would reduce 1,700 to 2,200 operationally deployed nuclear warheads each.
The SORT, a significant step towards nonproliferation, would expire on 31 December 2012.
The moderate but assertive foreign policy pursued by the Putin government earned respect for Russia from the international community.
Putin objected to Kosovo's plan for separation from Serbia, and warned the United States and European powers not to encourage Kosovo's cessation.
Fie opposed NATO's expansion programme, but also formed the NATO-Russia Council.
Fie understood correctly that Russia would require economic help from the United States and other European powers.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Therefore, he did not blindly oppose these nations to appease Russian nationalists.
Yet he never missed any chance to condemn American 'dominance'in international politics, and projected the image of a constructive critique of the United States in international relations.
During his eight years as the President of Russia, Putin's foreign policy achievements were significant.
Russia regained its status as a leading global power during the presidency of Putin.
Sustained economic growth, coupled with assertive domestic and foreign policies, led to Russia's enhanced international prestige and acceptance.
It had emerged as the world's biggest energy base, producing more oil than Saudi Arabia.
Almost the whole of Europe is dependent on the export of natural gas from Russia.
V The growing arms and commodity items exports have made Russia the third largest reserve of foreign exchange in the world.
Russia under Putin formed several multilateral forums like the Sanghai Cooperation Organization , NATORussia Council, Collective Security Treaty Organization , Quartet on the Middle East and the EU-Russia Common Spaces, to increase its presence and importance in international politics.
Russia's active involvement in all these forums indicated Putin's desire to achieve a big-power role for his country.
Anti-Russian regimes in neighbouring states like Kyrgyzstan, Georgia and Ukraine emerged for some time to threaten Russia's security and its foreign policy initiatives in neighbouring countries.
But Putin successfully met these challenges and made Russian position secure in Central Asia and East Europe.
A failed 'tulip revolution' initiated by anti-Russian groups in Kyrgyzstan in 2005 turned into a nightmare for the local population.
The failure, accompanied by killings and chaos in the capital and other cities, frightened the local elites and population; but at the same time it strengthened Russia's position in Central Asia.
Earlier, the much publicized 'rose revolution'in Georgia in 2003, and the 'orange revolution' in Ukraine in 2004-05 (these were also known as 'colour revolutions') that destabilized Russia-friendly governments in these countries, lost their sheen and gradually the political elite close to Russia came to power in Georgia and Ukraine.
These failed revolutions in effect ensured the success of Putin's foreign policy in neighbouring states.
Putin warned the United States and West European powers not to meddle in Georgia and Ukraine, and the situation never went out of Russia's control.
The Americans, with limited strategic interests in Georgia and Ukraine, also restrained themselves because they did not wish to antagonize Putin due to increased American political and business interests in Russia.
Putin and his Russia commanded more respect from the international community compared to Yeltsin and his Russia of the 1990s.
Russia, despite strong economic growth, failed to emerge as a major trade partner for many of its important neighbours A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT like China, Japan, and Kazakhstan.
With industrial nations like Germany, Italy, England, and Canada, Russian trade remained insignificant during the Putin period.
Further, Russia's trade volume with important regional organizations like the EU and the ASEAN did not assume significant proportions during the Putin presidency.
Russia in 2009-10—when Putin was the Prime Minister and a main figure in the Medvedev government—seemed to have lost its earlier political influence in many neighbouring states, especially in Georgia and Ukraine, with the proliferation of antiRussian forces in these states.
However, negative points in Putin's foreign policy are outweighed by the positive points.
Without reviving the Cold War and significantly antagonizing the West, Putin was very successful in establishing Russia as an important actor in international politics.
Medvedev was widely known as the person groomed by Putin to take over the mantle after him.
He continued with Putin's policies in domestic and foreign affairs, although he often showed sparkles of his individuality in dealing with internal and external issues.
Unlike Putin, Medvedev was not known in Russian politics as a person comfortable with foreign policy; he was more a 'domestic' politician.
He was largely dependent on Putin and the Russian foreign ministry for external affairs.
Like his predecessors, Medvedev also issued a Foreign Policy Concept on 31 July 2008, that outlined foreign policy priorities of his government.
It contained six priority areas that Russia wished to follow in international relations.
The FPC of 2008 contained nothing unique as compared to the FPCRF issued by the Putin government in 2000.
The former also opposed the expansion of the NATO and called for equitable relationship between Russia and the NATO in the Russia-NATO Council.
It objected to the inclusion of Georgia and Ukraine in the NATO and the projected expansion till the borders of Russia.
The FPC stated that 'Russia calls for building a truly unified Europe without divisive lines through equal interaction between Russia, the European Union and the United States.
It also stressed on increasing cooperation with the CIS, the EU, Japan, China, the two Koreas, the ASEAN, and several West European, African and Latin American states.
Medvedev met United States President Barack Obama in April A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 2009 during the Group of 20 Leaders' Summit in London.
The two presidents issued a joint statement after their bilateral meeting which was cordial and positive.
Medvedev and Obama agreed to pursue verifiable reductions in their huge nuclear arsenals.
By agreeing to verifiable reductions, Medvedev made a departure from the earlier Putin administration, which did not go for the verifiable reduction clause after the SORT, signed in 2002.
Both Medvedev and Obama reiterated their commitment to a nuclear-weapon-free world, and vowed to work together to achieve the goal.
They underscored the need for enhanced cooperation between their nations to meet the demands of the new international order.
Medvedev, like Putin, continued the policy of economic diplomacy for Russia.
He also used the resurgent Russian economy and strong energy resources to establish Russia's position in international politics.
Russia under Medvedev continued as the largest arms and energy exporter in the world.
But Medvedev gradually came out of the shadow of Putin in foreign and domestic policy matters, and put the stamp of his own personality in these areas.
For instance, Medvedev wanted the dismantling of a moribund OSCE in favour of more active security and cooperation mechanisms for Europe, and proposed a European Security Treaty.
He established a Customs Union with Belarus, and proposed similar unions with other CIS-countries.
Medvedev is no longer another Putin in a different garb; he is a different mind as well.
But Russia under Medvedev is doing well in economic development and international affairs, although the process of building a democratic Russia is far from over.
Russia drives Georgian forces from South Ossetia and Abkhazia, then recognizes both as independent states.
V 2008 November Parliament votes overwhelmingly in favour of a bill that would extend the next president's term of office from four to six years.
Supplies to southeastern Europe are disrupted for several weeks as a result of the dispute.
V 2010 June Presidents Medvedev and Obama mark warming in ties on the Russian leader's first visit to the White House.
Obama says the United States will back Russia's World Trade Organisation accession, and Russia will allow the United States to resume poultry exports.
Tens of thousands turn out in opposition protests alleging fraud, in first major anti-government protests since the early 1990s.
Opponents take to the streets of several major cities to protest at the conduct of the election, and the police arrest hundreds.
Russia formally joins the World Trade Organization after 18 years of negotiations.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT V 2012 December Angered by a United States bill blacklisting Russian officials in connection with the death in custody of lawyer Sergei Magnitsky, Moscow bans Americans from adopting Russian children and stops US-funded non-governmental organisations from working in Russia.
This sparks biggest East-West showdown since Cold War, with the United States and its European allies imposing sanctions and accusing Russia of stoking separatism in eastern Ukraine.
Ukraine accuses Russia of sending a big column of tanks, artillery and troops into eastern Ukraine.
X A Moscow court finds leading opposition figure Alexei Navalny guilty of fraud charges and imposes a suspended prison sentence.
They deny the charges, one after alleging he was coerced into confessing.
There is widespread domestic and international scepticism about the official account.
But West and Syrian opposition say it overwhelmingly targets anti-Assad rebels instead.
One of the most ancient civilizations, China's political history is nearly seven thousand years old.
During this long political history, China was under various rulers and political systems.
The Manchu rulers governed China for a very long period, from 1661 to 1911.
They were able to create a large territory that included Tibet, Mongolia and Sinkiang.
But at a later stage, the Manchu rulers were unable to govern and protect this large empire.
Inefficiency, corruption and extravagance of the later Manchu rulers led to the downfall of the Manchu dynasty.
This unstable situation was exploited by different foreign powers to proclaim their dominance in different parts of China.
But it should be remembered at this point that entire China never came under any particular foreign rule; parts of the land were occupied by different foreign rulers at different times.
To protest against the presence of foreign rulers, and the corruption in Manchu rule, the Boxur Revolt was led by Sun Yat Sen during 18951900.
Although this revolution was not totally successful, it nevertheless inspired people to unite against foreign rule and the Manchu dynasty.
Since then, China experienced a republican system instead of the earlier monarchical system.
During the First World War, Yuan Shi Kai declared himself as the Emperor of China reviving possibilities of returning to a monarchical system again.
Flowever, after the death of Shi Kai in 1916, the Kuomintang appointed Li Yuan Flang as the President of China, and declared China as a Republic.
After the death of Sun Yat Sen in 1925, Chiang Kai Shek assumed leadership of the Kuomintang party and China.
Kuomintang preferred to call itself a nationalist party with the aim to create a unified China, and Chiang Kai Shek became, as the undisputed leader of his party, the harbinger of this aim.
Since 1935, Mao was pressurizing the Kuomintang government for rapid land reforms programme in favour of the peasants.
This focus on rural areas yielded tremendous results as the popularity of Mao and his party soared in a largelyrural, agrobased China.
Before the Second World War, the communists gave issue-based support to the Kuomintang to fight Japanese aggression; but their ideological differences continued.
Mao's very able leadership; call for land reforms and establishment of rights of the peasants; support from the 'socialist' Soviet Union; and a corrupt Kuomintang rule.
Mao was trying to topple the Kuomintang regime, and training the communists to fight the Kuomintang.
In 1946, a civil war started in China between the communists and the Kuomintangs.
The United States supported the Kuomintang regime through military and economic assistance.
But the communists who were more organized and efficient won the civil war, and created the modern Peoples'Republic of China on 1 October 1949.
The modern Chinese state was born in 1949 and Mao Zhe Dong became its supreme leader.
From 1949 till his death in 1976, Mao Zhe Dong was the undisputed leader of the PRC, and the chief architect of China's foreign policy.
America's assistance to the Kuomintang regime during the civil war in China, and later in Taiwan, led him to locate the United States as an adversary.
Fie believed that after the Second World War, when European imperialism had taken a backseat, the Americans had assumed the role of a neo-imperialist and a neocolonialist.
Mao's PRC was very critical of the American role in Taiwan and in other parts of the world, where the United States was allegedly trying to interfere in the domestic affairs of states through economic and security assistance.
American interference in the Korean War in 1950 angered Mao, and China's relations with the United States plunged to an A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT abysmal low after the Korean War.
At various times in his leadership, Mao openly labelled the United States as an imperial and neocolonial power.
Understandably, China's relations with the United States were much strained from the beginning.
Mao was also sceptical about other Western European powers like Britain, France, West Germany and Italy for their perceived anti-communist ideological positions.
As a committed person to socialist ideologies, Mao was deeply resentful of the West Bloc, and almost turned China away from the Western world.
So China's relations with the United States and other Western powers were very cold and distant during the Mao era.
Mao's PRC went on a bonhomie with the Soviet Union, the first socialist state in the world, a superpower and a supporter of the Chinese communists during China's civil war and thereafter.
Ideological proximity and material support brought the Soviet Union closer to China.
Moscow gave huge economic and technological assistance to China after 1949, when the state-building process was going on in full swing.
China was creating its industrial and transport infrastructure with Soviet assistance during this time.
But the Soviet-China proximity did not last long, as differences emerged from the mid-1950s, overtly on the issue of transfer of poor Soviet technology to China, but covertly over the broader issue of leadership of the Socialist bloc.
The same year, the two countries levelled charges of illegal occupation of territories around their borders against each other.
China also severely criticized the presence of Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia in 1968 to curb a popular movement against the communist government.
From the mid1960s, China tried to be close to the East Bloc countries, only to arouse further Soviet suspicion.
The Soviet Union viewed this Chinese zeal as designs to curb the Soviet influence in the East Bloc countries.
Flowever, China was able to develop close relationship with Albania by the mid-1960s.
An angry Soviet Union stopped economic and technological assistance to Albania as a retaliatory measure.
The Sino-Soviet rift continued throughout the 1970s and the 1980s, as both the socialist countries tried to provide leadership to other socialist states during this period, and viewed the other with suspicion and mistrust.
United States President Richard Nixon's visit to China in 1972 further fuelled the suspicion.
Soviet leaders alleged that China was trying to build an unholy nexus with the United States to marginalize the Soviet Union in international politics.
China's relations with the socialist superpower were thus mostly adversarial in Mao's time.
Mao's China provided support to the anti-colonial struggle in the developing states with the desire to become the leader in those states.
China also became friendly with India, and the two big countries of Asia went along well for some time.
But from the late 1950s, border disputes and the issue of Tibet created serious differences between the two countries A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT which ultimately led to the 1962 Indo-China war.
Instead, China concentrated on building good relations with some other Asian states like Burma , Nepal, and Pakistan.
Foreign policy analysts in India viewed this Chinese move with suspicion, a latent design to isolate India and strengthen anti-India sentiments in these countries.
However, China's efforts to become a leader of the third world failed, as it could not take leadership in the NAM, and as it developed acrimonious relations with many thirdworld countries.
After 1965, China's relations with Indonesia and many other countries in Africa and Latin America deteriorated.
Indonesian President Suharto alleged that China was instigating the communists in Indonesia with a view to create internal disturbances in the country.
Three African states, Burundi, Ghana, and Central African Republic, cut off diplomatic relations with China in 1965-66.
Kenya also condemned the aggressive 'socialist imperialism'of China during this time.
Mao's China also failed to develop close connections with the developing countries of Latin America.
China's aim to lead the third world against the 'imperialistic' policies of the two superpowers was not realized, as Mao's China got estranged from several third world countries.
Viewed from an objective standpoint, Mao's foreign policy was not very successful.
He isolated both the superpowers and developed adversarial relations with them.
With important states of the third world like India, Indonesia and Yugoslavia , Mao's China developed very antagonistic relations.
China also remained isolated from the industrially developed Western European countries due to Mao's apathy for these 'capitalist', formerly colonial powers.
Mao, who was supposed to develop cordial relations with the poor states for his support to the anticolonial freedom struggle in poor countries, also isolated poor countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The Soviet influence over East Europe was a deterrent for Mao to make any significant impact in East Europe, although he tried and succeeded to establish close links with one or two smaller states in the region.
The ideological underpinning of Mao's foreign policy, to avoid the 'colonial'and 'imperial'powers, did not help China economically or politically, as China got estranged from the industrially developed United States and the West.
The confusion in Mao's foreign policy was manifested further when China got entangled in bitter rivalries with a 'socialist'Soviet Union, and 'nonaligned'India and Indonesia, and other developing countries of the third world with whom Mao's ideology should have gone well.
Instead, Mao's China was soon termed as politically ambitious, with an eye to leadership in the A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT socialist bloc, and the third world.
This China aroused suspicion in the world, and as a consequence, failed to win friends.
During Mao's tenure, China remained largely estranged in international relations.
This proposition clearly refers to the fact that after the death of Mao Zhe Dong, China's domestic and foreign policies were controlled by another supreme leader, Deng Xiao Ping.
Although Deng officially assumed leadership in 1978, succeeding Hua Guo Feng, who took over leadership for a very short period after Mao's death, Deng's rise in Chinese politics could be noticed from 1977.
From 1977 till his death in 1997, Deng Xiao Ping remained the most prominent figure in Chinese politics.
Consequently, Chinese foreign policy was also controlled by Deng during this period.
Fie made significant departures from Mao's policies, both in domestic and international spheres.
Mao's foreign policy was loaded with ideological issues like distance from the 'capitalist' and 'imperialist'states, spreading the message of socialism, supporting 'revolutionary'communist and nationalist movements around the world.
Deng's foreign and domestic policies were considered more pragmatic than ideological.
Deng was the architect of economic reforms in China which opened hitherto closed Chinese doors to the industrially developed Western world.
Chinese economic reforms helped Deng to pursue a more realistic and internationally acceptable foreign policy.
Deng realized that it would not help China much to isolate both the United States and the Soviet Union simultaneously.
For China's economic development, the US, Western European states and an industrially developed Japan were crucial and more welcome than the socialist rival, the Soviet Union.
China could no longer afford to ignore the Western states as 'capitalist'and 'imperialist' powers.
Apart from economic interests, a common adversary also brought China and the United States closer.
American President Richard Nixon tried to break the ice in Sino-American relations by visiting China in 1972.
But differences between the two nations persisted over Taiwan—which China claimed as its territory but the United States considered as a sovereign independent country—and Mao's label on the United States as an 'imperialist' power.
Therefore, Sino-American relations continued to be indifferent during the Mao period.
It was Deng who broke real grounds to establish closer links with the United States and other developed states of the West.
In 1979, China opened up its economy, allowing private business to proliferate and foreign investment to come.
A new Chinese Constitution was introduced in 1982 to facilitate liberal economic developments in China.
Deng's China created Special Economic Zones , mainly in the coastal areas, to give special privileges to foreign investors.
Now, the industrially A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT advanced states, apathetic to China for long for its 'closed door' policies, felt encouraged and got attracted to China.
The socialist market economy that Deng introduced in China was a new model in international politics and economy.
It retained one-party control in Chinese politics and society, but allowed deregulation of the economy.
V Although there were initial schisms about the SME, it gradually proved to be a huge success and made Deng, the conservative pragmatist, the undisputed leader of modern China.
Deng's foreign policy, must, therefore, be analysed in the context of the SME and his conservative pragmatism.
The success of the state-controlled liberal economy in China, manifested through its economic growth rate, made China a very attractive destination for foreign investments.
American, Japanese and west European private business started to enter China in a big way from the early 1980s, paving ways for the relegation of political differences to the background.
China's annual average economic growth rate for the decade 1960-70 was 5.2, and for 1970-80 it was 5.5.
As China shed its ideological bias to invite foreign investments from the 'capitalist' and 'imperialist' states of the West, these industrially developed nations also changed their views about a 'rigid' and 'closed' socialist state in Asia.
Gradually China's relations with the Western world improved, as China began to play, from the early 1980s, a significant role in mainstream international economics and politics.
Mao's China also wanted to play a major role in world politics, but could not fulfill its desires due to China's closed economy and adverse international relations; but Deng's China, economically open and strong, could play this desired role more easily, as China became more acceptable to the rest of the world.
China's relations with the Soviet Union also improved after Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the USSR in 1985.
Border trade between the two socialist giants went up and got strengthened by the late 1980s.
Before his visit, the Soviet Union announced the withdrawal of 5,00,000 Soviet troops from its borders with China.
A ten-year vision on close cooperation in trade, economic and technological areas between the two countries was announced during Peng's visit.
With 'glasnost' and 'perestroika' taking shape, the Soviet Union also opened up and shed its earlier hostility towards China.
Deng also reached out to third world countries, including India, to assess possibilities of improved trade and commerce.
By the early 1990s, when Cold War was nearing its end, China secured its place in the international order as a rapidly growing economy, a strong military, and a more open state with a realistic view of the world.
China's journey towards a major power status continued after the end of the Cold War.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 4) China's Foreign Policy I After the Cold War China maintained its spectacular economic growth after the Cold War and continued to use economic diplomacy as its major thrust in international relations.
Although an ageing Deng Xiao Ping resigned from all official posts in 1991, he remained as the central figure in Chinese politics, and virtually controlled the party and the state in China till his death in 1997.
The SME brought economic gains for China, which subsequently helped China in conducting international diplomacy more effectively.
After the Cold War, the United States remained the only superpower in an altered international order.
Deng's pragmatic China wanted to be close to the world's only remaining superpower.
The United States also wanted to forge strong economic relations with China because of its emerging market.
In 1994, the United States granted the 'Most Favoured Nation in Trade 'status to China.
Despite persistent criticism in the United States Congress about human rights violations in China, the United States did not hesitate to grant MFN status to China for trade and economic interests.
By 1998-99, China became the fourth largest trading partner of the United States with bilateral trade reaching United States $94. billion at the end of 1999.
Since then, it has become a major player in the WTO, supporting interests of the developing states.
Two-way trade reached a substantial United States $409. billion in 2008.
The United States emerged as the top trading partner of China in 2008 and 2009, with Japan emerging as the second largest trading partner in 2009.
These data revealed how China had used its economic diplomacy after the Cold War to bring former adversaries close towards China.
Despite occasional American concern for an authoritarian political system, and violation of democratic and human rights in China, the US-China economic relations remained very strong after the Cold War, and these would continue to remain strong in the future for mutualtrade and business interests.
Strengthened economic relations also helped Sino-American political relations to improve after the Cold War.
Top-level mutual visits by the leaders of the two nations continued after the war.
The US-China joint statement issued during Obama's visit acknowledged China's leading role in world politics, and particularly in Asia.
The statement, which raised eyebrows in India, clearly indicated that China occupied a dominant role in Asia.
It appeared to highlight the new Democratic Administration's preference for China.
This preference may also strengthen US-China political relations in future.
With Gorbachev becoming the President of the Soviet Union, Sino-Soviet relations began to improve.
China's relations with the new Russian Federation continued to grow after the Cold War.
In 1991, the Sino-Russian Border Agreement was signed apportioning territory that became controversial during the Sino-Soviet border conflict during the Cold War period.
In 1992, Russian President Boris Yeltsin visited China, and signed economic and defence agreements with China.
After Gorbachev's visit A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT to China in 1989, leaders of the two states continued to pay mutual visits.
These toplevel visits helped to normalize relations between the two countries.
V Russian President Vladimir Putin visited China in 2000, and signed three important economic and trade agreements with China.
In 2001, Russia emerged as the top supplier of defence equipments to China.
Also in 2001, the close relations between the two countries were formalized with the 'Treaty of Good Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation', a twenty-year strategic, economic, and arguably, an implicit military, treaty.
Before this treaty was signed, the two countries joined Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan to form the Shanghai Cooperation Organization , a multilateral forum for economic and strategic cooperation.
The Russian government also agreed to transfer Tarabarov Island as well as one half of Bolshoy Ussuriysky Island to China in 2004, ending a long-standing border dispute between the two countries.
The transfer had been ratified by both the Chinese and the Russian parliaments.
This event was a big leap forward in bilateral relationship between China and Russia, and could act as a confidence-building measure in the future.
Two-way trade between the two countries also registered significant growth in recent times.
During his visit to Russia in 2007, Chinese President Hu Jin Tao told Russian journalists that he was very optimistic about bilateral trade reaching United States $80 billion by 2010.12 Russian President Dimitry Medvedev also expressed similar hopes during his state visit to China in 2008.13 Although the total volume of present China-Russia trade is not as large as the volume of Sino-American trade, it is encouraging to note that China-Russia two-way trade has gained momentum after the Cold War.
It appears from the analyses made here that both countries are now eager to forge strong economic and political relations in a changed international order after the Cold War.
China also improved its relations with Japan, a close neighbour and an economic giant, after the Cold War.
Under the SME, China allowed Japanese companies to do business in the country.
This Chinese gesture helped to ease tensions between the two Asian neighbours.
This was the first visit to China by any Japanese Emperor after the Second World War.
Naturally, this visit aroused great interests in the two countries and helped to improve relations.
In 1993, Japan's erstwhile Prime Minister Hosokawa expressed regrets on behalf of his people for Japan's aggression over China during the Second World War.
Top-level mutual visits by the leaders of the two states are taking place regularly.
During his talks with the Chinese leaders, Abe stressed on cooperation in bilateral trade and investment.
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao visited Japan in 2007 and held talks on various areas of cooperation between the two states.
Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi visited Japan in November 2009 and met Japanese leaders.
Japan's Foreign Minister Okada welcomed Yang on his official visit to Japan, and stated that Japan and A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT China had engaged in dialogues on a variety of issues between their counterparts and that he would like to further promote active cooperation not only in bilateral relationship but also in regional and global issues.
As mentioned earlier, Japan had emerged as the second largest trade partner of China in 2008 with a total trade volume of United States $266. billion.
Clearly, mutual economic interests had paid dividends in Sino-Japanese bilateral relations which improved significantly after the Cold War.
China also endeavoured to improve its relations with the ASEAN, the regional organization with strong economic credentials.
China and the ASEAN now hold regular summits, also known as the 10 + 1 mechanism.
On 24 October 2009, the Twelfth China-ASEAN Summit was held in Hua Hin, Thailand.
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and the leaders of ASEAN-countries attended the summit.
The two sides reviewed the joint efforts to tackle the international financial crisis and other challenges faced by the two sides over the past one year, expressed their will to forge cooperation and seek common development, and reached broad consensus on deepening comprehensive cooperation.
The China-ASEAN Free Trade Area , to be completed by 2010, would become another important milestone in the history of relations between the two sides.
The current relationship between China and the ASEAN is featured by stronger mutual trust, closer ties in different areas, and the will to work for peace and security in the Asia Pacific region.
China's relations with EU were established in 1975, and are currently guided by the 1985 EU-China Trade and Cooperation Agreement.
At present, apart from regular political, trade and economic dialogue meetings between China and the EU, there are over twenty-four sectoral dialogues and agreements, ranging from environmental protection to industrial policy, to education and culture.
The Twelfth EU-China Summit took place in Nanjing, China, on 30 November 2009.
The joint statement issued after the summit acknowledged the role played by EU and China in fostering peace and harmony in the world, and called for increasing cooperation between the EU and China in the areas of trade, security, environment, education and culture.
As a group, the EU emerged as the largest trade partner of China in 2008.
China's relations with the developing nations of Asia, Africa and Latin America also improved after the Cold War in an atmosphere of free market economy and changed political calculations.
China is helping many developing states to improve their industrial and social infrastructure through economic and technological assistance.
On the whole, an economically resurgent China is now playing the role of an important actor in world politics after the Cold War.
After the war, England's powers were diminished because its economy was hit hard due to the war; and its colonies all over the world became free of British control, depriving it of essential resources to sustain its economy.
In comparison, the United States and the Soviet Union emerged as strong economic and military superpowers after the Second World War, relegating England to a lesser-power status in international politics.
British economy and foreign policy became largely dependent on the US, its ally before and after the war.
All the important bases of British power for centuries actually started eroding before the Second World War, leaving Britain to remain satisfied with a medium-power status today.
Of these five 'strengths', imperial interests and balance of power ended with the Second World War.
The vast British empire, in the form of colonies in almost every part of the world, went out of British control after the war.
For almost three and a half centuries Britain did not allow any other power to dominate in Europe, and maintained a balance of power in the continent through its command as holder of the balance.
But the system of balance of power also came to an end after the Second World War with the rise of two superpowers possessing nuclear weapons.
With unprecedented development in the field of science and technology from the early twentieth century, several European states—such as Italy, Germany, France, Portugal and Spain—started competing with England as important sea powers and trading states.
So Britain's dominance as a sea power and a trading state faced challenges before the Second World War.
British economy, traditionally dependent on sea power and trade, found many competitors after the Second World War—such as Japan, the US, Italy and the USSR—and lost grounds.
All these factors led to Britain's 'fall from grace'as a great power in world politics.
During the Cold War, Britain wished to play the role of an important actor in international politics, and succeeded to some extent, with the help of the United States.
With common bonds of heritage, language and culture, Britain and the United States remained strong allies before and after the Second World War.
Like the US, Britain's post-war foreign policy was preoccupied with the task of thwarting the 'advancement' of communism and the Soviet Union in the world.
For this reason, Britain's relations with the socialist countries of East Europe, Africa, Asia and Latin America were distant, and sometimes antagonistic.
But it must be pointed out at this point that Britain did not always support the United States blindly during the Cold War.
It expressed its reservations about the American policy on China, and put forward the view, as early as in 1950, that trade with China must be A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT augmented.
With impressive and increasing volumes of Sino-American and Sino-British trade today, Britain's views proved right in the long run.
Britain also opposed American policies during the Suez Canal Crisis and the Vietnam War.
Moreover, Britain tried to expand its sphere of influence in the world, independent of the US, through the Commonwealth.
Britain was able to establish close political, economic, and cultural links with more than a hundred states in the world through the commonwealth system.
Although the commonwealth is a much heterogeneous movement now, with lesser British control, it nevertheless helps British foreign policy to cultivate closer ties with many states, and has proved to be beneficial for British diplomacy for a long time.
In 1979, during the premiership of Margaret Thatcher, Britain successfully resolved the Rhodesian crisis leading to the establishment of Zimbabwe.
Thatcher, the last Prime Minister of Britain during the Cold War, also won the Falklands War against Argentina in 1982 to re-establish British control over the Falkland islands that Argentina had captured for a brief period.
British victory in the Falklands War reminded the world that Britain was not a spent force and could preserve its national interests effectively.
Major and his team did not seek a very proactive role for Britain in the new world order immediately after the Cold War.
Flowever, the first Gulf War in 1991 and the Masstricht Treaty for a revamped European Union were tough foreign policy challenges for the Major government.
But the Masstricht Treaty and the issue of a united Europe raised political storms in Britain, bringing out the shaky position of the Major government on foreign policy matters.
Flowever, Major showed some determination during the first Gulf War by sending British troops to defend Kuwait, and by persuading the American President Geoge Bush to support 'no-fly zones'in Northern Iraq with a view to prevent Iraqi aircrafts from flying over the area to attack rival aircrafts.
Fie paved the way for the Belfast Agreement, also known as the 'Good Friday Agreement', between Britain and Northern Ireland which sought to end London's direct control over Northern Ireland.
Under him, Britain preferred an 'interventionist' role in international politics.
The Blair government's interventionist A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT preferences could be ascertained from Britain's active involvement in NATO attacks on Kosovo and Serbia in 1999 in the wake of ethnic conflicts in these regions.
The Blair administration also made England an active player in the 'humanitarian intervention' in Afghanistan in 2001 and in Iraq in 2003.
The British military joined hands, mainly with its American counterparts, to launch massive attacks on disruptive forces in Afghanistan and Iraq.
In all these operations—Kosovo, Serbia, Afghanistan and Iraq—the Blair government cooperated closely with the United States to achieve its foreign policy goals of making Britain a principal actor in international politics again.
Blair was an ardent advocate of US-UK partnership to secure and promote Britain's national interests.
This cooperation became stronger after suicide bombers attacked civilians in London in 2005.
The Blair government, with a view to securing a prominent role for Britain in European affairs, took active interest in matters related to the European Union.
Britain worked hard towards achieving a European Monetary Union, and the Blair government asked the British Treasury to assess the possibility of adopting the Euro.
After careful assessment, the government decided to defer the adoption of euro for Britain when the single currency was introduced in many countries of Europe in 2002.
But it hoped that the currency would be introduced in Britain in future.
The Labour government also endorsed the Nice Treaty in 2002 which sought to strengthen the European Union by revamping its internal structure.
Further, it signed the Brussels Reform Treaty in 2007 that wanted to extend the powers of the union.
The Belfast Agreement was initiated by the former John Major government to bring peace to Northern Ireland.
This agreement formed a part of Blair's policy to brighten England's image in Europe.
In deference to the Belfast agreement, the Tony Blair government helped to restore the 'Stormont', the Northern Ireland Parliament, in 2007.
During his two tenures, Blair visited almost every part of Europe—including several areas in East and Central Europe—to restore Britain's close ties with these countries which were affected in many cases by Cold War politics.
Blair's euro-centric policies helped in many ways to reestablish Britain at the helm of European politics after the Cold War.
Brown continued with the foreign policy priorities of the Blair government, seeking closer ties with the United States and an active role in European and international politics.
Although Brown was committed to the Iraq War, he ordered withdrawal of British combat troops from Iraq in 2008.
Wanting to improve relations with China, he paid an official visit to the country in July 2008.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 13) There he expressed hope that England-China economic relations would continue to be strong, and the volume of bilateral trade would touch United States $60 billion by the end of 2010.
Although British sympathisers of the Tibetan unrest in 2008 wanted Brown to send a strong message to China, he could not satisfy them fully as he attended the closing ceremony of the summer Olympics of 2008 in Beijing on 24 August 2008.
Brown was in favour of building closer ties with China, a booming economy and an important power in today's world politics.
British relations with Russia suffered a setback when the Brown government expressed support to the people of Georgia during the South Ossetia War of 2008 between Russia and Georgia.
The British Foreign Secretary, David Miliband, visited the Georgian capital Tbilisi to meet the Georgian President and said that the British government and people stood in solidarity with the Georgian people.
The opposition party in Britain accused the Brown government in October 2009, during a Westminster Hall debate on a 'frozen relationship'with Russia that was reminiscent of the Cold War disengagement between the two countries.
Although Brown met with his Russian counterpart Medvedev twice in 2009, the relationship appeared far from cordial.
With Japan, the Brown government nurtured a traditionally close relationship, and further strengthened it.
It signed the Lisbon Treaty in December 2007, which sought to reform the EU by amending the earlier Masstricht Treaty.
However, the treaty was ratified by the British Parliament in July 2008, signalling an important foreign policy victory for the Brown government.
The Cameron government became the first coalition government in the UK since the Second World War.
The Cameron Ministry is new in Britain and it will take time to evaluate its performance.
Criticism arose within and outside England that British foreign policy was nothing but another face of American foreign policy.
To remove this 'American'tag, policy planners in Britain had been searching for a 'British'identity in their foreign policy since the end of the Second World War.
But due to several reasons, their policy could not come out of the American sphere of influence.
The reliance of three successive Labour governments (Blair and Brown periods) on the United States bears testimony to such observations.
The Blair government faced intense domestic criticism for its role in Afghanistan and Iraq, for its failure to check human massacre in Rwanda, Bosnia and Serbia.
British foreign policy thus often suffers from an identity crisis, and it would continue to haunt policy makers in Britain in future.
India 1) Origin and Philosophical Base I The foreign policy of any nation is the reflection of its tradition, cultural heritage, and sociopolitical and economic conditions.
It draws inspiration from the age-old tradition of the land, its rich cultural heritage, as well as from the comparatively recent socio-political and economic experiences.
India's foreign policy is imbibed with ideas of peace, universal brotherhood, non-interference and nonviolence.
The philosophical basis of India's foreign policy is rooted in its rich cultural heritage that rests on Buddha's tolerance.
Emperor Ashoka's non-violence, Sri Chaitanya's love for humanity and Kabir's religious harmony.
India was an old civilization with great cultural resources which, however, was stratified socially, economically and politically.
V The ambition reflected in the Preamble of thel950 Constitution to form an egalitarian, secular, socialistic-type just society focused on the social and economic development of the people and politically united into a democratic republican nation.
It led to a foreign policy of non-alignment as a means of retaining strategic autonomy combined with an effort to create solidarity of Asian/ developing countries as a political support base.
In the wake of the Cold War, India's pro-Soviet-tilt and Pakistan's total support for the West as well as China's occupation of Tibet, helped to exacerbate the neighbourhood tensions.
In spite of trying to settle peacefully through the UN the Kashmir issue created by Pakistan's aggression, the issue got converted there into an Indo-Pakistan dispute.
Two wars, one in 1965 and the other in 1971, the latter changing the political geography of the sub-continent, and the respective peace agreements signed in Tashkent and Simla failed to resolve the problem.
Subsequently, Pakistan started using terror as a state policy to try to force India to submit as part of its proxy war strategy.
The policy side consists of the philosophical or theoretical A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT base of foreign policy.
The philosophical or theoretical base of foreign policy is built upon the tradition, culture, social and political history, and political ideas of great personalities of the state.
The application side, on the other hand, is developed on the basis of the changing contours of national and international politics.
As such, it is more pragmatic and dynamic as it has to constantly adjust itself with the changing demands of the times and politics.
The application side of a state's foreign policy may not always reflect the ideologies contained in the policy side.
For instance, one aspect of the theoretical base of India's foreign policy is the policy of nonalignment.
But in its application, India's nonaligned policies were not beyond doubt during the Cold War period.
Further, one theoretical premise of the United States foreign policy is noninterference in the internal matters of sovereign independent states.
But in the application of United States foreign policy, one might also question if the Americans were true to this idea of non-interference during and after the Cold War.
Keeping these distinctions in mind, we proceed to discuss the basic principles of India's foreign policy.
While local politics in India mandate an internal focus, recent Indian administrations have understood that achieving their domestic objectives will require the engagement of the international community.
In recent years, India's military, diplomatic and economic energies have expanded far beyond Nehru's Non-Aligned position.
India's foreign policy is driven by five principal factors, through which are interwoven its relationships with two countries: the United States and China.
Pakistan is historically perceived to be India's main conventional threat, as evidenced by the military stand-off in late 2001 and early 2002. ii.
China is also India's closest military equal, a fact made most clear when India pronounced that its 1998 nuclear tests were in response to the China risk. iii.
Notably, however, there are no known Indian al Qaida or Taliban members (excepting the 2006 Fleathrow plot). iv.
India is also located in a volatile neighborhood, with ongoing wars, insurgencies and unrest taking place in Sri Lanka, Nepal, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, and a coup in Bangladesh.
Flowever, if India hopes to continue to lift up the 60% of its population in the rural sector and build infrastructure, it must increase its foreign financing significantly.
Exchange with its neighbors has supported India's growth, from the ""Look East"" policy of the early 1990's to today's increasing engagement with ASEAN, BIMSTEC, and the new SAFTA agreement.
At the same time as it pursues regional agreements, India also engages bilaterally (with free trade agreements with Singapore and a possible bilateral investment treaty with the U.S.) and globally, taking a leadership position in the WTO Doha negotiations. iii.
India's growth has been bolstered by China, which has achieved annual growth of over 10% since 2000.
However, the two countries will compete increasingly, as India engages in China's traditional stronghold of manufacturing, and China focuses on the services market.
India currently imports 70% of its oil and 50% of its gas; it is projected to import 80% of its energy needs by 2025. ii.
While India holds that it should be allowed to expand energy consumption and emissions until its per capita levels correspond with those of Western countries, increasingly polls indicate that the Indian public is recognizing the importance of more attention to environmental concerns. iii.
India is increasingly exploring nuclear power as an alternative energy source ; it is also one of the leading R&D venues for solar and wind power.
However, currently only 6% of potential non-conventional energy resources have been tapped. iv.
India's nuclear policy is shaped by its unstable relations with Pakistan and China, as well as the recent escalation of nuclear proliferation in the wider region.
Its goal is to build a ""credible minimum deterrent"" through land-, air-, and seabased capabilities. ii.
Since 2002, the India-Pakistan Composite Dialogue has significantly lowered tensions and resulted in several agreements to mitigate the chance of a mistaken nuclear attack. iii.
If the U.S.-India civil nuclear agreement is completed (see India-lran Relations briefing memo), India will be able to take a more active role in promoting nonproliferation directly, a goal that has long been touted as vital to India's national interest.
India has the second largest population in the world, and one of the youngest.
India's soft power remains strong, and its military, economic and diplomatic reach is increasingly A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT significant.
While already a leader of the developing world, India now wants status in the developed world. ii.
Given South Asia's instability, there are ample opportunities for India to focus on helping to alleviate the conflicts in neighboring Nepal, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh.
In so doing, India often confronts China's similar desire for regional leadership and seniority (such as China's desire to exclude India in 2005 from the newly formed East Asia Summit ). iii.
These five broad drivers of India's foreign policy have major implications for its relations with the two principal regional powers: China and the United States.
I China Given their mutual desire for stability leading to economic growth, China and India have worked hard in recent years to improve their relationship with senior diplomatic visits — Chinese President Hu Jintao visited in 2006 and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh reciprocated in January 2008 — along with numerous ministerial level visits and, starting in December 2007, joint military exercises. ii.
At the same time, the two nations are hedging their bets, with China developing a ""string of pearls"" policy to encircle India by building relationships with its neighbors, from its long-standing strong links to Pakistan, to improving engagement with Burma and Bangladesh.
India is countering this by building its own avenues of leverage in the region. iii.
Increasingly the environment is going to conspire to complicate this relationship, building on inherent areas of conflict in the economic, energy, nuclear, strategic and security realms.
These pressures are likely to increase as both India and China pursue leadership roles in Asia.
United States Since 2000, India's relations with the United States have undergone a ""transformation,"" reaching a level of primacy today.
After advocating for nonalignment , India began to move towards a more self-determining policy in the 1990s.
In 2000, then-President Clinton led a path-breaking visit to India that transformed Indian views of the United States and launched the new relationship.
The foundations for this new interaction were put in place by United States Ambassador Robert Blackwill from 2001 to 2003. ii.
America's principal challenges today lie in such areas as terrorism, extremism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, economic growth, energy, environment, narcotics, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, North Korea and potentially China.
These are very similar to the principal foreign policy challenges facing A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT India today.
And, in many cases they can only be addressed through long-term engagement and cooperation by the U.S., India, and many of their other allies, iii.
However, this bilateral relationship is held back by a number of constraints, most notably bureaucratic inertia and lack of trust, and the political considerations that accompany democratic polities.
RECOMMENDATIONS As India advances its position in the world and lives up to the potential that its character and natural assets imply, it could become a powerful force for transformation in key areas such as energy, nonproliferation, environment, economic development and terrorism.
However, if the United States does not engage seriously on an equal basis with India, the vacuum will be filled with other players, and America will have lost an opportunity to build a strong and vital alliance with a growing Asian power. ii.
Build a truly strategic relationship with India that transcends the civil nuclear deal.
This requires committing time, energy and resources to other significant elements of the relationship.
Continue to treat India as a principal world player, including supporting India's bid for permanent membership in the United Nations Security Council and the G8.
Support India's involvement in global energy groups, including the International Energy Agency and serious bilateral engagement on post-Kyoto protocols.
Push India to start to carry the burdens of leadership in areas of its direct interest, such as nonproliferation and terrorism.
The territory, known as the United States today, was discovered in the early sixteenth century by John Cabot, an Englishman by birth.
Cabot reached the East coast of America and established a settlement in Maryland, Virginia.
Before Cabot, another sailor, Christopher Columbus, reached the nearby islands of West Indies in 1492.
As Cabot was a British, he ultimately handed over the power to rule Virginia to the British monarch Henry VII, and a British colony, the first foreign colony in America, was set up in Virginia.
Gradually other foreign powers reached different parts of America and set up their colonies.
In the Southwest, near the present Florida, Spain established its rule.
The A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT French people occupied Novo-Scotia, the Dutch-captured areas around the Hudson Valley, while the Swedish set up their colony in Delaware.
The first official colony in America was set up in 1607 at James Town. iii.
By 1732, the number of formal official colonies rose to thirteen, all ruled by European powers.
In 1664, the British defeated the Dutch and captured the Dutch-ruled areas.
Similarly, they also captured the Spanish colonies and established British rule over a vast area of America.
Finally, the Englishmen defeated the French in the Anglo-French war of 1763, and established their sovereignty over the whole of America.
Anger and frustration over British rule began to be noticed in all thirteen colonies, and protest movements started all over America.
The dissident leaders in all colonies gradually established close links among themselves bypassing political differences.
On 4 July 1776, leaders of the thirteen colonies signed a declaration proclaiming independence from British rule. iv.
Although America got freedom from British rule in 1776, it took eleven more years to start the constitutional process in the territory.
In 1787, the constitution was adopted and the United States of America, consisting of thirteen former colonies, was officially formed.
The two Houses of the American Parliament , the House of Representatives and the Senate met separately for the first time in April 1789.
On 30 April 1789, George Washington took charge as the first President of the US, and John Adams assumed office as the first Vice President of the country.
Gradually, states were reorganized in the United States and today, the United States Federation consists of fifty states.
An abundance of natural resources, spectacular development of agriculture and industry, science and technology, and above all, human endeavour, have made the United States the only economic, political, military and technical superpower in the world.
But in its long constitutional history, the United States foreign policy mainly followed a policy of isolationismwillful abstinence from the main currents of international politics.
From 1789 to 1940, the United States never involved itself actively in international politics, although it maintained diplomatic ties with several countries.
Maintaining a balance of power among nations V Working with allies to solve international problems vi.
Furthering cooperative foreign trade and global involvement in international trade organizations A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT viii.
Examining these goals closely reveals that they are based on cooperation with other nations, although ""preserving the national security of the United States"" implies possible competition and conflict.
Effective steps to prevent Germany and Japan, after the United Nation's victory, from again waging an aggressive war. iii.
Establishment at the earliest possible moment of a United Nations security organization to maintain peace, by force if necessary, for generations to come. iv.
Agreement on measures to expand world trade so that the United States can maintain full employment and enter with other nations into an era of expanding production and rising standards of living.
V Encouragement of all conditions of international life favorable to the development by men and women everywhere of institutions of a free and democratic way of life in accordance with their own customs and desires.
Presidents have more power and responsibility in foreign and defense policy than in domestic affairs.
They are the commanders in chief of the armed forces; they decide how and when to wage war.
As America' chief diplomat, the president has the power to make treaties to be approved by the Senate.
During World War II, the internationalist wing of the GOP gained strength, as former isolationist Arthur Vandenberg switched sides. ii.
The leaders of the anti-isolationist or ""internationalist"" wing were Dwight D Eisenhower , and Richard Nixon . iii.
Conservative leader Barry Goldwater in 1964 rejected isolationism and called for an aggressive Rollback strategy to defeat Communism, a policy followed by Ronald Reagan . iv.
Isolation: The rejection of the League of Nations treaty in 1919 marked the dominance of isolationism from world organizations in American foreign policy.
Despite Roosevelt's Wilsonian background, he and Secretary of State Cordell Hull acted with great care not to provoke isolationist sentiment.
Roosevelt's ""bombshell"" message to the world monetary conference in 1933 effectively ended any major efforts by the world powers to collaborate on ending the worldwide depression, and allowed Roosevelt a free hand in economic policy.
The main foreign policy initiative of Roosevelt's first term was the Good Neighbor Policy, which was a re-evaluation of United States policy towards Latin America.
By 1940, it was in high gear, with bipartisan support, partly to expand and re-equip the Army and Navy and partly to become the ""Arsenal of Democracy"" supporting Britain, France, China and , the Soviet Union.
As Roosevelt took a firmer stance against the Axis Powers, American isolationists—including Charles Lindbergh and America First—attacked the President as an irresponsible warmonger.
Unfazed by these criticisms and confident in the wisdom of his foreign policy initiatives, FDR continued his twin policies of preparedness and aid to the Allied coalition. iii.
They viewed communism as a secular, millennial religion that informed the Kremlin's worldview and actions and made it the chief threat to American security, liberty, and world peace.
Truman in 1947 announced the Truman Doctrine of containing Communist expansion by furnishing military and economic American aid to Europe and Asia, and particularly to Greece and Turkey.
He followed up with the Marshall Plan, which was enacted into law as the European Recovery Program and pumped $12. into the European economy, forcing the breakdown of old barriers and encouraging modernization along American lines. iv.
In 1947 Truman, a Democrat, convinced the Republican-controlled Congress to support the Truman Doctrine by sending massive aid to the small country of Greece, threatened by a Communist takeover.
The rest of Europe was still in economic ruin, which Washington feared would help the spread of Communism, so the Marshall Plan was proposed to help restore the European economies.
Washington decided on a strategy of containment, as embodied in the NATO military alliance set up in 1949.
The plan was to prevent further Communist expansion, hoping that the internal weaknesses of the Soviet system would soon lead to its collapse.
The problem with containment was that it meant fighting wars against Communist expansion, especially in Korea in 1950-53, and in Vietnam 1963-73.
Containment had the basic flaw that the enemy could choose the time and place of movement, while America and its allies had to defend everywhere at all times.
In 1949 Mao ZeDong and his Communists won the civil war in China showing the failure of containment in Asia.
Without consulting Congress Truman ordered General Douglas MacArthur to use all American forces to resist the invasion.
In late 1950 China intervened unexpectedly, drove the UN forces all the way back to South Korea.
In 1950 Truman approved NSC-68, a top-secret policy paper that formed the grounds for escalating the Cold War, especially in terms of tripling spending on rearmament and building the hydrogen bomb.
The integration of European defense was given new impetus by continued United States support of NATO, under the command of General Eisenhower.
A vast foreign aid program supplemented a network of military alliances stretching around the globe.
The services contained about 3 million soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines at all times.
The military A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT stressed mechanization and electronics, with elaborate support mechanisms and a huge training program in technical skills; fewer than 20% of the servicemen were in combat roles.
The necessary hardware was supplied by the ""military-industrial complex"" of big corporations and labor unions.
A peaceful race to the moon, won by the Americans in 1969, was played out against rapid advances in size and accuracy of rockets by both sides.
The downside was his inexperience in foreign affairs, standing in stark contrast to the vast experience of the president he replaced.
Kennedy's rashness and inexperience caused a national humiliation in 1961 as he sent CIA-trained Cuban exiles into an ill-prepared attack on Castro's Cuba.
At the Bay of Pigs, all Kennedy's invaders were killed or captured, and he was forced to ransom them for cash.
Kennedy and Khrushchev reached a compromise whereby the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba publicly , while Kennedy secretly removed American missiles from Turkey aimed at the Soviets, and also promised that America would never invade Cuba—a promise still in effect in 2009.
Vietnam proved a trap for Kennedy as he sent in 16,000 military advisors to prop up an ineffective regime in South Vietnam.
Recognizing and accepting the Soviet Union as a superpower, Nixon and Kissinger sought both to maintain United States military strength and to inaugurate peaceful economic, cultural, and scientific exchanges to engage the Soviet Union in the international system.
At the same time they successfully engineered a rapprochement with Communist China, leading to the astonishing news in 1971 that Nixon would visit China, which he and Kissinger did in 1972.
Nixon and Kissinger worked to achieve a disengagement of United States forces fighting in Vietnam. ii.
One challenge to detente came with the outbreak of the October 1973 Arab-lsraeli War.
Faced with a threat of Soviet intervention, Nixon put United States military forces be placed on worldwide alert.
Fie then employed shuttle diplomacy to secure cease-fires between Israel and the Arab states and to restore United States Egyptian diplomatic ties, broken since 1967. iii.
The Nixon administration sought to protect the economic and commercial interests of the United States during a period of heightened Latin American nationalism and expropriations, 1969-74.
Though the administration initially adopted a flexible policy toward Latin American governments that nationalized American corporations' assets, the influence of Nixon's economic ideology, domestic political pressures, and the advice of his close adviser.
Secretary of the Treasury John Connally, led to a more confrontational stance toward Latin American countries. iv.
During the South Asian crisis in 1971, the White Flouse, stood firmly behind Pakistani president Yahya Khan and demonstrated a disdain for India and particularly its A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT leader, Indira Gandhi because of India's tilt toward the Soviet Union.
Many analysts believed that Pakistan's role as a conduit of rapprochement with China and Kissinger's focus on geopolitical concerns greatly influenced the American policy decision in 1971.
Nixon resigned in 1974 under the threat of impeachment and was succeeded by Gerald R Ford, who kept Nixon's policies.
The United States was not involved in 1975 when North Vietnam invaded and defeated South Vietnam, except to rescue Americans and some Vietnamese supporters.
He singled out the Soviet Union as a violator of human rights and strongly condemned the country for arresting its citizens for political protests. ii.
Carter also tried to remove the United States image of interventionism by giving Panamanians control of the Panama Canal.
He was strongly opposed by conservatives but won, and gave back the Canal.
The result was disaster and the United States invaded Panama in 1989 to overthrow a nasty dictator named Noriega. iii.
Detente with the Soviet Union collapsed in 1979 when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, setting off a long war that the Soviets lost.
President Carter responded by giving military aid to the rebels, imposing an embargo on the sale of grain to the Soviet Union and boycotting the 1980 Summer Olympic Games in Moscow.
The policy of detente that was established by President Nixon had ended.
V Carter's only triumph while in office was a historic peace treaty known as the Camp David Peace Accords, between Israel and Egypt, two nations that had been bitter enemies for decades.
The treaty was formally signed in 1979, with most middle eastern countries opposed to it, bit it remains in effect in 2009.
In 1979, a new radical Islamic regime lead by Ayatollah Khomeini in Iran overthrew America's close ally Shah.
In November 1979 student revolutionaries stormed into the American embassy in Tehran and captured 52 United States diplomats as hostages.
Carter tried to use the United States military action to rescue the hostages, but it was a total failure.
Fearful of what President Reagan might do, the Iranians released the hostages were released minutes before Reagan was inaugurated on January 20, 1981.
The result was a major humiliation for the United States, and a consensus that the country was now an underdog and needed new leadership to claw its way back.
Reagan restructured American politics in a manner reminiscent of Franklin Roosevelt' New Deal Coalition.
Reagan built entirely new electoral coalitions using fresh issues, such as opposition to taxes, opposition to economic regulation, and support for moral issues promoted by Catholics and especially evangelical Protestants.
The defeatism of the late 1970s sparked a new determination among the Reaganites.
In the 1970s the Soviets had rejected detente, expanded Cold War operations into Africa, Asia and Latin America, enlarged their long-range A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT missile forces, and invaded neutral Afghanistan.
The fall of the Berlin Wall in November, 1989, marked the end of the Cold War with a stunning American victory.
Relations with Britain had been strained since the Suez crisis of 1956.
Now both countries were led by like-minded leaders who collaborated closely.
Their collaboration was based on a striking convergence of ideologically driven conservatives who shared similar domestic agendas and a common foreign policy.
Both led domestic political revolutions-supply-side economics, increased defense spending, privatization, deregulation, and an overall conservative agenda.
Reagan and Thatcher's mutual trust strengthened Reagan's hand against the Soviet Union.
United States foreign policy was new to such conditions and it had the responsibility to adjust itself and protect American interests in this new international order. ii.
Foreign policy planners in the United States were ready to take up the challenges posed by the post-Cold War international order. iii.
Nonproliferation Of The Weapons of Mass Destruction In The World; The Bush administration zealously pursued nonproliferation policies.
Flis administration was the first significant American foreign policy planner after the Cold War.
During his presidency, nonproliferation of WMD became an important element of American foreign policy.
The Clinton administration declared different countries of the world as nuclear 'rogues'and 'threshold'states.
India, Pakistan, Israel, South Africa, Brazil and Argentina were termed as nuclear 'threshold'states.
The United States also identified South Asia as a 'nuclear hot spot', along with North Korea and Iraq, and engaged in diplomatic talks with India and Pakistan—North Korea and Iraq did not respond to such talks—to encourage nonproliferation in these countries. ii.
Normally, the United States tries to avoid relations of economic, political or security-related significance A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT with countries alleged by the AHRR of violation of human rights.
Economic Diplomacy; Economic diplomacy places importance on trade and business, keeping aside political considerations.
After the Cold War, the United States worked hard to pursue policies of economic diplomacy with different states.
Enhancing trade and commercial relations with other countries, providing investment opportunities to American capital in different parts of the world, increasing American financial assistance for industrialization and developmental activities in other states, all these constitute integral elements of American economic diplomacy.
The Bush administration also declared an 'anti-terrorism assistance programme' that contained, among other things, military training, exchange of information and security assistance to countries involved in the war on terrorism.
Further, a 'rewards for justice' programme announced by the Bush Administration sought to exchange information about international terrorists with friendly states, and give rewards of upto United States $25 million for information on international terrorists, and assistance to capture them.
The Obama administration also stepped up American efforts on counter-terrorism.
For instance, Obama's 'Af-Pak Policy', announced in March 2009, sought to eliminate terrorist groups like the Al Qaeda and the Talibans from Afghanistan and Pakistan and provide massive economic and security assistance to these countries to eliminate terrorist activities from their soil.
Security Assistance Programme became an integral part of United States foreign policy after the Second World War.
Almost 50 per cent of American assistance to different countries during the Cold War period came under this programme, which was considered crucial for American strategic interests to counter Soviet influence.
In the absence of the Soviet Union, whether it would be wise for the United States to spend huge amounts on the SAP became a controversial issue.
But all American Presidents after the Cold War preferred to continue with the programme, and the United States Congress approved the budget on the SAP from time to time.
The continuance of the programme by all American administrations during the post Cold War period proved the importance of the SAP as an element of American foreign policy in recent years.
President George W Bush , the first United States President after the Cold War, lobbied hard to retain the SAP after the Cold War.
Bush considered SAP as a very significant part of United States defence strategy.
Fie believed that the SAP would be very useful to protect vital American interests, mainly in these areas.
After Bush , all post-Cold War American Presidents lent their support for the SAP and continued to consider it as an integral part of American security policy.
After the Cold War, the SAP was used to strengthen democratic processes in East Europe, help counter-terrorism and anti-narcotic activities around the world, strengthen the maintenance of international peace and security, and above all, protect American national interests.
Fears of cataclysmic wars faded, to be replaced by new threats, especially those arising in the Middle East.
When Iraq under Saddam Flussein invaded its neighbor Kuwait in 1991, the United Nations demanded that Iraq withdraw.
When it refused the United States led a broad coalition that pushed Iraq out, but which left Hussein in power under UN supervision.
In 2001 Al Qaeda terrorists attacked the United States, leading America into a war on terrorism.
America was the world's only superpower, with military strength much greater than everyone else combined, and economic muscle and high technology to back it up.
The overwhelming strength of the United States, and the absence of any countervailing force like Communism, meant that fears and hatreds came to focus on America, widely seen as a new empire.
Americans meanwhile and to adjust to heightened levels of security at home, and were ill-disposed to listen to foreign critics.
The ways to which society and culture of the American homefront would adjust to the new Age of Terror became a central issue of the new century. ii.
He moved in close cooperation with Britain and other allies, but without the endorsement of the United Nations.
The warfare was short and decisive, but the occupation was met with violence and the goal of creating a democratic nation in Iraq proved much more difficult than expected.
Public opinion worldwide turned hostile to America—the superpower-as-bully syndrome brought out the old cliches about the ""Ugly American"" that had been in circulation for decades, emboldening anti-American forces and causing Americans, in the 2004 presidential campaign, to take a hard look at the nation's role in the world. iii.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Obama is a much different candidate today from the senator who distinguished himself by his opposition to the ""dumb war"" on his way to the presidency in 2008.
Obama has turned out, in many ways, to have pursued a fairly conventional, at times, hawkish foreign policy.
He has had some notable successes, such as the bin Laden raid and this year's withdrawal from Iraq — albeit on a timetable negotiated by his predecessor — and the successful overthrow of Muammar al-Qaddafi.
All the same, ""apology tours"" and ""leading from behind"" — referring to an unfortunate description of Obama's diplomatic strategy by a White House staffer — have already become buzzwords for Republican candidates.
He has also faced heavy criticism on the left for a sometimes inconsistent approach to international law in counterterrorism operations. ii.
Pentagon will lead a ""fundamental review"" of United States military capabilities in order to cut $400 billion in defense spending over the next 10 years.
Obama insists that enacting comprehensive immigration reform, which would likely include a path to citizenship for at least some illegal immigrants already in the United States, is still a ""top priority,"" V Israel/Palestine: Obama's engagement in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has probably been the most frustrating foreign-policy initiative of his presidency and the one on which he is most often criticized by his Republican opponents.
More recently, the administration has confirmed that it will veto Palestine's statehood bid in the United Nations Security Council. /i.
Obama has repeatedly criticized China — most recently at the APEC summit in Honolulu — for currency policies that he says have a distorting effect on the global economy. ii.
In his 2010 address to the United Nations General Assembly, Obama announced an overhaul of United States foreign aid policies, which he vowed will place them at the center of United States foreign policy. ii.
Early in his presidency, Obama made several overtures to Iran in an effort to improve relations.
In October, Obama signed long-delayed free trade agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea.
On his trip to Asia this November, Obama is working to promote a new trans-Pacific free trade agreement.
Obama signed an executive order closing the Guantanamo Bay detention center as one of his first actions as president.
The facility remains open, however, largely due to congressional opposition over where to house the remaining prisoners. xi.
Despite his stated support for environmental legislation and green energy, there has been little progress on passing major climate-change bills under Obama's watch. xii.
One of the centerpieces of Obama's first-term foreign policy was the effort to ""reset"" relations with Russia.
The president successfully negotiated the New START nuclear reduction treaty, xiii.
Still, with 200,000 dead in Syria's civil war, eastern Ukraine engulfed in a Russian-backed insurgency, and the Islamic State governing large parts of Syria and Iraq, it can be hard to see what's ""better"" about this world.
On each of these crises, one can criticize Obama for how badly they have turned out, but that assumes that the United States had the ability to influence these crises for the better before they spiraled out of control.
Foreign Policy of Pakistan post 9/11 1) Introduction The foreign policy of Pakistan is primarily directed to the pursuit of national goals of seeking peace and stability through international cooperation. ii.
To project the image of the country as a dynamic and moderate society iii.
Seeks to promote the internationally recognized norms of interstate relations iv.
We believe in the principle of honesty and fair-play in national and international dealings, and are prepared to make our contribution to the promotion of peace and prosperity among the nations of the world.
Pakistan will never be found lacking in extending its material and moral support to the oppressed and suppressed peoples of the world and in upholding the principles of the United Nations Charter."" ii.
Objectives Promotion Pakistan as a dynamic, progressive, moderate, and democratic Islamic country ii.
Safeguarding national security and geo-strategic interests, including Kashmir iii.
Islamic ideology; Liaquat AN Khan once said: ""Pakistan came into being as a result of the urge felt by the Muslims of this subcontinent to secure a territory, however limited, where the Islamic ideology and way of life could be practiced and demonstrated to the world."" ii.
Pakistan's foreign policy makers always sought western assistance. iii.
Public Opinion Formulation 4) Foreign Policy of Pakistan Pattern of relationship established with the outside world for the promotion of national interest of a country. ii.
Foreign policy of any country is a reflection of its domestic situation, particularly on matters related to politics and economy.
Sometimes other factors such as religion, culture, ethnicity and leadership also influence the foreign policy making process. iii.
Foreign policy often considered as the first line of defense of any country.
This is truer in case of Pakistan, as it was surround by different security situation. iv.
Foreign policy is based on shear realism and is free of allusions, romanticism and emotions.
V Pakistan is, geo-politically, at the cross roads of central Asia, west and South Asia.
Its proximity to the Persian gulf and the middle east is also a source of its strategic prominence. vi.
Pakistan has been a focal point of international political events due to its strategic location and due to the interests of the global powers in the region. vii.
Pak foreign policy based on the desire to safeguard the country's independence and terrestrial integrity.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C 5) 6 ) viii.
In 1990's we shifted from bilateralism to multilateralism, after the end of cold war.
Pak established better ties with Beijing and Moscow and sought option to play a viable role in the 3rd world and in the Muslim world. ix.
Events in international politics in the 1990's and early 21st century shaped the dynamics of our foreign policy.
Event of 9/11; attacks on Twin Towers, heavily affected our foreign policy Trends Era of Neutrality; 1947-53 neutral foreign policy ii.
Era of Allainces; 1953-62 alignment with the West (SEATO, CENTO, Mutual Cooperation Pact, United States Foreign Assistance Act)Pakistan became US' ""most-allied ally in Asia"" iii.63-71 phase of transition iv.
Introduction 9/11 attacks proved to turn the foreign policy of Pakistan upside down ii.
It was a crucial time that demanded an intelligence filled response. iii.
Musharaf was one of the foreign leaders to receive a call from Washington (You are either with us or against us) iv.
To exigently join United States in principle and workout the modalities later on 2.
U.S might have bracketed Pak with Taliban while declaring Pak a terrorist state. ii.
Our territory would have been subjected to furious onslaughts and airstrikes to neutralize resistance under the pretext of eliminating terrorist bases. iii.
India would have given a green signal to attack Kahuta as it had done previously. iv.
Kashmiri freedom struggle might have been labeled as a terrorist insurgency. xvii.
Pakistan's Choice Taliban refused to hand Osama to America despite Pak's pleadings.
Musharaf on 19th Sept,2001 while addressing to nation said, ""Pakistan comes first, everything else is secondary."" iii.
Pakistan joined U.S in strategic interest of, 1. territorial security 2. protection of its own nuclear and missile programs 3. revival of economy iv.
Joining was the most appropriate among the available options and was generally, if not entirely, in national interest.
V This shift in foreign policy of Pakistan showed the strategic intelligence of government towards the oncoming hurricane, xviii.
Demands By U.S After Alliance To stop Al-Qaeda operations at its border. ii.
To give blanket over flight and landing rights for military operations. iii.
To cut off all shipments of fuel to Taliban and stop recruits from going to Afghan.
Arms race in South Asia V To take into account the domestic constraints 8) Options with Pakistan Pak must not meddle with Afghan affairs and it must support the reconstruction process of Afghanistan. ii.
Pakistan needs to establish Good relations with China and other countries and should not only stick only to the United States iv.
Strong foreign policy is possible only when Pak's economy is strong, and there is political stability and good governance in the country.
V Pakistan should not go the extreme extent of assisting United States vi.
Pakistan's decision to join world community in the war against terrorism brought it back into the international mainstream and won it the revived and stronger support from major countries of the world.
Peaceful co existence,e. further development of regional ties and the strengthening of their own positions. iii.
The future strategy of Pakistan in its foreign policy must be a ""shift from traditional diplomacy to economic diplomacy as well as cultural diplomacy"" iv.
An effective policy requires domestic stability and a national consensus on issues.
Current Affairs: Regional Relations South Asia: Pakistan and India 1) Introduction 2) Timeline 1947 — The British Empire in the subcontinent is divided into two countries: India and Pakistan.
The war ends with a UN-ordered ceasefire and resolution seeking a plebiscite for the people of Jammu and Kashmir to decide whether to become part of India or Pakistan. iii.65 — India and Pakistan fight their second war over Kashmir.
Fighting ends after the United Nations calls for a ceasefire. iv.71 — A rebellion in East Pakistan and alleged interference from the Indian side lead the two countries to war for a third time.
V 1972 — Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi sign agreement in Indian town of Simla over principles meant to govern relations. vi.74 — India detonates its first nuclear device. vii.89 — Separatist revolt starts in Indian-administered Kashmir.
India accuses Pakistan of arming and sending militants into the region, which Pakistan denies. viii.98 — India carries out nuclear tests.
February 1999 — Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee holds summit with Pakistani counterpart Nawaz Sharif in Lahore.
X 1999 — India and Pakistan wage brief conflict in the mountains above Kargil on the Line of Control, the ceasefire line dividing Jammu and Kashmir. xi.
July 2001 — Summit between Pakistani leader General Pervez Musharraf and Vajpayee in Agra in India ends in failure.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT xii.
India blames Pakistan-based militants Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammad of launching attack.
Tensions rise as one million troops are mobilised on either side of the border; war only averted months later in June 2002. xiii.03 — Pakistan, India agree ceasefire on the Line of Control. xiv.04 — The two countries launch a formal peace process.
November 2008 — Ten gunmen launch three days of multiple attacks in Mumbai, killing 166.
India again blames Pakistan-based militants and snaps talks with Pakistan. xvi.
February 2009 — India cautiously welcomes Pakistan's probe into Mumbai attack.
Pakistan admits the attack was launched and partly planned from inside Pakistani territory. xvii.
June 2009 — Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Pakistani President Asif AN Zardari meet on the sidelines of an international gathering in Russia.
Singh tells Zardari he wants him to ensure militants cannot operate from Pakistan. xviii.
August 2009 — India gives Pakistan new ""evidence"" to investigate the Mumbai attacks and prosecute Hafiz Mohammad Saeed, suspected mastermind of the carnage. xix.
March 2011 — Singh invites Pakistani Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani to watch a historic World Cup cricket match between the two sides and discuss reviving peace process.
May 2011 — Indian and Pakistani troops exchange cross-border fire after an Indian soldier is killed by Pakistani troops in Kashmir.
After talks, India and Pakistan break no ice on how to demilitarise the no-man's land above the Siachen glacier. xxi.
July 2011 — Foreign ministers of India and Pakistan hold talks in New Delhi, hailing a ""new era"" in ties. xxii.
November 2011 — Pakistan decides to grant India Most Favoured Nation trade status.
Singh and Gilani promise a new chapter in their history after discussions in the Maldives. xxiii.11 — Pakistan takes further steps toward normal trade and travel ties with India, agreeing to open most commerce by February 2012 and ease visa rules. xxiv.
April 2012 — Zardari meets Singh in New Delhi in the highest-level meeting on each other's soil in seven years.
November 2012 — India secretly hangs the lone survivor of the Pakistan-based militant squad responsible for the 2008 Mumbai attacks. xxvi.
January 2013 — India accuses a group of Pakistani soldiers of ""barbaric and inhuman"" behaviour after two Indian soldiers are killed in a firefight in Kashmir and their bodies mutilated.
Peace talks stall and Indian Prime Minister Singh says there can be no ""business as usual"". xxvii.February 2013 — India hangs a Kashmiri man for the 2001 attack on its parliament that New Delhi blamed on militants backed operating from inside Pakistan, xxviii.
May 2013 — India reacts furiously to the death in a Pakistani jail of an Indian farmer convicted of spying who was badly beaten by fellow inmates. xxix.
May 2013 — Nawaz Sharif returns to power in Pakistan and looks to ease mistrust with India.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT xxx.
Both sides express willingness to begin new era of bilateral relations.
But United States policy took a u turn when Richard Hallbroke, on the occasion of his visit to India said ""America will not play a role of mediator between Pak and India over kashmir"" 6.
The longstanding Kashmir dispute is the core hurdle in the normalization of relations between the two countries.
Then there are other issues including Siachen, Sir Creek, water and so on and they need to be immediately resolved, if both countries want to cultivate an environment of friendship. ii.
The basic problem between both countries, Pak wants to solve all the mutual problems in the parameters of composite Dialogue as it includes all the issue including terrorism also.
India, on the other hand wants to satisfy her apprehensions against terrorism. ii.
Trust Deficit The second stumbling block is the existing mistrust between the two countries.
Former premiers of both countries, Yousaf Raza Gillani and Dr Manmohan Singh, during their meeting on the sidelines of Saarc Summit in Bhutan, assigned their foreign ministers to take steps to eliminate the trust deficit.
Flowever, all such efforts were thwarted by the circumstances and bigoted attitudes.
With lack of exchanges of sportspersons, academicians, students, parliamentarians, civil society activists, and the general public the trust deficit won't end anytime soon. ii.
Secondly, the Track-ll or Track-Ill diplomacy in the context of Pakistan and India has always been dependent upon Track-1 or formal diplomacy.
It means if the governments are comfortable with each other and are in a mood to negotiate, only then the visas for all other forms of non-formal diplomacy will be made available. iii.
Terrorism Terrorism is another formidable challenge for both India and Pakistan.
Unfortunately, instead of extending cooperation to each other to eradicate this menace, the two countries have been pointing fingers at each other.
India accuses Pakistan of being behind all acts of terrorism in India — Modi also reiterated this stance in his first meeting with Nawaz Sharif.
On the other hand, Pakistanis blame India of patronizing terrorism in Pakistan, particularly Indian funding for insurgents in Balochistan and FATA has been a sourcwe of great concern in Pakistan.
India has not been able to conclude the investigation of Samjhota Express tragedy so far. iv.
Modi's Security Team Narendra Modi's security and foreign policy team is also being seen as a challenge.
Dr Manmohan Singh had Shiv Shankar Menon as his National Security Advisor.
Mr Menon had served as India's Fligh Commissioner to China and Pakistan.
So, he was privy to the concerns of India's two most important neighbours.
Flowever, Modi chose a former head of Indian Intelligence Bureau, A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Mr Ajit Doval, as his new National Security Advisor, which also indicates some wrangling in future. ii.
India's obsession pointing fingers at Pakistan in any act of terrorism, and completely ignoring domestic extremists groups, could hamper the serious efforts aimed at normalization of relations.
The Minister for External Affairs Ms Sushma Sauraj, a Hindu hard-liner, is known as a dove neither in domestic political arena nor on external affairs.
Moreover, allocating a cabinet slot to former Army Chief General V K Singh is also not a positive sign because throughout his career, Mr Singh had been engaged in war games against China and Pakistan.
The Ultimate Strength Soon after taking over as Pakistan's Prime Minister, in 2013, Mian Nawaz Sharif announced that his top priority will be economic diplomacy and development.
In India, Narendra Modi contested the election on the slogan of development and good governance.
Nawaz Sharif himself comes from Pakistan's powerful corporate sector whereas Modi was also fully backed by that of India.
If trade and business gets a driving seat in policies of both the countries, huge gains in bilateral relations will definitely be reaped. vi.
According to Indus Water treaty Pak to get 55 thousands cusec water in peak season but Pak got 20 cusec last year. ii.
Construction of Kashan ganga, Dulhasti, Dugar, Gondhala, Such Khas hydro power projects on Chenab, Jehlum rivers have greatly decreased the flow of water into Pak.
India has to inform Pak 6 month in advance regarding any plan of construction of new dams over the rivers that flow into Pak.This is a clear Violation of 1960 Indus water treaty by India.
Buglihar and other water issues should be solved through negotiations as was done in case of ""Salal"" dam in 1978.
Talks held on Sir Creek and working group is trying to abolish visa restrictions by both countries.
A Project of CSS Writing Club c\»^c Compiled by Ayesha Younas V Indian foreign secretary acknowledgment that Indian decision to suspend dialogue after 26/11.
Dialogue should continue even long studying issues like Kashmir and Mumbai attacks are not resolved. vii.
If it collapse it fall out would be for the whole South Asia, and India would suffer more than any one. viii.
Both India and Pak should recognize and acknowledge each other stakes in Afghanistan.
Demolition of visa restrictions will help normalization of relations better than the settlement of this dispute or that.
X Success in dialogue could be achieved only if high up (PMSthe heads of both the states) are involved in discussion. xi.
For the first in Indian history did not, India did not blame Pak for this attack.
Khar offered ""uninterrupted and uninterruptible peace dialogue"" to India. viii.
And it is troubling Pak... in return the whole region is destabilized"". ii.
Indian consulates in Afghanistan especially in the bordering areas of Afghanistan troubles Pakistan. iii.
The Construction of Namyan-Chaghbar road in Afghanistan by India, worth 1. billion dollars, to minimize the strategic importance of Pakistan.
Through this road India wants to minimize the dependency of the world over Pakistan transit facility in order to reach out to the CARS resource.
According to the Commerce and Trade President of pak; ""This road would affect the Pak transit over 40%"" iv.
The emergence of ISIS in Afghanistan (to counter Taliban) also has connections with Indian security agencies, as do the majority of the groups, which announce their allegiance to it, enjoying good contacts with RAW and being exploited as proxies against Pakistan.
Recently, the ISIS claimed incident in Jalalabad also has traces of Indian linkage.
In fact, India, through ISIS in Afghanistan, is trying to counter the Taliban.
Interestingly, in response to Pakistan's accusations, Indian Defense Minister Manohar Parrikar, in a TV interview on May 23, said that India had to ""neutralize"" terrorists through terrorists only. viii.
The current TTP chief Mullah Faziullah is being protected by Afghan intelligence agents in Afghanistan.
Last year, United States troops snatched former TTP chief Flakimullah Mehusd's deputy, Latifullah Mehsud, from Afghan intelligence A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C agents.
Apparently, Latifullah had been traveling back and forth to coordinate attacks in Pakistan with Afghan agents.
Afghan Government's Advisor, Ehsanullah Aryanzai, in his statement said, ""India is using Afghan soil to destabilize Pakistan and Afghan security agencies are unable to stop Indian intervention due to the absence of a centralized government mechanism"", ix.
Indian Involvement in Pak Pak shared evidence with United States regarding Indian involvement. ii.
Leader of Baluch Liberation Army received with red carpet in India. iii.
RAW had hired Afghanistan's defunct intelligence agency, KHAD's agents to establish a bridge between the Tahreek Taliban Pakistan and itself.
RAW, via TTP, has hired the services of criminal elements/groups to gather information and conduct surveillance of potential targets. iv.
India's external intelligence agency, the Research and Analysis Wing , has long faced allegations of meddling in its neighbors' affairs.
V Prime Minister Modi appointed Ajit Doval, a well-known hawk, as his National Security Advisor.
In the 1990s, Mr Doval served as an undercover RAW agent in Pakistan for seven years. vi.
Besides, in Baluchistan, RAW, in collaboration with the Afghan intelligence agency, 'National Directorate of Security' , has been encouraging separatists.
It provides funding and weapons to Baloch militant groups such as Baluchistan Liberation Army , Baloch Republican Army and Baluchistan Liberation Front for terrorist activities in the province.
Intelligence reports suggest that Baloch militants are being harbored at various places and training camps located in Kabul, Nimroz and Kandahar in Afghanistan.
RAW is involved in providing fake identity and travel documents to Baloch militants for moving out of Afghanistan to India, the UAE and Western countries. vii.
Firstly, the accession to power of new leaders in Pakistan (Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif May 2013), and in India Prime Minister Narendra A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Modi as a result of the parliamentary elections in May 2014, and subsequent changes in their foreign policy vectors; ii.
Secondly, the modification of the general geopolitical content in the region after the completion of the combat mission of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan and the withdrawal of the major part of the coalition forces in December 2014; iii.
Thirdly, the establishment of India had an impact on the development of foreign policy, particularly in the Pakistani direction. ii.
The Kashmir sovereignty issue was again included as a major point in the agenda of Pakistani-Indian relations.
On the contrary, the government urged to ""freeze"" this and settle some technical issues, visas (providing expedited visa regime for certain categories of citizens of the both countries), transportation , etc. iii.
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and Narendra Modi met in May, 2014 for the first time when the head of the Federal Cabinet of Ministers of Pakistan was invited to the inauguration in New Delhi.
But the first political battles were turned by them against each other at the end of September 2014 at the UN General Assembly.
Pakistan severely criticized the position of India directed at blocking the execution of a referendum in Kashmir.
A little later, in January 2015, this point was again voiced during the visit of President Barack Obama in New Delhi. iv.
They confirmed that for in order to find their solutions concerted efforts are required and the resumption of the dialogue process, maintaining the ceasefire , the main mechanism for the stabilization of the situation on the Line of Control and the Working boundary between the two countries.
The visit of the Secretary Ministry of Foreign Affairs of India in Pakistan was generally formal and was held on the eve of the SAARC summit, which will take place in Islamabad.
Analysts pointed out that it had not brought much hope for a qualitative breakthrough, improvement of bilateral relations.
At the same time, according to the A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Pakistani side, it opened the way for future negotiations.
The games are planned in the United Arab Emirates, away from the unpredictable behaviour of the majority of the fans.
And so all the years of these relationships one step forward, two steps back.
Implement its pledge to grant MEN status to India by the end of 2016. ii.
Punish those involved in the 2008 Mumbai attacks, communicating any challenges to trials of the accused or related legal processes, including military interference, to Indian counterparts. iii.
Act against banned groups that operate freely and against any groups and individuals calling for jihad against India, invoking laws against incitement to violence. iv.
Take action against all militant groups, including India and Afghanistan-oriented jihadi outfits. iii.
Respond to the above steps by: acknowledging that non-tarrif barriers are a legitimate Pakistani grievance and ensuring that Pakistani exporters have unimpeded access to the Indian market under the MFN regime; and ii. repealing the Armed Forces Special Powers Act and other draconian laws, replacing a military-led counter-insurgency approach in Jammu and Kashmir with accountable policing and holding a meaningful dialogue with all Kashmiri groups. iv.
Focus on short, medium and long-term measures to optimize the use of water resources, going beyond project-related disputes that the IWT can already address. iv.
Prioritise cooperation on joint energy-related ventures, such as petroleum product pipelines from India to Pakistan, and assess the feasibility of a bilateral, and at a later stage regional, energy grid.
International armed forces were first used in 1948 to observe cease-fires in Kashmir and Palestine.
Although not specifically mentioned in the UN Charter, the use of such forces as a buffer between warring parties pending troop withdrawals and negotiations—a practice known as peacekeeping—was formalized in 1956 during the Suez Crisis between Egypt, Israel, France, and the United Kingdom.
Peacekeeping missions have taken many forms, though they have in common the fact that they are designed to be peaceful, that they involve military troops from several countries, and that the troops serve under the authority of the UN Security Council.
In 1988 the UN Peacekeeping Forces were awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace.
Although several efforts, both at the governmental and nongovernmental levels, have been made to resolve those conflicts, the region has so far failed to observe a durable and long-lasting peace.
Although the 'Cricket Diplomacy' between the two countries at the time of the Cricket World Cup, held in India in February-March 2011, has helped melt the ice, the normalization of relations between the two nuclear-armed neighboring countries of South Asia are still in the transitional phase and can only become normal if the long-standing element of mistrust, which developed after their inception in August 1947, is removed.
The current thaw in relations between India and Pakistan needs to be noticed for several reasons.
First, a realization occurred on both sides of the border that a continued brinksmanship may escalate into a full-fledged war.
India and Pakistan are the only nuclear neighbors, which are involved in active conflict with each other.
The Kashmir issue has become a nuclear flashpoint between the two states.
The world narrowly escaped the nuclear disaster when both the states had deployed over a million troops on borders during the crisis after the attack on the Indian Parliament in December 2001.
Second, the keen interest of the United States in the South Asian affairs has also put pressure on both India and Pakistan to work for peace-building in the region.
It must be noted that for the success of the Global War on Terror , peace between India and Pakistan is a prerequisite.
Washington needed Islamabad's active support in counter-terrorism operations both in Afghanistan as well as in Pakistan.
For this, normalization of India Pakistan relations was necessary so that Islamabad could effectively concentrate on its western borders.
Third, a realization has also occurred in both India and Pakistan that for the economic growth and development, peace in the region is inevitable.
The militant Jihadi groups, which were previously nurtured by the Pakistani state, have now become too powerful to control.
The blowback of the policy of using the Salafi/Jihadi groups in Afghanistan and Kashmir could be seen in the form of sectarian violence in Pakistan.
Therefore, crackdown against those militant groups was the need of the time.
This policy also met the Indian demand to dismantle terrorist infrastructure in Pakistan before the beginning of a meaningful dialogue between the two countries.
V A significant change, which has occurred after 9/11, is that the United States has now become an important regional actor in South Asia because of its physical presence in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Therefore, it is in no way that the United States would remain uninvolved in case any crisis occurs between India and Pakistan.
Moreover, the United States would no more bear Pakistan's policy of supporting militant Jihadi groups in Kashmir in order to engage India in a low intensity conflict.
It is argued that the United States presence and role will determine the future course of India-Pakistan relations and so as the solution of disputes, including Kashmir, between them.
First, the US, today, enjoys a greater degree of influence on both India and Pakistan simultaneously.
Second, a realization on the part of the US, India and Pakistan has occurred that the common threat to the regional as well as global peace and security is the menace of terrorism.
On the other hand, both the nationalists and conservative Islamists along with the military in Pakistan saw India as an enemy, which was against their existence.
Therefore, this enemy image on both sides of the border set the future direction of the relations between the two countries.
The unjust and delayed distribution of assets and territory further marked the increasing mistrust between India and Pakistan.
The principle of 'communal majority' was applied to the partition of the Indian SubContinent.
Under this principle, the contiguous Muslim majority areas were included in Pakistan, whereas the contiguous Hindu majority areas became the part of India.
When faced with the tribal invasion, the Maharaja ""invited the Indian army to repel the invaders but India first demanded his accession, which he provided.
Since then Kashmir has been the bone of contention and the issue of continuous antagonism between the two countries, which have fought two major wars in 1948 and 1965, and a limited war in Kargil in 1999.
These different and opposite approaches on Kashmir have not only complicated the situation between India and Pakistan, but have also diminished the prospects of the resolution of the dispute.
Having failed to resolve the Kashmir dispute through bilateral and multilateral negotiations, Islamabad then resorted to a strategy of engaging New Delhi in a lowintensity war in Kashmir.
For this purpose, Pakistan extended its full support to the militant Jihadi groups fighting against the Indian troops in Kashmir.
Although Pakistan continuously denied its role in Kashmir, it was disclosed during the Kargil incident in July 1999, when it was revealed that Pakistan-based militant groups along with regular forces participated in the operation.
Pakistan's engagement with the militant Jihadi groups and its involvement in the Kargil war further authenticated when the then Prime Minister of Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif, rushed to the United States in July 1999 and sought American assistance to avert the crisis as well as to end Pakistan's isolation.
V After achieving nuclear capability in May 1998, Pakistan became confident that the lowintensity war strategy in Kashmir would bear fruits.
The Kargil war not only sabotaged the whole peace process, which was started after the visit of the Indian Prime Minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, to Pakistan and the signing of the Lahore A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Declaration in February 1999, but also put a dent on the Pakistan's credibility.
The region missed another opportunity to improve India Pakistan relations when Pakistan's then President General Pervez Musharraf visited Agra in July 2001.
Although both Musharraf and Vajpayee agreed to the basic fundamentals of the draft agreement, it had fallen victim to the hard-line mindset of the Indian hawks, who did not want to see peace between the two neighboring countries.
However, Pakistan' policy of supporting the militant Jihadis in the Indian Held Kashmir continued even after the 9/11 incident.
Islamabad believed that since Washington badly needed its assistance in Afghanistan against the Al-Qaeda and Taliban, it would ignore its policy of engaging New Delhi in a low-intensity war in Kashmir.
Nevertheless, the policy proved to be ineffective and counter-productive with serious repercussions for Pakistan.
The 9/11 incident changed the overall international and regional political scenario in terms of renewed alliances to wage war against international terrorism.
With reference to India Pakistan relations, the immediate impact of the 9/11 incident could not be seen.
The element of mistrust, which was created in Kargil, continued, though the success of the US-led GWOT was largely depended upon normalization of relations between India and Pakistan.
Pakistan, which became the frontline ally of the United States in the war against Taliban and Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan, continuously faced the Indian pressure to dismantle home-grown terrorist infrastructure.
New Delhi linked the cross border terrorism with international terrorism.
Consequently, India and Pakistan continued to remain at loggerheads and could not formulate a common strategy to counter the most pressing menace of terrorism.
India accused Pakistan of its support to the Lashkar-e-Taiba , which was involved in that incident.
It massed its troops on the borders threatening an invasion across the Line of Control in Kashmir or across the international borders; ii.
It demanded to hand over 20 people who were allegedly involved in terrorist activities in India; iii.
Moreover, India also demanded Pakistan to ban militant Jihadi organizations, which were involved in that attack.
Realizing the tense situation on the borders, Musharraf in his address to the nation on January 12, 2002, vowed to take severe action against the A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Islamic extremist organizations.
Also, their accounts were frozen and their activities in Afghanistan and Kashmir were halted.
In a conciliatory tone, Vajpayee said, ""As Prime Minister of the country I wanted to have friendly relations with our neighbors and I went to Lahore, but it was returned with Kargil.
We are again extending a hand of friendship but hands should be extended from both the sides.
But once talks start there could be flexibility from both sides""21 Furthermore, Pakistan also announced a ceasefire on the Line of Control and lifted the ban on the air service.
Although both sides had realized the need of the dialogue process, they could not move forward and stuck to their old stances on the issue of Kashmir.
I In continuation of conducive environment, which developed with Vajpayee's offer of peace, the Composite Dialogue process started between India and Pakistan in January 2004.
Sir Creek, Terrorism and Drug Trafficking, Economic Cooperation, and Promotion of friendly Exchanges.
With the coming of Manmohan Singh in power in May 2004, the peace process continued with full realization that it would ultimately lead to sustained engagement and understanding between the two countries.
Even Musharraf, despite domestic pressure from religious-political party, the Muttahida Majlis-iAmI (United Action FrontMMA), emphasized upon the outof-box approach.
In an interview to an American TV Channel on April 21, 2005, Musharraf floated an idea for the resolution of the Kashmir dispute.
After the earthquake in Pakistan on October 8, 2005, Musharraf also proposed the opening of the LoC at five points.
Nauseri-Tithwal; Chakoti-Uri; Hajipur-Uri; Rawalakot-Poonch and TattapaniMendhar.
However, no major breakthrough on the materialization of those proposals took place because of the severe opposition from the Indian Army.
Despite this, the peace process under the Composite Dialogue continued until it suffered a severe setback when Mumbai incident took place on November 26, 2008.
Pakistan strongly condemned the incident and offered India its full support and cooperation with the investigation.
The Indian government attributed the attack to the LeT for perpetrating the terrorist activity.
However, later on, it acknowledged the only survived terrorist, Ajmal Kasab, was the citizen of Pakistan.
This was acknowledged by then National Security Advisor of Pakistan, Major General Mahmud AN Durrani.
Speaking to an Indian TV channel, Durrani revealed that Ajmal Kasab was a Pakistani national.
Perturbed on this revelation, Yousuf Raza Gilani, then Prime Minister of Pakistan, sacked Mr Durrani.
The Mumbai incident has had serious consequences for IndiaPakistan relations, and of course, the regional peace.
First, the mistrust between the two countries reached to its height when in an interview with the CNN in November 2009, Manmohan Singh raised doubts over Pakistani civilian leadership's control over the military, compatibility of Pakistan's and US' objectives in Afghanistan, safety of the nuclear weapons and Pakistan's seriousness in bringing the perpetrators of the Mumbai incident to the justice.
Second, the major casualty of the Mumbai carnage was the derailment of the 'Composite Dialogue' process between India and Pakistan.
Although Pakistan, immediately after the incident, offered its assistance in joint investigation, India rejected it.
Third, at the diplomatic front Pakistan faced a very awkward situation when the international community supported the Indian position.
They agreed to restore trust and confidence, which was shattered after the Mumbai incident.
Although both the countries did not concede to the 'Composite Dialogue' process, they pledged to restore peace process.
However, the positive sign of the Thimphu Summit was that it paved the way for the high-level dialogue process.
To advance the peace talks, foreign ministers of the two countries met in Islamabad in July 2010.
India's this claim came immediately after it was disclosed during the interrogation of David Coleman Headly, A Pakistani American, who was arrested in Chicago in 2009.
This further underscored the element of mistrust and diminished the prospects of peace between the two nuclear-armed countries of South Asia.
The dormant peace process between the two countries once again got further impetus when Manmohan Singh in his address in March 2011 at a university in Jammu and Kashmir offered peace talks to Pakistan.
He said, ""We wish to resolve all outstanding issues between the two countries through friendly dialogue and constructive and purposeful negotiations.
The dialogue at the secretary level remained successful and resulted in the signing of various agreements.
Similarly, the Commerce Secretaries of both the countries in their meeting on April 28, 2011, agreed to form various groups of experts to examine the feasibility of trading electricity and petroleum products, promotion of travel facilities and reducing customs A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT duties on products of export interest of both countries.
V Although the resumption of the dialogue between the two neighboring countries was a dire need particularly after the Mumbai incident, the element of mistrust has not yet reduced.
India still doubts that Pakistan is not doing enough to dismantle the terrorist infrastructure, which causes cross-border terrorism.
The Indian argument is that the peace process with Pakistan will not go forward until the latter ends its support for terrorist groups.
In the presence of such a deep element of mistrust and the history of failed negotiations, it is argued that both India and Pakistan need to seek the help of the third party mediation in order to ensure a stable peace in the region.
It is also argued that after the 9/11 incident the United States has become an active extra regional actor in South Asia.
The American involvement as a third party mediator between India and Pakistan may help both the neighboring countries resolve their longstanding disputes, mainly Kashmir.
It must be noted that the American engagement in the region is not a new phenomenon.
It has played an active role not only in averting various crises between India and Pakistan, but also bringing the two countries on the negotiation table.
The United States Engagement in the South Asian affairs During the Cold War period, the American role in the South Asian region could only be seen with reference to its relations with Pakistan.
The major interest of the United States was to counter the expansion of Communism in South and South-East Asia.
Although one may see several ups and downs in the US' relations with Pakistan, India saw the former as an imperialist power and the latter being an agent of it.
Therefore, the US, like Pakistan, could not lure India and its influence in the region during the Cold War period remained marginal.
The disintegration of the Soviet Union and India's policy of economic liberalization in 1992 led to the establishment of favorable relations between Washington and New Delhi.
Flowever, it did not pave the way for an active American engagement in the South Asian affairs till the Kargil crisis took place in May-July 1999.
It was the first armed confrontation between India and Pakistan after their nuclear tests in May 1998.
The crisis was averted when Nawaz Sharif visited the United States in July 1999 and sought American assistance.
A meeting between Mr Sharif and then American President, Billl Clinton, was held on July 4.
It is a wellknown fact that it was an American facilitation which led to the formal end of the Kargil crisis.
The successful American facilitation during the Kargil crisis could not last long and the two nuclear states of South Asia once again faced a grim crisis when Pakistan-based Jihadi groups attacked the Indian Parliament on December 13, 2001.
For the success of the GWOT, the United States is very keen to see cordial, friendly and tensionfree relations between the two neighboring states of South Asia.
It is a fact that the rigid mistrust between India and Pakistan has impeded resolution of political disputes between the two countries.
Since bilateral means to resolve disputes have proven ineffective, both India and Pakistan, by taking advantage of the United States stakes in the region in the post-9/11 scenario, may seek its assistance to play the role of a third party mediator.
Although India opposes any third party mediation in the bilateral talks with Pakistan, it must understand that without involving the third party, Islamabad would not be satisfied with the outcome of the negotiations.
Both India and Pakistan need to bear in mind that this is high time to seek American assistance to resolve their political disputes and move forward in the direction of durable peace in the region.
The matter of the fact is that once Afghanistan is politically stabilized and Al-Qaeda infrastructure is uprooted, the Americans would leave the region without any responsibility of cleaning the mess as it did in late 1980s after the Geneva Accords and left the region at the mercy of IndiaPakistan rivalry.
Had the 9/11 incident not taken place, the United States would not have taken keen interest in this region.
In other words, the 9/11 incident and as a result the American compulsion to depend on India and Pakistan for the successful launching of military operations, is a blessing in disguise.
On the part of the US, it is imperative to play the role of a third party mediator between India and Pakistan.
The United States must understand that the success of the GWOT largely depends on the joint cooperation of India and Pakistan.
Moreover, taking advantage of its leading role in the GWOT, and Pakistan being its frontline ally, Washington needs to keep intense pressure on Islamabad to curtail its support for the militant Jihadi groups fighting in Kashmir who have their links with militant groups in Afghanistan.
If Pakistan discontinues its support to the militant Jihadi groups, it will not only ease Indian concerns about Pakistan's non-seriousness in dismantling terrorist infrastructure, but also ensure the success of American strategy to defeat the AIQaeda and associated groups, fighting in Afghanistan.
Similarly, the US, by taking advantage of its nuclear deal with India, can also pressure the latter to seriously work upon mending the fences with Pakistan.
Moreover, the United States must transform its role from an agent of conflict management to conflict resolution.
In this regard, the support of the United States to the existing peace process between India and Pakistan is also necessary.
Peace making I The world has entered the 21st century with lots of hope and expectation of progress and prosperity.
Unfortunately, South Asia continues to remain the least developed A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT region with the expected 'destiny' of rampant corruption, unemployment, poverty, illiteracy, economic fragility and political instability.
The leadership of the respective countries has even failed to give its people any hope for a better future.
With huge natural and human resources, the South Asian region has a potential to progress at a rapid speed.
The only thing which is lacking is the political will among the respective countries to take bold decisions to resolve inter-state disputes, which have hindered the prospects for peace in the region.
The most important challenge for both India and Pakistan is how to continue and sustain the dialogue process, which could lead to the establishment of perpetual peace between the two belligerents.
Although both India and Pakistan have several times initiated talks on various contentious issues, including Kashmir, they failed to materialize them because of the deep element of mistrust.
As a result of their failed ventures, the extremist tendencies on both sides of the border have strengthened.
These extremist tendencies have not only caused the rise of terrorism, but also marginalized the saner elements on both sides of the border.
It is, therefore, a high time to invite a third party for mediation in order to evolve a workable strategy for the resolution of the most pressing conflict,e., Kashmir, which has the potential to cause another war between India and Pakistan.
However, before such mediation takes place, India, Pakistan and even the US, need to take few steps for the confidence-building measures.
Being a big regional power, India has to play a leadership role and at the same time de-emphasizing upon being a hegemonic power of the region.
If India wants long-lasting peace in the region, it has to alter its attitude towards its smaller neighbors, particularly Pakistan.
This is a fact that a nuclear Pakistan cannot accept bullying from India, and New Delhi needs not to outstare Islamabad.
V On the part of Pakistan, it has to shun the policy of engaging India in a low-intensity war in Kashmir by disassociating itself from the militant Jihadi groups.
Failing to do so, may not only enrage India, but also disorient the United States from engaging itself in the dialogue process.
Being the sole super power and an active extra-regional actor after the 9/11 incident, the United States enjoys a greater leverage in South Asia than any other country in the world.
It is in a position to pressure both India and Pakistan to make the existing peace process between the two countries meaningful and result oriented.
If this happens, the region will not only witness the economic prosperity, but also the resolution of political disputes, including Kashmir.
CBMS and Peace in South Asia I CBMs are such actions and agreements, which would be helpful in detente.
However, to A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT be more specific it can be defined as a bilateral or multilateral measure that builds confidence or trust, arrests the undesirable drifts towards open hostilities, reduces tensions and encourages the adversaries to make contact for negotiations without taxing too much the operative policy pursuits.
It is a fact that both countries are armed with nuclear weapons and therefore, the threat of intentional, accidental or inadvertent use of nuclear weapons has increased.
Successful CBMs need consistent negotiations, which may evolve a proper mechanism of defusing tension.
As for as India and Pakistan are concerned, both have failed to implement CBMs.
Their relations are the product of cold peace and cold war and even hot war.
Misperceptions, misunderstandings and incompatibilities have plagued their relations.
India and Pakistan have signed a number of agreements to establish ground rules for military exercises with the objective of avoiding the outbreak of an accidental conflict.
An agreement was ratified in August 1992 on Advance Notice of Military Exercises, Man oeuvres and Troops Movements.
The agreement does not permit military man oeuvres of the Pakistani and Indian land, naval, and air forces in close proximity to or in the direction of their international border.
No military activity is permitted within 5 km of the international border.
The agreement also provides for prior notification of major military exercises within a specified timeframe.
But both countries have violated the spirit of this agreement, it was this non-compliance of the agreements that had resulted in Kargil crisis.
A similar agreement was signed in 1991, also ratified in 1992 for the Prevention of Airspace Violations by Military Aircraft, establishing a no-fly zone along their international border.
According to the agreement, combat aircraft are prohibited within 10 kilometers of the international border and unarmed transport and logistics aircraft are permitted up to 1000 meters from each other's airspace.
This agreement has not been honored, and it has failed to de-escalate tension, especially during the time of military crisis.
Pakistan's downing of two Indian aircraft and India's downing of a Pakistani plane near the international border, during the Kargil crisis, are the most suitable quotable examples here.
Realizing the nuclear status of each other, both countries have entered into a nuclear specific CBM-Prohibition of Attack on Nuclear Installations and Facilities.
According to this agreement, on 1st of January of every year, both countries were to inform each A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Other about the volume and any change in nuclear installation.
Here the accuracy of nuclear facilities lists is also not beyond doubt.
A direct communication link known as ""Hotline"" between DGMOs was established in 1971.
In 1990, due to the mounting tension on borders, it was decided to use this line on weekly basis. ii.
Establishment of hotline between Pakistan Air Force and Indian Air Force . iii.
Communication between the Naval vessels and aircraft of the two navies when in each other's vicinity . iv.
Establishment of a hotline between Prime Ministers in 1997 after Male summit.
Invitation of the Guest Speakers at each other's national defense colleges.
Despite of such a list of CBMs, both have failed to achieve peace in the region.
They, probably, use them more as instruments to influence the West then to defuse tension in true sense.
Lack of political will has also marred the mechanism of conflict resolution.
Military CBMs have become even more essential due to the absence of political reconciliation between the two geographically contiguous, nuclear-capable states.
The following suggested CBMs could improve the deteriorating atmosphere of peace in South Asia.
Withdrawal of troops from border areas and creating a 20 miles a troops free Security Zone.
It is globalization of the world economy and closer co-operation of individual economies in the world that has engaged the global entities in economic diplomacy for peace building.
Economic CBMs involve mainly the elimination of tariffs, custom duties, taxes, and nontariff barriers etc.
As far as South Asia is concerned, intra-SAARC trade has remained at 4.2%, which shows the lack of confidence of South Asians over each other.
According to an estimate, India and Pakistan trade volume is $120 million since 1994, whereas their combined total global trade is $ 72 billion and has shown practically no substantial increase over the years.
There are so many agreements, which have been chalked out for co-operation in economic field, but it is an irony of fate that all such ventures are lying on the paper and A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT no concrete steps have so far been taken.
The most important of all these is the intraregional trade co-operation under the 1995 South Asian Preferential Agreement-SAPTA — which has been a strategic instrument in bringing about economic development in the region.
In the next round, 2,000 products were covered by the regional agreement.
If it is fruitless, it is because of the non-serious attitude of the regional members.
Joint Ventures in different trading items initially in both countries and then in the 3rd country. iv.
V One may not find more proper time to discuss and eagerly request for CBMs in South Asia than now, as unfortunately, relations between India and Pakistan have reached to their lowest ebb since 1971.
In May 1998, both countries went nuclear and celebrations on both sides were watched with fearful eyes.
It was followed by Kargil conflict that had caused intense war jingoism and had shaped South Asia a potential nuclear flashpoint.
The postponement of the SAARC summit, due to India's unwillingness to talk to the military rulers of Pakistan, was serious setback to the normalization.
Flijacking of Indian plane was another event that deepened the thaw in the regional tension.
It is a fact that both governments are entangled by their domestic political problems.
Indigenous turmoil-government and traders row, pressure from political parties to hold elections, future political set up, and deteriorating law and order situation in Pakistan at one hand and on the other hand, growing freedom struggle in Kashmir, insurgency in Assam, attacks on Christians and holy churches by the fundamentalist Flindus and lawlessness in many parts of India, have become hard nuts to crack.
But both governments are busy to deflect attention of their people from these real issues to the enemy across the border.
Instead of acting insanely, one must follow long-term policies for eternal peace here.
One of the very important determinants for peace making in South Asia is political will.
It is necessary now, because both countries as a matter of national policy are trying to harm each other to pursue their ends.
Public statements coming out of the leaders of both countries are most harmful.
They need to lower their rhetoric to create an environment of building at least a minimum level of confidence.
Even the conciliatory statements being made by both sides are meant more to impress the international community rather than motivated by a desire to reduce tensions and restore stability in the region.
The unrelenting harassment of each other's diplomats has to come to stop as it further increases animosity and aggravates the crisis.
X Another very difficult problem, which both the countries are facing, is the extremist posture adopted by the religious fundamentalist organizations.
Hindu, Muslim, and Christian minorities do exist on both sides of the border.
Lack of tolerance amongst them has further contributed in plaguing the relations.
It would be in the fitness of the things that a direct interaction between the fundamentalist organizations may be arranged, which will in turn help in easing tension.
Probably the situation is not that worse as has been portrayed by the respective intelligence agencies.
It is their over-efficiency and suspicions that have made each other's face grimmer.
Gap of communication amongst the agencies has flared up mutual antagonism.
Under such circumstances, it is the need of the moment to initiate a dialogue between the intelligence agencies of both countries so that misunderstandings may be addressed.
CBMs I As a major achievement of international peace and conflict research, there is a broad consensus that peace is more than just the absence of war.
Will to peace and the capability for peace is more important than deterrence.
If South Asia is observed intently, the state of affairs since 1947 cannot be called Peace.
Even when Pakistan and India did not clash militarily, their regional cold war was going on.
So, discussing imperatives of peace in South Asia, the problem of the will to peace and the capability for peace is a major factor for answering the question whether peace is possible in this part of the world.
If we want peace in South Asia, a real peace, then at first we have to bring peace in our minds.
We have to convince our people that for our survival and of the world at large, there is no other choice but to live in peace with neighbors.
We have to re-educate our media who is busy in providing Hot News early in the morning through creating war, ideological, enemy, and threat hysteria.
People can be secured by providing them food, shelter, and clothing, and this is possible only when both countries will bring peace, harmony, and economic well being in the region.
National security cannot be ensured by arms race, rather it would A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT destroy the shabby fabric of our economies as well.
CBMs do not mean peace, rather these are the ways to long lasting harmony.
Afghanistan Cold war theatre; Soviet Invasion and Mujahedeen; Geneva Accord; Post Cold War situation—Rise of Taliban, AL-Qeada & 9/11; Operation Enduring Freedom; The Bonn ProcessWithdrawal A chronology of key events: 1838-42 British forces invade, install King Shah Shujah.
Soviet intervention 1979 December Soviet Army invades and props up communist government.
But opposition intensifies with various mujahideen groups fighting Soviet forces.
US, Pakistan, China, Iran and Saudi Arabia supply money and arms to the mujahideen.
Half of Afghan population now estimated to be displaced by war, with many fleeing to neighbouring Iran or Pakistan.
Red Army quits A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 1989 Last Soviet troops leave, but civil war continues as mujahideen push to overthrow Najibullah.
US-led invasion 2001 October US-led bombing of Afghanistan begins following the September 11 attacks on the United States.
Hamid Karzai is sworn in as head of an interim power-sharing government.
Karzai picks members of his administration which is to serve until 2004.
Elections 2004 January Loya Jirga adopts new constitution which provides for strong presidency.
The first parliamentary poll in more than 30 years 2006 October Nato assumes responsibility for security across the whole of Afghanistan, taking command in the east from a US-led coalition force.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT New United States approach 2009 March United States President Barack Obama unveils new strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan.
An extra 4,000 United States personnel will train and bolster the Afghan army and police and there will be support for civilian development.
An Al-Qaeda double agent kills seven CIA agents in a suicide attack on a United States base in Khost.
Operation Moshtarak, in bid to secure government control of southern Helmand province.
Karzai says private security firms accused of operating with impunity must cease operations.
Military pact 2011 November President Karzai wins the endorsement of tribal elders to negotiate a 10-year military partnership with the United States at a loya jirga traditional assembly.
The proposed pact will see United States troops remain after 2014, when foreign troops are due to leave the country.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Pakistan and the Taleban boycott the scheduled Bonn Conference on Afghanistan.
Pakistan refuses to attend after a Nato air strike killed Pakistani soldiers on the Afghan border.
United States officials believed Taliban prisoners were using the books to pass messages, and that they were extremist texts not Korans.
Nato withdrawal plan 2012 May Nato summit endorses the plan to withdraw foreign combat troops by the end of 2014.
New French President Francois Flollande says France will withdraw its combat mission by the end of 2012 a year earlier than planned.
A former Taliban minister, he was crucial in reaching out to rebel commanders.
Three United States Marines are also disciplined for a video in which the bodies of dead Taliban fighters were urinated on.
The United States also suspends training new police recruits in order to carry out checks on possible ties to Taliban following series of attacks on foreign troops by apparent police and Afghan soldiers.
They back the opening of an Afghan office in Doha and urge the Taliban to do the same for talks to take place.
President Karzai suspends security talks with the United States after Washington announces it plans to hold direct talks with the Taliban.
Afghanistan insists on conducting the talks with the Taliban in Qatar itself.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT 2014 July Election officials begin recount of all votes cast in June's presidential run-off, as part of a USmediated deal to end dispute between candidates over widespread claims of fraud.
Election deal 2014 September The two rivals for the Afghan presidency, Ashraf Ghani and Abdullah Abdullah, sign a power-sharing agreement, following a two-month audit of disputed election results.
Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan reaches an all-time high, according to a United States report 2014 December NATO formally ends its 13-year combat mission in Afghanistan, handing over to Afghan forces.
Despite the official end to Isaf's combat role, violence persists across much of the country, with 2014 said to be the bloodiest year in Afghanistan since 2001.
The lynching of a woman wrongly accused of burning a Koran in Kabul provokes widespread revulsion and criticism of hard-line clerics.
The incident leads to widespread protests against the treatment of women.
Both sides agree to continue the talks at a later date, though the Taliban insist they will not stop fighting until all foreign troops leave the country.
CURRENT AFFAIRS: International Organizations Bretton Woods, IMF, WB, WTO, UNO, ICJ BRETTON WOODS • Even before the declaration of war on the Axis powers in 1942, officials in Washington were pondering the shape and character of the post-1945 international economic system.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Evolution of Bretton Woods • This approach also underpinned the 1942 Lend-Lease agreement with Britain which allowed the President to transfer munitions and other war-fighting material to those countries fighting the Axis powers.
Given their longstanding antipathy to capitalism, it was not surprising that the Soviets would not accept the institutional arrangements agreed to by the other participants.
It also had the largest standing army among the Western states and possessed the only functioning economy of any global significance.
Components of Bretton Woods System • The meetings at Bretton Woods resulted in a range of measures to stabilise the international financial system and facilitate the expansion of trade.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development , commonly known as theWorld Bank; to offer assistance in the form of loans to those countries devastated by the Second World War. • the International Monetary Fund ; to oversee the management of fixed exchange rates between member states. • and the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade ; to break down discriminatory trade practices.
Functions of Bretton Woods • The distinctive feature of the Bretton Woods system, however, was the fixing of exchange rates.
Demise of Bretton Woods • Although Bretton Woods was remarkably successful in reviving an international economy destroyed by war, it was seriously flawed as a long-term economic strategy.
Essentially, Bretton Woods failed to provide enough new gold to compensate for the growth in world trade.
From that point on, currencies began to float freely against each other.
Result of Bretton Woods • Despite its formal demise, much of the framework of the Bretton Woods system remains.
The ideology of globalisation would seem to run counter to such a proposal.
There is no doubt, however, that the conference held in New Flampshire in 1944 has been a major influence on the economic character of the world since 1945.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT International Monetary Fund Introduction • Formed in 1944 at the Bretton Woods Conference, it came into formal existence in 1945 with 29 member countries and the goal of reconstructing the international payment system.
As of 2010, the fund had XDR476. billion, about US$755. billion at then-current exchange rates.
Flistorical Background • The Great Depression of the 1930s had an enormous impact on the advanced industrialized states.
In the United States and Europe agricultural prices fell, unemployment skyrocketed, banks closed leaving people penniless, factories stood idle, and international trade collapsed.
Increases in the level of production needed to fight the war stimulated economic growth, put people back to work, and money into circulation.
The goals were to stabilize the value of money and to promote international trade.
Objectives of IMF • promote international monetary cooperation; • facilitate the expansion and balanced growth of international trade; • promote and maintain high levels of employment; • promote exchange stability and avoid competitive exchange rate depreciation; • eliminate foreign exchange restrictions; • offer resources to countries to correct maladjustments in their balance of payments without resorting to measures destructive of national or international prosperity; • shorten the duration and lessen the degree of disequilibrium in the international balance of payments of its members.
Organization A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • The Board of Governors consists of one governor and one alternate governor for each member country.
The Board normally meets once a year and is responsible for electing or appointing executive directors to the Executive Board.
Each member has a number of basic votes The Original Mandate of the IMF • The original mandate of the IMF was achieved primarily by linking the world's currencies to the American dollar.
Not only did it give them a clear idea of the actual value of different currencies, it also helped to bring a degree of predictability to the international economy.
Evolution of IMF • The par value system lasted until the early 1970s, when the United States decided it could no longer afford to allow countries to convert their United States dollars into gold.
In fact, the IMF survived because the need for monetary stability became more crucial in the absence of fixed exchange rates.
True, it continues to promote monetary stability and trade, but increasingly its role is to assist countries that are in the midst of financial crisis.
Functions of IMF • it works to foster global growth and economic stability by providing policy, advice and financing to members, by working with developing nations to help them achieve macroeconomic stability, and by reducing poverty • The IMF provides alternate sources of financing.
It shifted to examining the economic policies of countries with IMF loan agreements to determine if a shortage of capital was due to economic fluctuations or economic policy.
Their role became a lot more active because the IMF now manages economic policy rather than just exchange rates.
Cutting expenditures, also known as austerity, Devaluation of currencies,Trade liberalisation, or lifting import and export restrictions etc.
These macroeconomic reforms can include debt reduction strategies, privatization policies, and cuts in public spending.
It is for this reason that SAPs are regarded as particularly iniquitous by some observers.
Some economists suggest that the world economy would function better without it, and that many of its SAPs exacerbate crises rather than alleviate them.
Reforms in IMF • The challenge is to ensure that a balance is struck between good economic management and human needs.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • The IMF is only one of many international organisations, and it is a generalist institution that deals only with macroeconomic issues; its core areas of concern in developing countries are very narrow.
Greater voting power to developing countries so they have a greater say.
World Bank Introduction • The World Bank is an international financial institution that provides loans to developing countries for capital programs.
How World Bank Operates • The IBRD was the original arm of the World Bank that was responsible for the reconstruction of post-war Europe.
These loans come in the form of ""credits,"" and are essentially interest-free.
They offer a 10-year grace period and hold a maturity of 35 years to 40 years.
Adapting to the Times • sometimes as a nation develops, it requires more aid to work its way through the development process.
Opposition to the Bank • The globalization of market forces, vigorously promoted by the World Bank, creates greater inequality.
An Easy Way to Pressure the World Bank for Change • The World Bank gets most of its capital by selling bonds to wealthy investors.
Introduction • The United Nations was established to preserve peace between states after the Second World War.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • In a number of ways, the institutions of the United Nations reflected lessons learned from its predecessor, the League of Nations.
They also reflect demands to address the needs and interests of people, as well as the needs and interest of states.
The tensions between these various demands are a key feature of UN development.
Historical Background • Two years after the outbreak of the Second World War the British Prime Minister Winston Churchill met with President Roosevelt of the United States.
Apart from the defeat of Nazi Germany, they sought peace, freedom, collaboration, and security between states, overseen by a wider and permanent system of general security.
In 1945, 51 states met at the United Nations Conference in San Francisco to debate the terms of the UN Charter.
Objectives of UN • to maintain international peace, • to develop friendly relations among states, • to cooperate internationally in solving international economic, social, cultural and humanitarian problems • in promoting respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Aims and Articles of the Charter • The United Nations Charter was intended to provide a comprehensive set of prescription on conflict resolution and the use of force.
On the one hand there were the provisions for settling disputes between States, and the prescriptions as to when force could or could not be used.
On the other was the intended capability of the United Nations itself to provide collective security, if necessary by enforcing the peace.
Chapter VI of the Charter indicates the appropriate methods of settling international disputes and gives the Security Council certain powers in relation to these.
The General Assembly • The only time that all member states meet together is in the General Assembly.
It can debate any issue it chooses, adopt Resolutions with a two-thirds majority, help elect members of other UN bodies, and vote on the UN budget.
Ultimately, whatever power it has depends on its moral authority as a reflection of global opinion.
Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America, Western Europe, and Oceania.
Decisions of the Council have to be accepted by a majority of members, and must include the P5, each of which is able to veto a decision.
Evolution of UN System • The cold war and the decolonization process had discouraged more active involvement by the United Nations within states, due to the constant use of the veto by the great powers.
It also developed the practice of peacekeeping, which was in part designed to prevent the superpowers from intervening in conflicts that might then escalate into a direct confrontation between them.
Role of the Security Council • The Security Council has primary responsibility, under the United Nations Charter, for the maintenance of international peace and security.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT • The Security Council monitors the work of UN Peacekeeping operations on an ongoing basis, including through periodic reports from the Secretary-General and by holding dedicated Security Council sessions to discuss the work of specific operations.
While other organs of the UN make recommendations to Member States, the Council alone has the power to take decisions which Member States are obligated to implement.
Evolution of UN System • By the mid-1990s the UN had become involved in maintaining international peace and security by resisting aggression between states, by attempting to resolve disputes within states (civil wars), and by focusing on conditions within states, including economic, social, and political conditions.
Several Programmes and Funds were created in response to Global Conferences.
In its committees, cafes, bars, lounges and galleries, various diplomats often meet and happen to chat informally and so daily.
In such relaxed atmosphere, occasionally new ideas and approaches emerge, which sometimes lead to a fuller appreciation of opposite viewpoints and their eventual reconciliation.
But, let us remember, that all big events or achievements have small beginnings.
Some Success: Among these three special disarmament sessions, SSOD-I had some limited success in as much as it adopted a consensual resolution pointing to the grave danger arising from escalating arms race and urging immediate steps towards global disarmament.
Closely related to the problem of decolonization is the issue of fundamental freedom or human rights.
Surely, in this field, the UN has issued the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and several Covenants on Civil, political and economic rights.
Secondly, there is the problem of having to raise a sufficiently strong and trained peace-keeping force to be used as and when an emergency arises.
In all these cases, the disputes has either lingered on or has been set along three major landmarks in conflict resolution or the pacific, settlement of disputes-the Shastri-Sirimavo Agreement 1965, the Simla Agreement 1972 and the Farakka Accord 1977, were bilaterally negotiated.
Tajikistan had experienced difficulties during its transition period and had received every kind of support from the Organization, enabling the country to embark on the road to democratic development.
Today, Tajikistan was contributing to the fight against terrorism and extremism, transnational organized crime, arms smuggling, and human trafficking.
The country's police officers were participating in the joint peacekeeping operation of the United Nations and the African Union in Darfur.
The Drug Control Agency, which had been established with United Nations support, continued to play an important role in fighting illicit drug trafficking.
Prevention of illicit drug trafficking should be an integral A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT part of that struggle because the money earned from illicit drug trade was being channelled to finance the acts of terror.
On other matters of importance to his country, it stood for expanding good neighbourly relations with Afghanistan, and called on the international community to support that Government's efforts.
His country also believed that the Joint Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear programme would contribute to strengthening regional peace.
The Rwandan genocide of 1994 details the gross inability of the United Nations to carry out its sworn duty to maintain peace and security.
In 1993, UN peacekeeping forces entered the nation, attempted to secure the capital and enable humanitarian aid.
The peacekeeping forces were not authorized to use military manoeuvres to achieve these goals.
In January of 1994, a cable was sent from the Canadian Force Commander to the UN headquarters detailing the imminent threat of genocide by Hutu mobs on Tutsi minorities.
The Security Council never received the cable, and the notice was largely ignored.
Seeing that defeat was imminent, the government funded the Janjaweed, a group of Arabs.
By 2005, the Janjaweed were carrying out attacks on populated villages using artillery and helicopters, prompting condemnation by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.
Despite this condemnation, the UN did not enter Sudan, instead urging members of the African Union to intervene.
The Cold War exemplifies the failure behind the United Nations Charter.
In 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was established, which was binding to all nations, along with the Convention Against Genocide.
Civic rights were virtually non-existent and Stalin continued to rule with an iron fist.
Khmer Rouge Ruling Cambodia from 1975 to 1979, the Khmer Rouge practiced an extreme form of Communism, as dictated by their borderline-psychotic leader Pol Pot.
In 1979, the Vietnamese army invaded Cambodia to oust the Khmer Rouge and end the massacre and a new government was put in place in Cambodia.
Shockingly, the United Nations refused to recognize this new government because it was backed by Vietnam, which had recently ended a decade-long conflict with the United States.
After an ethnic cleansing campaign led by the Serbs targeted the Bosniaks, a largely Muslim community, the United Nations designated Srebrenica a safe-zone in 1993.
But, as many as 7,800 Bosniaks were killed by Serbian soldiers mainly due largely to an ill-equipped and unprepared UN force.
Five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council enjoy the luxury of veto power; when a permanent member vetoes a vote, the Council resolution cannot be A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT adopted.
Most recent example of a veto came when the UNSC attempted to evoke chapter VII sanctions from the UN Charter to intervene and prevent genocide in Syria.
But the vetoes by China and Russia halted any international intervention and rendered the UN hapless.
Palestine issue and Kashmir issue • Sri Lanka: In the final months of the war between LTTE and Sri Lankan army, the opposing sides fought in the heavily populated northeast coastline, a designated safe zone.
Independent experts urged the Human Rights Council of the UN to investigate claims of war crimes, but the United Nations made no attempts to intervene on behalf of the civilian population.
Despite this treaty, nuclear stockpiles remain high, and numerous nations continue to develop these devastating weapons.
The United Nations condemned the action, but failed to take any further action.
These terrorist acts continued throughout the remainder of the twentieth century, with no reaction from the UN; a simple condemnation was as far as they would go.
Italy was proud to be a leading country in the training of security forces in Iraq and had taken a primary role in the working group to counteract financing to Da'esh.
Terrorism remains a potent threat to international peace and security,"" Masood Khan said • ""Abject poverty is the fate of billions of people; our fragile planet is being exploited irresponsibly,"" he said, questioning if these developments were a precursor to another global crisis or even a war.
The Charter of the UN is based on the principles of sovereignty and non-intervention in the internal affairs of states.
The UN is unable to respond effectively to armed conflict that blurs the line between civil and interstate war.
Reforms of UN • Proposals have been put forward to make the organization more representative of the changing balance of power in world politics.
For example, the P5 represent the victors of the Second World War rather than the most important states of the twenty-first century.
An effective instrument that could bring an aggressor country to justice was needed, he urged, noting that the Russian Federation had used its veto twice during the Security Council's consideration of his country.
The veto power should not become an act of grace and pardon for a crime.
Fie welcomed the French Government's initiative to restrain veto use and supported an enlargement of the Council's membership and improvement of its working methods.
Indeed, the ideals and principles of the United Nations were being threatened around the world.
It was crucial that the Organization be adapted to today's realities and that it step up its efforts to tackle the underlying causes — not just the symptoms — of the crisis.
It must also improve its work in prevention and mediation in order to save lives.
In the twentyfirst century, the world would need a strong and reformed Organization.
On the issue of tackling terrorism, Milos Zeman, President of the Czech Republic, stressed that words and declarations would never fully eradicate that scourge.
Instead he proposed coordinated action under the umbrella of the Council with the activation of the ""sleeping structures"" of the United Nations.
Conclusion • The United Nations is a criminal enterprise in which no moral nation should ever participate, let alone perpetuate said Tom DeWeese, one of the United States leading advocates of individual liberty who fought over 30 years against oppression world-wide.
The long labour of peace is an undertaking for every nation and in this effort none of us can remain unaligned.
International Court of Justice 1) Introduction The International Court of Justice plays an immense role in the growth and implementation of International law. ii.
It is also known as the ""World Court"" and is a creation of a multi-lateral treaty. ill.
The International Court of Justice is one of the six organs of United Nations.
The ICJ is composed of 15 judges elected to nine year terms by the UN General Assembly and the UN Security Council.
It is stated under Article 93 of the UN Charter, that all the state parties to the UN charter are automatically parties to the Court's statute.
An advisory opinion is a function of the Court open only to specified United Nations bodies and agencies.
In principle, the Court's advisory opinions are only consultative in character, though they are influential and widely respected. ill.
For non-member states, article 93 also provides the right to be the parties of the Court if they wish to and willing to be bound by the jurisdiction of the Court.
Switzerland used this method to become the party of the Court in 1948 iii.
Article 34, paragraph 1 of the Statute of ICJ states that only state may be parties in cases before the Court. iv.
The Court has the jurisdiction over the states when the states accept the jurisdiction and willing to be bound by the jurisdiction.
The first jurisdiction is the power to decide on the legal dispute which submitted by the states.
This kind of power is called contentious jurisdictione. the Court has the power to settle the dispute when parties agree to submit to the Court. vi.
The Court gives advisory opinion to the UN organ such as Security Council or General Assembly when they need the legal advice from the Court For example.
World Health Organization request for an advisory opinion on the legality of the use of nuclear weapons by a state during armed conflict 4) The ICJ and the Security Council relationship After the Court issue the judgment for the disputed parties, there is one thing must be done.
ICJ doesn't have the power to enforce the parties of dispute to comply the judgment.
This job is transfer to the Security Council if the parties fail to perform the obligation incumbent upon it under a judgment rendered by the Court iii.
The initial request for an advisory opinion by the ICJ was put forward by the World Health Organization on 3 September 1993, but the ICJ did not render an opinion on this request because the WHO was Ultra Vires . iii.
Later another request was presented by the United Nations General Assembly in December 1994 which was accepted by the Court in January 1995. iv.
The General Assembly or the Security Council has the power to request advisory opinion from the ICJ under Article 96 of the UN Charter.
V The opinion provides one of the few authoritative judicial decisions concerning the legality under international law of the use or the threatened use of nuclear weapons.
Previously, there was no substantive theory or concrete debate over the issue of use, possession and legality of nuclear weapons.
It was after the request made by the UNGA, the ICJ gave a detailed opinion regarding nuclear weapons.
Apart from the 15 sitting judges, international lawyers from different states were called upon to put forward the arguments concerning nuclear weapons. vi.
The use of nuclear weapons posed a threat to life as under article 6 of International Covenant on Civil, Political Rights . vii.
Thus, the debate over this still continues and no conclusive decision is yet given on its usage.
Reform of Jurisdiction; This character of non-compulsory jurisdiction over the state is because of the principle of sovereignty iv.
Enforcement of judgment; The problem of enforcement arises when the Security Council can't issue the resolution.
In order to issue the resolution, 9 votes of Security Council member are needed.For substantive matter such as enforcement of ICJ judgment, all permanent member need to vote without veto of anyone. ii.
At the UN General Assembly session in 2000 the Member States adopted a Millennium Declaration, which sets out an ambitious plan of reform aiming to gear the Organisation A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT for the challenges of the 21st century.
The document envisages a reform and strengthening of the General Assembly, the Security Council, ECOSOC and the Secretariat, iii.
An expanded format of the Security Council with more permanent members would logically result in calls for the 'reservation' of seats on the ICJ bench for the members concerned. ii.
The justices of the International Court are elected for a term of 9 years and according to Article 13 of the Statute may be re-elected.
Every three years one-third of the justices are elected simultaneously by the General Assembly and the Security Council.
However, re-election campaigns place judges wishing to obtain a second or a third nine-year tenure in a vulnerable position and raise challenges for the Court's independence iii. there is a need for debate on reforming its working methods, including by means of establishing individual chambers in order to preclude delays in the administration of justice. iv.
The second category of reform proposals, which does not require amending or supplementing the Charter or Statute, includes procedural matters and working methods.
V setting up an open-ended working group within the UN General Assembly to be tasked with discussing and drafting recommendations on Court reform; vi. initiating an informal group of Friends of the Court to be tasked with rallying sufficient support for proposals and recommendations that would enhance the efficiency of the Court and global rule of law. vii. launching, at a later stage, of intergovernmental negotiations on ICJ reform at UN level on the basis of the model underlying the current intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the Security Council.
Manzar Javed AM Khan History • Idea of regional cooperation was discussed in three meeting • Asian Relations Conference in New Delhi in April 1947 • the Baguio Conference in the Philippines in May 1950, • the Colombo Powers Conference in April 1954. • framework for regional cooperation in South Asia was made by the late president of Bangladesh, Ziaur Rahman, on May 2,1980.
Secretariat • The SAARC Secretariat was established in Kathmandu on 16 January 1987 and was inaugurated by Late King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah of Nepal.
He is assisted by the Professional and the General Services Staff, and also an appropriate number of functional units called Divisions assigned to Directors on deputation from Member States.
Signing of on June 15, 2001, the Declaration of Shanghai Cooperation Organization, ® On 16 July 2001, Russia and the PRC, signed the Treaty of Good-Neighbourliness and Friendly Cooperation.
Economics cooperation ® A Framework Agreement to enhance economic cooperation was signed by the SCO member states on September 23, 2003.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ® At the same meeting the PRC's Premier, Wen Jiabao, proposed a long-term objective to establish a free trade area in the SCO, while other more immediate measures would be taken to improve the flow of goods in the region.
Kazakhstan also suggested an SCO folk dance festival to take place in 2008, in Astana.
Shortly afterwards, Uzbekistan asked the United States to leave the K-2 air base.
WRITE award ® Asian schlorship ® SPORTS ® ASEAN DEFENCE INDUSTRY A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Member states ® Brunei ® Cambodia ® Indonesia ® Laos ® Malaysia ® Burma ® Philippines ® Singapore ® Thailand ® Vietnam INTRODUCTION ® The Association of Southeast Asian Nations is a geo-political and economic organization of ten countries located in Southeast Asia, which was formed on 8 August 1967 by Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.
Since then, membership has expanded to include Brunei, Burma , Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.
The sea area of ASEAN is about three times larger than its land counterpart.
In 2010, its combined nominal GDP had grown to US$1. trillion.If ASEAN were a single entity, it would rank as the ninth largest economy in the world, behind the United States, China, Japan, Germany, France, Brazil, the United Kingdom, and Italy.
History of Asean ® ASEAN was preceded by an organisation called the Association of Southeast Asia, commonly called ASA, an alliance consisting of the Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand that was formed in 1961.
The five foreign ministers Adam Malik of Indonesia, Narciso Ramos of the Philippines, Abdul Razak of Malaysia, S Rajaratnam of Singapore, and Thanat Khoman of Thailand are considered the organisation's Founding Fathers.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ® Papua New Guinea was accorded Observer status in 1976 and Special Observer status in 1981.
ASEAN embarked on a program of economic cooperation following the Bali Summit of 1976.
This floundered in the mid-1980s and was only revived around 1991 due to a Thai proposal for a regional free trade area.
The bloc grew when Brunei Darussalam became the sixth member on 8 January 1984, barely a week after gaining independence on 1 January.
Cambodia was to have joined together with Laos and Burma, but was deferred due to the country's internal political struggle.
The country later joined on 30 April 1999, following the stabilisation of its government.
In 1990, Malaysia proposed the creation of an East Asia Economic Caucus comprising the then members of ASEAN as well as the People's Republic of China, Japan, and South Korea, with the intention of counterbalancing the growing influence of the United States in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and in the Asian region as a whole.
This proposal failed, however, because of heavy opposition from the United States and Japan.
Despite this failure, member states continued to work for further integration and ASEAN Plus Three was created in 1997.
On 15 December 1995, the Southeast Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty was signed with the intention of turning Southeast Asia into a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone.
The treaty took effect on 28 March 1997 after all but one of the member states have ratified it.
It became fully effective on 21 June 2001, after the Philippines ratified it, effectively banning all nuclear weapons in the region.
It is achieved while ASEAN seeks a more vigorous role in Asian and global affairs at a time when the international system is experiencing a seismic shift,"" he added, referring to climate change and economic upheaval.
The Republic of China has been excluded since the establishment of the ARF, and issues regarding the Taiwan Strait are neither discussed at the ARF meetings nor stated in the ARF Chairman's Statements.
Asean Plus Three ® The ASEAN Plus Three is a meeting between ASEAN, China, Japan, and South Korea, and is primarily held during each ASEAN Summit.
Until now China, Japan and South Korea have not yet formed Free Trade Area , the meeting about FTA among them will be held at end of 2012.
Aseaneurope meeting ® The Asia-Europe Meeting is an informal dialogue process initiated in 1996 with the intention of strengthening cooperation between the countries of Europe and Asia, especially members of the European Union and ASEAN in particular.
It also appoints a representative to sit on the governing board of Asia-Europe Foundation , a socio-cultural organization associated with the Meeting.
Asean-russian summit ® ASEAN-Russia Summit ® The ASEAN-Russia Summit is an annual meeting between leaders of member states and the President of Russia ® Economic community ® ASEAN has emphasised regional cooperation in the ""three pillars"", which are security, sociocultural integration, and economic integration.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ® The regional grouping has made the most progress in economic integration by creating an ASEAN Economic Community by 2015.
This economic growth was greater than the average Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation economic growth, which was 2.83 percent.
The latecomers have not fully met the AFTA's obligations, but they are officially considered part of the AFTA as they were required to sign the agreement upon entry into ASEAN, and were given longer time frames in which to meet AFTA's tariff reduction obligations.
The content of the portal currently consisted of subjects varying from security to culinary and in the future will also touch tourist sites and local culture.
Trade in services A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ® An ASEAN Framework Agreement on Trade in Services was adopted at the ASEAN Summit in Bangkok in December 1995.
Under AFAS, ASEAN Member States enter into successive rounds of negotiations to liberalise trade in services with the aim of submitting increasingly higher levels of commitments.
The negotiations result in commitments that are set forth in schedules of specific commitments annexed to the Framework Agreement.
These schedules are often referred to as packages of services commitments.
Single aviation market ® The ASEAN Single Aviation Market , proposed by the ASEAN Air Transport Working Group, supported by the ASEAN Senior Transport Officials Meeting, and endorsed by the ASEAN Transport Ministers, will introduce an open-sky arrangement to the region by 2015.
On 3 May 2009, they agreed to make a currency pool consist of contribution $38. billion each by China and Japan, $19. billion by South Korea and totally $24 billion by all of ASEAN members, so the total currency pool was $120 billion.
A key component has also newly been added, with the establishment of a surveillance unit.
It will perform a key regional surveillance function as part of the $120 billion of Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation currency swap facility that was established by Finance Minister and Central Bank Governors of ASEAN countries plus China, Japan and South Korea in December 2009.
European Union and United States has debt problems, while Japan should make tsunami recovery.
China who helped Asia lead the global post-2008 recovery still grapples with 3-years high inflation.
So, in the long term all of the problems will give negative impact to ASEAN indirectly.
There are possibility to push some programs of ASEAN Economic Community before 2015.
Intra-asean travel ■ with free visa among ASEAN countries, a huge intra-ASEAN travel occurred and on the right track to establish an ASEAN Community in the years to come.
Cultural activities ® The organization hosts cultural activities in an attempt to further integrate the region.
These include sports and educational activities as well as writing awards.
Asean media cooperation ® The first media cooperation and dialogue was started by China with ASEAN in 1991 and became ASEAN's dialogue partner in 1996.
AMC establishes partnerships between SEAN news media, and cooperate on information sharing, photo swapping, technical cooperation, exchange programs, facilitating joint news coverage and exchange of news footage.
AUN/SEED-Net is mainly supported by the Japanese Government through the Japan International Cooperation A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT Agency , and partially supported by the ASEAN Foundation.
Write Award is a literary award given to Southeast Asian poets and writers annually since 1979.
The award is either given for a specific work or as a recognition of an author's lifetime achievement.
Works that are honoured vary and have included poetry, short stories, novels, plays, folklore as well as scholarly and religious works.
ASAIHL ® ASAIHL or the Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning is a nongovernmental organization founded in 1956 that strives to strengthen higher learning institutions, especially in teaching, research, and public service, with the intention of cultivating a sense of regional identity and interdependence.
It covers accommodation, food, medical benefits & accident insurance, school fees, and examination fees.
SPORTS ® Southeast Asian Games ® The Southeast Asian Games, commonly known as the SEA Games, is a biennial multi-sport event involving participants from the current 11 countries of Southeast Asia.
The games is under regulation of the Southeast Asian Games Federation with supervision by the International Olympic Committee and the Olympic Council of Asia.
ASEAN PARA GAMES The ASEAN Para Games is a biennial multi-sport event held after every Southeast Asian Games for athletes with physical disabilities.
The games are participated by the 11 countries located in Southeast Asia.
The Games, patterned after the Paralympic Games, are played by physically challenged athletes with mobility disabilities, visual disabilities.
FESPIC GAMES ® The FESPIC Games, also known as the Far East and South Pacific Games for the persons with disability, was the biggest multi-sports games in Asia and South Pacific region.
The 2010 Asian Para Games will debut shortly after the conclusion of the 16th Asian Games, using the same facilities and venue made disability-accessible.
The inaugural Asian Para Games, the parallel event for athletes with physical disabilities, is a multi-sport event held every four years after every Asian Games.
Football championship A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ® The ASEAN Football Championship is a biennial Football competition organised by the ASEAN Football Federation, accredited by FIFA and contested by the national teams of Southeast Asia nations.
As a result of ASEAN Foreign ministers at Lombok meeting, they agreed bid to host the FIFA World Cup in 2030 as a single entity.
ASEAN DEFENSE INDUSTRY ® Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand have established defense industries.
MAASTRICHT TREATY ■ Signed in 1993 A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ■ European union was created ■ Membership of different countries statrted ■ Introduction of euro in 2002 o Lesbon treaty ■ A European Council President with a 2/2 year term, reducing the rotating Council Presidency's role.
Charter of Fundamental Rights ■ from 2000 made legally binding ■ Pillars merged to 1 legal person ■ enabling the Union per se to be party to treaties.
Lisbon treaty, 2009 ■ A secession clause ■ More double majority voting to new areas of policy in the European Council and the Council of Ministers, from 2014 on.
National parliaments engaged ■ by expanding scrutiny-time of legislation and enabling them to jointly compel the Commission to review or withdraw legislation.
It is actively involved in the negotiation of the treaty changes and defines the EU's policy agenda and strategies.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ■ The Parliament uses this to decide whether to approve the Commission's handling of the budget.
This cooperation had to particularly be developed with the advent of open borders through the Schengen Agreement and the associated cross border crime. ■ the Union has legislated in areas such as extradition, family law, asylum law, and criminal justice.
HUMANITARIAN AID ■ The European Commissions Humanitarian Aid Office, or ""ECHO"", provides humanitarian aid from the EU to developing countries.
Such regions are primarily located in the states of central and southern Europe Single market ■ core objectives of the European Economic Community were; ■ the development of a common market, subsequently renamed the single market, and a customs union.
A Project of CSS Writing Club Compiled by Ayesha Younas C\»^C PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT ■ The single market involves the free circulation of goods, capital, people and services within the EU, ■ the customs union involves the application of a common external tariff on all goods entering the market ■ Once goods have been admitted into the market they cannot be subjected to customs duties, discriminatory taxes or import quotas ■ Free movement of capital is intended to permit movement of investments such as property purchases and buying of shares between countries.
Monitory union ■ The creation of a European single currency became an official objective of the European Economic Community in 1969.
Agriculture ■ The Common Agricultural Policy is one of the oldest policies of the European Community, and was one of its core aims.
The policy has the objectives of increasing agricultural production, providing certainty in food supplies, ensuring a high quality of life for farmers, stabilising markets, and ensuring reasonable prices for consumers.
Agriculture expenditure will move away from subsidy payments linked to specific produce, toward direct payments based on farm size.
Science &education ■ the Erasmus Programme ■ , a university exchange programme which began in 1987.
In its first 20 years it has supported international exchange opportunities for well over 1. million university and college students and has become a symbol of European student life. ■ programmes for school pupils and teachers, for trainees in vocational education and training and for adult learners in the Lifelong Learning Programme 2007-2013 ■ science and eduaction ■ the Bologna process the EU is supporting comparable standards and compatible degrees across Europe.
Of these, 31. million were born outside the EU and 16. million were born in another EU member state.
The European Parliament provides translation into all languages for documents and its plenary sessions.
Religion ■ The EU is a secular body with no formal connection to any religion.
