While most Cubans initially celebrate Castro's victory over the unpopular, corrupt Batista, Americans fear that Castro will establish a Soviet-friendly regime just 90 miles off the Florida coast.
Apr 1, 1959Castro Tours U.S.New Cuban leader Fidel Castro tours the United States, hiring a prominent American PR firm to coordinate a charm offensive in hopes of reassuring Americans that the new revolutionary government in Cuba poses no threat to the United States.
While Castro receives some positive coverage in the American press, President Dwight Eisenhower refuses to meet with him.
Feb 1, 1960Cuba and United States Sever TiesFidel Castro negotiates a trade agreement with the Soviet Union, allowing Cuba to import Soviet oil.
Cuba's refineries—all owned by American corporations—refuse to process the Soviet crude, and Castro retaliates by nationalizing the refineries.
Castro's seizure of this American property leads to the severing of diplomatic relations between the United States and Cuba.
Jun 1, 1960Cuban Sugar Quota CutThe Eisenhower administration cuts Cuba's sugar quota, depriving Cuba of the opportunity to sell 7 million tons of sugar in the American market.
Castro threatens to nationalize all American-owned property in Cuba in retaliation.
Sep 14, 1960OPEC FoundedOPEC is founded by Iraq, Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Venezuela to coordinate petroleum production and pricing.
Aug 7, 1960Cuba Nationalizes American PropertyFidel Castro follows through on his threat to nationalize all American-owned property in Cuba.
Lands and businesses worth more than $850 million become the property of the Cuban government.
Oct 18, 1960Kennedy Campaigns with the ""Missile Gap""Presidential candidate John F Kennedy, Democratic Senator from Massachusetts, argues that the Eisenhower administration has allowed a ""missile gap"" to develop between the United States and the Soviet Union.
He claims that the Soviets are outpacing the United States in missile production, and that he will reverse this gap if elected.
Nov 8, 1960Kennedy ElectedDemocratic Senator John F Kennedy of Massachusetts is elected president, narrowly defeating Republican Vice President Richard Nixon in the 1960 elections.
Jan 20, 1961Kennedy InauguratedPresident John F Kennedy's inaugural address showcases the young president's idealism.
Even while demonstrating his commitment to the Cold War by promising that he will not shrink from defending freedom, he also promises to be open to cooperation with the Soviet Union in the interest of peace and arms control.
Mar 13, 1961Alliance for Progress LaunchedPresident John F Kennedy launches the Alliance for Progress, a massive program of economic aid for the Western Hemisphere akin to the earlier Marshall Plan for Western Europe.
Kennedy hopes the Alliance will generate economic growth and social progress in the developing nations of Latin America, inspiring allegiance to the United States while making communism a less attractive alternative.
Mar 1, 1961Peace Corps EstablishedPresident John F Kennedy establishes the Peace Corps to send idealistic young Americans to aid developing countries around the world.
Kennedy hopes the organization will create positive feelings towards the United States in Africa and Asia while undermining the appeal of anti-American revolutionary movements.
Jul 9, 1961""No Cities/Counterforce"" Strategy ProposedHoping to make the use of nuclear weapons more feasible, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara proposes the strategy of ""no cities/counterforce,"" which would target Soviet military bases instead of cities in order to lower the number of potential casualties.
Apr 12, 1961Soviet Becomes First Man in SpaceThe USSR's Yuri Gagarin becomes the first man in space, successfully completing one orbit around earth in his Vostok 1 spacecraft.
Apr 17, 1961Bay of Pigs InvasionA CIA-organized force of anti-Castro Cuban exiles attempts to invade Cuba, landing at a place called the Bay of Pigs.
Rather than toppling Castro's government, the invasion is quickly crushed by Cuba's armed forces.
Aug 12, 1961East Germans IsolatedEast Germany closes the border between East and West Berlin in an attempt to cut off East Germans' flight to the more prosperous West.
Aug 15, 1961Berlin Wall BuiltEast Germany builds the Berlin wall, dividing East and West Berlin.
The wall separates families, cuts off workers from jobs, and devastates Berliners on both sides, becoming the most powerful symbol of the oppression of Eastern Europe under Soviet domination.
Oct 27, 1961 Oct 28, 1961Checkpoint Charlie Confrontation American and Soviet tanks face off for two days at Checkpoint Charlie, one of the few border crossings remaining between East and West Berlin following East Germany's closure of the border.
After East German police violate an agreement allowing free transport of diplomats across Berlin's sectors, American general Lucius Clay sends in diplomats to test the East German response.
Oct 30, 1961Tsar Bomb DroppedA Russian bomber drops the Tsar bomb, the largest nuclear weapon ever detonated, in a test over the Arctic Ocean.
The 57-megaton Tsar bomb is thousands of times more powerful than the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima in 1945.
Nov 30, 1961Operation MongoosePresident John F Kennedy initiates the CIA's Operation Mongoose, authorizing covert attempts to overthrow Fidel Castro's communist regime in Cuba.
Operation Mongoose is a failure and pushes Castro closer to the Soviet Union.
President John F Kennedy rejects advice from military advisors to launch an immediate attack on Cuba.
Oct 22, 1962Cuba QuarantinePresident John F Kennedy goes on national television to announce the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba and the imposition of an American ""quarantine"" or naval blockade around Cuba.
Kennedy begins negotiations with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, largely leaving Cuban leader Fidel Castro out of the loop.
The deal is kept secret from the public, which believes that Kennedy has won his victory through pure resolve rather than through negotiation.
Aug 5, 1963Limited Test Ban TreatyThe United States, Soviet Union, and Great Britain sign the Limited Test Ban Treaty, which bans atmospheric nuclear tests in hopes of slowing the arms race and protecting against nuclear fallout.
Nov 22, 1963Johnson PresidencyLyndon Baines Johnson assumes the presidency after the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
Jun 16, 1963First Woman in SpaceSoviet cosmonaut Valentina Vladimirovna Tereshkova makes the first flight by a woman in space.
Jun 20, 1963Hotline EstablishedThe American and Soviet governments set up a telephone hotline to ensure that the two country's leaders will always be able to establish direct communications during future Cold War crises.
Nov 1, 1963Vietnam CoupSouth Vietnamese leader Ngo Dinh Diem, a corrupt and unpopular ruler, is killed in a military coup carried out with United States approval.
Rather than improving the situation, Diem's murder plunges South Vietnam even deeper into crisis.
Dec 19, 1964Mutually Assured Destruction Defense Secretary Robert McNamara develops the idea of Mutual Assured Destruction, which holds that in a world in which both the United States and USSR possess enough nuclear weapons to wipe each other off the map, both sides' fears of nuclear retaliation will prevent either from ever using the weapons for aggressive purposes.
Although critics decry McNamara's nuclear ""balance of terror"" policy as mad , McNamara believes his policy will help maintain a stable nuclear world.
Aug 2, 1964Gulf of Tonkin IncidentIn the Tonkin Gulf, off the coast of Vietnam, the communist North Vietnamese allegedly attack American ships that have strayed near Vietnamese waters.
The ""Gulf of Tonkin Incident"" gives the Johnson administration a pretext to justify sending American troops to intervene in Vietnam.
Oct 16, 1964Chinese Atomic BombCommunist China detonates its first successful atomic bomb.
Nov 3, 1964Johnson LandslideIn the 1964 presidential election, Democrat Lyndon B Johnson crushes Republican Barry Goldwater to win a second term as president.
May 16, 1966 Oct 10, 1976Cultural Revolution Chinese leader Mao Zedong initiates the Cultural Revolution, which aims to renew support for revolutionary communism and rid Chinese society of bourgeois elements.
In support, some Chinese students launch the Red Guards, an anarchic and sometimes violent student movement against party leaders and intellectuals who do not fully support Mao and his policies.
China comes close to civil war with massive purges of intellectuals and political opponents.
Estimates of the number of people killed in the Cultural Revolution range from 500,000 to 3 million.
The Cultural Revolution lasts a decade and brings higher education in China to a halt.
Jun 5, 1967 Jun 10, 1967Six Day War Israel battles Egypt in the Six Day War.
After the Israelis launch a pre-emptive strike upon learning that Egypt is contemplating war, triumphant Israeli forces seize Sinai and the Gaza Strip from Egypt, the West Bank and East Jerursalem from Jordan, and the Golan Heights from Syria.
Jul 1, 1968Nuclear Non-Proliferation TreatyThe United States, Soviet Union, and Great Britain sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, agreeing not to spread nuclear weapons to other countries and to limit nuclear delivery systems.
The treaty gives the United Nations' International Atomic Energy Agency the job of inspecting nuclear facilities.
Jul 25, 1969Nixon DoctrineThe Nixon Doctrine of President Richard Nixon states that the United States will continue to lend support to its allies with money and weaponry, but will largely leave them responsible for manning their own defenses.
Josip Tito of Yugoslavia and Nicolae Ceausescu of Romania visit Dubcek to show their support, and students in Poland and Yugoslavia protest in sympathy with Czechoslovakia.
The Czech people soon demand even greater reforms, beyond those proposed by Dubcek's government.
Dubcek, who counsels moderation, finds himself divided from other influential leaders.
Aug 21, 1968Czechoslovakia FallsSoviet forces invade Czechoslovakia, crushing the Prague Spring.
Czech leaders are flown to Moscow, where they are forced to renounce their earlier reforms, leading to the reintroduction of censorship.
Nov 13, 1968Brezhnev DoctrineThe Brezhnev Doctrine of Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev justifies repressing the Prague Spring reformers in Czechoslovakia by stating that no socialist state can adopt policies endangering the interests of international socialism, and that the Soviet Union can intervene in any Soviet-bloc nation if communist rule there is threatened.
Nov 17, 1969SALTA meeting in Helsinki, Finland, between the United States and Soviet Union initiates the first phase of a Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty , freezing both sides' number of ballistic missile launchers at current levels.
Sep 4, 1970Salvador Allende Becomes President of ChileIn Chile, leftist Salvador Allende heads a political coalition supported by both the Chilean socialist and communist parties.
Despite CIA attempts to weaken his support, Allende is freely elected president, putting Marxists in power by democratic means.
Allende nationalizes the country's vital copper industry, gives free milk to schoolchildren, and begins to put the economy under state control.
Aug 26, 1970 May 31, 1972Cienfuegos Crisis The Cienfuegos Crisis begins when an American U-2 spy plane spots a submarine base in Cuba.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger thus chooses to handle the issue with quiet diplomacy.
Feb 1, 1970Soviet-German Pipeline AgreedThe Soviet Union and West Germany make a deal, agreeing to build an oil pipeline between the two nations.
These negotiations demonstrate West German leader Willy Brandt's strategy of showing his openness to working with the Soviets in order to build better relations with Soviet-controlled East Germany.
Aug 12, 1970Moscow TreatyIn the Moscow Treaty, the USSR and West Germany agree to existing borders and to normalize relations between the two nations.
Dec 20, 1970Polish StrikesThe Polish army violently puts down strikes of protesting workers in Gdansk, Poland.
May 26, 1972Antiballistic Missile TreatyThe United States and USSR sign the Antiballistic Missile Treaty to limit anti-ballistic missile systems, which could potentially defend against missiles carrying nuclear weapons.
May 3, 1971East Open to DétenteEast German leader Walter Ulbricht is forced out of power and is replaced by Erich Honecker, who is more open to détente with the West.
Jul 1, 1971Kissinger Tours AsiaSecretary of State Henry Kissinger tours Asia, secretly visiting Beijing to open up diplomatic relations with communist China.
Sep 3, 1971Four Powers Agreement ReachedThe Four Power Agreement on Berlin between the four World War II allies—Britain, France, the United States, and Soviet Union—finally resolves critical issues created during the occupation of Germany in 1945.
The Western powers agree to recognize East Berlin as the capital of East Germany and the Soviets agree to improve access between East and West Berlin.
Feb 21, 1972Nixons Opens ChinaPresident Richard Nixon travels to China and meets Chinese leader Mao Zedong.
Dec 21, 1972Basic Treaty SignedWest and East Germany sign the Treaty for the Basis of Relations , which gives East Germany de facto recognition of its statehood and borders though not de jure recognition.
This means that while West German leader Willy Brandt is willing to recognize that East Germany operates as a sovereign state in practice, he is not willing to legally define East Germany as a separate from the German nation.
Brandt adopts this stance because he hopes for the eventual reunification of Germany.
This distinction between de facto and de jure recognition plays out in East and West Germany's exchange of permanent representatives rather than ambassadors.
May 22, 1972DétentePresident Richard Nixon travels to the USSR for a summit with Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev in the Kremlin.
They agree to seek a policy of détente, neither seeking an advantage at the expense of the other.
May 29, 1972SALT I SignedThe signing of the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty by the United States and USSR in Moscow heralds the beginning of détente.
The treaty freezes the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles held by each country for five years.
The treaty also shows an acceptance of equal strategic arsenals—both the United States and USSR realize that they each will continue to have a large number of weapons no matter how vigorously they compete in an arms race.
Nov 7, 1972Nixon ReelectedRepublican Richard Nixon is re-elected president, crushing Democrat George McGovern in the presidental election of 1972.
Jan 27, 1973Vietnam PeaceThe Paris Peace Treaty establishes a ceasefire in Vietnam.
Sep 11, 1973Chile CoupIn Chile, the military bombs the presidential palace, overthrowing the elected left-wing government of Salvador Allende, who is either murdered or commits suicide.
Oct 6, 1973Yom Kippur WarThe Yom Kippur War begins as Egyptian and Syrian troops, using Soviet tanks, cross the Suez Canal to launch a surprise attack against Israel on the Jewish Yom Kippur holiday.
Israel requests arms from the United States, and the Americans attempt to send them; however, European countries refuse to let the Americans use air bases on their soil for this purpose.
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat temporarily regains the territory his country lost in the Six-Day War of 1967, but will not then accept a ceasefire, continuing the war.
Israeli forces recover from their initial setbacks, counterattacking to retake the land captured by Egypt.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger puts America's nuclear weapons on DEFCON III, an unprecedented level of high-alert.
Oct 22, 1973Yom Kippur ResolutionUnited Nations Security Council Resolution 338, coauthored by American Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev, calls for a ceasefire to end the Yom Kippur War.
Oct 19, 1973OPEC Imposes Oil EmbargoThe Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries , led by Saudi King Faisal, imposes an oil embargo on the United States and other Western powers in retaliation for their support of Israel during the Yom Kippur War.
Oct 27, 1973Peace Talks BeginEgypt and Israel begin peace talks to end the Yom Kippur War.
Leaders from both countries meet at Kilometer 101, a point of passage between the two nations located between Cairo and the Suez Canal.
Nov 11, 1973Yom Kippur Peace Treaty ReachedAn agreement ending the Yom Kippur War is reached between Egypt and Israel, and the United States resumes diplomatic relations with Egypt.
Still, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries continues its oil embargo against the United States American oil prices skyrocket by 400% in 1974.
Nov 23, 1974SALT IIPresident Gerald Ford and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev meet in Vladivostok to sign accords limiting offensive nuclear weapons.
This lays the groundwork for another Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty , which further restricts the arms held by both nations.
Mar 17, 1974Oil Embargo EndsThe Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ends its oil embargo against the United States.
Dec 19, 1975Cold War Stabilizes1975 marks the high point of détente between the United States and Soviet Union.
The Vietnam War is over, China is America's friend, relations between East and West Germany are improving, and the United States and USSR have made a number of agreements to slow the nuclear arms race.
The Cold War seems to have stabilized, with reduced tensions on both sides.
