In the year 1962, Soviet and American tensions are at an all-time high as the Soviet Union assembles nuclear warheads on Cuban soil, just miles off the coast of Florida.
Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union and John F Kennedy, President of the United States engaged in dozens of heated debates and conversations involving Fidel Castro, the Prime Minister of Cuba.
When Kennedy decides to implement a blockade on Cuba, he is well aware that he will be confronting Soviet supply ships in the process.
Second, Soviet officials began to build naval units specialized in the art of nuclear war, all of which were engaged in surrounding the island of Cuba with supplies and attempting to break through the American blockade.
Finally, the Soviet Union explains to Cuba the nature of the blockade, revealing the unwillingness of either commander to strike first.
Mikoyan states, “The United States was screaming about the blockade, but there was no real blockade.
Then it …show more content… The influence of Cuba was highlighted primarily in Soviet military donations and construction of nuclear warheads on Cuban land, in addition to the classification of offensive and defensive structures built by the Soviet Union.
Finally, in the resolution terms and removal of Soviet nuclear arms from Cuba, the influence Cuba played in defusing and resolving widespread national tensions was illustrated.
In what would come to be known as one of the most daunting presidential addresses during the Cold War, Kennedy informed the public that there was a series of offensive missile sites on the island of Cuba, which had been placed there by the Soviet Union.
Kennedy went on to inform his audience that the Soviet Union had been ordered to remove all the missiles from Cuba and a quarantine had been placed on the island.
Recently declassified information shows plans of an invasion, the assassination of Fidel Castro, and the installation of a favorable government in Havana since November of 1961.
This validates Nikita Khrushchev’s, Soviet Premier, claim that the missiles were purely for Cuba’s defense.
It is the event when the two superpowers are coming closest to a nuclear conflict.
It is the event which is causing the two superpowers to come closer for a nuclear conflict.
The United States wanted to contain communism while the Soviet Union wanted to spread it, causing conflict.
The Cuban missile crisis began when Fidel Castro began a revolution to overthrow the Cuban government.
This conflict gave rise to a renewed stance on international negotiations and diplomacy with these nations and their political leaders under the global spotlight for the entire process.
On October 22, 1962 President John Kennedy advised Americans about the nearness of the rockets, he disclosed his choice to order a maritime barricade around Cuba which he made it clear the United States was set up to utilize military constrain just if it 's vital just to kill this apparent danger to national security.
Besides, numerous individuals really dreaded the world was on the precarious edge of atomic war.
The Cold War was a war of ideologies, fueled by United States fear of Communist expansion into the Western hemisphere.
The USSR’s alliance with Cuba was seen as a communist ‘invasion’ and met with panic.
Since the introduction of nuclear weaponry to the world stage at the end of WWII, the United States and USSR began building arsenals of these weapons, something the Soviets believed they were trailing the United States in.
This crisis involved 2 superpowers, the United States, The Soviet Union and the Island of Cuba.
A revolution that began in 1953 was led by Fidel Castro to overthrow the United States backed dictator Batista.
What happened was, after receiving permission from President Fidel Castro to deploy the weapons, the support equipment left the Soviet Union for Cuba.
The U-2 overflights, the American reconnaissance flights, were part of a broad continuing effort to monitor and contain Cuba.
