CIA & JFKSupport The Deep StateOur Man in MexicoIn Our Man in Mexico, investigative reporters tells the remarkable story of CIA station chief and what he really thought of JFK's assassination.
Click on the cover image to buy it now.Learn More * Mary Ferrell.org, has the largest online collection of JFK assassination records and the most concise guides to the JFK debate.
Make your voice heard by participating in calls to action on our Action page.
Suggest content for our Research page, or email us with news items and links to useful resources and information.
LeMay’s comment reflected a widespread belief in the United States military and intelligence circles that JFK’s foreign policy posed a threat to United States national security.
The comment was recorded on the White House recording system on Oct., 1962.
Accordingly, they planned to launch a pre-emptive nuclear attack against the United States as soon as an American attack on Cuba began.
Reply Tom April 28, 2014 at 11:23 pm Thanks for posting the transcript.
Therefore, I beg to differ with Mr Robert Morrow regarding the direction for where the coup originated.
Kennedy simultaneously pursued a two tract policy regarding both Vietnam and Cuba, presiding over policy that conveyed, to military leaders and the CIA, Vietnam and Cuba were not worth sending in United States military combat units.
It is duly noted there were pervasive, truculent mindsets among hard liners who wanted to “nuke” both the Soviet Union and Cuba, as a solution to the current Cold War conflicts.
Needless to say, history has proven JFK correct , respectively, in their assessments of contrived CIA conflicts, and operational abuses.
Years later, the CIA, through Robert Mahew , hire mob drug smuggler and gambling kingpin, Myer Lansky, Tampa drug smuggler, Santos Trafficante, New Orleans mobster Carlos Marcello, and Chicago Boss, Sam “Momo” Giancana.
There were other Mafiosi involved, to be sure, such as Los Angeles , and Kansas City , because the United States mob already was operating under a Commission; but the enduring core of the active Castro assassination mob group was Johnny Roselli and Santos Trafficante.
It was Trafficante who played both the Cuban and American sides against one another, as he is suspected of having his people inside Operation Mongoose and in Cuba, as mob heroin may still have been coming through Cuba’s outlying areas.
Mexico City’s ELINT Programs, and ZR/RIFLE, the Executive Action program.
Harvey, even after being exiled to Italy, maintained his “friendship” with mobster Johnny Roselli, who Harvey kept as a liaison to ZR/Rifle and Operation Mongoose.
After all, the same people who planned and participated in the Bay of Pigs, then moved on to Vietnam, had just such information.
They witnessed Kennedy’s alleged vacillation regarding military action in Cuba, and decided this would not happen in Vietnam.
Currently, illicit drug sales in North America are estimated, yearly, at $90 billion dollars.
Reply Darwin April 28, 2014 at 11:57 am LeMay was a fascist and almost certainly a psychopath/sociopath and the two are not unrelated.
General McClelland began with a typical military base system and then let brains and technology run their course.
With a degree in business administration from WSU and an FCC Engineering License, Elroy was an energetic and farsighted entrepreneur who founded the first radio station, KELA, in Centralia in 1937…Throughout the war, she commuted from Washington D.C. when necessary while Elroy served at Army Air Forces Headquarters in the Pentagon as Executive Officer and Special Assistant to General McClelland, head of USAAF communications.
Salinger, describing the mistake as the worst security breech in his four years at the White House… Salinger said, “When he called Gen.
John Elroy McCaw, worked on OSS Special Projects known as operations Aphrodite, Simmons, and Javaman.
Major Maitland A Edey… “In 1942, Thompson joined the Army, where he edited a magazine for air force intelligence.
Reply Lyle D November 13, 2013 at 12:16 am What people need to realize, consider the USS Liberty, the role of Permindex and the figures that make up board.
Similarly, the principal cities of the Soviet Union would be destroyed.
The lady, as she tells it, asked if there were any place where she could take her children and grandchildren to safety; the general would, of course, at the first alert be inside the top-secret underground hideout near Washington from which the retaliatory strike would be directed.
As I do JFK research, I have come to the conclusion that CIA/military/shadow government rage over Cuba policy was a far, far bigger reason for the JFK assassination than Vietnam policy.
Here are some more Cold Warrior quotes, which in retrospect from what we know now, seem pretty stupid, even dangerously stupid.
We locked Castro’s communism into Latin America and threw away the key to its removal,” growled Barry Goldwater.
Most members of Kennedy’s team had no military or diplomatic experience whatsoever.
Hunt, along with LBJ and Hoover, has long been a prime suspect in the JFK assassination.
Byrd was a founder of the Civil Air Patrol which had such members as David Ferrie, Lee Harvey Oswald and a young Barry Seal who later became a legendary CIA drug smuggler and pilot.
Byrd was both an oil man and a military contractor and his company received a large military contract in early, 1964.
Billie Sol Estes, who is still alive today in 2012, admits planning murders with LBJ, Cliff Carter and Malcolm Wallace.
LBJ said in early 1961 “Get rid of him” referring to Marshall and the need to murder him.
Hunt later gave $1 million to Curtis LeMay and supported him when he ran for VP under the American Independent ticket with George Wallace.
Byrd later wrote an autobiography “I’m An Endangered Species” in which he does not mention the JFK assasination.
Byrd later had the so-called “sniper’s window” of the 6th floor of the TSBD removed as a memento.
Edward Lansdale, an Air Force general with a deep CIA background was photographed 5 feet west of the TSBD on 11/22/63 and he was identified by both his peers Col.
Charles Cabell was an Air Force General who was appointed deputy director of the CIA in 1963.
Charles Cabell’s brother was Earl Cabell, the Mayor of Dallas at the time of the JFK assassination.
Pretty much all those Air Force men mentioned and those Texas oil men and military contractors hated both JFK and Robert Kennedy with a white hot passion.
It includes recorded snippets of discussion that took place in the White House during those tense days.
And Kennedy replies, “Well, you’re right there with me…” Reply Leave a Comment Cancel ReplyYour email address will not be published.
Name* Email* Website Δdocument.getElementById.setAttribute ).getTime ); This site uses Akismet to reduce spam.
