The successful and determinedly civilian orchestration of the great panoply of persuasion that was brought to bear on the Soviets in the Caribbean seemed to herald an era wherein vastly expanded power, blessedly, had become a relevant, useful, and rational instrument of American policy.
The triumphant position of the United States in the aftermath of the Cuban Crisis reinforced the longstanding American hope that a stable international order could be sustained if it were underwritten by America's readiness to employ effective force.
But in the early 1960s, a new nexus between force and order seemed, to the crisis managers, clearly to exist.
And the union promised no less than the achievement of a stable, liberal international regime, predicated on ample reserves of American power directed by a confident, sophisticated national security elite.
There was no need for deterrence to come to any kind of unlimited test since limited coercion could form an unmistakable and undeniable politico-military grammar.
If force could be made a discrete instrument of bargaining, the inner dynamic of Soviet expansionism could be tamed and defeated without incommensurate dangers.
The Cuban missile crisis seemed to offer the promise that the sterile and fruitless Kabuki of diplomacy, replete with archaic conference halls and interminable discussion, could be replaced by the management centre, the telex, and rapid-fire 'signals' divined by those pragmatic minds who were alert to war's horrors, yet not inured to them.
The Clausewitzian Heritage From the mid-seventeenth century to the onset of the twentieth century, war and peace were ambiguous concepts, defined as much by legal artifacts as by the empirical reality of the battlefield.
Wars began with declarations and ultimatums, and they ended with treaties and conferences.
Short of war, there was an abundance of military manoeuvres and demonstrations of intent that were undertaken without much public concern.
European publics were largely unaware, illinformed, and disengaged from war.
The worst parts of most wars were fought at sea or in outposts distant from the capital.
Battles might be intense, but all those lost belonged to the largely professional armies and navies.
From the Treaty of Westphalia to the onset of the Napoleonic War, capitals and courts were rarely at risk.
The consequence of defeat, in contradistinction to earlier practices, was neither slavery, slaughter, nor forcible conversion.
Gains or losses were summed up and parsed out in the form of military alliances, dynastic marriages, or overseas colonies.
By the middle of the eighteenth century, there had emerged a kind of 'international society' of resonant interests.
In this 'classic' international 'system' the familiar palliatives of diplomatic adjustment were well tolerated.
In the end, diplomats settled up at the bargaining table what soldiers had determined on the battlefield.
When, for instance, France ceded Canada after the Seven Years War, Voltaire sniffed that it was not worth worrying about a few 'miserable acres of snow'.6 To Clausewitz, the warrior and the diplomat had a kind of regulatory synergy, sharing an end not of victory, but of a stable peace.
One will only fight until some modest quid pro quo had been acquired, and a moderate effort should suffice for that.
The enemy's reasoning will be much the same . . . e must be willing to wage such minimal wars which consist in merely threatening the enemy with negotiations held in reserve.
Clausewitz's great fear was that war would become 'pointless and devoid of sense' — a 'thing unto itself.
Once war compelled animosities to become too intense, it lost its integration with the broader world of statecraft.
If war were left to the generals or left to its own inner expansive logic, then war's political nature would be suffused.
By the end of the nineteenth century, war could consume not just professional armies, but great sections of whole societies as well.
Once war began to approach its terrible and absolute form, the only remaining rationale for its employment was to defeat the cause of war itself.
Peace would be durable only if dictated unconditionally after crushing the enemy.
The demand for total victory was not so much the expression of political philosophy as a reflex reaction to total war.
Apocalyptic Power By the mid-1950s, the Eisenhower Administration had given atomic weapons a central place.
Yet nuclear weapons were challenged even by those who depended on them as excessive.
No matter . . . how certain that within 24 hours we could destroy Kuibyshev and Moscow and Leningrad and Baku and all the other places . . ., I want you to carry this question home with you.
I repeat, there is no victory in any war except . . . through our dedication . . . to avoid it.
Not that many elements of any given Soviet challenge could be depicted as deserving the threat, in return, of atomic destruction.
Atomic weapons would have an effect disproportionate to any normal valuation as a policy objective.
Atomic victory did not mean bending an enemy to one's will, or even destroying his army.
It was not 'politics by other means', but what the Nuremberg lawyers spoke of when they wrote the laws of genocide.
Once the Soviets achieved a kind of nominal strategic nuclear parity; war, defined in terms of nuclear weapons, was a coin too fearful in consequence to be redeemed.
Yet, while nuclear weapons might paralyse one side, there was, in the emerging American community of defence intellectuals, a fear that these same weapons would embolden the Soviets.
It can be argued that fear of all-out war is bound to be mutual, . . . but . . . if the Soviet bloc can present its challenges in less than all out form, it may gain a crucial advantage.
Every move on its part will then pose the appalling dilemma of whether we are willing to commit suicide to prevent encroachments, no one of which seems to threaten our existence directly, but which may be a step on the road to our ultimate destruction.
The Depreciation of Diplomacy and The New Strategists The dreary history of the inter-war period seemed to reveal that Western negotiation with totalitarian regimes had reaped only more demands.
Finally, when the West said 'no — no more', Hitler found the final 'no' coming from Munich's 'worms' just as unconvincing as all the others.
The incandescent image of Chamberlain and his folded umbrella burned with idectic certainty in the collective memory of American policy-makers.
The rejection of armed action contribute to the most ghastly human phenomena.
War was viewed . . . not as Catch-22 or Mash or even Patton . . . but as the only way to deal with world order.
But whatever the sad spectacle of Munich might have meant, it could have been overcome, one supposes, had not Roosevelt's wartime diplomacy been discredited as well.
If it was their business to lay the foundation for a firm peace, then there too there was failure.
After the war, diplomats (who had been in Asia when Chaing was forced to flee from Mao's troops, or who had been with Roosevelt at Yalta) were accused, at a minimum, of having known the enemy too well — and, at a maximum, of deserting American interests for those of our adversaries.
To Indiana Republican Senator William Jenner, for instance, General Marshall was a 'front man for traitors . . . a living lie . . . an errand boy . . . a stooge, or a coconspirator for this administration's crazy assortment of collectivists cut-throats and Communist fellow traveling appeasers'.22 In the classic diplomatic tradition, diplomacy and negotiation were nearly synonymous.
The diplomat's function was to bring 'intelligence and tact to the conduct of official relations' in order to 'harmonize' divergent national interests.
The sum of treaties derived by negotiation formed a tissue of 'positive' international law.
International law, and the relationships it implied, made international society more predictable and hence more orderly.
By the late 1940s, diplomacy had become not so much a method of ameliorating the clash of interests as a self-defeating vestige of an ancient and irrelevant civility.
But meetings were believed to be little more than venues for mean-spirited propaganda, or complex traps to lure good-willed Western innocents.
At a conference in 1954, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles asked one of his aides whether he might not be satisfied if the Soviet Foreign Secretary would accept free elections and the reunification of Germany.
Of course, there was a belief that one could get agreements of a type with the Soviets, yet these could hardly be more than truces.
As Henry Kissinger wrote, In any negotiation, it is understood that force is the ultimate recourse.
It is the art of diplomacy to keep the threat potential, to keep its extent indeterminate and to commit it only as a last resort.
For once power has been made actual, negotiations in the proper sense, cease.
A threat to use force which proves unavailing, does not return the negotiation to the point before the threat was made.
It destroys the bargaining position altogether for it is a confession not of finite power, but of impotence.
To the 'new strategists',34 the great given was that while classic diplomacy had no real utility, a kind of functional diplomacy35 had developed wherein adversaries would bargain with each other through the mechanism of graduated increments of military force in order to achieve a 'negotiated' accord.
This odd, 'vicious' 'diplomacy of violence' gave a kind of perverse and pernicious twist to the ancient practices of official 'gentlemen' who directed their energies toward the search for settlements.
As former State Department official and Harvard economist Thomas Schelling explained, 'the power to hurt is bargaining power' whose 'only purpose, unless sport or revenue, must be to influence somebody's behavior to coerce his decisions or choice; to be coercive, violence has to be anticipated.
To exploit it, is diplomacy — vicious diplomacy, but diplomacy'.38 As soon as the Soviets acquired deliverable strategic weapons, in the mid-1950s, Eisenhower began to indicate that he was willing, for his part, to move toward a settlement.
As he told the Soviets at Geneva in 1955, ' it was that wars began where diplomacy fails, diplomacy must begin because war has failed'.39 But diplomacy was not the Eisenhower Administration's long suit.
Dulles had cooperated with McCarthy in 'cleaning out' the State Department.
Dulles was, as Eisenhower had noted, 'a sort of international prosecuting attorney' more than he was a classic statesman.
Kennedy and the State Department The Kennedy team, perhaps with the exception of the President himself, also had a low regard for the diplomatic enterprise as well as for its nominal embodiment, Secretary of State Dean Rusk.
Rusk felt he had the ear of the President, and bore in silence the scorn of those 'gossips' who later committed their opinions of him to paper a practice Rusk, in turn, felt, along with his great tutor, General George Marshall, abused a public trust for one's private purse.
And Rusk bore with 'too much composure . . . criticism . . . aimed at the frequent sterility of the State Department bureaucracy'.44 Rusk garnered general disdain from Kennedy's entourage and was the object of many jokes.
Kennedy ""on his way"" to Palm Beach,. . . promising] an outsized . . . aid grant.
But, carped Professor Schlesinger, 'inscrutability inadequate as a principle of life'.47 To the bright, assertive, and self-consciously masculine Kennedy team, State seemed as if it had been denatured.
The professional foreign service was criticized as an insipid swamp of diplomatic gobbledygook.
The Foreign Service personnel system was said to engender only bromides instead of the action-filled recommendations that the Kennedy team was looking for.
I think we need to smile less and be tougher'.48 Kennedy took matters into his own hands, creating ad hoc alternatives to what the professionals suggested, using advisors to distill whatever wisdom there was from deep within the 'opaque' interior of the national machinery.
The President appointed and received ambassadors on his own initiative and encouraged American ambassadors to report directly to him.
Kennedy was his own Secretary of State, and some speculated that that was why he kept Rusk on long after the painful burlesques had begun to ride the cocktail circuit.
Just because a country had 'gone communist, didn't mean it couldn't be gotten back', he once said.
Kennedy, and especially McNamara, grappled with the problem of central deterrence at a time when it was clear that the use of strategic weapons could be suicidal, yet much of American defence planning focused on somehow actually using nuclear weapons.
When Kennedy, urged on by Eisenhower, focused on the Laotian problem in 1961, the new President was startled to discover that the Joint Chiefs seemed obsessed with nuclear weapons.
Robert Kennedy recalled the meetings on Laos, in 1961, when the military unanimously recommended sending in at least 60,000 (and perhaps 160,000) United States troops, armed with tactical nuclear weapons:52 They were to be brought in through two airports.
The representative said we would then have to destroy Hanoi and possibly use nuclear weapons.
The President had sought to make it appear as if an armed solution might be necessary while simultaneously striving to engineer, through diplomacy, a well-veiled exit from an unsupportable position, and to mask that retreat as a kind of personal victory.
All sides covertly and liberally violated the agreement, but the Laotian issue nearly disappeared from the headlines.
Kennedy had finessed the matter entirely by dint of exploring the distance of Laos from the concerns of most Americans with the help of court scribes.
If retreats were to happen elsewhere, the next time, they would have to be even more befogged than had been Harriman's discussions in Geneva on the Laotian question.
It would be best of all, of course, if events were said to have unfolded as a result of an American determination to use force.
From the onset, the Kennedy Administration was preoccupied by the issue of proportioning appropriate responses to military tests.
Tuchman's two-fold lesson drawn from the onset of World War I was that military planners should not be allowed to remain autonomous from the world of the statesmen; and that war should not occur as an act of civilian capitulation to 'military necessity'.60 The Kennedy Administration was not prepared to be grabbed at the forelock by military machines, and the Kennedy team were certainly unwilling to be the prisoners of military professionals whom they were starting to see, well before the Cuban missile crisis, as trigger-happy.
Cuba's European Context Even though Cuba and other geographic 'threats' consumed inordinate amounts of time, they were 'side issues', peripheral to the real centre of American concerns.
Without German manpower, the only defence of Europe must be the thinning reed of nuclear deterrence.
Without a dense German defence in depth — even though that defence risked the potential loss of 80 per cent of the German 'substance' — the defence of the rest of Europe was almost inconceivable.
Nuclear weapons might deter a Soviet invasion, but the Soviets could only be stopped from making a determined thrust continuing to the English Channel by a barrier of German manpower.
The emotional pivot of the German question rested in the exposed occupied enclave of Berlin.
After Dulles died, Eisenhower determined to seek a peaceful solution to the recrudescent Berlin crisis, spurred, to be sure, by Khrushchev's periodic deadlines and threats.
The Vienna meeting went badly, as a startled young President encountered a bullying Khrushchev.
Khrushchev reaffirmed his deadline for an accommodation over Berlin as December.
Just after midnight on the morning of Sunday 13 August 1961, East German troops began to tear up the streets at the western edge of the divide that separated the Soviet zone of Berlin from the occupying Western allies.
By 26 October 1961, American tanks faced Soviet tanks on the Friedrichstrasse, nearly muzzle to muzzle.
A senior Soviet official in Berlin at the time said that if the American tanks had 'followed the orders given to them and those orders were to destroy the Berlin wall — our tanks would then open fire'.65 In those 'strange and moody days', as Arthur Schlesinger recalled them, Kennedy himself estimated the chances of nuclear war at 20 per cent.
Three and a half billion dollars were allocated to civilian defence, including household radiation detectors and a national air raid siren system.
The first step in ending the crisis came with an apparent Soviet tactical retreat.
So let's give them one', Khrushchev said, as he turned his guns around.
Khrushchev then announced that he would not seek a peace treaty with his East German subordinates because the Western powers had showed 'understanding', and, he might have added, East Germany seemed to have been securely imprisoned.
Less than a month before the missiles were discovered in Cuba, a special KGB liaison from the Soviet Embassy, Georgy Bolshakov, told Bobby Kennedy that Khrushchev had given personal assurances that there would be no Soviet defensive missiles in Cuba.
President Kennedy was disturbed by the audacity of the move much more than he was bothered by the arithmetic of mutual atomic damage.
The sum of the Soviet action constituted both a national and personal test.
Since deterrence rests as much on a psychological relationship as it does on the balance of forces, a shift from the well-advertised 'missile gap in reverse' of the year before to a position where, as Kennedy fretted, 'they look like they're coequal with us', was bound to be unsettling, especially if the best-advertised component of containment had, it seemed, been reversed by a strategic short-cut.
If, as Kennedy summed up the experience in public a few months later, the Soviets had succeeded in keeping their missiles in Cuba, 'it would have politically changed the balance of power.
It would have appeared to, and appearances contribute to reality'.76 McNamara had, well before the crisis, abandoned 'static' measures of nuclear advantage reckoned in terms of raw megatonnage delivered to an ever more expansive list of targets.
Undoubtedly this 'bean counting' was somewhat surreal and its impact was largely 'psychological', as one of the participants in the Excomm deliberations put it.
But, according to United States analysts at the time, the 24 MRBMs and some 12 to 16 IRBMs discovered in Cuba had raised the number of targets the Soviets could lethally cover in the United States by 40 per cent.
On the merits of what was known, the missiles severely eroded the possibility of an unanswered United States first strike against the Soviets.
This had been something central to United States Air Force planners, but was not critical in the mind of the Secretary of Defense, who believed, before the crisis, that a disarming first strike was a chimera.
Clearly, however, in their own terms, the missiles seemed to give the Soviets some of the leverage they had lost when the missile gap had been revealed as a myth the year before.
In October 1962, Kennedy said to his advisors, 'I should have said . . . that we don't care.
But when we said we're not going to [tolerate them] and then they go ahead and do it, and then we do nothing, then . . . our risks increase.
I just think it's just a question of . . . a political struggle as much as military' issue.
If there was a Soviet response, then the Soviet Union would be struck as well, presumably with a disarming atomic first strike.
Although there were doubters in the Excomm, even among the 'Doves', most seemed to feel that if Cuba were invaded, then the Soviets would be forced to move in an area where the Russians had an equivalent preponderance, and where the United States had an equivalent exposure.
An invasion was expected, at least as Robert Kennedy's memoirs have it, 'by Monday or Tuesday', 29 or 30 October.
It is possible that an invasion could have been mounted, and that the Soviets, even though they suffered high casualties, and a significant strategic and political loss, might not really have done much, as some analysts and some of the participants in the crisis now maintain.
Some in the Excomm were therefore willing to 'write off an attack on Turkey if a Soviet attack were confined to the Jupiter sites.
But if allied forces in Berlin were squeezed, it raised prospects so frightening that McNamara said he was not 'prepared to address' them.
By 27 October, the Excomm had become convinced that whatever the missiles' ultimate strategic meaning, their symbolic meaning was both unmistakable and no longer tolerable.
The longer missiles stayed on in Cuba, the more irretrievable the situation would become.
The longer operational missiles were in place, the more certain it was that they changed the Soviet bargaining position vis-a-vis the United States, and diminished the standing of the United States in the world.
Further, if the crisis persisted, the majority in Excomm feared that the extant high-voltage stasis could not be sustained.
Shooting could start anywhere, and then the United States would have put in jeopardy not just its control of events, but control of the rhythm of combat as well.
With all the dangers, the Chiefs and Chairman Maxwell Taylor were clear in their recommendation in favour of a strike no later than Monday, if for no other reason than that after then the military would start to lose its edge, as planes and men wore down under the strain of peak readiness; with each surveillance, moreover, more planes and pilots were exposed to hazards.
The consensus that the crisis had to be resolved within 48 hours was further crystallized by the receipt of two quite different messages.
The first was a rambling private letter, offering to exchange the missiles for a promise that the United States would not invade Cuba.
It mentioned the obsolete, but nonetheless recently operational, US missiles in Turkey, near the Soviet border.
Soon after the second message was in hand, an Air Force U-2 surveillance flight was shot down over Cuba with the loss of a pilot.
Reconnaissance planes would scour the island in runs spaced at two-hour intervals.
The President was hardly compelled by the logic of targeting a few of the offending Soviet-manned anti-aircraft batteries.
The momentum of events, it was clear in the Excomm discussions, pointed to striking Soviet surface-to-air missiles.
The Joint Chiefs wanted an all-out co-ordinated air strike launched on Cuba 'right away', but agreed to a limited, single strike first, with the understanding that if another attack on US aircraft occurred, then there would be a thoroughgoing extirpation of the offending SAM.100 Two thousand sorties would cover an estimated 16,000 troops, but in fact there were over 40,000 Soviet personnel and their equipment.
Secretary Rusk, on contemplating the reaction of the 'Hawks' to the news of the downed U-2, found his eyes brimming with tears.
This made a 'token' Soviet counterforce, a 'damage limiting' strike against military targets, if the Soviets were going to bother, seem somewhat far-fetched.
Whether or not the Soviets understood or knew United States targeting plans, there was pressure on Khrushchev to act.
Perhaps, as the editor of Khrushchev's memoir noted, had Khrushchev been more 'Normal'; that is, had he believed along with Soviet and American 'deterrence theorists' that nuclear weapons could not just be an instrument of bluff, he would have acted to use them, for he would have assumed that American thinking would be tracking an equivalent line of thought.2 Later, McNamara and Bundy would claim not only that there had been little likelihood that the SIOP would ever become relevant, but also that any prospect of the use of nuclear weapons had always been remote and even far-fetched.
Clearly, most of the participants in those events found them harrowing.
American intelligence had learned that their premier informant, Colonel Olaeg Penkovsky, had been arrested on 22 October.
The Soviets, as Raymond Garthoff suggests, might have inferred that the information relayed by Penkovsky to the United States verified that the United States did, indeed, have sufficient nuclear punch to exercise the Chiefs' preferred first SIOP option, a devastating co-ordinated first strike.
Orders to cease the U-2 flights near the Soviet borders were either not received or were ignored.
In one 'Strangelove' incident, an authorized U-2 entered Soviet airspace.
The U-2's SOS alerted Galena Air Force base in Alaska and a group of American fighter aircraft rose to escort the errant plane back to base.
Most of the actions relevant to this alert would have been picked up in due course, but the Soviets must have been puzzled by the bravura with which these moves were broadcast.
This unprecedented intensification of peacetime readiness for war was effected openly so that the Soviets could pick the message up and be suitably daunted.
Some analysts took this as preparation for war, notwithstanding the fact that none of the Soviet strategic forces within the Soviet Union had been put on alert.4 An Atlas ICBM was test-launched from Vandenberg on the afternoon of 26 October 1962.
The missile that was tested sat side by side with others that were fully loaded, already on alert.
At the least, the test flight might well have appeared as a nuclear 'stray' had the Soviets been able to observe it.
At the most, it could have been seen, like the wandering U-2, as a precursor to an all-out attack.
At the height of the crisis, at least one CIA covert action team was roaming Cuba.
Operation Mongoose activities were suspended, apparently only as an afterthought, on 30 October 1962, by Robert Kennedy.
Nonetheless, the CIA-sponsored unit decided, on its own authority, to blow up a factory on 8 November.
One might speculate as to what might have happened if any of the clandestine units operating in Cuba had decided to fire on Soviet missiles, vulnerable as they were reported to be to rifle fire, or if they had attempted to kill Castro or his close associates, or if they had killed any of the high Soviet officials on the island at the time.
The main instrument of control of the tempo of pressure was the blockade run by the Navy.
The Navy has been running blockades since the days of John Paul Jones and if you and your deputy will go to your offices, the Navy will run the blockade.
Anderson: Don't worry, Mr Secretary, we know what we are doing here.8 In fact, all six submarines near the quarantined area were shadowed.
One sub was 'surfaced', unknown to the Excomm, by a lowlevel depth charge and disabled.
The Soviets were not informed of where the quarantined area was supposed to have been in any case, until 27 October 1962 'Black Saturday' when George Ball suggested to the President that they be notified.0 The quarantined area had a flexible definition in practice.
The Jupiters In the wake of the crisis' successful resolution, innate self-confidence suffused the profound relief of the moment.
The national security group, ExComm, who had handled the Cuba material, code-named, meaningfully, 'Elite', felt that they had mastered the merger of politics and force.
National security managers occupied a narrow circle with few apprentices and still fewer fully accredited practitioners.
Both in scope and depth, the President and his advisors had a decisive edge over the President alone.8 But the Excomm conversations, as now disclosed in declassified transcripts, hardly show a cool delineation of alternatives or a deliberate dissection of well-gamed actions.
There were reports that one assistant secretary was so disconcerted and fatigued that he drove into a tree at 4 am.
Although a trade might look reasonable at home and overseas, it could also constitute something of an embarrassment within NATO and an opening to right-wing critics.
To his largest group of advisors he wanted to appear as resolute as possible.
Hence, only at the eleventh hour, and then only to a small circle of intimates, was Kennedy willing to show some of the flexibility that he had apparently come up with on his own.
Not known to this 'mini' Excomm, however, was the approach that Bobby had made to Ambassador Dobrynin regarding a swap of the Jupiters for the missiles in Cuba.
Then, very late that night, Rusk and President Kennedy took further measures to end the crisis via a quid pro quo.
The Secretary was empowered to authorize, on a signal, the UN Secretary-General to announce in public the offer of an exchange of the United States missiles in Turkey for the missiles in Cuba.7 It was a complex game.
Informally, the President had authorized his brother to see if Ambassador Dobrynin would accept a 'private understanding' (already broached in discussions with Dobrynin some days earlier) with Khrushchev quietly to exchange the Jupiters for the missiles, and to offer publicly to guarantee that the Cubans would be free from American invasion.
Formally, there was to be a 'no invasion' pledge in return for removal of the missiles.
But if Khrushchev rejected Bobby's offer, the President was prepared to go forward with the offer of a public trade.
Mid-morning the next day, Khrushchev responded via Moscow radio, accepting Robert Kennedy's offer without (as Robert had insisted) mentioning the imminent withdrawal of the Jupiters.9 Kennedy was thus salvaged from the ignominy of having to make his eagerness to initiate a public swap known to most of his advisors for 25 years.
The crisis was portrayed as a 'test of will' that highlighted the Soviet transgression of the political-nuclear status quo.
The chroniclers of the 1960s claimed that the Soviets merely capitulated.
One result of the misleading way in which the crisis legend was retold was that the new national security managers who proliferated after Cuba routed those who had most favoured negotiations.
In front of each other, the Excomm members were afraid of being sullied by the taint of 'Munich' — of sounding anything less than bold.
Only the 'cautious' and 'hawkish' Rusk, McGeorge Bundy explained, who had a reputation as not 'insensitive to the interests of allies, and eager to make unwise concessions to the Soviets' could think it 'easier on us' to propose the swap (that Kennedy seems already to have told his brother to take to the Soviets informally days before).159 Later, Abraham Chayes, Kennedy's State Department legal counsellor, noted at an Excomm reunion, Max Taylor said that there were three options — talk the missiles out of Cuba, shoot 'em out, and squeeze 'em out.
This one gets talked about less than the others because of the power of the Munich stigma and because it sounds a lot less courageous.
A 'moderate' in these terms was limited to suggesting limited violence.
The military's enthusiasm for preemptive attacks on the Soviet Union, and Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay's wish to attack Cuba even the day after the Soviets announced that the missiles were to be withdrawn, drew great walls of well-advertised scorn from the Kennedy national security consiglieri.5 Later, for instance, a story circulated in Georgetown's more fashionable salons that reflected the civilian wisdom of the day.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Lyman Lemnitzer briefed Kennedy on Vietnam, but he had pointed not to the Mekong Delta, but rather the Yangtze Valley.
In sum, the military were not just dangerous, they were fools, and whatever the extent of 'failures' in the Cuban crisis, those failures were adjudged to be the result of incomplete control exercised over a rather loutish military.
The conclusion was clear; the professional military either posed most of the risks, or exacerbated them.
The military, however, was fighting the war and had the data and personal experience that was crucial.
Bad relations meant the civilians and the soldiers were less likely to work together to develop good strategy.
It enabled them to make strategy of a sort without help from the generals.
Sub-nuclear, and indeed subconventional, violence could, in the right admixture, be useful overseas and supportable at home.
Later, these confident assumptions were placed on a vast testing ground in South-East Asia.
At least people like Helmut Schmidt and Dennis Healey . . . have a chance to rise through government positions . . . with some experience and expertise in defense under their belts.
Many of them had great success in military organizations, serving with heroism and distinction.
Bundy had worked on the planning for D-Day with Admiral Kirk and General Bradley.
When things were winding down in Europe, he transferred to the infantry in order to be in on the invasion of Japan.
McNamara was an air force planner in the war, working with Robert Lovett to bring the latest life-saving business management techniques to supplying and supporting the air force.
Hilsman, a West Point graduate, was a guerrilla fighter with Mosby in the Burma theatre.
The Kennedy national security clique's evident disdain for the military did not stem from a 'know nothing' ignorance of armed force, but from their affection for the appealing theory that they had mastered a great secret of avoiding the Hobson's choices presented by nuclear war.
Alas, as Rosen points out, all those theories abstracted from the 'pauses' and 'squeezes', 'signals' and 'messages'172 that were adduced from the the blockade, the nuclear alerts, the mobilizations, and the dispersal of the bombers in SAC — about the transmittal of 'political meaning' through coercion (to whatever extent they may have succeeded in Cuba) manifestly failed in Vietnam.
The once ebullient quintessential crisis manager, Robert McNamara, told his old associates in a kind of coda to the crisis managing craft that there ought to be a 'law', that 'it is impossible to predict with a high degree of confidence what the effects of the use of military force will be because of accident, miscalculation, misperception, and inadvertence.
You can't manage crises; it's a dangerous metaphor, because it's misleading'.173 Cuba and the American Century The Cuban missile crisis revived the sense of the American mission.
After all, the symbolic or 'psychological capital' of deterrence rested on the notion of resolve; and one way to demonstrate political will was through the assertion of conventional force.
A successful use of armed force could demonstrate 'resolve' without the threat of organizing a nuclear holocaust.
So, after Cuba, a success in limited war became even more of an imperative.
In this hidden debate, there was strong incentive . . . for the civilian leaders to demonstrate that success was possible in Indochina without the need either to compromise the Cold War objectives or to threaten to use nuclear 1 01 weapons.
Of course, the underlying assumptions of the planners of limited war — as they emerged victorious from the Cuban crisis — were as old as the cold war.
They dated from Truman's Manichean presentation of a bitter bipolar global confrontation where a gain to one party would necessarily be a loss to the other.
Later, a world with diverse centres of power, with elements of superpower co-operation, where gains and losses would be less easily demonstrable, would not be so congenial to a military remedy.
A multipolar world would be less hospitable to the belief that the only options available to policymakers were either military force or retreat.
But such a development was to come about only after a militarized vision of diplomacy had been tested in Vietnam and found wanting.
As the cold war fades, it is unclear whether the old twin of force, the diplomat, can be rehabilitated.
But in a world now made more traditional by the collapse of the leading revolutionary faith, surely nuclear crisis will not have its old salience, nor will nuclear weapons compel us in the same directions.
The long-neglected temporizing repertoire of the statesmen — the conference chamber and the treaty — may once again restore a balance to the unnatural 50-year union of the warrior to the diplomat.
This is Francois de Callier's definition from his De la manièrede negocier avec les Souverins, published in 1716.
De Callier was the basic Western handbook on the subject well into the twentieth century.
Kennan's private views were always more complex than his most oft-quoted analysis.
These distinctions have been at the heart of Henry Kissinger's academic corpus.
In Arthur Krock, Memoirs, Sixty Years on the Firing Line , Appendix A, 431.
De Calliers wrote this in 1716, and he was Louis XIV's Cabinet Secretary, and a diplomat of long experience.
Henry A Kissinger, 'The Congress of Vienna', World Politics, July 1956, Vol. viii, 277.
The phrase is that of James King, who circulated several influential manuscripts on the subject.
Osgood had read King's manuscripts, but failed to credit them, to King's dismay.
Rusk was unknown to Kennedy; they had met only once, briefly, and perhaps Kennedy felt early on that Rusk had served him ill by not questioning plans for the Bay of Pigs more strongly.
Schlesinger dates Rusk's exclusion from the Kennedy inner circle from this time.
For instance, he claims that Rusk may have had a 'nervous breakdown' during the Cuban crisis, whereas we now know that Rusk played a serious and potentially critical role in the resolution of the crisis.
The impression was that the preferred goal was 160,000 troops equipped with tactical nuclear weapons.
But notwithstanding Eisenhower's 'hidden' distrust of massive retaliation, his record seems to show him as much of a 'brinksman' as Dulles on more than a few occasions.
See some of the still unanswered questions on this incident which are raised in James A Nathan, 'A Fragile Detente', Military Affairs, Oct.75.
The Chiefs and their chairman, Maxwell Taylor, took the military threat quite seriously.
The Executive Committee of the President was an ad hoc group assembled at short notice.
It consisted of about 15 people, most with high-level responsibilities.
Raymond Garthoff, 'Memo on the Military Significance of the Soviet Missiles Bases in Cuba', Department of State, 27 Oct.62, declassified 20 Nov.81.
Marc Trachtenberg has found a revealing transcript of an interview with Air Force General Bruce K Holloway, who says of the SIOP, 'This is the one place I can certainly say something nice about Mr McNamara.
Sagan , 'SIOP-62', International Security, 49, emphasis in the original.
To be sure, American strategic planning had evolved from manufacturing 'a smoking radiating ruin' at the end of two hours to attempting to 'withold cities' and perhaps other targets as well.
To the Soviets, the sheer number of American strategic weapons aloft or on alert pointed to the inexorable conclusion that if there were to be an American nuclear assault on the Soviet Union, its limits would make no difference to the Soviet recipients.
Bundy believes that Kennedy would not have ordered an air strike or an invasion, even if Khrushchev had rejected all the proposals on the table.
Rusk and Sorenson, arguably the two who best knew the President's mind on this matter, hold a different view.
Recently, there was yet another purported revelation that would indicate that the crisis was even closer than anybody had suspected.
Grbikov's information was, however, not just startling, but in contradiction to the recollection of other, and seemingly better informed, participants.
To be sure, the Soviets seemed to have made no preparations at all for nuclear conflict; see Sorenson, Kennedy, 713.
Anderson, it is important to note, has maintained that there is a substantial amount of fiction in this account.
According to Scott Sagan, there is some ambiguity as to whether United States actions disabled the Soviet sub that was observed being towed back from the area, or whether the sub simply broke down.
Halper's book is a gold-mine of first-rate analysis and eclectic learning even though, perforce, much of the information on which he bases his analysis has been superseded by the release of documents in the 1980s and early 1990s.
See Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, We All Lost The Cold War (forthcoming), for details of this meeting.
The letter was revealed for the first time at the Hawk's Cay Conference, Rusk to Blight, 25 Feb.87; Welch , Hawk's Cay, 131.
Ambassador Dobrynin has contended, according to one second-hand report, that the initial overture was made by Robert Kennedy on Wednesday 24th.
Talking notes recently discovered in the Kennedy Library indicate that the range of desiderata asked by Robert included Soviet restraint of Cuba in the western hemisphere.
United States House Appropriations Committee, Department of Defense Appropriations for 1964, 88 Cong., 1 Sess., 1963, pt. i, 57.
The article 'In a Time of Crisis' appeared on 8 Dec.62, and was written by Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett.
It could well have been Bobby, instead of his brother Jack, who spoke despairingly of Stevenson.
The seriousness about this is apparent when one notes that McNamara made this point twice in four days — once at the opening of the retrospective and once as it closed see ibid., 13.
