Wikimedia Commons Most historians agree that the world has never come closer to nuclear war than it did during a thirteen-day period in October 1962, after the revelation that the Soviet Union had stationed several medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
This lesson will examine how this crisis developed, how the Kennedy administration chose to respond, and how the situation was ultimately resolved.
Learning Objectives Evaluate the Soviet Union's justification for placing missiles in Cuba.
Analyze the competing perspectives within the United States and the Soviet Union regarding how to respond to the threat in Cuba.
Evaluate President Kennedy's decision to ""quarantine"" Cuba and compare it to other Cold War era policies.
Analyze the correspondence and diplomatic maneuvers used by the United States and Soviet Union.
History & Social Studies United States History Grade: 9-12 Lesson Plan Author: John Moser & Lori Hahn 11/13/09 Updated by EDSITEment team on 07/08/19 Lesson Plan Details Background In late September 1962, United States spy planes flying over Cuba discovered the presence of Soviet-made medium-range nuclear missiles on the island.
The result, played out through the month of October, was the most serious foreign policy crisis of the Kennedy White House-indeed, probably the most serious foreign policy crisis in the history of the Cold War.
Cuba was a mere ninety miles from the coast of Florida, and missiles fired from there could easily strike targets in the United States as far north as Cincinnati, and as far west as San Antonio-and with minimal warning time.
Perhaps even more importantly, Kennedy felt that American prestige was on the line; as recently as September 4 the president had given a speech in which he warned the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, against placing any such weapons in Cuba.
That Khrushchev had done so in spite of this warning seemed to demand a response.
While most Americans remained blissfully unaware of the situation, the CIA formally presented its findings to President Kennedy and his ""ExComm"" on October 16.
The group considered a range of options for responding to the challenge, from opening face-to-face negotiations with the Soviets to launching an all-out invasion of Cuba.
In the end they settled on a blockade of the Cuban coast-although for purposes of international law it was referred to as a ""quarantine"" rather than a blockade.
Until the missile sites had been dismantled United States warships would stop and search all ships approaching the island for equipment related to the missiles.
Those that were found to be carrying such equipment would be turned back.
Kennedy announced his decision to the American people in a radio broadcast on October 22, and United States warships immediately began stopping Soviet vessels bound for Cuban shores.
For the next several days it seemed that the world hovered on the brink of a nuclear war, while feverish negotiations continued between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Finally, on October 27 a deal was struck—the Soviets agreed to remove their missiles from Cuba in return for promises from the United States not to invade Cuba, and to pressure NATO into withdrawing its medium-range missiles from Turkey.
Fidel Castro, the pro-Soviet president of Cuba, felt betrayed by the Soviet leadership, since he had not been consulted at all on the settlement.
More importantly, leaders in both the United States and the Soviet Union seemed genuinely rattled at how close they had come to nuclear conflict.
In the months ahead they agreed to the installation of a telephone ""hotline"" connecting the White House and the Kremlin and allowing for instantaneous negotiation between the two.
In addition, the two sides began the first steps toward limiting the nuclear arms race, working toward a treaty—eventually signed in August 1963—banning the above-ground testing of nuclear weapons.
Evaluate how historical events and developments were shaped by unique circumstances of time and place as well as broader historical contexts.
Use questions generated about individuals and groups to assess how the significance of their actions changes over time and is shaped by the historical context.
Analyze complex and interacting factors that influenced the perspectives of people during different historical eras.
Distinguish between long-term causes and triggering events in developing a historical argument.
Integrate evidence from multiple relevant historical sources and interpretations into a reasoned argument about the past.
The episode includes original television reports, photographs and maps of the missiles in Cuba, and interviews with those who were living in Cuba and working in the United States government at the time.
First have them read the following statement that Kennedy made on September 4, 1962, warning the Soviets against placing missiles in Cuba.
Statement by John F Kennedy on Cuba, September 4, 1962 Next they should study the following documents, most of which the CIA presented to Kennedy in his briefings during the early days of the crisis.
As CIA analysts, the students' job is to draft a memorandum for the president, in which they must explain to him why the presence of these missiles presents a threat to United States national security.
Days of Decision Now that students have determined that the presence of the missiles constitutes a threat to national security, the second activity will put them, either individually or in groups, into the role of President Kennedy through the use of the interactive exercise.
They will be presented with a menu of possible options, and then will have the opportunity to consult with advisers before choosing one of the options.
By scrolling over the photograph of Kennedy and his cabinet, the names of certain advisers will appear.
By clicking on a name a brief list of statements by that individual will appear at the bottom of the screen.
After they have done this, students should next read the ""Special Intelligence Estimate"" prepared by the CIA; this will appear when the ""Special Intelligence Estimate"" tab is clicked.
After students have consulted the cabinet and the Special Intelligence Estimate, they should make a decision regarding how to respond to the missiles in Cuba, and click on the option that most closely resembles their choice.
This will produce a brief narrative explaining whether or not this was also the decision reached by the president, and why or why not.
Once students have completed the exercise, teachers should conduct a class discussion about why they chose the options they did.
After they have done so the class will move on to the third activity, which deals with Kennedy's actual response.
Kennedy's ""Quarantine"" Speech By October 22 President Kennedy had made his decision; it was now time to announce it to the world.
For the third activity students will read the text of Kennedy's radio and television address to the nation, in which he announced the ""quarantine"" of Cuba.
Located at the same site is an audio version of the document, which teachers might wish to have students listen to.
Teachers may wish to conclude this activity with a class discussion of the speech;e., whether Kennedy made the right choice, what its implications were, and how effective the speech was in conveying the seriousness of the situation.
Resolving the Crisis It was on October 22 that the crisis began in earnest, for on that day Kennedy revealed to the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev—and to the rest of the world—that he was aware of the missiles in Cuba.
The result was a week of furious negotiation between the two sides, while United States warships began stopping Soviet vessels off the Cuban coast.
In the fourth and final activity students will read excerpts from the following seven documents—correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev, in which the two sides negotiate a deal for the removal of the missiles.
Unique to this excerpt is inclusion of the perspectives of Soviet citizens on what was taking place in Cuba and how the decisions being made in Washington, D.C. might affect those in the Soviet Union.
Alternatively teachers might select students to read particular sections aloud in class.
Afterward students can discuss how the events in the film compared to what they have learned in this lesson.
For one historian's take on the film, see ""Thirteen Days' Doesn't Add Up,"" located at the EDSITEment-reviewed resource History Matters.
In the wake of the crisis Kennedy and Khrushchev both agreed that some more efficient means of communications had to be found between Washington and Moscow in order to prevent future crises from escalating.
This led to the installation of a ""hotline"" in which either the President of the United States could pick up a telephone and be immediately connected with his counterpart in the Soviet Union, or vice versa.
It might be worth asking why both sides might, as the result of the crisis, have considered this to be important.
Having students look back at the correspondence between JFK and Khrushchev —paying particular attention to the fact that it took place over a seven-day period—might help them better understand the two men's reasoning.
Teachers might also wish to have students construct a timeline of the events surrounding the crisis.
