Excerpts from the address by President Kennedy, October 22, 1962 Neither the United States of America nor the world community of nations can tolerate deliberate deception and offensive threats on the part of any nation, large or small.
The emphasis is not so much on any supposed intrinsic evil characterizing the S.U. (as some students suggested and as a subsequent President claimed ) or even on a unfavorable contrast between past Soviet and U.S. behavior but on the contrast between the S.U.’s reckless behavior in the immediate situation and its own quite cautious behavior in the past.
Answers and Discussion page 2 In that sense missiles in Cuba add to an already clear and present danger — although it should be noted the nations of Latin America have never previously been subjected to a potential nuclear threat.
Aggressive conduct, if allowed to grow unchecked and unchallenged, ultimately leads to war.
Contrary to what some students said, JFK is not dismissing Premier Khrushchev as a “mere irritant or fanatic” — someone who has control over nuclear weapons is not a “mere” anything.
Indeed, JFK is attributing a considerable measure of prudence and rationality to Khrushchev, which implies that he can be expected to back down — provided that the United States does not demand too much — rather than risk general war.
Take-Home: Answers and Discussion page 3 First: To halt this offensive build-up, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
The Foreign Minister of the Organization of American States in their communiqué of October 3 rejected secrecy on such matters in this Hemisphere.
I have directed the Armed Forces to prepare for any eventuality and I trust that in the interests of both the Cuban people and the Soviet technicians at the sites, the hazards to all concerned of continuing this threat will be recognized.
It was not a zero-sum but a Generic Bargaining (or Chicken) Game, in which one outcome is worst for both players.
JFK asserts that the history of the U.S.-S.U. nuclear relationship entailed tacit coordination on a “precarious status quo,” but this certainly was not a pure coordination game.
Choosing initially did not precluding using or subsequently; however, it would necessarily entail losing the advantage of surprise and also risked giving the S.U. the time and incentive to make pre-emptive commitment to hold on to the missiles the best they could.
A Political Analysis” pertaining directly to the JFK speech : Meanwhile secrecy was collapsing rapidly.
News stories written on Sunday evening reported an “air of crisis” in the capital.
The Excom got one scare when it was announced that Gromyko (still in the United States) was to make an important statement at 3:30 Monday afternoon.
It prepared a short statement announcing the blockade, which was to be released if Gromyko disclosed the Soviet operation, in order to recoup the initiative as best as possible.
It turned out that the Foreign Minister only wanted to give a farewell speech as he left the country.
The nature and timing of the disclosure was designed so as to gain a maximum of both impact and support.
Special efforts were made to obtain the greatest possible consent from allies and Latin American countries.
Dean Acheson was dispatched to Paris to inform President de Gaulle personally.
Richard Goodwin went off to the annual Alliance. for Progress meeting in Mexico City, where many OAS officials would be Monday evening.
Answers and Discussion page 6 to that time the President met with Congressional leaders, disclosing everything.
At 6 PM Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin was called into Secretary Rusk's office, informed of everything, and presented with a personal message for Premier Khrushchev.
Simultaneously a mass briefing was conducted in the State Department auditorium for diplomats from forty-six allied and friendly nations.
He called the Soviet missiles “offensive,” retaining the distinction that he had introduced earlier and could hardly drop now.
He directed his speech entirely against the Soviet Union, treating Cuba as a mere pawn in the conflict.
He noted Soviet deceptions, specifically the September 11 statement and Gromyko’s assurances, each of which he quoted.
He then announced United States actions, clearly indicating that more would follow if necessary.
At the same point he again suggested that further, more violent, action might follow.
The quarantine had two purposes, as Secretary McNamara made clear at his news conference later Monday night.
First, it was designed to deter, or if necessary physically prevent, the introduction of additional strategic weapons into Cuba.
Second and more importantly, it was designed to establish a pattern of irresistible United States momentum and visible willingness to run high risks until the weapons already in Cuba were removed.
It gave the Soviets time to reconsider their action; it permitted them to comply without having to back down before a specific ultimatum.
During the open crisis, the United States successfully communicated its determination to see the missiles removed and the Soviet Union successfully communicated its willingness to do so, short of outright capitulation.
The Soviet Union evidently missed the United States' purposeful signals that strategic weapons in Cuba would not be tolerated.
One reason for this was that the American warning was blurred by the domestic political context it which it was made.
The burden of President Kennedy's news conference remarks of September 4 and 11 was to restrain and reprimand the domestic opposition; the risk of intervention was stressed; the warning to the international opposition was perfunctory by comparison.
This suggests what is likely to be a general problem for a democratic nation — especially the United States — which speaks with many voices for diverse purposes.
When it is resolved to respond in a certain contingency, it may be unable to communicate its intent effectively.
With respect to inadvertent signals, one would suppose retrospectively that the Soviet Union might have picked up sufficient signals between October 16 and 22 to move to pre-empt the planned American initiative.
To use the appropriate jargon, an open society may not be good at damping down inadvertent signals but it excels in at producing noise that can hide them.
When the crisis looked most grim to American policy-makers , this may have been due only to delay in receiving a message.
One result of the crisis was the establishment of the “hot line,” permitting instantaneous private communication.
How a hot line would have affected the course of the Cuban crisis is hard to say, but it should be pointed out that it only facilitates communication.
It transmits with equal efficiency all sorts of messages, including threats and deceptions.
Answers and Discussion page 8 Cuba and Schelling Thomas Schelling's brilliant book, The Strategy of Conflict, certainly provides one useful basis for a partial analysis and understanding of the Cuban missile crisis.
In certain respects the contestants were employing the kind of tactics he discusses, especially in the matter of getting in the first strong commitment.
Thus for example the Soviet Union conducted its operation in Cuba secretly and hurriedly (somewhat competitive values; they sacrificed a measure of secrecy for extra speed) in order to present the United States with a fait accompli.
Once the bases had been completed and revealed to the world, the Soviet Union presumably would have had an even stronger incentive to keep them and the United States would have had a harder time in forcing their removal; perhaps it would have been reluctant even to attempt it.
Conversely, once the United States discovered the Soviet operation, it wanted to make an effective but also not unnecessarily dangerous commitment to remove the missiles before the bases were completed.
Thus there was a race to make the first public commitment, and the United States had the critical advantage of knowing it was in such a race.
The second, dramatic instance of the “first commitment” tactic involved the nuclear warning contained in President Kennedy's speech of October 22.
This commitment gave Premier Khrushchev a strong incentive to keep the missiles under Soviet control and, if possible, his personal control, and it made it reckless for him to threaten to do otherwise.
Conversely, if Khrushchev had already announced that he had turned control of the missiles over to the Cuban government, and had indicated that it would be difficult or impossible for him to regain control of them even if he wanted to, it would have become reckless or pointless for Kennedy to make the threat that he did.
However, I believe that the Cuban crisis suggests that other factors — including other types of strategic moves — that Schelling does not emphasize can also be of critical importance.
Specifically, in a crisis. it is important not only to be able effectively to threaten your opponent but also to be able effectively to reassure your opponent.
In the first place, the success of American policy probably depended to a considerable extent on the ability of the United States to assure the Soviet Union as to the limited nature of its objectives.
The Soviet Union would have been less ready to retreat if it had not been persuaded that the United States would not press its initiative further and would not make further demands — in particular that the United States would not seek total Soviet withdrawal from Cuba, the elimination of the Castro government , or the unnecessary humiliation of the Soviet Union or of Premier Khrushchev.
The Soviet accommodation was also facilitated by American willingness to go along with Khrushchev’s “no invasion – no need for missiles” rationale.
Generally, the strategic moves that Schelling finds interesting are the ones that are “interesting” from a theoretical point of view, in particular threats made credible by more or less irrevocable commitments.
And indeed there is something fascinating about the idea that it may be wise to reduce one's own discretion in a conflict situation.
You may want to use such tactics in, for example, an experimental game situation.
Your opponent may not even notice or understand the ingenious way in which you have committed yourself — in which case you can run through the game again.
In international politics in the nuclear age, however, one cannot conduct foreign policy in this experimental frame of mind.
It is too risky; the scope, if not the probability, of potential disaster is too great.
In summary, the types of strategic moves to which Schelling gives most attention are not those that are most commonly employed in international politics, even — perhaps especially — in crises.
Thus Schelling is useful and perhaps necessary for a thoughtful analysis of the Cuban Crisis, but he is not sufficient.
The crises is divided into three phases on the basis of the information available to the participants.
The first two phases are “played” under conditions of imperfect information.
In the first phase, the Soviet Union begins installing missiles in Cuba, but the United States does not know about this.
In the second phase , the United States knows what the S.U. is doing but the S.U. does not know the United States has “found out” the S.U. actions.
