A third-world country, Cuba was not to be a threat to any major powers of the world in the mid-Twentieth Century.
However, the existing foreign policy of the United States of massive retaliation, derived from the Domino Theory that if a state whose government lay in fragility fell to communism, other similarly circumstanced states in the region would follow, stated that it would be the responsibility of the United States’ armed forces to prevent thirdworld nations from collapsing into communism.
This massive retaliation, from President Eisenhower’s Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, would require military action and a magnificent display of arms to squander any communist forces.
President Eisenhower responded by giving the Central Intelligence Agency the authority to begin training Cuban political refugees, residing in southern Florida, to fight in a guerilla manner, as a resurgence of anti-communism in the island of Cuba.
President Kennedy wanted the Cuban government, the United States population, and the rest of the world to think that this invasion was believably led by Cuban rebels2.
Thus, President Kennedy demanded a different invasion plan of the C.I.A.’s design.
On April 4, he would approve a plan on a less crowded beach with a more easily defendable cover-up that the United States was not involved.
This plan would be known as Operation Zapata, or more commonly known as the Bay of Pigs.
This incident would fail, and result in the capture or deaths of every member of Brigade 2506.
The success of this invasion relied upon the indigenous Cuban people rising up in support of the invading anti-Castro Cubans.
This, as well as a perceived air support from the United States Air Force did not happen and the ill-conceived coup d'etat failed miserably.
Premier Khrushchev’s impression of Kennedy as a weak-willed child would be solidified after this military blunder of the United States.
The incident would also not only encourage Khrushchev’s thought that the Soviet Union could become dominant over the United States, but also confirmed the fears of Cubans, that the United States government was hell bent on wrecking havoc on the defenseless third world country that had just overthrown a dictatorship.
Following the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Premier Khrushchev began in mid 1962 to covertly send materials to construct nuclear arms to Cuba.
Premier Khrushchev’s reasoning behind the latter was that if he could intimidate President Kennedy in Cuba long enough, the distraction would be 2 The Sixties.
First broadcast June 5, 2014. 3 set, allowing Khrushchev to remove the capitalistic enclave within his satellite state, East Germany.
Berlin was, strategically, more vital to the Soviet Union than a sole communist island in the Caribbean.
By placing emphasis on Cuba, Khrushchev effectively halted any United States action in East Germany during the Kennedy Administration, following the Berlin Crisis of 1961.
By the summer of 1962, the Soviet Union was sending what appeared to be transportation ships to Latin America.
In actuality, through Operation Anadyr, the Soviets were sending infantry to assist the Cubans in construction of nuclear missile launch sites.
According to Sergei Khrushchev, Premier Khrushchev’s brother, the Soviets learned that their missiles would be severely inferior to the Jupiter missiles the United States possessed in Turkey3.
This fact only served as fuel for the Soviet cause to have insurance against what was, in their eyes, an imminent United States attack.
Soviet military and missile construction specialists accompanied agricultural delegates to Havana as part of the red herring that allowed the Soviets to physically step foot on the island without United States detection.
This massive cover up was called “maskirovka” by the Soviets, and entailed the use of denial and deceit to serve as a means to an end.
During the same summer, the United States announced, through legislation in Congress, that PHIBRIGLEX-62, a major military exercise, would be conducted in the Caribbean.
Castro was outraged, and believed this to be the early stages of a second United States invasion of Cuba.
The reason for the military exercise on the part of the United States, was in effect, to prove or 3 Frankel, Max.
Director John McCone; a theory that Director McCone himself briefed President Kennedy on--that the Soviets might be constructing missiles with nuclear capabilities on Cuba’s northern shores.
On September 15, the first Soviet missiles reached Cuba at the port of Mariel4.
MRBMs were installed to the east and west of Havana, with plans for IRBMs to also be installed to the west5.
On October 7, Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado spoke at a United Nations General Assembly, in which, among other things, President Torrado stated that Cuba was in the possession of “inevitable weapons”, a threat that the United States largely ignored6.
The Discovery of Arms On October 15, 1962, eight cans of film, taken by U-2 spy planes by the United States military in the Caribbean, were sent to the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington.
The cans of film revealed two nuclear missile launch sites on the island of Cuba, with the possibility 4 Frankel, Max.
The following day, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy informed President Kennedy of the presence of nuclear arms aimed at the United States from the island of Cuba7.
President Kennedy’s immediate reaction was to keep the impending crisis quiet, for two reasons.
Firstly, he had to act not as that of a president, but as that of a father.
In private, he told his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, that the two of them had enjoyed a good life.
President Kennedy made the decision to not brief the American public until a viable plan was in place, as not to arouse certain panic.
President Kennedy had assured the American public that “he would not allow the Soviets to install offensive weapons in Cuba”9.
President Kennedy wanted to regain the upper hand in the cold war against Nikita Khrushchev, and the premier calling the president’s bluff did nothing to aid Kennedy’s cause.
Additionally, 1962 was a year of midterm elections for the United States.
If President Kennedy could not entertain the American public with his abilities to effectively handle the Soviets, candidates like his own brother, Ted Kennedy, of the same party, would not be elected.
Most notably, President Kennedy recognized that if he called out Premier Khrushchev’s efforts in Cuba, the Soviet Union’s efforts would be revealed.
If that happened, the events that followed would be out of Kennedy’s control.
With the fate of his party, and more importantly, the country, in his hands, it was President Kennedy’s call as to how to handle the inevitable conflict.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy suggested a full-scale invasion of Cuba once more.
A second invasion was, in fact, in the planning stages of the United States military, under the name of Operation Ortsac.
President Kennedy, however, wished not to have another blunder involving the island of Cuba, especially when the fate of the world could be in his hands.
Instead, Kennedy wanted to slow the crisis down, allowing himself and his cabinet time to think.
In a way, the decision to implement the blockade, which he called a “quarantine” to soften the wording to be less militaristic, was actually the first move towards a compromise with the Soviet Union.
The Notification It was October 22--six days after President Kennedy had been briefed on the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba--that he notified the American people of the threat that both Castro’s and Khrushchev’s regimes were placing, not only on the United States, but on the world as a whole11.
After President Kennedy promised to “quarantine” Cuba (promising that no Soviet ships bound for Cuba would be allowed through a United States Naval blockade) and his retort that any action taken by the Soviet Union or Cuba through use of missile launch would be met with 10 The Sixties.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. 7 reciprocation, the American public prepared for the end of days.
The United States Air Force’s defense readiness was upgraded to Defcon 2; Air Force bombers circled American airspace.
On October 24, Premier Khrushchev’s response letter stated that the president's naval blockade was a “pirate act” and that the Soviet ships inbound were instructed to ignore it13.
Negotiations and Compromise The ExComm met several times a day from the span of October 16 to October 28, 1962.
The secret service was “braced for an evacuation of key personnel by helicopter” if nuclear war was imminent, according to former secret service agent on Jackie Kennedy’s detail, Clint Hill14.
Feklisov asked Scali to speak to United States officials regarding a solution to the crisis, not involving full-scale nuclear armageddon.
Scali, did, in fact, deliver the message to the necessary high-up officials in the White House the same day15.
The crisis came to its climax when the first few Soviet ships came into the view of the American blockade around the Caribbean islands.
The situation in Cuba had begun to collapse, as two additional R-12 launch sites that had been in construction would be completed and operational.
United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson requested to the ExComm that the quarantine be lifted in exchange that the Soviets stop the 13 O'Reilly, Bill, and Martin DuGard.
McCone, Bundy, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk all opposed this idea immediately16.
According to Soviet records, a decision had been made the previous day, October 25.
In addition to this, the Soviet infantry stationed at the missile launch sites would be instructed to begin dismantling the missiles17.
At 6:00 PM in Washington , a personalized letter from Premier Khrushchev arrived to President Kennedy, a letter prompted by the meeting with Scali and Feklisov.
The letter opened the door to compromise, as it, in a somewhat discombobulated fashion, asked for negotiations to begin.
President Kennedy did not lift the blockade following Khrushchev’s letter; he did, however, allow Khrushchev time to act.
Khrushchev had not mobilized the Soviet army to full alert, perhaps due to his belief that President Kennedy was bluffing about retaliating if Soviet ships passed the quarantine.
Unknown to the public was a letter that was sent from Khrushchev to Kennedy.
The letter said that the Soviet Union ships bound for Cuba were not carrying weapons.
The United States in return would make a statement that it would not invade Cuba.
The secret negotiation allowed the Soviet Union to agree to dismantle the missiles in Cuba if the United States agreed to dismantle their missile in Turkey.
In 1963, President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev established the MoscowWashington hotline; a direct communication system between the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. and the Kremlin in Moscow, in order to not allow miscommunication and hysteria to potentially dictate the fate of the world once more.
This shift toward a lessening of the tumultuous relations between the Soviet Union and the United States served as a precursor to the period of detente in that the countries were beginning to gradually learn how to coexist, despite their socioeconomic and political differences.
The Modern Era, ABC-CLIO, 2018, Accessed January 7, 2018. worldhistory.abcclio.com/Search/Display/1938812.
Used in Appendix A to demonstrate the photographs taken by United States intelligence of the Port of Mariel and the presence of nuclear-capable weapons.
In the release, Castro describes his interpretation and the Cubans’ reasoning behind installing medium and intermediate range missiles from the Soviet Union.
A photograph of intermediate-range ballistic missile sites in Cuba, taken during a U-2 reconnaissance flight in 1962.
Used in Appendix A to show the photographic evidence of missile launch sites.
Names like McNamara, Gribkov, and even Castro are present in the transcriptions.
A memorandum addressed to the news editors of the United States that briefed said editors on how to handle coverage of the missile presence in October 1962.
An autobiography written by the former secret service agent in charge of the “Jackie Kennedy and children” detail, Clint Hill describes his witnessing of historic events in United States history of the mid-Twentieth Century from a unique perspective--that of an 13 insider in the White House.
Hill illustrates an observer’s view of the crisis as it unfolded; one of panic and ignorance, and blind trust in the government trying to save his family’s lives.
The telegram sent by Premier Khrushchev to the White House that was described as “rambling and emotional”, that left the United States with the initial feeling that a compromise might be found.
Khrushchev discusses how the Soviet Union saw the American Empire as dangerous and why the Soviets felt the necessity to be prepared for an American instigation.
An audio recording of the memorandum released by President Kennedy that addressed the United States on the presence of weapons with nuclear capabilities on the island of Cuba.
This offered a unique and specific perspective in that of someone not existentially angry at the United States, but rather terrified that they were in fact the “villains” of the crisis.
An online database that went in depth, chronicling the events of October 1962 through the eyes of both the United States government and the general public.
Used during the initial phases of research to find general knowledge on the topic.
A book written by journalist Max Frankel, this book was used to gather notes on events leading up to the crisis from both a Soviet and American perspective.
Used for quotations about the policies derived from the Kremlin and White House in 1962.
A biographic piece that depicts the relationships between presidents and former presidents of the United States, this book went in depth on the crisis and how both President Kennedy responded to the crisis and how he sought advice from former presidents Truman and Eisenhower.
This magazine issue was released as a special edition as a joint effort by TIME and LIFE magazines to commemorate the 100th birthday of John F Kennedy.
Articles within the magazine give broad overviews of the crisis as it unfolded and how President Kennedy used the ExComm to assist him.
A source that gives perspective of the citizens of the Soviet Union in 1962, this article from Torch Magazine highlights how the Soviet Union acted throughout Premier Khrushchev’s regime and why their thoughts could perceivably be justified.
Written by someone who was a child when the Cuban Revolution occurred, this online article chronicles the events of the mid Twentieth Century involving the United States and Latin America from the perspective of a child in Ft.
The article offers details on how close, both physically and symbolically, the island was and continues to be with southern Florida.
A biographical novel that discusses the presidency of John F Kennedy in its entirety, this book chronicles the events of October 1962 from within both the White House and the Grand Kremlin Palace, as both countries forced the world closer to nuclear war than it had ever been.
A detailed online article by The Atlantic that discusses the entirety of the crisis and discusses U.S.-Soviet relations prior to and following the events of October 1962.
The, at times, opinionated article argues various points, such as that the Soviets were justified in believing that the United States wanted to topple the Cuban government.
A CNN miniseries that aired in 2014, this episode of a multi-part documentary that encompassed the atmosphere of the 1960s as a whole delves into the tenuous relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States during said decade.
A biography written about the former Attorney General of the United States and brother of President John F Kennedy, this book tells the story of the life of Robert F Kennedy.
This issue of TIME magazine was released as a special edition to commemorate the 100th birthday of President John F Kennedy.
Portions of the issue cover the crisis in a broad sense, to give an overview of the events of October 1962 to those who are unfamiliar.
Used to facilitate a basic structure for how my historical paper would be organized.
