Not only had he straightf orwardly so stated in an earlier reference to similar United States missiles in Turkey, but much later he acknowledges such missiles are of no military value.
There is a further, unindexed reference to TJ.S, pressure on the British govt to frustrate the repeated elections won { by Cheddi Jagan.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy had intended to write the history of his own administration.
No one else will ever be able to achieve the central, the presidential, perspective on these years.
Even the public official closest to Kennedy, then the Attorney General of the United States, looking at the White House papers after his brother's death, was astonished at the variety of presidential issues he had not known about before.
A presidential associate, moreover, inevitably tends to overrate the significance of the things he does know about.
Grace Tully, who was Franklin D Roosevelt's personal secretary, acutely observed of the books written by the men around F.D.R. , ""None of them could know that for each minute they spent with the President he spent a hundred minutes by himself and a thousand more with scores of other people _ to reject, improvise, weigh and matchthis against that until a decision was reached,"" * * * e 4 The presidential p erspective on this administration is now tragically and irretrievably lost.
I said that I had understood he did not want us to keep full accounts of anything.
You can be damn sure that the CIA has its record and the Joint Chiefs theirs.
When they arrived, Stevenson took Kennedy into his 3tudy for a private talk.
This was just after the Soviet Union had shot down the CIA's U-2 plane engaged in photographic reconnaissance over Russia, and the two men agreed in their assessment of what they regarded as a bungled administration response.
When Kennedy first met James Mlchener, he said, I've always liked your Fires of Spring, "" foregoing the inevitable Tales af the South Pacific""^ when tie net Eugene Burdick, he mentioned The_ iTinth.' wave , not Tfae""~Ugly American.
Stevenson had pointed out that Kennedy, after his months of absorption in the campaign, would need to be brought promptly up to date on the main problems of foreign policy if elected; perhaps he should make provision now for a report to be delivered right after the election.
He displayed absolute assurance about his capacity to do the job; and he had a hard and sure instinct about bow to get what he wanted.
In Kennedy the will to ooramand and the will to victory were visible and unbeatable.
Kennedy had to an exceptional degree the gift of friendship and, in consequence, a great diversity of friends; part of his gift was to give each the sense that be alone had a clue to the mystery.
The friends came in layers the Choate and Harvard friends, the friends from the Navy, the social friends from Palm Beach and Newport, the Irish friends, the senatorial friends, the intellectual friends and each layer considered itself closest to the center.
And, when he entered politics, it came to mean moral courage the courage to which he later dedicated his Profiles, the courage of ""a man who does what he must in spite of 1 personal consequences, in spite of obstacles and dangers and pressures, 11 the courage which, he said, 'is the basis of all human morality.
We are a new generation which science and technology and the change in world forces are going to require to face entirely new problems which will require new solutions.
Avoid self-righteousness like the devil nothing is so self -blinding, "" Liddell ®art was addressing these remakrs to statesmen; they work just as well for historians.
Kennedy rarely lost sight of other people's motives and problems For all the presumed coolness on the surface, he~had an instinctive tendency to put himself into the skins of others.
At a neighboring table, a man obviously drunk, began in a low but penetrating voice to direct a stream of unprintable comment at him.
Kennedy's companions raised their own voices in the hope that he would not hear, but to frio avail.
On Wednesday night after the elecfcicn he relaxed at dinner I with several friends.
The gropp fell into an animated discus. sion of what the President-elect should do first.
One guest suggested that he fire J Edgar Hoover of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, j another that he fire Allen W Dulles of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Kennedy, listening with apparent interest, egged his friends on. when „ they opened their papers the next morning, they were therefore a little irritated to read a Kennedy announcement that Hoover and Dulles were , staying in their jobs.
M *\ Jakoi ■i J ■-&C^ :J f ta 1 A 1000 DAYS Kennedy's Methods Political p * 12 ^ ’;i‘ 0 ,Jed f» e sday night after the election he relaxed at dinner soverai friends.
The gropp fell into an an im ated discus fhn* 1 h 1, fM &t he ^, r2Si o eafc ' eleet s kould do first.
The discussiai concentrated on points of crisis, and especially on the mounting difficulties in Laos.
Herter, the retiring Secretary of State added that he did not think that ""the Soviet bloc"" intended a maior war in Southeast Asia but that they would continue to make trouble up to the brink.
The United States, Herter recommended, mutt convince the communists of our intention to defend Laos, at the same time trvinc to persuade our allies to move with us in concert.
If a political setcoulBn o tBe pranged in Laos, then this country must intervene. lsenhower added that Laos was the key to all Southeast Asia.
If the communists took Laos, they would bring ""unbelievable pressure” on Thai land, Cambodia and ^outh Vietnam.
Laos, he said with solemnity, was so important that, if it reached the point where we could not persuade others to act with us, then he would be willing, ""as a last desperate hope, to intervene unilaterally.
He wondered for a moment why communist soldiers always seemed to have better morale than the soldiers ""representing the democratic forces""; evidently there was something about ""the communist philospphy' which gave their supporters ""a certain inspiration and a certain dedication.
Then he said that it would be fatal to per* cor ™ unlsts an Y P a rt in a new Laotian regime, citing the Experience or Uhl na and the Marshall mission* Kennedy, listening quietly, finally asked how long it would take to put an ■American division into Laos.
The President-elect prepared himself with great care, and the two men talked by themselves for seventy-five minutes before walking arm-in-arm into the Cabinet Room where Clifford and Persons were waiting.
Persons phoned Clifford later and reported tfcat Eisen hower, who had previously called Kennedy a ""young whippersnapper "" was overwhelmed by Senator Kennedy, his understanding of the world problems, the depth of his questions, his grasp of the issues and the keenness of his mind.
The subsequent rapport between the two principals assisted the transition process.
But Kennedy was concerned throughout not to assume responsibility until he assumed power.
In the main, the Eisenhower administration did not try to inveigle Kennedy into underwriting its policies.
There were exceptions, however most notably when K obert Anderson, the outgoing Secretary of the Treasury, wanted a Kennedy man to go with him to Bonn and discuss the gold problem with the Germans.
Kennedy instead asked Paul Nitze to receive Anderson's report on his return.
Similarly the State Department sought Kennedy's advance approval of a proposal for &. multilateral nuclsar foPc© to b© submit tod to th© Dosoubsr me 6 1 i ng of the North.
Atlantic Council; Kennedy again declined, instead asking Nitze and David Bruce to talk quietly with the NATO Director G eneral, PaulHenri Spaak.
When ttie Eisenhower administration terminated diplomatic relations with the Castro regime early in January, Kennedy was informed but took no part in the decision.
My fellow countrymen reeled through the streets, picking up fourteenyear-old Cuban girls and tossing coins to make men scramble in the gutter.
The stimulus to raw material prices provided first by the Second World War and later by the Korean War made it easy to argue that Latin America had no basic economic problems.
The Elsenhower administration was thus able to relax in the comfortable doctrine that private investment by itself would bring about development in Latin America, as they supposed it had done in the United States; that government aid should be confined to military and technical assistance; and that the way to enable private investment to do its job was to back governments which would foster a < favorable* investment climate by leaving private business alone, guaranteeing investors, especially foreign investors, full and unrestricted returns and insuring monetary stability.
This meant, of course, right-wing governments; and it was this thesis, rather than an innate preference for dictatorships, which sent Vice-President Nixon to Havana to praise the ""competence and stability"" of the Batista regime and moved President Eisenhower himself to award the Legion of Merit to dictators like Perez Jimenez of Venezuela (for, among other reasons, his ""sound foreign-investment policies"") and Manuel Odria of Peru.
The insistence on monetary stability before all else received the ardent support of the international Monetary Fund, which imposed deflation on a number of Latin American states as the condition for IMF loans.
The theory of development as an act of immaculate private conception was founded, among other things, on a considerable ignorance of bhe history of economic development in the United States itself.
When what economists unhappily term 'social overhead capital* or 'infrastructure* is the great need, public investment becomes a necessity, since private capital will not go into these areas of low return.
As for Washington's insistence on fiscal purity, thi3 was perhaps a trifle unseemly on the part of a naticn which had financed so much of its own development by Inflation, wildcat paper money and bonds sold to foreign investors and subsequently repudiated.
In preaching fiscal orthodoxy to developing nations, we were somewhat in the position of the prostitute who, having retired on her earnings, believes that public virtue requires the closing down of 4 the red-light district* The policy of the fifties not only violated our own national practice; it was also manifestly inadequate to the problems of Latin America, and it reinforced the cherished L a tin conviction that the essense of the United States purpose was economic imperialism.
Its result had been to place our position in extreme jeopardy throughout the hemisphere.
And the rise of Fidel Castro in Cuba was transforming a failure of policy into a threat to security.
ThBs was the situation which the President feared and into which he was not asking McGovern and me to look.
The shift to laissez faire was more puzzling, though it was in part a response to the economic orthodoxy of the Eisenhower administration and the International Monetary Fund.
When we met with Alvaro Carlos Alsogaray, the Minister of Economy, he thundered at us ^cross the conference table about the virtues of his ‘free enterprise policies.
Prondizi was skeptical about Pood for Peace and, indeed, about 'social investment' in general.
This was a common Latin reaction to the program launched in i960 at Bogota providing for a Social Progress *und and increased investment in housing, education and other forms of welfare.
Prondizi argued that development required hard capital investment in heavy industry; if this were done, the new wealth produced would take care of the social problems.
A continentwide program of basic economic growth, he said, was the only way to save the hemisphere from communism.
It seemed characteristic thht the remarkable writer, Jorge Luis Borges, whom I had been particularly eager to meet, should be receiving $60 a month as director of the Biblioteca Hacional less, as he bitterly remarked, than a street cleaner.
In general, the government appeared weary and lacking in imagination or energy.
When we went on to Brazil, the contrast was spectacular, tinder Juscelino Kubitschek, the retiring president, the sheer momentum of growth had charged the nation with a certain economic dynamism.
Yet Brazil, while defying the orthodoxies of public finance and defrauding the International Monetary Fund, could show as a result not only inordinate inflation and inordinate graft but a solid increase in its industrial base and national output.
Wild as it all was, it somehow seemed better than the stagnation of Argentina; but one wondered whether a middle course might not be possible.
Of course, I have had my disagreements with and disappointments over some of the things we have done.
But the main trouble does not lie In the United States; It lies in Latin America.
The source of othe difficulty is that the haves in Latin America do not realize that their day is over.
The selfishness and blindness of 4 the oligarchies in these countries is the reason why a storm is brewing."" pliSi The process of revoluation in Bolivia, which had begun haltingly with the MNR uprising of 1943 , had reached its climax when the MNR returned to power in 1932 and, during the presidency of Victor Paz Estenssoro, carried through one of the few genuine social transformations in Latin America* s long history of political upheaval.
Despite the nationalization of the tin mines and other offenses against free enterprise, the Eisenhower administration exempted Bolivia frcm its Latin American canons and actually gave it more grant aid than any other country in the hemisphere about £±xgS $150 million.
This aid, however, had produced little in the way of economic stimulus or other visible result.
Much of it had gone for direct budgetary support; the rest for technical assistance.
In I960 the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs actually told the House Eoseign Affairs Committee with regard to a projected development program, ""We had to tell the Bolivian Government that they couldn't put their money into it and we weren't going to put ours into it.
Paz Estenssoro, whose second term as president had recently begun, was now struggling to get his poor and isolated nation moiing again.
The visitor to the Presidential Palace in La paz must pass by the lamppost, across the street, from which the corpse of President Villaroel dangled in 1946 a chastening reminder to his successors of the uncertainty of political life (and one on which Paz Estenssoro may now must today from his exile in Peru)# Paz, an intelligent and harassed man, began by setting forth the general case for revolution with fluency and candor.
The great need in Latin America, he said, was to incorporate the poor people into both the money economy and the political society.
But too much of Latin America lingered in a quasifeudal state, with the very poor, and especially the Indians, living under the domination of a landed oligarchy which thought it was ruling by divine right.
The longer the oligarchs resisted change, Paz said, the more violent revolution would be when it came.
Peru and Ecuador, he added, were particularly near the point of social explosion.
I responded that many North Americans agreed with this analysis, that even a Republican administration in Washington had provided the margin of financial support which had saved the Bolivian Revolution from disaster.
Where revolution meant healthy social change, the Kennedy administration could be depended on to look on it with sympathy, but not so when revolution meant dictatorship, ^repression and the entry of alien forces into the hemisphere.
The leaders of the Bolivian government surety bore a particular responsibility to maintain the integrity of their revolution.
The coml83 munists have made themselves the advocates of the just demands of the workers and peasants.
But he gloomily admitted that they might try to take over Bolivia as they had taken over Cuba; ever since the Castro revolution, he added, the communists had proves especially successful in winning adherents and forcing issues.
Three hard weeks at Buenos Aires convinced Dillon that Washington’s diagnosis of the hemisphere was badly wrong.
In one hut a baby, lying helplessly in his* mother* s arms, was dying of measles.
The rest of the fanily of seven S ^ tting on th,e dlrt floor eating a hopeless meal of beans and farina When McGovern and I entered, they looked up apathetically, except for a ’ naked baby, perhaps eighteen months old, who rushed cheerily toward us holding out his arms to be taken up.
He was covered with scabs and pockmarks, and we were reluctant to touch him.
A cameraman, who had come along In order to record evidence of need sufficient to convince Congressmen, kept flashing pictures of this terrible scene, Furtado was realistic in his assessment of possibilities.
Seeing no present hope of doing anything in the semi-arid zone, he was concentrating on the sugar lands.
An emergency food program, he said, would do nop good; it might even disturb the existing dietary balance which kept the people marginally alive.
If you give them food and do nothing to change their i way of life, they will only work less.
As we drove through the desperate countryside, Furtado discussed women as the index of the state of development.
After nine hours in the hinterland, we returned, tired and depressed, to Recife.
As we got out of the car, an enameled Brazilian girl came out of the hotel in high heels and a chic Paris dress.
During the fifties the American Embassy regarded him with mistrust as a Marxist, even possibly a communist.
But in 1961 Furtado seemed to see the problem of the northeast as a personal race between himself and the agitator Francisco Juliao, who was organizing the peasants in Ligas Camponeses and urging them to seize the land.
McGovern and I were both appalled by the magnitude of the problem and impressdd by the initiatives which Brazil had already taken.
When I came back to Washington in early March, it was with the conviction, more urgent now than ever, that the struggle of the invisible Latin America to join the twentieth century was confronting the United States with a crisis one which, if ignored, might end by transforming the southern half of the hemisphere Into a boiling and angry G hina, but which, if approached In a strong and comprehensive way, might still net be beyond our power to affect.
Here was a world at once fascinating and appalling in its internal contrasts, where a highly polished nineteenth century civiliation coexisted with unimaginable primitivism and squalor, and where a surging passion for modernization now threatened to sweep both aside.
Here were free republics with meager traditions of stability or continuity where, indeed, ninety-three illegal changes of regime had taken place in the last thirty years but with deep pride In their more othan a century of independence.
Here was half of the western hemisphere, which, if it turned against the United States, would mock our leadership before the world and create a hard and lasting threat to our national security, but which, if we could work effectively with Its people, might provide the world a model in the processes of democratic development.
Here was Fidel Castro, the passionate leader of the Dub an Revolution, behind him the inarticulate woes of generations, and behind him too the thrust of communism from beyond the hemisphere; and here was the new young President of the United States, whose accession to power had already awakened fresh hope in the America?, and behind him the uneven and uncoordinated energies of reasonable men and of indigenous Latin democracy.
My talks with Betancourt, Haya de la Toree, Paz Estenssoro and others had given me the strong impression that the democratic left In Latin America had turned decisively against Castro and that he would increasingly appear as the symbol not of social revolution but of Soviet penetration.
None1 theless, if the United States were not ready to offer an affirmative program for democratic modernization, new Castros would undoubtedly | rise across the continent.
John Moors Cabot, as Assistant Secretary of State for Inter£ American Affairs, fought in 1953 for a hemisphere program of economic assistance and social reform.
But George Humphrey and his Treasury Departemtn denounced the whole idea, and Cabot, discouraged, j resigned to return to the field.
His successor, Henry Holland, better fitted the DullesHumphrey mood, A doctrinaire apostle of ‘free enteru prise,* he passionately opposed, for example.
United States loans to public undertakings in Latin America, and he feared that, if the progI ressive democrats came to power, they would curtail the power and disturb the confidence of businessmen, as they had in the United States under the Hew Deal.
It was H 0 px an d who tried to keep Romulo Betancourt from finding refuge in Puerto Rico.
Rubottom, Jr., a Foreign Service officer of temperate but cautious views.
In a speech in Puerto Rico at the end of 1958, a few days before Fidel Castro entered Havana, Kennedy urged that Latin America be given a new priority in UnitedStates foreign policy.
Perhaps the most Influential was Adolf Berle, who, after playing a role in the creation of the Good Neighbor policy, had served Roosevelt as Assistant Secretary of State and as ambassador to Brazil.
More than anyone else, Berle provided the link between the Good-Neighbor policy and the Alliance for Progress.
His experience in Brazil, where he helped in I 9 I 4. to set off the train of events leading to the overthrow of hhe Vargas dictatorship, convinced him that the Good Neighbor policy kbh could not survive as a diplomatic and Juridical policy alone.
The principle of absolute nonintervention, he felt, did not exhaust the policy; it could only be the first phase in its unfolding.
If Good Neighborism did not mean a set of democratic ideas, it would be no more than a policy of sanctifying economic stagnation and political tyranny a result that would injure the moral position of the United States without gf furnishing strategic security. * • a a s This evolution of the Good Neighbor policy, Berle well understood, required the emergence in Latin America of political leaders and parties committed to democratic objectives.
During the forties and fifties, when the State Department was Ignoring or harassing Latin American democrats, Berle made it his business to keep in close touch with men like Betancourt and Figueres, In this effort, he worked closely with Luis Munoz Marin, the remarkable governor of Puerto Rico.
Together they developed a network of unofficial relationships with the partidos populates of Latin America.
Kennedy, whose friendship with Munoz began with the Puerto Rican trip of 1958, fell heir to these ideas and relationships.
After graduating from Harvard Law School in 1958, 0 00 dwin came to Washington as law clerk to Justice Frankfurter He was certainly driving and often impatient; those whom he overrode called him arrogant.
He soon proved himself more skilled in writing for Kennedy than anyone but Sorenson; and he also showed himself able to take on any subject, however new and complicated, master its essentials with rapidity and peecision and arrive at ideas for action.
Its significance, however, lay in the new elements it brought into official thinking.
It saw the communist threat as requir197 Ing not just a military response as the Pentagon believed, or just an economic response, as some Latin Americans believed, but a combination of both.
Besides military containment, it urged the systematic and semiofficial promotion of democratic political parties and a new stress on economic development through country development plans.
These elements carried the task force program beyond Kennedy's Tampa speech or Dillon's Social Progress Trust Fund.
If the recommendations were accepted, the goal of the United States would be not ijust the limited program of social development envisaged at Bogota but a long-term program of xisaiaixst national and continental development, shielded against communist disruption and aimed at leading the whole hemisphere to selfsustaining economic growth and democratic political institutions.
Birth throes of the Alliance This view did not prevail In all parts of the executive branch.
A preference for right-wing governments had been implicit in the policy of the early Eisenhower years; and hhe evolution of the Castro regime in Cuba had persuaded some, especially in the armed services, that the right-wing alternative should now become the .explicit object of United States policy.
The Cuban experience, it was argued, proved that the United States could never retain control of a Latin American revolution, no matter how plausible it might seem in its first stages.
As for attempts to avert revolution through pressure for reform, this would only alienate those who held the real power the oligarchy (more favorably known as the 'producing classes* or 'those commanding capital resources') and the military and open the door to incompetent liberals who would bring about inflation, disinvestment, capital flight and social indiscipline and would finally be shoved aside by the communists.
The conclusion was that we should oppose revolution and reform in Latin America and concentrate on helping our 'tested friends' those who gave us economic privileges, military facilities and votes in the United Nations and who could be relied on to suppress local communists, tax and land reformers, and other malcontents and demagogues.
If we did not support our true friends, we would only convince Latin America that our friendship was not worth having.
It was idle to say that a policy of permanent counterrevolution would not work; military support, antiguerrilla training and unswerving United States backing would keep any friendly regime in power, and the resulting social stability would attract investment and produce growth.
Eventually the ^atin Americans might become capable of self-government.
Thebe was a sophisticated case for this policy, and it was made during his visits to Washington by a brilliant former diplomat, John Davies, Jr., who had been drummed out of the Foreign Service by John Foster Dulles and was now^running a furniture factory in Feru.
Progressive civilian governments tended to be unstable and soft; military governments were comparatively stable and oould provide the security necessary for economic growth.
This argument, impressive in the abstract, was perhaps less satisfactory when it got down to cases, because the military who really produced development were rare in Latin America.
In Washington the case for the right-wing alternative seemed to proceed less from thoughtful analysis of the conditions of growth than from unthinking satisfaction with the existing social order.
During the Second World War the United States armed services began to become acquainted with Latin America.
Our officers naturally associated with members of the oligarchy, who spoke English and invited them to parties, and they naturally developed a fellow feeling, for their brother officers -.sjsouth of the border.
After the war, the War Department argued that f ' 1 military relations with Latin American governments should be enlarged in the interests of the security of the United States.
In 19 ^)6 Truman proposed under Pentagon pressure and over the State Departments objections ""to standardize military organization, training methods, and equipment"" throughout the hemisphere with the evidant hope of ultimately producing an inter-American army under D n ited States generalship.
In the wake of this policy came a program of arms exports to Latin American countries.
This program was reinforced by the Pentagon's chronic need to dispose of obsolescent weapons and thereby acquire credits against which new ones could be purchased.
In these years the United States military fell into the habit of conducting their own direct relations with their Latin American counterparts, training them in United States ataff schools, sending them on tours of United States military installations, welcoming their arms missions in Washington, showing them the latest available (i.e., most recently obsolescent) 'hardware* and engaging in elaborate return visits of the-lr own -gf'all with minimal notice to the Department of State and minimal coordination with the country's foreign policy objectives.
The original rationale for all this was the supposed need to protect o the long coastlines of the Americas from foreign attack.
In time the notion of a flotilla crossing the ocean to invade Latin America began to lose what thin semblance of probability it might ever have had, and the Pentagon began to cast about for new missions to justify its incestuous relations with the military of Latin America.
By 1961 anti-submarine warfare and counterinsurgency were the favorite candidates.
The D a tin American military naturally responded with delight to all overtures and even, on occasion, were able as in the case of anti-submarine warfare to play off the ^nited States Navy against the United States Air Force to gfet the best possible weapons deal.
United States military aid obviously gave the recipient governments prestige and their military forces power.
Such gestures were somehow inconsistent with the spirit of the task force report.
For their part, democratic Latin American leaders began to use the United States arms program as a means of warding off right-wing coups, appeasing their own military and purchasing time for social reform.
Thus Frondizi, who ruled on the sufferance of the Argentine military, hoped to placate bis generals and admirals by backing their requests for United States arms.
Even Betancourt, confronted by Castro, Trujillo and internal unrest, was determined to make sure of his own army by getting his generals the arms they wanted from the United States.
Brazil, Peru, Chile and Argentina were all devoting a quarter or more of their annual expenditures to military purposes.
By lg6l the special interests of the military were threating to distort United States policy much as the specill interests of business had distorted policy thirty-five years earlier.
Still, even in the Eisenhower administration, the counterrevolutionary case had been a minority view, and in the new administration it had even less hope.
Nonetheless, pressure for a revival of the policy stirred beneath the surface.
He had opposed the decision of theEisenhower administration to support OAS sanctions against Trujillo, and he took every opportunity to advocate full support for all anti-communifet regimes, whatever their internal character.
For men of Burke’s persuasion, talk of an alliance for progress could only seem bleeding-heart, do-good globaloney.
For Berle, with all his ardor for democracy and development, comprehended also, in another part of his nature, the shadowy world of intrigue, conspiracy and violence.
He had an extensive knowledge of communist movements and a vivid apprehension of communist dangers.
This ability to combine awareness of the communifet threat with a belief in social revolution was possibly one reason why Kennedy asked Berle to join the administration.
For Kennedy fully understood this was, indeed, the mainspring of all his thinking about Latin America that, with all its pretensions to realism, the militant anti-revolutionary line represented the policy most likely to strengthen the communists and lose the hemisphere.
He believed that, to maintain contact with a continent seized by the course of revolutionary change, a policy of social idealism was the only true realism for the United * States.
But Mann had played a useful role in helping move hemisphere phlicy forward in the Eisenhower years; and, hhough he had an old Latin American hand's skepticism about the grandiose schemes of the Hew Frontiersmen and, on occasion, even responded a little to the crotchets of Admiral Burke, he was a good bureaucrat ^and ready enough to go along.
We are likewise disturbed at the thought of imitating methods which pursue their economic objectives at the cost of fundamental human freedoms.
Let us once again transform the American continent into a vast crucible of revolutionary ideas and efforts a tribute to the power of the creative energies of free men and women an example to all the world that liberty and progress walk hand in hand.
One found still a measure of doubt and cynicism, but most people were deeply moved.
The Venezuelan Ambassador took my arm and said urgently, Y, We have not heard such words since franklin Roosevelt.
In the thirties idealism was sometimes declared, even when it did not exist; in the sixties, it was sometimes deprecated, even when it was the dominant motive.
Most had some profession or skill to which they could always return; but ordinarily they used it as a springboard for general meddling.
Where Eisenhower had wanted a staff with clearly defined functions, Kennedy resisted pressures toward specialization; he wanted a group of all-purpose men to whom he could toss anything.
It seemed to me that in many ways Dick Goodwin, though younger than the average, was the archetypal Hew Frontiersman.
His two years in the Army had been too late for the war, even too late for Korea.
One could not deny a sense of Hew Frontier autointoxication one felt it oneself.
The pleasures of power, so long untasted, were now being happily devoured the chauffeur-driven limousines, the special telephones, the top secret documents, the personal aides, the meetings in the Cabinet Room, the calls from the President.
The verbosity, I have suggested, was marked only in comparison with the muteness of the Eisenhower days; but the rest was true enough, especially in these first heady weeks.
On personalities, an instinctive commitment to the Establishment, of which he was so superb a product, was tempered by a respect for intelligence wherever he could find it.
He never appeared tired; he was always ready to assume responsibility; and his 0 subordinates could detect strain only when rare flashes of impatience and sharpness of tone disturbed his ^usually invincible urbanity.
One felt that he was forever sustained by those two qualities so indispensable for success in government _ a deep commitment to the public service and a large instinct for power.
Jean-Paul Sartre and C Wright Mills, who visited Cuba in 1959-60, later proclaimed that the revolution was a peasant uprising, caused by conditions of intolerable pverty, and despair in a wretchedly underdeveloped country.
In fact, as more careful writers like TheodoreDraper and Hugh Thomas have pointed out, Cuba was hardly in so hopeless a shape.
It was, indeed, the perfest test of the Eisenhower theory that unhampered private investment was ^atin America* s road to salvation.
It stood fourth among Latin American nations in per capita Income, fifth in manufacturing, first in per capita distribution of automobiles and radios.
It ranked near the top in education, literacy, social services and urbanization.
These aggregate statistics, however, concealed shocking disparities in the distribution of wealth, especially as between city and countryside and between white and Negro.
There was enough wealth about to reveal to all how agreebble wealth might be.
The statistics also along with the popularity of kfes Havana cigars concealed the extent to which the Cuban economy depended on a single industry, sugar, which not only was at the mercy of world markets but was Itself then in a state of decline.
Still, if Cuba had serious economic problems and, compared to the United States, a low standard of living, it was quite well off compared to Haiti or Bolivia.
The immediate motives behind the revolution were as much political as economic, and the revolutionaries themselves were members of the middle class rather than peasants or workers.
A 1000 DATS POLITICAL P.216/7 Cuba’s history as an Independent republic had been a drama of acute and chronic political frustration.
One crowd after another had come to power on promises of progress and regeneration only to go out in orgies of graft and plunder.
Carlos Prio Socarras, who had presided over a genial regime of social reform^ and political corruption until Batista overthrew him in 1952, once visitdd my office in the White House and observed with a certain dignity, ""They say that I was a terrible president ofCuba.
This feeling of political and social disgust produced a passion for change.
In its origins, the Cuban Revolution was led by professional men and lntellectuals(Like the Castro brothers and Ernesto Guevara, the Argentine physician) and subsidized by businessmen and (Handowners.
At the start of 1957 Castro had been the leader of a beleaguered band of a dozen men hiding out in the hills; at the end of 1958 he entered Havana in triumph.
He did this, not because he defeated Batista’s if.,000 soldiers on the battlefield _ at the moment of victory, his own force numbered less than two thousand men but because of hhe withdrawal of support from Batista’s government on the part of most of the people and most of the airoy.
The Havana underground, brilliantly organized by a radical young engineer named Manuel Ray, completed the work Castro had begun in the Sierra Maestra.
He later said that he hid radical views in order to hold the anti-Batista coalition together, and this was probably true.
But, though a radical, there is no conclusive evidence that he was then a Sommunist or even a Marxist-Leninist.
It should not be forgotten that in 1943 Batista had appointed to his cabinet the first avowed Communists ever to hold cabinet posts in any American government; one of them Carlos Rafael Rodriguez was in Castro's government twenty years later.
Even when t he Communists broke with Bitlsta, they continued to condemn Castro as bourgeois"" and a ""putschist,"" adolescent and irrespopsible.
He was, above all, a political opportunist a man with a firai will and an extraordinary ambition.
He thought in terms of winning power and keeping it,""° "" u Javier Felipe Pazos vea, ""Cuba ’Long Live the Revolution} ' "" New Republic , November 3 7 1962.
Fidel’s younger brother Raul and Guevara, who had long had close relations with the Communists, no doubt helped move Fidel in this direction.
Now that he had won his power, the Communists offered him the means of keeping it and using it.
The State Department grew obsessed with the problem of getting American citizens proper indemnification for expropriated land and business; Havana construed this as the anticipated enmity of American business to Cuban reform.
But Bsnsisi Bonsai still advocated a policy of moderation in order to make it more difficult for Castro to rush to the other side.
Others in Washington especially Vice-President Nixon, who had met Castro during hi 3 Washington visit and distrusted him from the start wanted a more aggressive policy, if only on a contingency basis.
Julio A Amoedo, the Argentine ambassador to Havana and a personal friend of Castro's, as the intermediary.
There appears to have been still another attempt in March through Rufo Lopez Fresquet.
On the morning of March 17, I960, President Dorticos rejected this last United States overture.
Lopez Fresquet responded that he had remained as Finance Minister only on the assumption that the Cuban government wanted to compose its diffenences with Washington; if Castro thought no reconciliation possible, then, Lopez Fresquet said, he wanted to resign.
On the same day in Washington President Eisenhower agreed to a recommendation from the CIA to train a force of Cuban exiles for possible use against Caatro.
But Washington still declined to use the weapons of economic pressure which lay so easily at hand.
It was not until July I960, long after Castro had effected the substantial communization of the government, army and labor movement and had negotiated economic agreements with Russia and China, that the United States took public retaliatory action of a ^fmajor sort.
The suspension of the balance of Cuba's I960 sugar quota (that same quota which Guevara had already denounced in March as ""economic slavery”) was the conclusion, and not the cause, of Castro* 3 hostility.
Washington did not finally break off diplomatic relations until January 3, 1961, and then because of Castro's scornful demand that the staff of the Havana Embassy be reduced to eleven people in forty-eight hours.
He made his most extenddd statement in a speech at Cincinnati in early October.
He began by appearing to adopt the thesi3 that the ^ate Department should have listened to its pro-Batista ambassadors and recognized the revolution as a communist conspiracy from the outset.
Though SarV^rriith was an amiable gentleman and old friend from ^alm Beach, Kennddy did not regard him as an oracle on Cuba.
He had remarked at Hyannis Port in August, ""EArl Smith once said to me that the American Ambassador was the secondmost important man in Cuba.
Naturally those conditions couldn't last,"" (Smith also made his remark about ""the second most important man in Cuba"" publicly, stimulating President Dorticos of Cuba to congratulate a Cuban audience on now having ""the privilege of living in a country where the United States Ambassador means little."") p,225> The more substantial part of the Cincinnati speech and the part which I believe more faithfully reflected Kennedy’s views condemned the Eisenhower policy toward Cuba on quite different grounds.
Neither Kennedy nor his staff knew about the secret Cuban army in Guatemala, and they had no enterprise of this sort in mind themselves.
Nixon, however, knowing that Allen Dulles had briefed Kennedy about Cuba, assumed that the briefing covered operations as well as intelligence.
He therefore incredibly concluded or so helater said that Kennedy was trying to claim credit for hhe idea and that the secrecy of the project was now in jeopardy.
Immediately after the election, his concern was with an affirmative program for Latin America rather than with Cuba.
On November lij. he asked John Sharon for estimates of the effectiveness of the trade embargo against Cuba and of the possibilities of a rapprochement.
Pour days later Dulles and Richard Bissell of CIA informed him for the first time about the Guatemalan project.
By the end of 1959 Miami was&live with anti-Castro political activity of an unorganized and feckless sort.
Every time two or three refugees gathered together a new union or movimiento was likely to emerge.
The political leaders of this second migration were men who had served neither Batista nor Castro, They were characteristically identified with the old Cuba of the traditional parties, of progressive intent and ineffectual performance.
Some were decent men; others were racketeers who had found fL politics a lucrative way of life.
They wanted the restoration of political 'democracy* as they had known it before Batista, but they saw no need for far-reaching social change.
Their objectives aere compatible with the interests of North -American investors and with the prejudices of the Eisenhower administration.
If this had not been the case, they would gladly have modifi eels ji ilia their objectives; for they were men long habituated to automatic deference to the United States.
In June five leading groups were cajoled Into forming the Prente Revolucionario Democratico.
Three of the five members of the new committee represented pre-Batista Cuba; Manuel Antonio de Varona, who had been prime minister under Prio Socarras, was typical, Varona promptly declared that the post-Castro government would restore properties seized by the Castro regime to their United States and Cuban owners.
The other two members of the Prente had briefly served the revolutionary government.
The political criteria laid down by the CIA in Washington and demanded by most members of othe Frente were abandoned in the rush.
Bender gave particular authority to a dubious figure in Miami named Joaquin Sanjenis, and Sanjenis favored men of the Cubam right.
Men who had taken part in the revolution had a natural hatred of officers who had served Batista.
The American advisers, on the other hand, were impatient of what they regarded as political quibbling.
They preferred men who had professional military experience (like Pepe San Roman, who had received training at Port Belvoir and Fort Benning in the United States) and could be eelied on to follow orders.
It is true that mofct of the Batistianos were so called because they had once been in Batista's army, not because they now wanted to return Batista to power.
But this did not make the Cubans selected by the United States advisers to command the Brigade any more popular with the rank and file.
In spite of the optimistic reports rendered to CIA in Washington about the splendid morale in the camp, discontent increased.
I¥ is hard to disentangle' all thekotives behind this demonstration; but it seems clear that the mutineers had the support of the Frente.
At this poijit, the United States advisers intervened on behalf of the officers.
A hundred of the Cubans refused to accept this decision and insisted on seeing representatives of the Frente.
When they were promised a visit from the Frente, most agreed to rejoin the Brigade, but a few still held out.
In a new report in early March, they dropped the point about External support and hinged victory on the capacity of the assault to produce anti-Castro action behind the lines.
From the viewpoint of the Joint Chiefs, then, the Cuban resistance was indispensable to success.
They could see no other way short of United States intervention by which an invasion force of a thousand Cubans, no matter how well trained and equipped nor how stout their morale, could conceivably overcome the 200,000 men of Castro's army and militia.
As Dulles said at the March 11 meeting, ""Don't forget thfet we have a disposal problem.
If transfer to the United States was out, demobilization on the spot would create even greater difficulties.
The Cubans themselves were determined I 1 to go back to their homeland, and they might well forcibly resist | efforts to take away their arms and equipment.
Moreover, even if fj the Brigade were successfully disbanded, its members would disperse, disappointed and resentful all over Latin America, They would tell where they had been and what they had been doing, thereby exposing CIA operations.
This could only result, Dulles kept emphasizing, in discrediting Washington, | disheartening Latin Ameriaan opponents of Castro and encouraging the Fidelistas in their attack on democratic regimes, like that of Betan4 court’ irj Venezuela.
Disbandment might thus produce pro-Castro revolutions all around the Caribbean.
A 1000 DAYS BAY OP PIGS Government in Exile PP237/8 As the expeditionary force enlarged Its hold, the CIA men argued, now introducing a new idea, a provisional government could be flown in; and.
If the invaders could sustain themselves for ten days or two weeks, this government could receive recognition as the government of Cuba.
Once this was done, the new government could request United States aid, though this aid was carefully defined as ""logistic"" and therefore presumably excluded military intervention.
The CIA planners envisaged a continuous o build-up and enlargement of the perimeter around the beachhead over a long period, rather like A n zio in 1944* The scheme envisaged victory by attrition rather than by rebellion and no longer assigned a significant immediate role to the Internal resistance.
As the Invaders strengthened their position, this, along with their command of the skies and the acceptance of the new government by other American republics, would produce a steady withdrawal of civil support from Castro and his eventual collapse.
And, if by any {chance the attack failed, Trinidad was near enough the Escambray for false (the invaders to disappear into the hills.
Castro, the CIA said, was about to receive jet airplanes from the Soviet Union along with Cuban pilots trained in Czechoslovakia to fly them; once the MIGs arrived, an amphibious landing would turn into a slaughter.
After June 1, it would take the United States Marines and Air Force to overthrow Castro.
If a purely Cuban invasion were ever to take place, it had to take place in the next few weeks.
The Idea sounded plausible enough, t hepimemorandum suggested, if one excluded everything but' Cuba^ itself; but, as soon as the focus was enlarged to include the rest of the hemisphere and the rest of th^ world, arguments against the decision gained strength.
Above all, ""this would be your""”f ir’st dramatic foreign policy initiative.
At one stroke you would dissipate all the extraordinary good will which has been rising toward the new Administration through the world.
A 1000 DAYS Bissell 2lj-l Richard Bissell, whom ^ had known as an economist in the Marshall Plan before he turned to intelligence work and became CIA's deputy director for operations, was a man of high character and remarkable intellectual gifts.
His mind was swift and penetrating, and he had an unsurpassed talent for lucid analysis and fluent exposition, A few years before he had conceived and fought through the plan of IT2 flights over the Soviet Union; and, though this led to trouble in I960, it still remained perhaps the greatest intelligence coup since the war.
He had committed himself for the past year to the Cuban project with equal intensity.
Yet he recognized the strength of his commitment and, with characteristic honesty, warned us to discount his bias, nonetheless, we all listened transfixed in this meeting and other meetings which followed fascinated by the workings of this superbly clear, organized and articulate intelligence, while Bissell, pointer in hand, would explain how the invasion would work or discourse on the relative merits of alternative landing sites.
Both Dulles and Bissell were at a disadvantage in having to persuade a skeptical new administration about the virtues of a proposal nurtured in the hospitable bosom of a previous government aproposal on which they had personally worked for a long time and in which their organization had a heavy vested interest.
This cast them in the role less of analysts than of advocates, and it led them to accept progressive modifications so long as the expedition in some form remained; perhaps they too unconsciously supposed that, once the operation began to unfold, it would not be permitted to fail.
It was only later that I learned about the Anzio concept; it certainly did not come across clearly in the w hite House meetings.
Obviously no one expected the invasion to galvanise the unarmed and unorganized into rising against Castro at the moment of disembarkation.
But the invasion plan, as understood by the President and the Joint Chiefs, did assume that the successful occupation of an enlarged beachhead area would rather soon incite organized uprisings armed members of the Cuban resistance.
On the other hand, if we did | mine in the end have to send American troops to Laos to fight communism | on the other side of the world, we could hardly ignore communism I ninety miles off Florida.
Laos and Cuba were tied up with each other, j though it was hard to know how one would affect the other.
Dulles and Bissell, convinced that if the Cubans were ever to be sent against Castro they had to go now, sure that the Brigade could accomplish its mission and nagged by the disposal problem, now redoubled their efforts at persuasion.
Dulles told Kennedy that he felt much more confident about success than he had ever been in the case of Guatemala.
CIA concentrated particularly in the meetings on trying to show that, even if the expedition failed, the cost would not be excesUndersive.
Tf the operation were truly '^CubanTzed’,'1 'it"" would hopefully appear as part of the traditional ebb and flow of revolution and counterre volution in the Caribbean.
Moreover, if worst came to worst and the invaders were beaten on the beaches, then, Dulles and Bissell said, they could easily ""melt away into the mountains.
This might have been true at Trinidad, which lay near the foothills of (the Escambray, and it was more true of the Bay of Higs than of hhe other two alternative sites proposed ini^midMarch.
But the CIA exposition was less than candid both in implying that the Brigade had undergone guerrilla training (which had substantially ended five months earlier, befoee most of the Cubans had arrived in Guatemala) and in suggesting the existence of^an easy escape hatch.
I don»t think we fully realized that the Escambray Mountains lay eighty miles from the Bay of p igs, across a hopeless tangle of swamps and jungles.
And no one knew (until Haynes Johnson interviewed the survivors) that the CIA agents in Guatemala were saying nothing to the Cubans about this last resort of flight to the hills, apparently fearing to lower their morale.
Dean Rusk listened inscrutqbly through the discussions, confining himself to gentle warnings about possible excesses. w hen he went to the SEATO conference in late March and Chester Bowles as Acting Secretary sat in his place, Bowles was horrified by what he heard but reluctant to speak out in his chief's absence,, On March 31 he gave Rusk a strong memorandum apposing the invasicn and asked to be permitted, if Rusk disagreed, to carry the case to the President.
Rusk reassured Bowles, leaving him with the impression that the project was being whittled down into a guerrilla infiltration, and filed the memorandum away.
It would commit us to the heavy responsibility of making a success of postCastro Cuba.
This point will not be lost on the rest of the world nor on our own consciences.
The Alliance for Progress provided a solid basis for insulating the rest of the hemisphere from Castro.
Ag for the Cuban exiles, an imaginative approach could find a more productive use of their talents than invading their homeland.
Yet the President returned from Palm Beach more militant than when he had left.
This meeting was held at the State ^apartment in a small conference room beside Rusk's office.
Affcep i the usual routine _ persuasive expositions by the CIA, mild disclaimers by Rusk and penetrating questions by the President Kennedy started asking people around the table what they thought.
Fulbright, speaking in an emphatic and incredulous way, denounced the whole idea.
It would compromise our moral posit icn in the world and make it impossible for us to protest treaty violations by the Communists.
He gave a brave, old-fashioned American speech, honorable, sensible and strong; and he left everyone in the room, except me and perhaps the President, wholly unmoved.
Mann said that he would have opposed it at the start, but, now that it had gone so far, it should be carried through.
Berle wanted the men to be put into Cuba but did not insist on a major production.
Kennedy once again wanted to know what could be done in the way of quiet infiltration as against the beachhead assault.
The meeting fell into discussion before the round of the table was completed.
A 1000 DAYS BAY OP PIGS Schlesinger' s Political Morality I bad been thinking about little else for weeks and was clear in my mind that the invasion was a terrible idea.
This was not because the notion of sponsoring an exile attempt to overthrow Castro seemed intolerable in itself.
Seeing no justification for intervention, other naticns would sympathize with David rather than Goliath.
A prolonged civil war in Cuba between the Castro regime and an exile army backed by the Bnited States, thenSmemorandum went on, would open us to damaging attack in the United Nations and elsewhere around the globe, fhe Russians would enlist volunteers in Jose Marti and probably even Abraham Lincoln Brigades and seek to convert the conflict into another Spanish Civil War.
What this stately language meant was that the operation might recklessly expend one of our greatest national assets John P Kennedy himself/ Nothing had been more _ depressing in the whole series of meetings than to watch a collection of officials, some of them holdovers from the previous administration, contentedly prepare to sacrifice the world’s growing faith in the new American 1 resident in order to defend interests and pursue objectives of their own.
Dean Rusk was almost alone in recognizing this problem; but his solution was the curious one of suggesting that someone other than the President make the final decision and do so in his absence someone who could be sacrificed if things went wrong.
But, just as the members of the White House staff who sat in the Cabinet Root failed in their job of protecting the President, so the representatives of thestate Department failed in defending the diplomatic interests of the nation.
I could not help feeling that the desire to prove to the CIA and the Joint Chiefs that they were not soft-headed idealists but were really tough guys, too, Influenced State* s representatives at the cabinet table.
More than once I left the meetings in the Cabinet Room fearful that only two of the regulars present were against the operation; but, since I thought the President was the other, I kept hoping that he would avail himself of his own escape clause and cancel the plan.
He said, n You know, I've reserved the right to stop this thing up to 2ip hours before the landing.
This change reflected the now buoyant CIA i&nphasis on the ease of escaping from the beaches into the hills.
By this time we were offered a sort of all-purpose operation guaranteed to work, win or lose.
If it failed of its maximum hope a mass uprising leading to the overthrow of the regime it would at least attain Its minimum objective supply and reinforcement for the guerrillas already on the island.
Though Dick had not attended the Cuba sessions, we had talked constantly about the problem.
Later that morning before departing for an economic conference in Latin America he went to see Rusk. w hen Goodwin expressed strong doubts about the Cuban operation.
Afterward Goodwin urged me to send Rusk a copy of my memorandum to the President and follow it up by a personal visit.
When I set forth my own doubts on Saturday, the Secretary listened quietly and somewhat mournfully.
Finally he said he had for some time been wanting to draw a balance sheet on the priject, that he planned to do it over the weekend and would try to talk with the President on Monday.
He reverted to a suggestion with thich he had startled the Joint Chiefs during one of the meetings.
This was that the operation fan out from Guantanamo with the prospect of retreating to the base in case of failure.
They are perfectly willing to put the president's head on the block, but they recoil from the idea of doing anything whihh might risk Guantanamo.
So far as the operation itself was concerned, he felt, as he told me that afternoon, that he had successfully pared it down from a grandiose amphibious assault to a mass infiltration.
Accepting the CIA assurances about the escape hatch, he supposed that the cost, both military and political, of failure was now Underreduced to a tolerable level.
He was particularly impressed by the fact that three members of the Cuban Revolutionary Council had sons in the Brigade; the exile leaders themselves obviously believed that the expedition would succeed.
As the decision presented itself bo him, he had to choose whether to disband a group of brave and idealistic Cubans, already trained and equipped, who wanted very much to return to Cuba on their own, or to permit them to go ahead.
The President saw mine no obligation to protect the Castro regime from democratic Cubans and decided that, if the Cubans wished to make the try on the categorical understanding that there would be no direct United States military support, he would help them do so.
If the expedition succeeded, the overthrow ofCastro would greatly strengthen democratic prospects in the hemisphere; if he called it off, he would forever be haunted by the feeling that his scruples had preserved Castro in power.
More generally, the decision resulted fforn the fact thbt he had been in office only seventyseven days.
He had not had the time or opportunity to test the inherited instrumentalities of government.
He could not know which of his advisers were competent and which were not. ^or their part, they did not know him or each other well enough to raise hard questions with force and candor.
Moreover, the massed and caparisoned authority of his senior officials in the realm of foreign policy and defense was unanimous for going ahead.
The director of the Central Intelligence Agency advocated the adventure; the Joflint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense approved its military aspects, tte Secretary of State its political aspects.
They all spoke with the sacerdotal prerogative of men vested with a unique understanding of arcane matters, ""if someone comes in to tell me this or that about the minimum wage bill,"" Kennedy said to me later, ""I have no hesitation in overruling them.
But you always assume that the military and intelligence people have some secret skill not available to ordinary mortals.
The only opposition came from Fulbright and myself (he knew nothing of Bowles's memorandum to Rusk, nor did he know that Edward R Marrow, the new director of the United states information Agency, who had learned about the operation from a Hew York limes reporter early in April, was also deeply opposed), ancf this” cfid"" not"" bulk large against the united voice of institutional authority.
Had one senior adviser opposed the adventure, I believe that Kennedy would have canceled it.
One further factor no doubt influenced him; the enormous confidence in his own luck.
He had won the nomination and the election against all the odds in the book.
Despite hime&lf, even this dispassionate and skeptical man may have been affected by the soaring euphoria of the new day.
On the following Tuesday the Robert ^ennedys gave a party to celebrate Ethel's birthday.
It was a large, lively, uproarious affair, overrun by guests, skits, children and dogs.
Finally he said, ""You may be right or you may be wrong, but the President has made his mind up.
Our purpose was to persuade him to give the Council's program social and economic content.
We pointed out that the Council draft was filled with impassioned appedls to the foreign investor, the private banker, the dispossessed property owner, but had very little to say to the worker, the farmer or the Negro.
We suggested that the Council must reassure the Cubans that it had no intention of de~ s-fcryww stroying the social and economic gains of the last two years.
A few days leter Gilbert Harrison of the New Republic sent over the galleys of a pseudonymous piece called ""Our Men in Miami,"" asking whether these was any reason/ why it should not be published.
It was a careful, accurate and devastating account of CIA activities among the refugees, written, I learned later, by Karl Meyer.
Defeated by the moralissue, I handed the article to the President, who instantly read it and expressed the hope that it could be stopped.
Harrison accepted the suggestion and without question a patriotic act which left me oddly uncomfortable.
Turner Catledge, the managing editor, called James Heston, who was in his weekend retreat in Virginia, to ask his advice.
Heston counseled against publication; either the story would alert Castro, in which case the T jme s would be responsible for casualties on the beach, or else the expedition would be canceled, in which case the limes would be responsible for grave interference with national policy.
This was another patriotic act; but in retrospect I have wondered whether, if the press had behaved irresponsibly, it would not have spared the country a disaster.
He made his only misstep when, in a speech before the American Newspaper Publishers Association on April 27, he told the press that it should be prepared to censor itself in the interests of national security.
A 1000 DAYS Kennedy Political Morality p • H62 Kennedy understood this better than anybody and needed no prodding.
The basic issue in Cuba is not one between the United States and Cuba, It is between the Cubans themselves, I intend to see that we adhere to that principle and as I understand it this administration^ attitude is so understood and shared by the anti-Castro exiles from Cuba in this country,” A 1000 DAYS USSR Cuban Interests of 262/4 The meeting on April 12 was preceded by a strange incident whose significance even today remains indecipherable to me.
I received a request from Oeorgi Kornienko, the counselor of the Soviet Embassy, for an immediate appointment.
Soon a sharp-eyed, moon-faced man appeared, speaking fluent but somewhat formal English.
After some preliminary palaver, he said courteously that he did not fully understand the policy of the United Spates toward Latin America and especially toward C u ba.
When he expressed wonder that the United States cared so much about the emergence of a regime in Cuba with ties to the communist world, I suggested that he might understand if he were to transfer recent events in Havana to, say, Warsaw; I doubted whether the Soviet Union would accept such developments in the case of Poland with the same detachment he now urged on me.
By Soviet standards he should be more impressed by American patience than by A m eri.
After additiai al inconclusive talk, Kornienko asked whether we excluded the possibility of further negotiation with Castro.
Kornienko doubted whether Castro would regard internal Cuban questions as negotiable.
He then asked what sort of action Washington might take as evidence of a serious desire to negotiate.
Speaking in the same spirit of fantasy which he had earlier invoked, I inquired whether he thought that the Castro regime would, for example, offer the Revolutionary Council equal freedom of political action.
I came to know Kornienko better in time; we used to lunch together at irregular intervals until he returned to Moscow at the end of 1963, These luncheons were never very productive.
Kornienko, an exceedingly intelligent and entirely immovable defender of the current Soviet brief, whatever it might be, rarely showed any inclination to talk apart from it.
His talk was marked by a total absence of warnings or threats; his attitude seemed one of polite curiosity.
His visit must have been either exploratory or, more probably, diversionist; for he had nothing positive to suggest.
In any case, I promptly informed the President and Rusk of the meeting.
Diplomatically, the obvious presumption is that Kornienko was asking for an explanation of what was up and, at the same time, telling the U.s, it was generally aware something was up and it was interested in it.
A L ) ) ) DAYS Exile Government 264/5 Everyone knows, Miro said, that the United Spates behind the expedition.
Berle then said that it could not succeed without an internal uprising, and that, if one came, we would provide the democratic Cubans with the things necessary to make it successful.
Once the provisional government was established on the beachhead, we would offer all aid short of United States troops.
Mj.ro said that 10,000 Cubans would immediately align themselves with the invading forces.
I reproduce this part of the confersation from notes made at the time because Miro told his colleagues and later claimed publicly that Berle had promised the support of 10,000 United States droops.
Either Miro’s knowledge of English or the translation was sadly at fault.
A 1000 p .267 DAYS Advisers Military My observations have increased my confidence in the ability of this force to accomplish not onlyxiinitial combat missions, but also the ultimate objective, the overthrow of Castro.
The Brigade and battalion commanders now know all details of the plan and ape enthusiastic.
The top CIA officials Dulles, Bussell, Barnes were civilized and responsible men; but the CIA operatives in the field and their military colleagues were a different breed, if, at least, the Cubans themselves are to be believed.
As zero hour approached, the American advisers told them again (or so they later informed Haynes johnson)^that their Brigade would not be the only unit in the invasion.
They received the impression that after seventy-two hours they could count on United Skates military and air support.
Kennedy, who had been much concerned about the UN aspect of^the Cuban operation, told the group in the Cabinet Room thfct he wished Stesrenson to be fully informed, and that nothing said at the Uu should be less than the truth. g-feta ""The integrity and credibility of Adlai Stevenson,"" he had remarked tp me on April 7, ""constitute one of our greaf&iational assets.
In preparation for the debate, Tracy Barnes and I had held a long talk with Sevenson on April 8.
But our briefing, which was probably unduly vague, left Stevenson with the impression that no~ 'actnioD~ woul'r take place during the UN discussion of the Cuban itenu Afterward , when' “la'rlan Cleveland” the Assistant Secretary for international Organization Affairs, Clayton Fritchey of the United States Mission to the UN> and I lunched with Stevenson at the Century, he made clear that he wholly disapproved of the plan, regretted that he had been given no opportunity tq&omment on it and believed that it would cause infinite trouble.
But, if it was national policy, he was prepared to make out the besg possible case.
After the Saturday air strike, Raul Roa, the Cuban foreign minister, succeeded in advancing the Quban item, scheduled for the following Monday, to an emergency session of the Uu political Committee that afternoon.
In Washington Harlan Cleveland tried to ascertain the facts about the strike.
Word promptly and definitely came back that It was the work of genuine defectors, and Cleveland passed this information on to Sfcsrvenson.
A s Stevenson spoke, someone handed him p,272 a piece of press ticker containing what appeared to be corroborative detail, and Stevenson read further parts of the CIA cover story into the record.
The 'needtoknow' standard had simply left the Bureau oi International Organization Affairs and most of the Rureau of InterAmerican Affairs {as well as Ed Murrow and the USIA) Ignorant of the operation.
Rusk himself, moreover, seems for a while to have confused the phony defector at Key ^est with the authentic defect_or at Jacksonville.
Apparently it was not till late Saturday afternoon that he understood that the Key West plane was part of the CiA plot.
Dean Rusk told a press conference later thfct morning, ""The American people are entitled to know Whether, we are intervening in Cuba or intend to do so in the future.
An angry diplomatic note came in from Khrushchev, denouncing the invasion and pledging ""all necessary assistance"" to Castro.
Dulles is a legendary figure, and it's hard to operate with legendany figures.
I must have someone there with whom I can be in complete and Intimate contact someone from whom I know I will be getting the exact pitch.
By Fiday, however, the morning papers were filled with Kh what purported to be ‘inside 1 stories about the Cuba decision.
An impulse for self-preservation was evidently tempting sane of the participants in those meetings in the Cabinet Room to put out versions of the episode ascribing the debacle to everyone but themselves.
Kennedy, having called a ten o'clock press conference, summoned Rusk, Salinger, Bundy, Sorensen, ^oodwin and myself fior breakfast in the Mansion.
The President remarked acidly that the role of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was notably neglected in several stories an omission which, by Washington exegesis, pointed to the Pentagon as the source.
Then he added, with unusual emphasis, ""There is only one person in the clear _ that's Bill Pulbright.
And he probably would have been converted if he had attended more of the meetings.
They were talking about the CIA, The President said that he could not understand how men like Dulles and Bissell, so intelligent and so experienced, could have been so wrong, but added that nothing could be done about CIA immediately.
So long as he kept Dulles there, he said, the Republicans would be disinclined to attack the administration over the Cuban failure.
U e felt that he now knew certain soft spots in his administration, especially the CIA and the Joint Chiefs.
David Orrasby ^ore told me that British intelligence estimates, which had been made available to CIA, showed that the Cuban people were still predominantly behind Castro and that there was no likelihood at this point of mass defections or insurrections.
The commission, perhaps because two of its members had been architects of the project, construed its mandate narrowly, concentrating on dissecting the military operation and on thinking up a new interdepartmental agency to coordinate future cold war ventures.
The State Department successfully opposed this idea; but the Taylor report did focus the government's attention on the problems of eopiing with guerrilla warfare and of improving the control of clandestine projects.
Too much comment on the Bay of Pigs has fallen into the fallacy of Douglas Southall Freeman, who once wrote a long chapter analysing the reasons for Lee's defeat at Gettysburg without mentioning the interesting fact that the Union was there too.
For the reality was th&t Fidel Castro turned out to be a far more formidable foe and in command of a far better organized regime than anyone had supposed.
His police eliminated any chance of sabotage or rebellion behind the lines.
He himself never panicked; and, if faults were chargeable to him, they were his overestimate of the strength of the invasion and undue caution in pressing the ground attack against the beachhead.
One reason Washington miscalculated Castro, of course, was a series of failures in our own intelligence. w e regarded him ad an hysteric.
And there were tactical errors. p .294 If there were no Intervention, then only an internal uprising could finally have overthrown Castro; and an Internal uprising/ would have required both an intact underground and a far more potent political purpose than any which animated the CIA project.
If it was to be a covert operation for which we could plausibly disclaim repponsibility, it should have been, at most, a guerrilla infiltration.
Once It grew into a conventional .295 amphibious invasion, it wa3 clearly beyond the limits of disownability.
Unless we were prepared to back it to the hilt, it should have been abandoned.
All of us, the £ resident most of all, went through this sequence of thoughts again and again in the months to come.
The President reserved his innermost thoughts and, in the end, blamed only himself. ££s But he was a human being and not totally free of resentment.
My Impression is that, among these advisers, the Joint Chiefs had disappointed him most for their cursory review of the military plans.
About Dulles and Bissell he said little^ I think he had made up his mind at once that, when things settled down, they would have to go.
He regretted this becao.se he liked them both A 1000 DAYS ADVISERS Political, Military p .296 The first lesson was never to rely on the experts.
He now knew that he would have to broaden the range of his advice, make greater use of generalists in whoffi he had personal confidence and remake every great decision in his own terms as, indeed, he had done with the other decisions of the ninety days.
He understood too that the prestige of the presidential office had been lightly regarded by men whose primary loyalty was not to him or his administration.
Thereafter he took care to make sure that the presidential interest would be represented in the large decisions.
He turned from the people he had inherited in government to the people he had brought in himself _ the people he had worked with longest, knew best and trusted most.
Neither* Robert Kennedy nor Ted Sorensen had taken part in the meetings in the Cabinet Room; both were at his right hand at every subsequent moment of crisis for the rest of his Presidency.
He charged Dick Goodwin with responsibility for the next steps in policy toward Cuba and the exiles.
He chose Maxwell Taylor as his personal adviser on military affairs until the time came when he could make him Chief of Staff.
A 1000 DAYS Kennedy Beliefs p*300 'Though Kennedy had, in the main, stayed kloof from the DAC Debates, he sas clearly aligned with the Ste venson^Harriman-, Bowles position, if more in the Harriman than in the Bowles mood* A sharp critic of the tendency to suppose that all problems had military solutions, he was a strong advocate of economic assistance to the uncommitted world.
His reactions in I960 to the shooting down of the U-2 over the Soviet Union and to the Quemoy-Matsu issue showed bis dislike for rigid interpretations of the cold war.
He did not suppose that the United States had it within its power to work overnight changed in the Soviet Union; but he did not suppose either that the Soviet Union was fixed forever in its present mold.
He therefore favored a policy of reasoned firmness accompanied by a determination to explore all possibilities of reasonable accommodations.
Khrushchev, who had given up on Elsenhower after the U-2 incident and the collapse of the Paris summit in Hay I960, seized several opportunities to semaphore his hopes for Kennedy.
World wars and local wars he/categorically rejected as leading directly or progressively to nuclear holocaust.
He defined ""national-liberation wars"" as those ""which began as uprisings of colonial peoples against their oppressors developed into guerrilla wars.
He named Cuba, Vietnam and Algeria as examples and added that the ""multiplying of 0 the forces of the national-liberation movement"" in recent years stemmed largely from the opening of the new front against American imperlalisih in Latin America.
As for ""peaceful coexistence,"" this was, ""so far as its social content is concerned, a form of intense economic, political and ideological struggle between the proletariat and the aggressive forces of imperialism in the world arena."" 3l5 Khrushchev 1 s January speech made emphatic the point often expressed by Eisenhower during his Presidency the impossibility of total nuclear war as an intrument of rational policy.
A 1000 DAYS ADVISERS McNamara | 1 31i|He had no illusions about the difficulties of his quest.
The Department had already balked, thwarted, exposed and broken a success/ion of able men imprudent enough to accept appointment as Secretary.
The Secretary also quickly achieved an effective relationship with Jerome Wiesner who had fought hard through the fif I ties to improve the state of American defense and whose work on the Gaither committee of 19^7 had prepared the ground for McNamara' s reconstruction of strategy now.
McGeorge Bundy also kept an alert eye on the evolution of defense policy; and both Bundy's and Wiesner* s hands were strengthened when Carl Kaysen, a Harvard economist who united cogency as a debater and intrepidity as an operator, joined the National Security Council staff.
McNamara, Wiesner, Bundy and I Eaysen worked well together . i f i'hey gave the ^resident confidence that he was in a position to conI trol national strategy.
Later that day, when Nixon saw the President and urged an invasion of Cuba, he also urged ""a commitment of American air power"" to Laos, According to Nixon's recollection, Kennedy re plied, M I rjust don't think we ought to get involved in Laos, particularly where we might find ourselve3 fighting millions of Chinese troops in the jungles.
In any event, I don't see how we can make any move in Laos, which is 5000 miles away, if we don't make a move in Cuba, which is only 90 miles away.
But fighting did not cease; and, according to reports reaching Washington on Wednesday, April 26, the Pathet Lau were attacking in force, as if to overrun, the country before the cease-fire could take effect.
On Thursday the National Security Counsil held a long and confused session.
Walt Rostow has told me that it was the worst White House meeting he attended in the entire Kennedy administration.
Rostow and the Laos task force, supported by Barriman who was now on a trip of inspection in Laos, still urged a limited commitment of American troops to the Mekong valley.
But the Joint Chiefs, chastened by the Bay of Pigs, declined to guarantee the success of o the military operation, even with the 60,000 men they had recommended a month before.
The participants in the meeting found it hard to make out what the Chiefs were trying to say.
Indeed, the military were so divided that Vice-President Johnson finally proposed that they put their views in writing in order to clarify their differences.
The President, it is said, later received seven diffeeent memoranda, from the four Chiefs of Staff and three service secretaries.
The military proved ono more satisfactory in explaining the pro.338 posals they were prepared to make.
The President_ was appalled at the sketchy nature of American military planning for Laos the lack of detail and the unanswered questions.
Kennedy, after interrogation, discovered that the airstrips could only be used by day and that it would take a week or so for troops to reach them overland.
He then asked what would happen if the Pathet Lao allowed the troops to land for two days and then attacked.
For all their differences, the military left a predominant impression that they did not want ground troopsat all unless they could send at least 140,000 men equipped with tactical nuclear weapons.
By now o the Pentagon was developin g what would become its standard line in Southeast Asia unrelenting opposition to limited intervention except on the impossible condition that the President agree in advance to every further step they deemed sequential, including, on occasion, nuclear bombing of Hanoi and even Peking.
At one National Security Council meeting General Lemnitzer outlined the processes by which each American action would provoke a Chinese counteraction, provoking in turn an even more drastic American response.
It soon began to look to the ^hite House as if they were taking care to build a record which would permit them to say that, whatever the President did, he acted against their advice.
This had not yet been identified as a tactic, howevet, and in April 1961 their opposition to limited intervention had a powerful effect.
He added that, if we intervened anywhere in Southeast Asia, we must be prepared to use nuclear weapons should the Chinese en ter in force.
And there always remained the difficulty of Justifying intervention against communism in Laos while rejecting it against communism in Cuba.
When I returned from my post-Bay of Pigs trip to Europe on May 3, the President said, ""if it hadn’t been for Cuba, we might be about to intervene in Laos."" ¥aving a sheaf of cables from Lemnitzer, he added, ""l might have taken this advice seriously.
He had, I believe, been prepared to undertake limited intervention in Laos before the Bay of Pigs, and he did not altogether exclude it now.
Instead, Kennedy made quiet but hard scoring military preparations, let the Russians know about them and let them mine kno'w 'at the same time that there was an~ honorable alternative to fighting.
This was a first experiment in Kennedy diplomacy under pressure, and it was marked by restraint of manner, .toughness of intention and care to leave the adversary a way of escape without loss o£~ face"" Ivhruahchev, for his part,"" found himself involved with a group of local communist militants whose actions he could not entirely control and whose allegiance he sought in the struggle for the international communist movement.
But he did not want war, and, once he believed that Kennedy would fight if pushed too far, he retreated to negotation, confident that history would eventually deliver what opposition had temporarily denied.
Ag a Senator Kennedy had repeatedly emphasized the gravity of the stakes in Berlin.
Kennedy himself, with characteristic detachment, used to wonder later what had gone wrong in the spring of 1961.
He thought at times that the March and May messages calling for an increased American defense effort might have / sounded too threatening.
It is possible that the acceleration of the Minuteman and Polaris programs had unintended effects in Moscow and that, as Kuznetsov had warned Wiesner and Rostow at the Pugwash meeting, the s oviet leaders now saw no choice but to match the American build-up.
In addition, Harriman in his March debut as roving ambassador^had said that ""all discussions in Berlin must begin from the start.
Yet at the same time the Soviet signals were not, seen from Washington, very encouraging.
Khrushchev’s truculent speech of January preceded Kennedy’s defense messages by many weeks; and his decision to move against West Berlin had ample explanation in his own problems and ambitions.
As for the President, he saw no sense in meeting Khrushchev unless something of substance was likely to result.
When the Attorney Beneral made this point to the Soviet Ambassador, he was givaa to understand that progress was entirely conceivable on Laos and on the test ban.
Beyond these specific problems, the President was attracted by the meeting as offering an opportunity to define the framework for future AmericanSoviet relations.
Kennedy saw the world as in a state of uncontrollable change, rushing in directions no one could foresee.
The equilibrium of force, he believed, was now roughly in balance between the United States and the Soviet Unicn if not in the sense of numerical parity, at least in the sense that neither could hope to destroy the other and emerge unscathed; and the overriding need, he felt, was to prevent direct confrontations between Russian and American power in the chaotic time ahead.
He intended to propose, in effect, a standstill in the cold war so that neither great nuclear state, in the inevitable competition around the planet, would find itself committed to actions which would risk its essential security, threaten the existing balance of force or endanger world peace.
De Gaulle commented that Khrushchev had been threatening action on Berlin and laying down six-month deadlines for two and a half years.
Barely if he planned to go to war over Berlin, he would have done 30 already.
He recalled his own remark to Khrushchev that, while it was too bad that Berlin was situated in the Soviet zone.
P.35I there it was, and its future could be solved only within a framework of general detente and disarmament.
The problem, Kennedy said, was whether Khrushchev really believed in the firmness of the west; even ^resident de Gaulle himself had recently questioned whether the United States was ready to defend Paris at the risk of the obliteration of ®ew York De Gaulle added that the west could not win a military victory in Berlin; Khrushchev must be made to recognize that fighting around Berlin would mean a general war.
We must make our policy clear by action, Kennedy said, and Khrushchev must understand that, if necessary, we would go to nuclear war.
He was going to Vienna, above all, he said, so that he and Khrushchev could understand each other's purposes and interests and therefore avoid the ""serious miscalculations 1 ' which had produced the earlier wars of the century.
In the last analysis, the General said, what counted for every man was himself and his own judgment.
To his mind, the question was how two great nations, with different social systems, confronting each other across the world, could avoid head-on collision in an era of great change.
The Soviet Union, he said, had tried for a long time to develop friendly relations with the United States.
But it refused to do so at the expense of other peoples because agreements of this sort would not bring peace.
America must understand that communism has won its right to grow and develop.
The premise of John Foster Dulles's policy had been the liquidation of communism; this philosophy could never lead to good relations.
He would not hope to persuade the president of the merits of communism, Khrushchev said, anymore than he expected the President to waste time trying to convert him to capitalism.
But de facto recognition of the existence of communism was indispensable.
Kennedy observed courteously that Americans were impressed by the economic achievement of the Soviet Union; it was' a source of satisfaction to the whole world.
But, as he saw the problem, it was not that the democracies were trying to eliminate communism in areas under communist control, but that the communists were trying to eliminate free systems in areas associated with the west.
It was impossible, he said, for the S ov iet Union to implant its policy in other states.
All the Soviet Union claimed was that communism would triumph; this was not propaganda but a scientific analysis of social development.
Conmiunism was superseding capitalism today as capitalism had superseded feudalism in the past.
Changes in social systems were bound to cone, but they would be brought about only by the will of the people themselves.
The Communists believed in their systems, as the President believed in his.
The Soviet desire for general and complete disarmament proved its intention not to resort to arms.
YHien communist minorities seized control against the popular will, the Chairman regarded this as historical inevitability; we did not, and this brought our two natioss into conflict, obiricn sly we mum could not avoid disagreement, but we could avoid the direct confrontation of our military forces.
Our interest here was to make _ clear why we were concerned about what the communists called inevitability.
This led Khrushchev into a sententious discourse on intellectual freedom.
The Inquisition had burned people but could not burn their ideas, and eventually the ideas prevailed.
If not , communism would win; but which would be a victory of ideas, not of arms.
T 0 this Kennedy responded that the two powers shared the obligation to conduct the competition of ideas without involving _ vital national Interests, Khrushchev said sharply that he hoped he had misunderstodd this remark.
Did he mean that communism should exist only in countries already communist and that, if it developed elsewhere, the United States would be in conflict with the Soviet Unions This view was incorrect; and, if that was really the Hay the United States thought, conflict could not be avoided.
The only rule was that they should not be propagated by arms nor by intervention in the internal affairs of other countries.
He could guarantee fehat the Soviet Union would never impose ideas by war.
Kennedy quoted Mao Emex Tse-tung’s remark that power came out of the end of the rifle.
Khrushchev blandly denied that Mao ever said this; Mao was a Marxist, and Marxists were against war.
The greatest danger was the miscalculation by one power of the interests and policy of another.
It was a vague term, he said, and it suggested to him that -America wanted the Soviet Union to sit like a schoolboy with hands on the top of the desk.
The Soviet Union held its ideas in high esteem and declined to guarantee that they would stop at the Russian frontier.
He did not understand the American theory of what Russia had to do to maintain the peace.
The Soviet Union was going to defend its vital interests, whether or not the United States regarded such acts as miscalculations; it did not want war, but it would not be intimidated either.
Of course war would be fatal; both sides would lose equally and be punished equally.
But the west should put the word ""miscalculation"" into cold storage, for it3 use did not impress the S ov i e t Union at all.
By ""miscalculation,"" Kennedy patiently explained, he meant the difficulty of predicting what any country might do next.
The United States itself had made misjudgements, as when it failed to foresee Chinese intervention in the Korean War.
The purpose of the meeting, as he saw it, was to introduce precision into each side’s assessments and thereby minimize the risks of misjudgement.
Khruschev, retreating to jolliness, commented that, if the meeting succeeded, the expenses of bringing it about would be well justified.
If it failed, not only would the money be wasted but the hopes of the people of the world would be betrayed.
The conversation had been civil but tough, Khrushchev had not given way before Kennedy’s reasonableness, nor Kennedy before Khrushchev’s intransigence.
Noticing two medals on Khrushchev’s chest, Kennedy asked what they were.
The American president observed, perhaps a trifle grimly, ""l hope you keep them.
As for miscalculation, every leader had to make judgments; he himself had miscalculated about the Bay of Rigs.
He had to estimate what the Soviet Union would do, just as Khrushchev had to estimate about the United States.
If we could only reduce the margin of uncertainty in such calculations, then our two nations might survive the period of competition without nuclear war.
It was really the United States which caused revolution by backing reactionary governments; look at Iran, look at Cuba.
Fidel Castro was not a Communist, but American policy was making him one.
Khrushchev himself had not been born a Communist; the capitalists had converted him.
Kennedy’s assumption that revolution was the consequence of intervention was dangerous.
And, after all, it was the United states which had set the precedent for intervention.
Kennedy disclaimed any brief for Batista; as for Iran, if the Shah did not improve conditions for the people, change would be inevitable.
The Castro regime was objectionable, not because it expelled American monopolies, but because it offered communism a base in the western hemisphere.
The United States did not object to the Marxist government s of Guinea or Mali.
If governments ruled in the interest of wealthy minorities, of course they were doomed; but social changes must take place peacefully and must not involve the prestige or commitments of America and Bussia or upset the balance of world power.
The P at he t Lao had certain advantages; they received supplies and manpower from ^orth Vietnam; moreover, they stood for change.
Kennedy noted that he himself had been electped President as an advocate of change.
The solution was to let a neutral and independent Laos decide its own future; and the problem was to make the ceasefire work by setting up a mechanism for its verification.
Khrushchev, displaying no great interest in Laos, preferred to revert to the question of reactionary regimes.
Our two sides differed, he said, in our understanding of what popular or anti-popular movements were.
We should both agree not to interfere and to leave it to the people of the country.
The worst thing for the United States to do, he warned, was to gH start guerrilla warfare against / regimes it did not p,36ii like; no undertaking was more hopeless than guerrilla action instigated from outside and not supported by the people.
He did not know, Khrushchev went on, whether the balance of power was exact, but no matter; each side had enough power to destroy the other.
But the United States supported colonial powers, as in Africa, and then was surprised when the people turned against it.
Kennedy pointed out that the United States had in fact backed liberation movements in Africa and hoped that the number of independent African states would increase.
Khrushchev replied with scorn that the American policy was uneven, its voice timid.
Kennedy brought up Khruschchev* s pledge to support wars of national liberation in his speech of January 6.
Was this noninterference* Obviously both nations were helping groups in other countries.
The pboblem, while we backed our respective movements, was not to clash ourselves.
The Tsars had denied the revolutionary American republic recognition fob twenty-six years as an Illegitimate regime.
The realistic policy for the United States would be to recognize China and admit it to the United Nations.
Kennedy made once again hhe point about preserving the existing balance of power.
The entry of addition al nations into the communist camp, the loss of Taiwan such developments would alter the equilibrium.
If some African country were to go communist, he said, it might add a few drops to the bucket of communist power, were the/balance of power conceived as a bucket on each side.
But it would also be an expression of the popular will; and any attempt to stop it from outside would bring about a chain reaction and possibly war.
Kennedy responded with equal force that, so far as Washington wa 3 concerned, countries with varied social systems could pursue independent policies, like India, Burma, Yugoslavia.
But changes which altered the balance df world power were different; perhaps the Russians might agree if, for example, Roland should join the west.
He felt in it time, Kennedy added, to discuss Laos and the test ban in detail.
Khrushchev affected outrage over Kennedy's reference to Poland, contending that Poland's electoral system was more democratic than that of the United States, where parties existed only to deceive the people.
As for preserving the existing balance, if this were the premise of American policy, Khrushchev said he must doubt whether the United States really wanted peaceful coexistence' or was seeking a pretext for war.
After all, he said, the United States might occupy Crimea on the claim that this improved its strategic position.
For Kennedy the status quo was the existing {emphasis mine) balance of international force.
This did not at all mean that he wanted to freeze the world in its social mold.
On the contrary, he believed internal political and institutional change to be both inevitable and desirable.
But his hope was that it would take place without transferring power from one block to the other and therefore without making either side feel threatened and constrained to resist change by force.
For Khrushchev, on the other hand, the status quo was something very different; it was in essence the communist revolution in progress across the world.
From this perspective Kennedy’s conception of a global standstill was an attempt not to support o but to alter the status quo; it was an attack on hhe revolutionary process itself.
This idea of a dynamic or potential status quo was, of course, deeply imbedded in Leninist analysis.
Reminiscing about Vienna three years later, Khrushchev complained to w illiam Benton that Kennedy had bypassed"" the real problem.
But Kennedy nevertheless felt that the offer of a standstill was worth the effort.
Though Kennedy held his own, was fighting on his opponent's familiar terrain.
He might have done better to seek the realm of concrete fact, bhe pragmatic rather than the 1 ideological debating ground, and concentrate, as he had tried increasingly°todo through the daj, o» particular situations in particular countries.
Khrushchev came to Vienna ready -to collaborate on Laos and on nothing else; for the rest, he hoped to unnerve Kennedy and force hit into concessions.
The President began by saying that, if they couldn't agree on everything, at least they might be able to agree on Laos.
Here after all was a land without strategic importance to either side but in which the United States had treaty commitments.
Khrushchev responded that the Soviet Union had no desire to assume responsibilities in remote geographical areas.
It was in Laos only at the request of s ouvanna Phouma and the legitimate government.
If the President would pardon his bluntness, Khrushchev said, this policy stemmed from delusions of grandeur, from megalomania.
America was so rich and powerful that it asserted rights for itself and denied rights to others.
The Soviet Union did not agree and would not desist from helping other peoples to win their independence.
If America really wanted to normalize the situation and avoid confrontations, it must rcsrenounce its claim to special rights.
Kennedy responded that the commitments had been made before he became President; why they were undertaken was not an issue here.
Whatever had happened in the past, the issue now was to decrease commitments on both sides and get a neutral and independent Laos.
Khrushchev doubted whether these commitments were altogether a legacy; after all, Kennedy had put the American military advisers into uniform and had ordered a landing of Marines, ^hen Kennedy said that, though there had been speculation about sending Marines, no such order had been issued, Khrushchev replied that he was referring to press reports.
The west, he added, was better than the Communists in making this kind of refined threat; and, if the United States sent in Marines, another Korea or worse would result.
As for the Soviet Union, it would guarantee to exert every effort to influence the Laotian forces to establish a pitruly neutral government.
SksxnxxtxjaKKxtiLHHXMHHXkkKxt® Add TEST BAN P-369 P-370 P.371 The next question was the teat ban.
There were two issues here Khrushchev began^ the number of suspicious events to be inspected, and the organization of the machinery of inspect, A s f or the / first, the Soviet Union considered three inspections a year sufficient; any more would constitute espionage.
As for the control mechanism, the Soviet Union had originally been ready to accept a commission chaired by a representative of the United Nations.
N 0 w, after the unneutral behavior of the UN in the Congo, this was no longer possible.
The only fair way was to establish a body made up of representatives of the three world groups the Communists, the neutrals and the western states empowered to adopt only decisions agreed upon by all.
The work of other international organizations, Khrushchev added, should be organized along similar lines.
In any case, Khrushchev continued, the test ban had little importance by itself; it must be linked with the general and complete disarmament.
If the west would accept the Soviet disarmament plan, then the S OV i e t U n ion would drop the troika and the requirement for unanimity and agree to any controls.
Kennedy asked whether Khrushchev really thought it impossible to find any person neutral between the United S tates and the Soviet o Union.
Kennedy answered that he wished it were. * * • « ■ t * « » e After this unsatisfactory discussion, they turned to Berlin.
Here Khrushchev, while still stopping short of bluster, displayed his greatest animation and intensity.
It was sixteen years after the end of the war, and there was still no peace settlement.
He wanted to reach agreement with the west on a treaty, Khrushchev said; but, if the United states refused, the Soviet Union would sign the treaty alone.
This act would end the state of war and cancel all existing com-"" mi tments, including occupation rights, administrative institutions and rights of access.
There would be no interference with its internal affairs or its communications, though agreement on access would have to be reached with the Democratic Republic.
Kennedy, thanking him for stating the case so frankly, came back with equal frankness.
This discussion, he said, raised not only legal questions but practical facts which affect American security.
They were not talking about Laos any longer; Berlin was of primary and vital concern to the United States.
We fought our way there, and our continuing presence rested on contractual rights.
If we allowed ourselves to be expelled, American pledges and commitments would ever after be regarded as scraps of paper.
He had not become President of the United States to acquiesce in the isolation of his country any more thanjfeirusbchev would acquiesce in the isolation of the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev said that he understood this to mean the United states did not want a treaty.
Misinterpreting Kennedy again, he declared that the invocation of national security could mean that Americans would wish to go on to Moscow too, since that would improve their strategic position.
Kennedy responded sharply that the -Americans did not wish to go anywhere, just to stay where they were.
No doubt the current situation in Berlin was not satisfactory; but conditions were unsatisfactory all over, and this was not the time to upset the world balance of power.
Khrushchev certainly would not accept a comparable shift in favor of the west.
An he wanted to do was to trahquilize the situation in the mofet dangerous spot in the world.
The Soviet Union wanted to perform an operation to excise this thorn, this ulcer without prejudicing interests on either side.
And thereafter any infringement of the sovereignty of East Germany would be regarded as open aggression wihh all its consequences.
Kennedy said that the United States opposed any military buildup in West Germany which might threaten the Soviet Union.
But Khrushchev's proposal would bring about a basic change in the world situation overnight.
He had not come to Vienna for this; he had come in the hope of improving relations.
The United States could not accept the abrogation by one nation of the fournation agreement.
Khrushchev waved this aside as without juridical foundation and recalled Roosevelt's remark at Yalta that American troops would leave Europe after two years.
But, if the United States tried to maintain its present position after a treaty, this would violate the sovereignty of East Germany and of the coramunifet camp as a whole.
Once the Berlin question was out of the way, the road would be clear for an improvement of relations.
In any case, the Soviet Union intended to sign the treaty by the end of 1961.
If America wanted war over Berlin, there was nothing the Soviet Union could do about it.
Maybe he should sign the treaty right away and get it over; that is what the Pentagon had wanted.
It was not quite a tirade; it was too controlled and hard and therefore the more menacing.
Kennedy replied that the United States did not wish, to precipitate a crisis.
If the United States surrendered to the Soviet demand, it would not be regarded as a serious country any longer.
After all the United States itself had signed a unilateral peace treaty with Japan.
The Soviet Union was determined to go ahead, and responsibility for subsequent violations of Bast German sovereignty would be heavy.
Kennedy replied that the United States did not wish to deprive the Soviet Union of its ties in Eastern Europe and would not submit to the loss of Its own ties in Western Europe.
Hejiad not assumed office to accept arrangements totally inimical to American interests. p .373 in’between, they had snatches, of private talk.
Khrushchev said (see that he had read Kennedy's defense message and thought that in conse385) quence the Soviet Union should perhaps increase its land forces and artillery.
Then early in July Khrushchev himself, citing Kennedy's (see call for a larger A ne rian defense effort, announced a suspension of 373) the partial demobilization of the Red and a one-third increase in Soviet military spending.
Yet, as Chip Bohlen has often said, nothing would clarify more the discussion of policy toward the Soviet Union than the elimination of the words 'hard* and 'soft* from the language.
I had to see the President shortly before luncheon about other matters.
As we finished, I handed him the memorandum, saying that he might want to look at it that afternoon on his way to Hyannis Port, where he had scheduled a meeting on Berlin the next day with Rusk, McNamara and General Taylor.
Agreeing that Acheson* s paper was far too narrowly directed to military problems, he said with emphasis that Berlin planning had to be brought back into balance.
If we sit silent, or confine ourselves to rebutting S 0 yi e t contentions , we permit Khrushchev to establish the fram^ework of .tix&MKKX discussion.
As we do this, we in effect invite him to demand from us a i definition of the guarantees we would find acceptable.
This, of course, casts the United States as rigid and unreasonable and puts us on the political defensive.
The paper indicates no relationship between the proposed military action and larger political objectives.
It defines an immediate casus belli ; but it does not state any political objective o t her than p re sent access procedures for which we are prepared to incinerate the world.
It Is essential to elaborate the cause for which we are prepared to go to nuclean war.
P.381 While we were agitating the political side, McGeorge Bundy and Kissinger were bringing the President comparable questions about the state of military planning.
McNamara had informed the White H 0 use early in May th&t existing plans in case of trouble in Berlin assumed almost immediate resort to nuclear war.
In a pre-Hyannls Port memorandum of his own, Bundy now commended on the dangerous rigidity of the strategic war plan, pointing out that it called in essence for an allout nuclear strike against the Soviet Nnion and left the President littl choice as to how he would face his moment of thermonuclear truth.
Bundy suggested thfet Kennedy remand the war plan to McNamara for review and revision.
At the Hyannis Port meeting on Jluly 8 the President made his dissatisfaction with the state of planning abundantly clear.
On the diplomatic side he decided to ask Acheson to try his hand at a ""political program for Berlin and instructed Rusk to produce a negotiat389 ing prospectus.
On the military side, he asked McNamara f or a platl which would pemmit non-nuclear resistance on a scale sufficient both to indicate our determination and to provide the communists time for second thoughts and negotiation before everything billowed up in nuclear war.
The State and Defense papers were to be delivered ±hx±eh within ten days. 16 did not, of course, prove that easy to reshape policy, but the meeting laid out the lines of battle within the -American government for the rest of the summer.
At first, Kennedy gained little ground/ When the National Security Council met on Berlin on July 13, Rusk reaffirmed the Acheson argument that we should not negotiate until the crisis became more acute.
And Acheson himself, supported by Lyndon Johnson, now argued strongly for a proclamation of national emergency.
This declaration became the symbol of the drastic reaction to the crisis, it implied an immediate expansion of the armed forces, an increase in the defense budget of perhaps $5 billion, standyby price and wage controls and new taxation.
Though the proclamation w^uld legally facilitate the calling up of reserves, its essential purpose was psychological.
Only a response of this order, Acheson argued"", could deter Khrushchev from irretrievable steps and make the American peonle understand the full gravity of the crisis.
If Khrushchev would not accept a reasonable proposal, this, in Kissinger's view, was an argument for rather than against our taking the initiative.
A n y other course wouTd see us ""jockeyed into a position of refusing diplomatic solutions,"" and, when we finally agreed to discussion, as we inevitably must, it would seem an American defeat.
Diplomacy, Kissinger concluded, was the ""necessary corollary to the build-up.
Moreover, if we declared the emergency now, we used up a measure which would be more effective if taken as a response to clear-cut Soviet provocation.
It would also, Sorensen feared, arouse those at home and abroad who are fearful of 'rash' and 'triggerhappy* actions by the United States.
Only ""fools,"" Kennedy said, could cling to the idea of victory in a nuclear war.
But he still hoped to arrive at a point where both the Soviet Union and the United States would accept the premise that $ the only alternatives were authentic negotiation or mutual annihilation.
He did not wish to drive the crisis beyond the point of no return; and therefore, while reiterating our refusal to retreat, he rejected the program of national mobilization and sought the beginnings of careful negotiation.
Ted Sorensen now prepared a draft for a Berlin speech along these lines, and Kennedy began to work it over.
Then on the night of July 25 television cables were installed in the presidential office, and the president made his report to the people.
But, if our military posture had to be defensive, ""our diplomatic posture need not be. . . . lie do not intend to leave it to others to choose and monopolize the forum and the frsmfework of discussion.
We o were determined to search for peace ""in formal or informal meetings.
But for some reason the press, playing up hhe military points and almost ignoring the passages about negotiation, made it appear a triumph for the hard line.
He happened at the moment to $ be at Sochi conferring with John J MeCloy about disarmament.
On the day before the speech, he was in a jolly mood, comparing the exchange of diplomatic notes to kicking a football back and forth and adding that hhis would probably continue until a treaty was signed and the Soviet Union kicked a different kind of ball.
The next day he told MeCloy emotionally that the United States had declared preliminary war on the Soviet Union.
This confirmed,Kfarushchev said, the thesis of his January speech that the capitalist world had lost confidence in its xfe capacity to triumph by peaceful means.
The President, he added, seemed a reasonable young man, filled with energy and doubtless wishing to display that energy; but, if war occurred, he would be the last president.
Howevsjp, Khrushchev concluded, he still believed in the ^resident's good sense.
After thunderstorms, people cooled off, thought problems over and resumed human shape.
The storms were apparently not quite over when Khrushchev replied in a televised broadcast on August 7Though his tone was considerably higher-pitched than Kennedy's, the two speeches none the less bore curious resemblances of the sort which led the President later to invoke the mirror metaphor in discussing S ov 3_ e t pronouncements.
Kennedy, having launched his military build-up, now tried to set his diplomatic offensive in motion.
He had been pressing the State Department to prepare negotiating positions ever since the Hyannis port meeting, but it was uphill work.
This was in part because of the very genuine intellectual difficulty of devising a proposal.
Now Acheson himself, in response to the President’s request, made his own recommendations.
He suggested that the western foreign ministers be called together at the end of August to concert a stand.
As for the content of our negotiating position, Acheson offered in effect a dressed-up version of the status quo.
Acheson' s ideas were more helpful with regard to procedure than to substance.
He had disapproved of the conciliatory passages in the President's speeches, and some of his characteristically slashing comments had got back to Kennedy, who regretted them, not because they were critical, but because he did not feel, any more than he had after the Bay of Pigs, that those involved in decisions should make their criticisms public.
Bundy, McNamara and Maxwell Taylor all thought that the meeting of western foreign ministers should take place as soon as possible; and Kennedy agreed.
Early in August, Rusk went to Paris to work out a negotiating strategy with his three western counterparts.
The hope was to find enough agreement to justify inviting the Soviet Union to a four-power conference.
But the Americans still had no solid position to propose, and the French remained flatly hostile to the whole P* 39U idea.
De Gaulle soon wrote to Kennedy that the / opening of negotiations would be considered immediately as a prelude to the abandonment, at least gradually, of Berlin and as a sort of notice of our surrender.
One wonders whether, if it had produced an invitation to Moscow to discuss the crisis, the Russians would have dared carry through the drastic action they were preparing for the next weekend.
The Wall For the Berlin crisis was having its most spectacular effect in Bast Germanv itself.
The Beg refugee exodus was growing every day; over thirty” thousand fled to West Berlin in July alone.
Toward the end of the month the Bast German regime imposed new measures intended to restrict the flight, but the effect was only to increase it.
Ln Washington a few people began to speculate about further communist countermeasures.
In a television interview ofl July 30 Senator Fulbright remarked, ""I don't understand why the Bast Germans' don 1 1 close their ' b or deiHce cause I think t hey have a right"" to close"" it, 11 Early in August the RreaTd'ent , strolling with ""alt Hostow along""t""he colonnade by the Rose Garden, observed that Khrushchev would have to do something internally to re-establish control over the situation and that, if he did, we would not be able to do a thing about it.
Eastern E u rope was a vital interest for Khrushchev, and he p could not stand by and let it trickle away.
But it wasnot a vital interest for the United States. 1 can get the alliance to move if he tries to do anything about West Berlin but not if he just does something about East Berlin.
East German troops and police occupied most of the crossing-points on the East Berlin side of the dividing line, tore up the streets and installed roadblocks and barbed-wire barricades.
Despite the presidential and/other anticipations, the action caught the State Department and the CIA by surprise; evidently the test-of-will thesis had diverted attention too long from the local problems of East Germany.
For contrary to the later Impression that on August 13 the East Germans built overnight a great wall, which the allies, if they had had any guts, should have promptly bulldozed down a number of crossing-points remained open, the construction of a concrete wall did not begin until August 17, and movement between the sectors continued for several days after that.
For all Washington could tell on the thirteenth, the intention might have been to control rather than to end the refugee flow; and this hardly was a reason for invading the eastern sector and thereby inviting retaliation and risking war.
Xet the possibility remained that the intention might be far more sinister 1 that the Wall might represent the unfolding of an unalterable Soviet plan, based on a conviction of American irresolution, to drive the west out of Berlin.
Kennedy, remarking that there was one chance out of five of a nuclear exchange, instantly mobilized the resources of government.
Rejecting some countermeasures, like cutting off interzonal trade, as too drastic and others, like changing the system of interzonal passes, as too trivial, it reached the somewhat impotent conclusion that accelerating the military build-up in the United States was the most effective response.
But it took four days four interminable days so far as west Berlin was concerned before the protest was delivered in Moscow.
The apparent American impassivity not unnaturally alarmed the West Berliners; and on August 16 Mayor l ' d illy Brandt wrote Kennedy condemning the feeble western reaction and proposing a series of more stringent responses.
He_did not, however, suggest anything like the dispatch of troops into East Berlin to dismantle the barriers.
Nonetheless, Brandt's letter, reinforced by cables from our Minister in Berlin, made it clear that some American reaction more specific than the general military build-up was necessary to sustain the morale of / West Berlin.
Kennedy therefore decided to send Vice-President Johnson to carry his answer to Brandt and at the same time to signify to the Russians that Berlin was an ultimate American commitment.
I P.398 3 mine Underlining mine The Wall remained, a shabby obscenity straggling across the face of the city.
In retrospect it seems to have been a defensive rather than an aggressive action.
It represented a solution, at considerable political cost, of the problem which, more perhaps than anything else, had led Khrushchev to reppen the Berlin question earlier in the year.
By stanching the blood-flow from Bast Germany, the Wall secured the most immediate B 0V iet interest in Berlin.
Kennedy’ 3 determination to rebuild the military power of the west had shown Khrushchev that he could not obtain his maximum objectives by bluff.
Now the ""'■'•all, by achieving his minimum objective, released him from the necessity of forcing the issue to a showdown.
The Crisis Fades Aaay This was not, however, fully perceived at the time.
It is hard now to recall the forebodings of the late summer of 1961, to evoke again the pessimism that shrouded the government.
George Kennan came back from Belgrade for a few days early in August. ”l am expendable, I have no further official career, and I am goigg to do everything I can to prevent a war,” he said to me one afternoon with great earnestness.
We both known how tenuous a relation there is between a man’s intentions and the consequences of his acts.
There is no presumption more terrifying than that of those who would blow up the world on the basis of their personal judgment of a transient situation.
I do not ""propose to let the future of mankind be settled, or ended, by a gropp of men operating on the basis of limited perspectives and short-run calculations.
When Rusk commented to the President on September 5 that Mosc ow was showing little in t""e re s't' In^^£ 0 ^Tag[o^~ge^eH^re 2 TIec[ grimly,"" it Isn ’ t t imeyetf.
Given this apparent Soviet desperation , the w hite House group regarded it as more urgent 'than e ve r to sp""ee~d The military build-up and at the same time to exhaust every diplomatic recourse before Armageddon.
On August lip, the day after the first crossing-points were closed, Bundy reported to the ^resident unanimity in his immediate staff for the view that we should take a clear initiative for negotiation within the next week or ten days.
The possibility of a revolt in East Germany constituted a further argument for seizing the initiative.
The State Department, he added, was more cautious about American action, preferring to keep things within the four-power process.
Bundy, doubting whether new ideas would come out of the four-power discussions and noting that we were making very slow headway toward a clear position, suggested that a public deadline might be the only way to galvanize the lumbering machinery into action.
Someone in Clay's headquarters had sent him an emotional draft filled with denunciations of communist perfidy and promises of Atn er i can deliverance.
There was no point, he said, in kidding anybody, no point in exciting emotions beyond the possibility of satisfaction.
In early 1962 each side tabled its P r °P 03al3 ^ a succession of Rusk-Gromyko talks.
It seemed probable that Khrushchev did not want the gap bridged the s ”r. of 1961 ttat he o™ 1 * “»* wpSFtto ss within the existing equilibrium of military force.
Selfjustification; assumes as fact what isn*t -mfe, negotiations not important; Khrushchev wanted "" Communist” Berlin* rather than end of problem it made for him, and ®f for,t: fco justify later missile crisis as outgrowth of Berlin crisis. s A 1000 DAYS ADVISERS [|06 The frustrations of the summer over Berlin brought the Bresident's discontent with his Department of State to a climax.
One muddle after another the Department's acquiescence in the Bay of Pigs, the fecklessness of its recommendations after the disaster, the ordeal of trying to change its attitude toward Laos, the maddening delay over the answer to Khrushchev's aide-memoire and the banality of the result, the apparent impossibility ""of developing a negotiation position for Berlin left Kennedy with little doubt that the State Departemtn was not yet an instrumentality fully and promptly responsive to presidential purpose.
II Bureaucratization was only part of the explanation for State's malaise when Kennedy came to office.
The other part was the shock of McCarthy or rather the shock of the readiness of Dulles, as Secretary of State, to yield up Foreign Service officers to Mccarthyism.
The Dulles period was a time of distress and humiliation for the professionals.
These years saw the expulsion of experienced and independent-minded diplomats, like John Davies, ^r., and the exile of others, like Charles B 0 hlen.
Circumspection had always eased the path to advancement in the Service; now it became a requirement for survival.
The McCarthy era, by demonstrating the peril of dangerous thoughts, elevated conformism into a conditioned reflex.
Career men stopped telling Washington what they really thought and consecrated themselves to the cliches of the cold war.
Some did this more skillfully than others, and the result, as Davies wrote later, was that ""many cautious mediocrities rose to the top of the B e p V i C e,"" along with those most uncritically committed to the coldwar view of the world.
No one was more annoyed by this fidelity to the past, or more poignant in expressing his annoyance, than Galbraith.
In Western Europe after the Bay of Pigs one ambassadpr after another asked me in varying tones of perplexity and aguish what in hell had happened.
On my return I called for the cable files and found that Washington had confined itself to sending / around bland official 1 explanations 1 couched in language suitable for public release.
Even though the Attorney General interested himself in the problem, we were never able to persuade State to level with its own embassies on this matter.
Galbraith, after receiving a similarly useless 'explanation* of policy, sent a crisp cable to the Department suggesting that in the future the confidential communications of the State Department not be used for purposes of ""internal bemusement.
The Bay of figs provided Kennedy the warning and confirmed his temperamental instinct to reach deep inside State, defense and the CIA in order to catch hold of policies before o these policies made his choices for him.
Cuba and Laos had already provided the new administration with horrible examples of the readiness of CIA operatives in the field to go off on policies of their own.
This was only the most spectacular expression of the steady growth of the CIA in the 1950s.
In some areas the CIA had outstripped the State Department in the quality of its personnel, partly because it paid higher salaries and partly because Allen Dulles's de finance of McCarthy enabled it to attract and hold abler men.
It had almost as many people under official cover overseas as State; in a number of embassies CIA officers outnumbered those from State in the political sections.
Often the CIA station chief had been in the country longer than the ambassador, had more money at his disposal and exerted more influence, ^he CIA had its own political desks and military staffs; it had in effect its own foreign service, its own air force, evep, on occasion, its own combat forces.
Moreover, the CIA declined to clear its clandestine intelligence operations either with the State Department in Washington or with the ambassador in the field; and, while covert political operations were cleared with State, this was sometimes done, not at the start, but after the operation had almost reached the point beyond which It could not easily be recalled.
The coincidence that one Dulles brother was head of State and another the head of the CIA had resulted in practical independence for the Agency, because Allen Dulles could clear things with Foster without clearing them with Foster' Department.
The lucky success in Guatemala, Moreover, stirred dangerous P.428 longs for adventure in CIA breasts.
None of this is to suggest that the CIA constituted, in the title of a popular expose, an ""invisible government'' or that its influence was al_ways, or often, reactionary and sinister.
In my experience its leadership was politically enlightened and sophisticated.
H 0 t seldom CIA representatives took a more liberal line in White House meetings than their counterparts from State.
A great deal of CIA energy went to the support of the anti-Communist left around the world political parties, trade unions and other undertakings, None the less, it had acquired a power which, however beneficial its exercise often might be, blocked state Department control over the conduct of foreign affairs.
The Agency itself suffered from doubt and gloom after Cuba, and it was feared that drastic measures would cause total demoralization.
It was revised and approved by the Advisory Committee on Science and Technology and adopted by the DAC, with Kennedy's specific endorsement, on December 5, 1959.
As for America, in spite of Harold Stassen's valiant efforts during his time as disarmament negotiator, our policy remained formalistic, like the B ov i s t»s dedicated to developing positions, not for negotiation, but for propaganda.
After all, the United States had nominally accepted ""general and complete dis armament "" in the 1959 UN resolution, even if our actual proposals before and after had suggested that we were interested only in partial measures and unwilling to go the distance.
Your first decision, Mr President must be to make sure that you yourself are genuinely for general and’ complete disarmament.
Only total disarmament will save the world from the horror of nuclear war as well as from the mounting expenses of the arras race.
Your basic decision must be to identify yourself with a new approach to disarmament.
Strategy for the General Assembly Kennedy listened with interest but also with a slight tinge of skepticism.
With his profoundly realistic mind, he saw little present chance of significant progress and therefore looked to disarmament primarily as a measure of political warfare , feeling ’at the same time that, if the political warfare were to fee effective, our plan, unlike its predecessors in the fifties, must offer an honest basis for negotiation.
Now he said that he well understood the ""propaganda"" importance of the disarmament drive.
This casual remark stung Stevenson; he seemed seized for an instant as if by an anguished feeling that Kennedy did not really care about disarmament at all.
While Cleveland and I, both anxious to keep our principals together, watched a little helplessly, Stevenson returned to the attack, telling the President in effect that he just had to have faith.
For a moment, cTeveland argued that the resumption itself should be brought before the Security Council, but McCloy and Arthur Dean opposed this on the ground that we would gain nothing and might restrict our own freedom of action.
It would look hypocritical for us to take the question to the Security Council if we have already decided to resume testing.
This decision, of course, was based on a belief in the reality of world opinion.
On September the day he ordered the resumption of our own underground tests, he called in Rusk, Stesrenson, Cleveland, Bundy, Sorensen and me to consider what he might say.
For a while we discussed Berlin, the President rattling off a series of ideas which might eonsititute part of o a negotiating position.
Stevenson then urged that he hold a special press conference to emphasise his interest in Berlin negotiations and at the same time unveil the new Ameriaan disarmament plan; he feared that the S ov iet Union might respond to the Kennedy-Mac^illan note on an atmospheric test ban by talking ones more about general and complete disarmament and thereby scooping our own disarmament initiative. in a moment he expressed his personal regret at the day's decision to resume testing.
The Russians made two tests after our note calling for a ban on atmospheric testing.
He has had a succession of apparent victories space, Cuba, the thirteenth of A ugu st (the Berlin Wall) , though I don't myself regard this as a Soviet victory.
I'm not saying that it was the right decision^ Who the hell knows-1 But it is the decision which has been taken.
Note that here again Schlesinger ignores Kennedy's mobilization of the National Guard.
Kennedy; Berlin; Rational Guard; mobilization; Reserves; or Army, Militarv.
In a journalist, such omissions would be inexcusable. in .^ historian, they can be only a deception and a misrepresentation, deliberate and in full awareness of its significance.
It really doesn't make any | sense the idea that Taiwan represents China, But, if we lost this fight, if Red China comes into the UK during our first year in town, your first year and mine, they’ll run us both out.
It will be an election j year; but we can delay the admission of Red China till after the election.
S 0 far as this year is concerned, you must do (( everything you can to keep them out.
I am going to send a new letter to Chiang Kai-shek, based on what is good for us, not what is good for Formosa.
We’ll get Cabot Lodge to talk to Luce A dlai, you talk to I Roy Howard I will talk to Waiter Judd.
T 0 install a triumvirate, he said, would be to "" entrench the ^o'lWar in the headmine quarters of peace.
Yor ""a nuclear disaster, spread by wind and water and fear, could well ""engulf the great and the small, the rich and the poor, the committed jj and the uncommitted alike.
A 1000 DAYS Advisers Schlesinger | P . ii Over the next week we began work on the President's UN speech.
But others ofous | questioned whether this was really a contradiction, for obviously disarmament negotiatio ns would be predicated on the resolution of the I Berlin crisis.
When wa met. to consider it at the State Department, Secretary KcNsmara, wh6 had Obviously not examined it with care before the meeting, quickly ponfeived its imperfections and abandoned it as a basis for argument.
One defense official made an impassioned case for the resumption of atmospheric testing In order to prevent the world from believing that the Communists were gaining so commanding a lead that there was no point in resisting them further.
McGeorge Bundy replied that he was against tests for the sake of psychological warfare and insisted on the principle that we never test in the atmosphere unless required by military necessity to do so.
Dong hours of debate in the National Security Council and in the privacy of the ^resident's office, involving scientists from Defense, Aec and various bomb laboratories, led the President to the conclusion that Wiesner was essentially right.
Yet one began to notice an unconscious hardening through the government, as if a final decision had been made.
When I later described the meeting to Kennedy, he said, ""Personally I hate the idea of resuming atmospheric tests.
But it's going to be damned hard to stave off the pressure, especially when the news gets out that the big Soviet explosion was relatively clean.
It was evident that the current series would not by itself enable Khrushchev to reverse the balance of nuclear power.
But if the Russians, on the basis of 0 the knowledge so acquired, were to conduct a new series while the United States refrained from atmospheric testing, the next one might well put them in the lead.
We could, in other words, ""eat 1 ' one s oviet round but not two; and without the treaty we had no assurance that, having completed one sequence, Soviet scientists and generals would not demand another and another.
However much Kennedy loathed the idea of atmospheric tests, any president who stood aside and allowed the enemy to achieve nuclear superiority would plainly have taken an unacceptable risk in the face of his constitutional obligations.
This, I believe, was the president's state of mind when, after several weeks of racking contemplation, he discussed the problem with Harold Macmillan in Bermuda on December 21.
If these horrible weapons were not fired off, it would be a hopeless economic waste; if they were, it would, be k90 the end of civilization.
And, while the United States and / the Soviet Union were having this sophisticated competition, many other nations in a few years would begin to acquire their own simpler bombs.
Berlin, Macmillan said, seemed to him small beer compared to the destruction of humanity.
You and I, he said to Kennedy with emotion, could not sit in an ordinary little room four days before Christmas and talk about these terrible things without doing domething about it.
Perhaps you and I, he told Kennedy, should meet at the summit with Khrushchev and really push for disarmament. w e might fail, but we would have lost only a few months.
Macmillan added that, after reading Russian novels and everything else he could find about Russia, he felt that they might come around.
The Russians were halfway between Europe and Asia and watching the rise of China with foreboding.
The west thought of them as enormously different, but their economic and social structure was not that alien.
After all, mines and railroads were nationalized through most of Western Muroppe, and one saw already in Russia a spread of unequal privileges through society, the children of the ruling class were going to elite schools, as o they did in Britain.
Without yielding, could we not provide time to allow the forces o of humanity to exert their influence Macmillan was eloquent, and Kennedy was moved.
The problem, 'he pointed out, was what would happen in 1961]. if the Russians continued to test and the west didn't.
Even though he was himself a ""great anti-tester , 1 he saw no alternative but to prepare for resumption and, if there was no progress with regard either to Berlin or disarmament, to resume. ii .91 When the talks resumed, the Prime Minister began by asking that the final decision be postponed to permit one last try at disarmament.
Kennedy replied that a new effort would only enable the Russians to stall things for many more months.
Our case would be no better a year from now, and in the meantime the Russians could get ready for a new series of tests.
He concluded later in the day by asking whether Macmillan would agree to atmospheric tests on Christmas Island if the situation did not change.
Macmillan responded that this was a decision for the cabinet; but Britain and A me rica were partners, we were in this together; he only wished that the announcement would seem less a threat than a hope.
In a deeply personal letter to Kennedy, the Prime Minister argued again that resumption would probably lead the Russians to carry out their next^ series; we would be forced to do the same; the contest would intensify; and, as the burden of the race mounted, one side or the other, when it thought it had attained superiority, might be tempted to put the issue to the test.
As the test programs of o the great powers continued, he went on, there would be no hone of preventing the spread of nuclear we aeons to non-nuclear states.
If this capacity for destruction ended up in the hands of dictators, reactionaries, revolutionaries, madmen around the world, then sooner or later, possibly by the end of 0 this P.493 century, either by error or folly or insanity, the great crime would be committed.
It would seem to any ordinary person, MacMillan continued that humanity was setting out on a path at once so fantastic and so ret’ rograde, so spphisticated and so barbarous, as to be almost incredible.
He nimseli noted the strange irony that he should have spent Christmas ^ay_ wondering how to commend to his cabinet colleagues the dedication of Christmas island for this purpose. it might be, he concluded, that we were condemned, like the heroes of the old Greek tragedies, to an ineluctable fate from which there was no escape; and that like those doomed figures we must endure it, with only the consolation of the admonitory commentaries of the chorus the forerunners of the columnists of to-day.
But in his view the situation demanded a supreme effort to break the deadlock.
Amplifying the thoughts he had avanced in Bermuda, he proposed that the three leaders Kennedv Khrushchev and himself — convert the impending eighteen— power disarmament meeting, scheduled for Geneva in March, into a final try for freneral disarmament, a test ban treaty and an agreement not to transfer nuclear weapons or information to non-nuclear powers.
But, on the whole, it was not o the things one did in one's life that one regretted but rather the opportunities mmssed, J-he Macmillan letter contained certain ambiguities.
It did not make clear, for example, wnether the use of Christmas Island was conditioned on our agreement to a disarmament conference at the summit, or whether the resumption of American atmospheric testing was conditioned on the conference's failure.
It did make clear, however and in moving and powerful language both the extent of Macmillan's anxiety and the magnitude of the decision which confronted us.
As Adlai Stevenson promptly wrote the president, ''It would be unfortunate and could be tragic if we were to give the Brim© Minister a dusty answer."" , But ths_State D epar t ment was considerably less moved.
On January B undy and I went over to Busk's office to examine State ' s cdraft reply.
It was an evasive, bureaucratic screed, falling so far below Macmillan in styjle and tone as to be unresponsive.
What an attitude toward the major ally* ) Rusk, however, agreed that the answer should not be perfunctory.
Hn the meantime, a debate arising from the President's State of the Union message had redirected attention to the idea of a test ban confined to the atmosphere.
At Kennedy's instruction, the early drafts promised one last try for such a ban before we resumed testing above ground ourselves.
But this thought had aroused such distress^in both State and Defense that the president eventually reduced It to agenerality about breaking the log jam on disarmament and nuclear tests.
V i a l ■ Underlining •mine -'I ■■■.. | pJ-l-95 mins 1 | Under| lining | mine probably work to our advantage, whether accepted or refused by the Soviet Union, unless the Russians accepted the ban for two or three years and then found a pretest to break it.
If they tood advantage of the ban to prepare secretly for new tests, we might lose nearly a year in the technology race.
To guard against this, McNaughton therefore proposed a number of political and legal devices to help make the ban stock.
In the White House Carl Kaysen after a careful analysis concluded that an atmospheric ban would not pose unacceptable military risks and might well lead to new and striking gains in arms control.
This debate was not simply a disagreement between virtuous antitesters and wicked big-bomb men.
A wholjry intelligent case for atmospheric resumption existed, and Robert Komer of the tJ hifce House made it in comments on the Kaysen-Schle singer position.
If this were so, then they would not appreciate the value of stable deterrence until they grasped the futility of the arms race.
So long as our Dolicy encouraged Moscow to think it might possibly overtake us in nuclear power, the Russians would have less incentive to consider other ways of insuring their security.
There might be no_ other way to drive home to Moscow the strat egic realities of o the nuclear age . moreover, incessant American con-~ ' cern about nuclear weapons might signal to the Russians a reluctance to use them and thereby, in a time of crisis over Berlin and southeast Asia, compromise our nuclear deterrent before we had fully developed adequate defenses of other sorts.
In the course of February Kennedy received an analysis of the s oviet tests by a panel of leading scientists, including so prominent an advocate of the tan as Hans Bethe, Their report disclosed a highly advanced nuclear technology, with new designs and techniques, including some unknown to the west""or at least unexplainable on the basis of the information available as well as substantial gains in weaponry.
The technical basis had evidently Deen 'laid for a new series which might enable the Soviet Union to develop bombs whose yield pef we&ght of explosive would be somewhat higher than ours, while this wouild not give any substantial military advantage to the °oviet Union, the knowledge that the Russians had better weapons would have given them a political and diplomatic advantage the president was disinclined to accept.
With a heavy heart, he decided that we would have to resume atmospheric testing.
As for the tests themselves, he made it clear he wanted low-yield detonations concentrated in short periods.
In the next months, he spent a goad deal of time reviewing and revising the proposals for the American atmospheric series. lj-96 The next question was when the world should be notified.
Kennedy at first thought, and Macmillan concurred, that announcement should be J until after the eighteen— nation Disarmament had met in Geneva; this would, mean sometime in April.
Note also how careful ^chlesinger is to avoid showing that from the USSR point of view they at least could consider they were pushed to. do. this, especially because, as he is also careful to not even indicate, the United States had done considerably more testing which gave it a scientific if not a military advantage.
At faxha the same time, the ^resident wanted to rescue Macmillan' s osuggestion for a new disarmament initiative.
Opposition had arisen to the proposal that we make one more offer of an atmospheric test ban before resuming our own tests, partly because it would seem a retreat from our original Geneva position and partly because it provided no insurance against secret preparations and thus against another surprise Soviet series.
The President therefore decided to declare his readiness to trade off our atmospheric series, not for a partial, but for a comprehensive test ban treaty.
Late in February I lunched in London with Hugh Gaitskell, who had just come back from a visit to Washington filled with enthusiasm for Kennedy.
The President had provided him with a full technical briefing on the testing matter something which the British government had curiously never given him p and Gaitskell agreed that the United States had no choice but to go ahead.
Kennedy later told me that Gaitskell's argument for relating resumption to the Geneva disarmament talks had strengthened his determination to try once more for the Geneva treaty, but that it had also convinced him, contrary to Gaitskell's recommendation, that he should not allow the Disarmament Committee to begin its work under the illusion that the United States was not yet settled in its own mind about the need for testing.
The _ prime Minister had still hoped somehow to stafe o ff Ame ric an resumpt ion, Ij Underana Kennedy's mess age came as a shock.
In particular, it would once aga__in offer a comprehensive test ban treaty.
That action, he added, would be 'a monumental step toward peace and both prime Minister Macmillan and I would think it fitting to meet Chairman Khrushchev at Geneva to sign the final treaty.
Note; Combination of propaganda, for it would not be a proposal as acceptable to much of the rest of the world as that of the USSR for complete disarmament, and ultimatum, which no government of a major power could accept with confidence in its survival.
Cn April 25, as dawn broke over Christmas Island, the United States began a new round of tests in the atmosphere.
Disarmament and the Defense Budget The rogue elephant was loose again, and neither Kennedy nor Macmillan was content to let him rampage unchecked.
Note that the quote from Khrushchev is dated by nothing but a ""then"", referring to an unidentified time during the 3-4 year period.
For their part, they put forward a plan demanding abolition in the first sisia&E stage of all means of deg livering nuclear weaoons, as well as of all foreign bases. ^ hi s would mean the immediate unbalancing of the existing equilibrium in favor of I conventional force and could hardly be acceptable to the west, -n adI dition, the Russians continued to oppose any serious verification of i 0.498 anything except weapons destroyed until / the end ci the third stage.
Nor I W as the 'overkill* idea the notion that each side was compulsively j, engaged in piling up more and more nuclear bombs justified, at least I Underin its more nightmarish form.
Actually e ach side (outside the ai r I scoring forced) was coming to realize that; it nad more tK an anougn. and a gnu I added deal of the"" new expenditure mbe went, not to increase stockpiles, but I f 0 r replacement, modernization of weapons systems, research into new weaoons and the maintenance of 0 a higher state of alert.
Nor was Loru Snow*s sensational fantasy of I960 ""Within, at the most, ten years, some of these bombs are going off"" necessarily acquiring more validity each passing minute; for the vast effort, in the United States at leasi., to improve fail-safe controls was reducing the probability of the Dr.
I \ >:-99 mine mine In short, if there was an arms race, neither side was galloping as fast or as frantically as it could.
The experience of thespring and summer of 19 6l, moreover, had convinced him"" that running fas ter i n the race would only provoke his opponent to run faster too and thereby increase the stMn without necessarily altering the gap” He had seen no alternative to higher defense spending in order to liberate American strategy from its predominant reliance on nuclear weapons; but the rise in ""'ashington* s defense budget had now produced a comparable rise in Moscow's.
Fo r it was evident^ that the budget was the most effective means of signaling t o the Soviet Union our intentions, wh etHer""He~f e ns Iv'e' or i'irst'-stri k~“ as'~wbTl as the kinds or weapons ^ang ^ s trat eg i e s wb.i chT mi g h t ""be"" iSut u all y ~ acl v a nt a g e ou s ana the kind s or liiiii t t ion that ""might be mutually possible.
And compare the following sentence with the preceding paragraphs which makes clear the USSR would certainly do something about any United States missile increase.
After cutting down the original Ai r Force missile demands considerably, he perhaps felt that he could not do more without risking public conflict with the Joint ■i Chiefs and the vociferous B_70 lobby in Congress.
As a result, the ^resident went along with the policy of multiplying Polaris and Minutej man missiles./ ¥ithin the magnitudes of the budget the ^resident, of course, retained a series of choices about weapons systems.
This > counterforce ' strategy required us to have the capacity to hold in reserve, even after a massive surprise attack, sufficient striking power to destroy the enemy society if driven to it; this I would given an opponent ""the strongest imaginable incentive to refrain from striking our own cities.
At the same time McNamara reorganized | the control . system so that, instead of investing all striking power in a single presidential push button, the command structure could retain afte I attack the ability to respond in a number of ways besides blowing uo the world, 2/ 1/ Imagine this. :Je don't need those missiles, we know the USSR will do something in return, tripling our striking power would not endanger theirs, and because the B ecre tary of Defense can't cope with his'nnx ■j subordinates and lobbyists, the entire world is to be jeopardized.
Yet it was the USSR that lacked/"" intellectual comprehension ,'j of the meaning of nuclear plenty"", they had a ""cultural lag"", and they did not understand ""the strategic realities of the nuclear age”, i Zj Does this not osay what yhe United States has always denied, that the president does not have either exclusive control or even last say, and that the j ""command structure"" can act a&one, as it alone desires ,, |501 'j'he counterforce' doctr ine had its ambiguities.
These ambiguiti es were"" partly inherent “in the rudimentary state of strategic doct rine^ — — — * I should never be forgotten that the relatively recent development of"" £ fr. e Intercontinental ballistic missile had revolut i o nlze d the problem of that the rethinking*^” 'strategy' in terms"" of the ICBM had been o-oinp on only for five years i n the United States and hardly at all in the rg_st_ o f the world , fc hat ' pre vl ous"" ""military experience h_ ing oo he lp this analysis and that thinking about the unthinkable was painful anyway.
Everything existed in the shadow world of pure theory; nor could the electronic computers of the systems analysts program the political realities weighing"" on the policy makers.
Moreover, deterrence was in the end not a mathematical but a psychological problem.
An this made strategic analysis far less exact than the pseudoprecision of its terminology suggested, and it permitted a variety of interpretations of diverse strategic postures.
But no one who listened tc the anguished musings of Kennedy and McNamara on nuclear weapons could doubt their unalterable opposition to preventive or pre-emptive"" nuclear war.
All underp-503 scoring mine P.50U Kennedy faced no harder problem of public education than that of convincing both Capitol Hill and the Kremlin that his demands for strength and for disarmament , far from being contradictory, were complementary.
Kennedy, Sc hie singer or both here are indulging in pure fiction, blended with either propaganda, ( self-deception or both.
Just a few pages earlier Bchlesinger says, and quotes the white House as knowing, that we ”pro yoked TT the USSR into increasing its aims budget when it did.
Once, at a meeting of the Committee of Principals, someone from A CD A objected to a proposed arms control measure on the ground that it might Imperil the nation.
McNamara said sharply, n tlf I'm not afraid of it, I don*t see why you should be* You take care of disarmament.
Bet me worry about the national security of the United States."" ^illiam Foster, while sensitive to congressional reactions, proved a calm director of ACDA, and in Adrian Fisher he had a stalwart and effective deputy.
Ampng the civilians concerned, the Secretary of State proved the main source of indifference.
This came partly, i think, from his concern about the Bonn government, which disliked disarmament since it did not want a reduction of east -west tension until the problem of German unification was solved; partly because he anticipated 1 that disarmament would cause trouble on the Hillj and partly because of his chronically cautious cast of mind.
Presiding over the Committee of Principals, he often gave the impression that he regarded oisarma— £ ment as an essay in futility, if not in folly.
One participant in the meetings later reported his impression that Rusk ""feared living in a i> world in which predominant military power was not his major tool.
UnderCertai nly the disarmament talks forced Esmas the u ussianp_tc> linging think about the intricate problems of nuclear survival, to examine I mine their own st rategicP"" limitations and~ capabilities, and to ponder the £ riddle of the nuclear equilibrium.
Even though so little appeared to be accomplished at the time in the antiseptic i conference rooms beside the quiet lake at Geneva, ohs disarmament negotiations turned out in the end to be a good deal more than exercises in political warfare or theological disputation.
Policy * State p*506 The tendency in the years after the Second L ^orld War had been to see the planet as tidily polarised between America and Russia.
In the 1950s John Foster Dulles had transmuted this from an assumption into a dogma.
But, like a missionary, expected the primitive peoples to accept the true faith, only instead of gathering them down by the river for a mass baptism he tried to herd them into the military pacts he scattered across the face of Asia.
The resolution declared that ""all peoples have the right of self-determination, n that ""inadequacy of political, economic, social or educational preparedness should never serve as a pretext for delaying independence"" and that ""immediate steps shall be taken’ 1 in all nonself-governing territories “to transfer all powers to the peoples of those Territories, without any condition s or reservations, in accordance with their freely expressed will,"" tfb.il e the language of the resolution was sweeping.
Its practical implications, as the debate made clear, were limited. it was less a plea for immediate action than for an affirmation of purpose, and it had actually been worked out by the American delegation with ^£roAsian repI i resentatives in order to head off a more demagogic Soviet proposal.
Our delegation even had the concurrence of the ‘>tate Department in Washington in its desire to vote for the resolution.
Eut the British were opposed, and Harold Macmillan called Eisenhower by transactlantic I ^ telephone to request American abstention.
When an instruction to ab~ |Sll stain arrived from the '%ite House, / James J Wadsworth, then our am$ bassador to the Ujr, tried to reach Eisenhower to argue the case.
Wadsworth loyally defended the American abstention in the General Assembly; but, when the resolution passed by 89-0, eight other nations joining the United States in ab| staining, an American Negro delegate actually stood up and led the applause.
Senator Wayne Morse, another delegate, later condemned the United States decision and declared that ""on every major issue of colonialism at the l5th General Assembly, our voting record shows that we | rejected our own history, and allowed the Communist bloc to champion the cause of those millions of people who are trying to gain indepdn;j dence.
This was typical of o the sense of relief, curiosity and hope Kennedy's accession to office stiired in neutral capitals.
The Russians insisted that the Pathet Lao be seated on a basis of equality with the representatives of Prince Souvanna Fhouma, the neutralist, and General Phoumi, the protege of the Eisenhower administration, and the British were ready to go along.
Eventually _ the three faction factions met in Laos and agreed on triple representation.
The Geneva meeting recessed while Kennedy and Khrushchev met in Vienna.
He added thfat military alliances with inefficient and unpopular _ govern ments involved grave dangers, especially that of converting legitimate anti— government sentiment into anti-American and proSoviet sentiment.
In a similar spirit of devotion to the past, the Department refused to let Harrlman talk even informally with the Chinese delegates at the Geneva conference.
At the end of July Galbraith wrote me from Geneba, where he had made a brief trip to bring himself _ abreast of the negotiations.
Harriman's belief th&t S 0U rvanna was the only possible head of a coalition displeased the diehards in Washington.
In February 1962 Averell got Washington to suspend the monthly’ grant of $3 milluon which enabled the Phoumi regime to meet its military and. civilian payrolls, and in harch he went to Laos «o tell Phoumi personally that he must accept the ^cuvanna solution.
Phoumi was still unyielding until A pril, when the Thai government, which had hitherto backed him, accepted the Harriman logic and urged him to join a government under Souvanna.
Here is an example of a reputable, a world-famous historian and presidential advisor, displaying his intellectual integrity and devotion to truth and fact.
On May 6, with North Vietnamese support, they seized the town of Nam Tha, where Pb.oumi had imprudently deployed a substantial force, The engagement was, as usual,"" almost bloodless.
The Boyal Laotian Army fled, and the communists appeared to be starting a drive toward the ^hia border.
This flagrant violation of the cease-fire brought a prompt reaction in Washington.
Harriman now proposed that a contingent of Marines be sent to Thailand.
Kennedy was at first reluctant, fearing that once the Marines were installed in Thailand it would be difficult to find an occasion to withdraw them, but decided to go ahead.
Clearly, in Mr Schlesinger' s history, there was no provocation for this ""flagrant violation of the ceasefire"" and it was, naturally, by the side he didn't like.
But others, without Mr Schlesinger ' s political complications, have also written hhis history.
T hat spring Phoumi began a large-scale reinforcement of Nam Tha, an outpost deep in Pathet Lao territory, twenty miles from the Chinese border.
Ambassador Brown warned him personally that the reinforcement was provocative and that the royal troops were so badly deployed that they would be an easy mark for the pathet Lao.
In May, Brown's admonition proved accurate. he Communists retaliated against the build-up, smashed into Nam Tha and sent Phoumi* s troops in wild retreat.
Two of his front-line generals commandeered the only two jeeps in the area and fled into Thailand.
According to Mr Schlesinger, General Phoumi was ""the protege of the -Eisenhower administration , indicating he was the protege of no one with the end of that administration, % or under the Kennedy administration.
But, according to "" If he Invisible Government "" , Phourtii was ""CIA-backed"", continuing under Kennedy, and further, ""Kennedy promised Phoumi substantial new supnort if his troops would show some de terrain at icn to fight.
The ""contingent of Marines"", as noted, 5,000, and Kennedy's fear of ever getting them out again does not mean these were the only United States forces in Thailand, for that bastion of freedom was headquarters of Mr Dulles 1 SEAT0 organization, under a military dictator 1 , Sarit Thanarat, whose personal corruption was spectacular, even for the Orient, and it was a United States base.
Mr Schlesinger neglected to note that this ""contingent"" was a reinforcement versus 1800 Pathet Laos.
He also""f orgot"" that the Thai dictator ""was a close friend of fhoumi"" and hsmxMk dependent upon^the United States for diplomatic, financial and military support.
At Phoumi* s request Thanarat imposed a blockade of oil and rice calculated to depose Souvanna Phouma, who then warned the western ambassadors he was at the end of his rope.
Hr. ^chlesinger' s is a highly selective history, probably not typical of Harvard.
In Washington Harriman called in the Laotian -Ambassador and said that, if the coalition were not immediately completed, it would be the end of Phoumi. when this word reached Vientiane, Phoumi, whose power had vanished with his army, capitulated, on June 12 a coalition government was formed with S D urvanna as prime minister and Phoumi and Prince Souphanouvong of the pathet Eao as vice premiers.
For a moment South Vietnam threatened to walk out of the Geneva conference.
When Michael Forrestal, who covered Southeast Asia for the Bundy staff, eeported this from Geneva, the President sent a strong letter to Diem saying that this was a decision involving American lives, it was the best possible solution andit would be in the interests of South Vietnam.
Schlesinger' s memory or notes fail him, for he has failed to note whose ""man"" Nhu Diem, who tried to wreck the accord, was.
He was Washington's, from the time Mr Dulles moved him from the Karyknoll I-Ionastaey in the United States and installed him in Saigon, where Diem was a faithful implementer of Sr.
Nor does he record Washington's singular lack of warmth in support of Souvanna P houraa.
But by now, with the clear inability of Phoumi Nosovan to take over, the only other choice was the Pathet Lao leader or, from Washington »s interests and intents, there was no other choice.
The settlement did not 'work* in the sense that the signatories observed the Geneva deelaaation.
Coalition might have had a chance at the time of the Vientiane Agreement of 1957; but the Eisenhower administrfetion had killed the idea then and again in I960.
In 1962 coalition labored under terrific disadvantages which had not existed five years earlier the Pathet Lao army, no longef an ill-squipped rabble of 1800 men, now had 20,000 soldiers armed with S oV iet weapons; Pathet Lao ministers now controlled not just Economic Planning but Information, Transport and Public Works; and there was a Soviet Embassy in Vientiane.
Mr ^chlesinger notes the cabinet posts held by the ^athet Lao but not by Washington's Nosovan, an odd omission considering the importance of the ministries of Interior, which controlled the police, and War or Defense, which, of ( course, controlled the Armed forces.
He has noted tcie new strength of the Pathet Lao (without Indicating this was the knowledge of the Us government in I96I rather than at the 1965 time of the book, and he has implied that, despite this increase of more than a thousand percent in its manpower and vast improvement in its equipment, it was fear of Us troops in Thailand rather than a desire for settlement and peace that ""forced"" it into an accord.
But this oversight is no greater than forgetting to record the earlier theft of an ""electicn"" from Souvanna phouma by the then US-supported forces.
In addition, Hanoi was now deeply committed to the policy of supplying the Viet Cong rebels in South Vietnam through^ the Laos corridor.
The Pathet Lao representatives soon withdrew from Vientiane and resumed their effort to take over the country by force; the International Control Commission failed to close the corridor to s outh Vietnam or otherwise assure neutralization; and Laos fell into a state of de facto partition.
Had he, with his longer view of history and more civilized concept of politics, been in their place, Mr Schlesinger would perhaps have found a more satisfactory way of coping with the assassination of their ministers by Phoumi Kosovan' s Armed Forces who, fearing their own skill, had physically prevented any assistance from reaching the victims and had even, by force, kept the head of the government, Souvanna Phouma, out until they were certain the ministers had bled to death.
But Mr Schlesinger did, nonetheless, expect the Soviet Union to ""secure compliance by the Communist States,"" whose lack of compliance^or its significance he finds unworthy of exposition.
Considering the nature of the United States compliance, this is perhaps fortuitous.
But for^ouvanna Phouma the choice was simple to join forces with the pathet Lao or with phoumi Nosovan who controlled most of Phouma' s army.
It thereupon, in 1965, developed that Phoumi, whose major distinction as a general was a marked unwillingness to fight and whose secondary attribute was an incapacity to do so, no longer served any purpose for the United States and he did, in fact, flee to sanctuary in Thailand.
Yet, despite the systematic violation of the Geneva Agreement, the new policy brought clear gains.
The Kennedy strategy ended the alliance between the neutralists and the Pathet Lao.
Souvanna, Kong Le and other neutralist leaders became, as Winthrop Brown and Harriman had foreseen, the defenders of Laotian independence no longer againstthe United states but now against communism.
The result was to localize the crisis, stop an imminent communist take-over, place the Patnet Lao in the role of breakers of the peace, block the woufc hward expansion of China and win the American position international support.
By 196j>» ■5l8 General Phoumi, after the / failure of his last intrigue, had fled the country; William Sullivan was now A me rican Ambassador in Vientiane; and Souvanna phouma was receiving active American assistance in Laos and stoutly supporting American policy in ^outfr Vietnam* The result ez pressed Kennedy 1 s ability to see the world in terms more complex and realistic than total victory or total defeat.
Laos was neither won nor lost, but it was removed from the area of great -power confrontation, The Laos experiment illustrated both the advantages and problems of neutrality.
By the end of 1965* it was no longer true that Laos had been ""removed from the area of greatpower confrontation 11 * And to say that in 11 stoutly supporting American policy in South Vietnam 11 Souvanna phouma illustrated ""neutrality 11 is to redefine the word.
Moreover, he hdd no doubt about the value to the United states of neutralist support in the various disputes with the Soviet Union. -his led to considerable White House interest in a meeting of unaligned nations, stalled by Nehru, Tito, Nasser and Sukarno for^Belgrade in early September 1961, George McGeen, as head ofoths State Department’s Policy Planning Council, responded to our concern.
But elsewhere in State there was the usual indifference, if not opposition, to the whole idea of taking special trouble with the third world.
A few days before the conference opened, I learned that the Department was about to inform Belgrade no message would be forthcoming.
With the * resident's approval, I succeeded in stopping the cable and _ asked Alexis Johnson at State to call a meeting to reconsider the deqzsion.
The meeting later in the day was almas t a travesty of those B'oggy Bottom seances which haunt one's memory.
The men from the Depart ment arrived with a whole series of feeble reasons for doing nothing/ Ag Tom Sorensen of TTSIB and I knocked one down', they clutched for an.519 other, until, as S ore nsen said later, he / was sure' that someone would argue that the cable would cost 512, 20 and the Department couldn't afford it.
Finally Carl Rowan, who was then Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Aff a i rs and plainly unsympathetic with his colleagues, scribbled an excellent draft on a yellow pad.
At the end of ofche day, Alexis Johnson called to say that he was prepared to back the message if we Would agree on a few changes.
Host were trivial and unobjectionable, but, when he suggested that a passing presidential expression of good wishes be deleted, this seemed to carry aaution to the point of inanity.
Johnson, who was good-natured about these matters/ consented not to press for this final excision, and the message went out.
It was probably worth the effort at least Hamilton p ish Armstrong, the sagacious editor of Foreign Affairs , who covered the Belgrade meeting, told us later that it had been a success and its omission would have been'a serious error.
But when the talk turned to Vietnam during luncheon, he fell into remote silence.
They all went back to W ashing ton in the afternoon for a state dinner in the evening.
It was the first big affair of the autumn, and the staff had forgotten to open the flue in the fireplace on the first floor.
My wife and I were among the party of about twenty-five, too many for the family dining room on the second floor but a little too few for the state dining room.
During dinner Nehru.' s daughter, Indira Gandhi, assailed the President about American policy, praised Krishna Kenon, the professional anti-American of New Delhi, and otherwise elevated the mood of the evening.
In conversation he"" displayed interest and vivacity only with Jacqueline.
The private meetings between the President and the Prime Minister were no better.
Nehru was terribly passive, and at times Kennedy was hard put to keep the conversation going.
The President talked a good deal more about Vietnam, but the Prime Minister remained unresponsive.
Kennedy, instead of indulging in statesmanlike banalities about American hopes for peace, answered frankly that his visitor did not know the half of it, that the pressures were indeed enormous; he named particular Congressmen, generals and industries.
It was, the President said later, like trying to grap something in your hand, only to have it turn out to be just fog.
This commitment, undertaken without White House consultation, tied our hands at the United Nations.
The State Departnraiht, over Stevenson's protest, insisted that he cut out the allusions In his speech to Portuguese colonialism, and this made the speech when delivered at the Security Council seem all the more unfeeling to the Indians.
He began with a pleasing picture of Krishna Me non, ""so well known in these halls for his advice on peace and his tireless enjoinders to everyone else to seek the way of compromise,"" standing on the border of Goa rallying his troops at zero hour.
Indeed, Stevenson himself in a few days began to feel he might have gone a little far.
Diem Most intractable of all was the problem of Vietnam, in the end this was to consume more of the President's attention and concern than anything else in Asia.
The American commitment to the Saigon government was now of nearly seven years' standing.
After the Geneve Agreements of 1954 had split Vietnam along the ifth parallel.
T he"" ' c omfa'i tn e n t to Lout h Vietnam"", -like the parallel attempt/ to make the languid country of Laos a badion of western power, f ollowed directly from the Dulles conception of tKeVworld as irrevocably"""" split Into two unified and hostile blocs.
In such a world, the threat of _ communism was indivisible and the obligation to oppose that threat unlimited.
So you have a beginning of a disintegration that would have the most profound/influences.
A more discriminating view might have Regarded Ho Chi Hinh, the boss of North Vietnam, less as the obedient servant of a homogeneous Sino-Soviet bloc than as a leader of nationalist communism, historically mistrustful of the Chinese and eager to preserve his own freedom of action.
It might have taken a more relaxed attitude toward the evolution of Vietnam; and it might have decided to draw the American line ^ on the Siamese side of the Mekong River, where both the political and military foundations for an American position were a good deal stronger.
Dulles's anticolonial mood, moreover, required it to be in the main an American commitment, lest our effort in South Vietnam be tainted by suspicions of European imperialism.
It cannot be said that Diem had altogether kept his side of the bargain, especially in the performance of ""needed reforms,"" nor can it be said that the Eisenhower administration brought this omission very urgently to his attention.
Diem, a profound traditionalist, ran a family despotism in the oriental manner.
He held power in his own hands, regarded opposition as treason, showed disdain for the shallow institutions of western democracy and aimed to restore the ancient Annamese morality.
They accompanied this by a ""systematic | barrage of self-serving reports all too reminiscent of the French | military a few years before about the commendable efficiency of this amy and its capacity to control any situation.
After a stop in Taiwan, where he was pleasantly surprised to find Chians Kai-shek and Madame Chians talking about social progress like old Hew Dealers, he went on to Saigon.
There, in the interests of reassurance, he somewhat imprudently hailed Djem as the Win ston Churchill of South Asia.
P.Sli-2 .... ""our mission arrested the decline of confidence,"" he reported to Kennedy on his return.
Time was running out, and ""the basic decision in Southeast Asia,"" he told Kennedy,""is here.
We must decide whether to help these countries to the best of our ability or throwjfi in the towel in the area and pull back our defenses to San Francisco and a 'Portress America' concept.
More important, we would say to the world in this case that we don't live up to our treaties and don't stand by our friends.
Diem in particular viewed the Americans wL th a mandarin's disdain and increasingly Kiixresponded to their advice by the simple but powerful device of doing all the talking himself, what perhaps began ; as a tactic soon became a disease.
By 1961 Diem’s compulsive talking was becoming legendary; survivors would vie with each other in accounts of conversations lasting six or seven or twelve hours and would exchange dodges intended to help trapped victims extricate themselves from the presidential flow.
Diem seemed unwilling or unable to undertake, for example, the i programs of rural reform designed to close the gap between the president's palace in Saigon and the people in the villages.
Most likely the whole conception of seeking 'popular support* seemed to him one of those western delusions with no relevance to life in Asia.
Instead, there seemed a strong case for trying the Johnson approach and making an increased effort to stabilize the situation in South Vietnam.
Their collective answer to Kennedy's question was that South Vietnam had enough vitality to justi^ a major United States effort.
To halt the decline, they recommended increased American intervention in effect, a shift from arm's-length advice to limited partnership.
While only the Vietnamese could finally beat the V iet Cong, Americans at alplevels, Taylor and Rostow argued, could show tHem™h'6V 'the job was go be"" done.
In addition to a variety of recommendations designed to get the Vietnamese Amy to take the offensive, Taylor proposed that American troops perform certain tasks, like airlift and air reconnaissance, which the Vietnamese were not prepared to undertake; be even envisaged sending an American military task force perhaps 10,000 men capable of conducting combat operations for self-defense and perimeter security and, if the Vietnamese Army were hard pressed, of providing an emergency reserve.
They therefore raised the question of how long Saigon and the United States could be expected to play by the existing ground rules, which permitted North Vietnam to train and supply guerrillas from across the border and denied South Vietnam the right to strike back at the source of aggression.
Rostow argued so forcibly for a contingency policy of retaliation against the north/ graduated to p*f2|7 match the intensity of Hanoi's support of the / Viet Gong, that ""Rostow Plan 6 T1 became jocularly established in the contingency planning somewhere after 3EAT0 Plan 5* The TaySbor-Rostow report was a careful and thoughtful document, and the ^resident read It with interest.
He was impressed by its description of the situation as serious but not hopeless and attracted by the idea of stiffening the ^iem regime though an infuslcn of American advisers.
He did not, however, like the proposal of a direct American military commitment, ""They want a force of American troops,"" he told me early in November.
But it will be just like Berlin, The troops will march in; the bands will play; the crowds will cheer; and in four days everyone will have forgotten.
The war in Vietnam, he added could be won only so long as it was thei r war.
Both saw Diem as the key to success, and both were convinced that attempts to bring pressure on him would be self-defeating.
The appeal to the peasants was concentrated in the so-called strategic hamlet program, launched by the regime in April.
This idea, adapted from the British experience in fighting the guerrillas in Malaya, called for the relocation of peasants into fortified villages, surrounded by barbed wire fences and ditches filled with bamboo spikes.
The theory was that the hamlets would give the peasants protection and a sense of security, control the movement of people and supplies through the countryside and cut the Viet Cong off from their primary sources of food, intelligence and recruits. tillage defense units would arise to fight the enemy.
Sach hamlet would, elect its political representatives by secret ballot.
And each hamlet would eventually become the unit for education, medical care and the distribution of pigs, fertilizer and low-interest agricultural loans.
Ngo Dinh Nhu made the strategic hamlet program his personal project and published glowing reports of spectacular success, claiming 7 million people in 7000 hamlets by the middle of 1963. 0np6iight have wondered whether Nhu was ljust the man to mobilize the idealism of the villages; but K 0 iting an<3 Harkins listened uncritically to his reports and passed them back to Washington, where they were read with elation.
In military matters the enlargement of the American presence appeared to have even more encouraging effects.
The advisers flocked in with the weapons of modern war, from typewriters to helicopters.
They worked with local 'counterparts’ in all sections of the government in Saigon.
Maxwel l / Taylor, when he returned for a fresh look afkax a year after his first visit, thought he detected ""a great national movement"" rising to destroy the Viet C 0 ng. one could doubt a wide sp r e a'd"" anbT substantial improvement in the military situation. in Washington, the President, who had other matters on his mind, accepted the cheerful reports from men in whom he had great confidence.
And what credentials this backgfoung gave the respected advisors for their subsequent roles, here not indicated.
As one crisis after another flared up in the months to come he used to say that, if we didn't have the UN operation, the' only way to block Soviet domination of the C ongo Would be to ±Q „ ifch 0 £ p J own forces. ■‘■he UN could not bring the great powers together in the Congo, but at least it could keep them apart.
He often envied the communist capacity to mobilize popular idealism, especially of ° the young.
The pluralist world, indeed, was inherent in the standstill thesis he had set forth to Khrushchev in Vienna a thesis which implied that nations should be free to seek their own roads to salvation without upsetting the balance between the super powers. ... 6l7 There wece indeed grounds for optimism in the spring of 1962, Not only was the ccmmunist empire itself faced by incipient crack-up, but . the Russians had receded from Berlin and Laos, had made a botch of things in Africa o and had their troubles at home.
In the meantime, we had enormously strengthened our military position, we were making substantial progress in the third world, we were watching Western Europe grow ifevery month in strength and vitality and we hopefully discerned a new spirit in our own society.
In the twentieth century the ostensible issue is capitalism vs. the proletariat.
The central issues of our time, Kennedy said in New Haven, ""relate not to basic clashes of philosophy or ideology but to ways and means of reaching common goals,"" As every past generation had to dis~ enthrall itself from an inheritance of truism and stereotype, 11 so in our own time we must move on frmi the reassuring repetition of stale phrases to a new, difficult, but essential confrontation with reality. ,T For the great enemy of the truth is very often not the lie deliberate, contrived and dishonest -■ but the myth, persistent, persuasive and unrealistic.
He recruited tils senatorial staff, for example _ Sorensen, Feldman, O'Brien, Dungan, Goodwin as knowledgeable men on national problems; be never had a foreign policy specialist in his Senate office.
But, though he was well aware of the problem within the executive domain, I do not think he had entirely appreciated its mag. nitude.
The textbooks had talked of three coordinate branches of government; the executive, the legislative, hhe Judiciary.
And, in pursuing his purpose^, the President was likely to encounter almost as much resistance from the executive bramch as from the others.
By 1961 the tension between the permanent government and the presidential government was deep in our sys tem.
This problem had assumed its contemporary dimensions after Franklin Roosevelt and the enlargement of government under the New ueal.
He had therefore bypassed the traditional structure, resorting instead to the device of the emergency agency, set up outside the civil service and staffed from top to bottom by men who believed in New Deal policies.
But Roosevelt left his successors a much bigger government, and in due course the iron law of organization began to transform what had served as brilliant expedients for him into dead weights for them.
In the thirties conservatives had bemoaned the expansion of the federal government as a threat to freedom.
Instead they should have hailed the bureaucracy as a bulwark against change.
It began to exude"" the feeling /hat ^residents could come and"" ^residents go but.
The perment government was, as such, politically neutral; its ""essential commitment was to doing things as they had been done before.
This frustrated the enthusiasts who came to Washington with ^isenhower in 19f>3 zealous to dismantle the New Deal, and it frustrated the enthusiasts who came to Washington with Kennedy in 1961 zealous to get the country moving again.
It became in certain ways more powerful than ever* The reason for this was that, one risk having failed, all risks were regarded with suspicion; and, since the permanent government almost never wished to take risks (except for the CIA, where risks were the entrenched routine), this strengthened those who wanted to keep things as they were as against those who wanted to change things.
The permanent government included men and women of marked devotion, quality and imagination* Kennedy knew this, seized many occa^ slons to say so publicly and gave John Macy, the chairman of the Civil Service Commission, every support in improving the morale of the career I 1 | i ■i I683 1 s services.
Yet, though a valuable reservoir of intelligence and experience as well as a valuable guarantee against preisdential government’s going off tbs tracks, the permanent government remained in bulk a force against innovation with an inexhaustible capacity to dilute, delay and obstruct presidential purpose.
The fighters _ one sawthis happen to Ki chard Goodwin when he went over to the State Department were gradually weakened, cut off, surrounded and shot down, as if from ambush, by the bureaucracy and its antiNew Frontier allies in Congress and the press.
At the start we had all felt free to 'meddle' when we thought that we had a good idea or someone else a poor one.
But, as the ice be&nn to form again over the government, free-wheeling became increasingly difficult and dangerous.
Wherever we have gone wrong from Cuba to fiscal policy has been because we have not had sufficient confidence in the New Frontier approach to impose it on the government.
Every importantmistake has been the consequence of excessive deference to the permanent government.
The problem of moving forward seemed in great part the problem of making the permanent government responsive to the policies of the presidential government.
Above all* he loved pungent expression s , Early one Sunday in December 1962 he Moke me to read aloud two sentences from a Khrushchev speech in th^tiorning newspapers.
But, so long as the Secretaries of State and Defense endorsed the policy of unconditional support of Diem, it was hard for the f resident to act until some dreadful blow-up made the failure of the policy manifest _ and by that time it might"" be too late.
Kennedy feared overexciting people about public issues, as be came to believe thiit bis call for an air-raid shelter program had doneduring the Berlin crisis of 1961; and he was embarrassed on the rare occasions when he sueeumbed to public emotion himself, as he did when the Cuban Brigade, freed from Castro's prisons, presented its flag to him at Miami in December 1962.
Critics began to question the verities again, and defenders of the status quo no longer had the tie art , or nerve, to call them communists.
Both identil fied themselves a bit self-righteously with ‘peace' as if everyone who disagreed with them wanted to blow pip the world.
And for both the proper United States policy was unilateral disarmament and neutralism.
Schlesinger has his own strange concept of and definition of the ""left"", as he calls them, and he selects a few hardly typical and hardly ""left"" strawmen from whose writings, whether or not out of context, he selects a few samples, presented as typical^/, for debunking.
In the subsection entitled ""Kennedy and the Left, 11 by redefining the left to include a few liberals and no Communists, with fine disregard for reality, Schlesinger pretends that there was violent opposition to everything Kennedy did and stood for by what he called the left"", in relating Kennedy's opposition from the other side, Schlesinger, by definition, restricts it.
Dishonestly but necessarily, he had to restrict the opposition from the right to the radical right because xfx&tes many of the right on many issues collaborated with Kennedy and approved of many of his policies.
The spread of extremism on the left during Kennedy's administration is a figment of Schlesinger ' s imagination (i and, with equal disregard for fact, he attributes Kennedy's concern to his sense of the latent streak of violence under the survace of American life.
Picture of negotiation with the John Birch Society He portrays Earry Goldwater qs the most moderate or the most left of the right in these words, ""The spectrum of the right ran all the way from the amiability of Barry ^oldwater to the lunacy of the outher fringe.
During this time the daily conduct of ^atin American affairs remained in the hands of the permanent / govern| meat blase officials in the State Department and the aid agency who believed that they alone understood the Latinos and dismissed the I Alliance for Progress as a slogan left over from the presidential cam| paign.
St’ ""the"" VncT ""of this section, to illustrate the attitude of the State Department personnel, Schlesinger tells of ""the contrast | between two memoranda"" from State to the ''hite Rouse on the same | day.
IP anyone had doubted this proposition, it received full verification in the tribulations of the Dominican Republic.
Since 1930 Rafael Trujillo had operated a cruel and efficient dictatorship on the eastern half of the lovely but tragic” ~olcl Spanish island of Hispaniola.
The presence of young Trujillo remained troubling, however; anonls control of the army presumably limited our capacity to do anything about him.
Toward the end of August the State Department proposed that we try to induce the array, Balaguer, Rarafis Trujillo and the moderate opposition to stick together in order to lay the foundations for movement toward i| self-government.
Finally Morales-Carrion, j evidently distressed over this part of the discussion, spoke up with sober eloquence.
They are the counterparts of the people who made democracy effective in Puerto Rico and Venezuela.
Mow the lid is off, political life has revived and it is not always under control.
The R resident listened with a mixture of sympathy and doubt, i Finally he said, ""Yes, yes, but the whole key in all those country s is the / emergence of a leadei’ a liberal figure who can command popular support as against the military and who will carry out social and ) economic reform a Nehru or a Hunos.
The great danger / in the next six mor± hs Is a take-over by the army, which could lead straight to Castro.
This is the situation we have to deal with now th/at is why we must get a ■ modus vivendl among all the forces prepared to commit themselves to democracy, instead of letting them tear themselves apart and let in the far right or the far left.
The other side was his absolute determination to prevent any new state from going down the Oastro road and so giving the b 0V iet oHnion a second bridgehead in the hemisphere.
F.774 British Guiana had a population af about 600,000, almost evenly divided between the Hegroes of the towns and the A a st Indians of the countryside.
The people enjoyed a considerable measure of selfgovernment and, if things went according to schedule, were due for full independenise±Etxara in another year or two.
An election in September 1961 brought the Indian party, the people 1 3 Progressive Tarty, and its leader Or.
Kis wife, an American girl whom he had met while studying dentistry in Chicago, had once been a member of the Young Communist league.
His party lived by the cliches of fen impassioned, quasi-Marxist, anti-colonialist socialism. lagan was plainly the mnst popular leader in British Guiana.
Though they had earlier imprisoned him moreothan once, they now claimed it was possible to work with him and that he was more responsible than his rival, the Negro leader Forbes Burnham.
Their view, as communicated at the highest level, was that if Jagan* s party were the choice of the people, London and Washington should do their best to keep him on the side of the west by cooperating fully with him and giving his regime economic support.
Otherwise he would turn to the communist bloc, which would only guarantee Soviet influence in an independent British Guiana.
This was the situation when J agan, after his election, expressed a desire to come to 'Washington and talk about assistance for his development program.
At thfet point the State department saw no real alternative to the British policy.
The aid budget made tentative provision for assistance in the magnitude of &5 million.
He made his American debut, like so many other visiting statesmen, on Meet the Press, where he resolutely declined to say anything critical of the Soviet Union*and left an"" 'impression of either wooliness or fellow-traveling.
This appearance instantly diminished the enthusiasm for helping his government.
The President, who caught the last half of the show, called for a re-examination of all aspects of 0 the problem, saying he wanted no commitments made until he had seen Jagan himself.
He turned J out to be a personable and fluent Hast Indian but endowed, it seemed to those of us present, with an unconquerable romanticism or naivete.
He began by outlining the economic cii 1 cumsiances' bif British Guiima” and his own development plans, when he explained that, as a socialist, he felt that only state planning could break the bottlenecks, Kennedy said, ""I want to make one thing perfectly clear.
Vie are not engaged in a crusade to force private enterprise on parts of the world where it is not relevant.
Recalling Jagan*a words of admiration for Harold L&feki on Meet the Press, Kennedy observed thfet he himself had studied for a term under Laski at the London School of Bionomics and that his older brother had visited the Soviet Union with him, Jagan replied that the first book of Laski 1 s he had read was The ^kaeri can Presidency ; he considered himself, he added, a Bavanite, Vie all"" re”sp""oncreS"" agreeably to this, citing Ecvan 1 s faith in personal freedom and recalling his belief that the struggle of the future would b© between democratic socialism and communism.
Jagan, after avowing his commitment to parliamentary government, went on to say that he also admired the Monthly Review and the rather procommunist writings of Paul s weezy, Len’lTuliVrman and Paul Baran, George Ball and I pressed him on this point, declaring there was a large difference between Sevan and the &weezy group.
Well, Be vanism, Sweesyism, Hubermanism, Baranism I really don't get those ideological subtleties/' Kennedy observed later that this was the one time when his exposition rang false.
On p/r/'6//P6W the tricky language and the undignified third degree to which the head of a new stste was subjected.
For the rest Jagan spoke as a nationalist committed to parliamentary methods.
When Kennedy asked how he conceived his relations with the communist bloc^, Jagan inquired whether the United States would_jre gard a trade agreement with the Soviet Union as an unfriendly act, Kennedy responded that a simple trading relationship was one thing; a relationship which brought a country into a condition of economic dependence was another.
There were special problems here because Jagan was requesting #40 million a figure all out of proportion to the size of his country, especially in relation to the competing needs of Batin American nations with much larger populations and closer bonds to the United States.
Kennedy wholly ag reed with the staff 1 s recommendation i that he not receive Jagan a second time but instructed me to see him myself in view of the great British concern that Jagan not return disgruntled to British Duiana; perhaps a statement could be worked out which would give Jagan something to take home and satisfy the' British without committing us to immediate action.
Sitting down at his desk, he dashed off a longhand letter to Jagan, explaining that I came with his confidence, and asked Evelyn Lincoln to type it.
When he looked at it again, he decided that it was a little cold, said told me to ""as warm it up"" and signed the warmed-up letter.
Parliamentary democracy is going to be damn difficult in a country at this stage of xits development.
He was in a desperate mood at the thought of going hone emptyhanded but brightened at the prospect of a statement.
Jagan made the commitment to democracy (as why should he not?), as Schlesinger has already said (p.4J he ""was plainly the most popular leader"" in the country, it is clear Schlesinger and his cronies (in oppositi® to the position of the s tate Department, which to Schlesinger is reactionary) had no intention of going through the the United States end.
AID was fearful From""' tlie ""start that assistance to British Uuiar.a would cause, congressional criticism and injure the whole aid program.
The President, after meeting Jagan, had grown increasingly skeptical, but he was impressed by the British contention that there was no alternative.
Here it is clear that the United States forced the British government into a change of policy and into an antidemocratic one.
The end of the first paragraph is a brilliant display of Schlesinger at his dishonest best.
Although the CIAAFL operation is public knowledge and was well publicized in -Europe (recently in Washington Post as part of Jay Lovestone's work), had Schlesinger known all this, if, in fact, he did not have something to do with it, he doesn't mention it, preferring instead to blame it on the victim.
So far as the crack about Jagan's ""forgetting his _ objection t® imperialism"" is concerned, this is the most vicious kind of dishonesty.
British Guiana was still a British colony and it had, and in fact had been allowed, no array.
What else was the prime minister to do except ask Britain for help to put down the CIAAPLinspired and financed race riots] Thus far our policy had been based on the assumption that Forbes Burnham was, as the British described him, an opportunist, racist i and demagogue intent only on personal power.
Cne wondered about this, though, because the APL-CIO people in British Guiana thought well of him; and Hugh Gaitskell told me that Burnham had impressed him more than Jagan when the two visited Labour party leaders in London.
He appeared an intelligent, self-possessed, reasonable man, insisting quite firmly on his ^socialism* and ’neutralism 1 but stoutly anticommunist.
H e also seemed well awage that British Guiana had no future at all unless its political leaders ""tried to temper "" the racial animosit ies and Sinless fie in parTioular gave his party, now pred'ominatly African, a biracial flavor, in the meantime, events had convinced us that Jagan, though perhaps not a disciplined communist, had that kind of deep procommunist emotion which only sustained experience with communism* could cure; and the United states could not afford the Sekou Toure therapy when it involved a quasicommunist regime on the mainland of Batin America.
An obvious solution Cfould be to establish a system of proportional representation.
This, after prolonged discussion, the British government finally did in October 1963; and elections held finally at the end of 1961.
With much unhappiness and turbulence, British Guiana seemed to have passed safely out of the communist orbit.
Coming atop the Dominican Republic, where Kennedy said he'd stick with Trujillo's people rather than run the risk of what he thought might be something like Castroism from an election is another example of the same.
Both, it otiould be noted, preceded the introczuction of missiles into ^uba and even the appeal to the USSR for help.
They certainly were both^pufclic and known to Khrushchev when he made his de-' cision.
Re doesn't even say that a single election was held, referring instead to what was the result of one of the elections, a control of the parliament on a U2.7^ of the vote, a rather good performance under the parliamentary system.
Better than any in Fnance,for example, for a number of decades until de Gaulle.
And it is a much healthier parliamentary majority than Harold Ui 1 son had in Britain at the time of publication of Schlesinger' book.
The central threat remained pudel Castro, whose broadcasters were now inveighing daily and agents conspiring nightly against the democratic regimes of E a tin America.
There were twelve sure votes for a hard policy; but among the dissenters were the largest countries of the hemisphere Brasil, Argentina, Mexico, Chile as Bell asBolivia and Ecuador.
The foreign minister of Hati, recognising the value of his vote, calmly remarked to Husk that he came from a poor country in desperate need of aid; obviously this need would affect his vote.
In the meantime a new idea was emerging out of 0 the incessant buzz of talk in the lobbies and corridors of the San Rafael Hotel that the government of Cuba be excluded from the inter-American system.
This idea had been informally advanced by Argentines seeking an alternative to mandatory sanctions.
His use of the phrase ""spare wobby governments"" to describe a device to avoid the democratic process is as interesting as his lack of note of the political orientation and beliefs of Kickenlooper, close to the far end of the Republican right, and Selden, whose devotion to the principle that the Us should intervene militarily in ^>atin American countries, embodied in a House Resolution that passed in 1965, led to serious international reactions and such opposition at home that the Sentate didn't pass it.
It would seem that the includion of these two men in the delegation appointed by Kennddy shows that he joined them, and that he wanted them because of their kn^n positions.
Assistant Secretary Woodward solved these juridical scruples by arguing ingeniously that the declaration of incompatibility would exclude Cuba automatically.
As for Haiti, we finally yielded to blackmail and agreed to resume our aid to the airport at Port Au Prince.
There remained the Caribbean states tehich still wanted mandatory sane tjnns; ... tr ~In t he end, after hew"" prob lems , we never built the airport.
This is good writing because it excites, the interest of the reader and begins with a very dramatic treatment.
However, it is remarkably poor and wholly inaccurate reporting, for it leaves out entirely the background and entirely the context in which the decision was made and in no way indicates what immediately led to it or how.
Explaining that ""the Soviet Union had never before placed nuclear missiles in any other country"", Schleslnger in a burst of yellow .journalism asks a q uestion he does not answer.
Cuba did not; really require the introduction of long-range nuclear missiles, U ne may be sure that Khrushchev, like any other national leader, took that decision not for Cuban reasons but for Soviet reasons, pending Khrushchev' s reminiscences, one can only speculate as to what these Soviet reasons were.
Instead, he argues with a mixture of irony, half-fact, distortion and falsity.
The missiles were not long range but were short x®Kgs and intermediate.
The defense of Cuba was not a side effect but the only possible effect (see Khrushchev's secret letter to Kennedy in Abel) for the transferring of the entire Russian military establishment to the island of Cuba could not successfully defend Cuba from destruction if the United States determined upon this course.
He explains it by saying that it took longer to construct bases for them ""and there may have seemed no point^in sending the missiles until the bases were nearer completion.
The worry was not about the military balance for ""this would still leave the United States with a two_to_one superiority in nuclear power targeted against the Soviet Union 11 , figuring P.797 on 64 missiles in Cuba.
It was a staggering project staggering in its recklessness, staggering in its misconception of the jweb American response, staggering in its rejection of the groundrules for coexistence among the superpowers which Kennedy had offered in ''ienna.
Kennedy' s""offer"" of ground rules in Vienna, of course, had no standing and certainly not the siaKsanction that Schlesinger here tries to give them.
Nor did Khrushchev wait until this time to ""reject"" what Kennedy had ""offered"" as Schlesinger own lengthy discussion -of the Vienna meeting makes clear.
Ehryshche v at the nasSHkg meeting told Kennedy he Would not accept the new strictures Kennedy was trying to impose upon him and everything in his subsequent actions made clear that he had not and would not.
By this agonising anti-reasoning Schlesinger tries to say that what Kennedy offered was a proper thing, that Khrushchev until this moment had accepted, and that it was in fact Khrushchev that was challenging the normal relationship between powers.
It was K enne dy who sought without success to impose upon Khrushchev his, Kennedy's, ambitions for the relationship between the two powers.
An the propaganda devices they used here, including the slight omission of a more precise description of Ilyushin 28, an outdated, short-range plane which could carry nuclear bombs as could any number, for example, of commercial airliners.
He implies that installation of the other missiles did, but he does not in fact say that any effort was ever made to conceal them.
Three weeks later CIA sent an urgent report to the president that 'something new and different* was tfeking place in s oviet aid operations to Cuba.
The data ""suggested” the refurbishing of air defense, ""presumably by putting up a network of SAM sites, 11 In the light of the characteristics of Schelsinger* s concept of history as revealed in this book, it is not niggling to point out that"" he didn't say the President received the urgent report 3 weeks later but that it was gent and we are left to presume that he did receive it.
The one thing that Is hard is that at some time, presumably near ""late July"", there was reason to believe missiles were being installed in Cuba.
Structurally, the presumtlon to which S ehlesinger refers relates as much to the nature of the missies as to the fact, and to the fact as to the nature.
The propaganda has to do with the intention of establishing a ""Soviet bridgehead in the Western Hemisphere"", increasing Castro's prestige and showing the world ""Washington's inability to prevent such things at its very doorstep"", clearly an attribution to ""Moscow"" of what itosuited Schlesinger and the administration to attribute to them, for which Schlesinger has kb laid no foundation in normal logic or fact.
What little attempt at reasoning consis ts in_ saying ""obviously, Moscow hdd calculated that the United States after the Bay of figs, couldn't object.
Here the bland assumption that only the United States could define for the Soviet Union and for Cuba what was defensive and offensive.
In fact, what is ""obvious to him is so obscure to the Soviet Union that he at no time indicates the s oviet Union would so construe American reaction.
His whole argument, like that oi the administration, is that the Soviet Union never assumed Such a thing would happen that they, in fact, planned the opposite would happen.
But the only possible interpretation of this sentence is that, with an astounding unanimity, ""our best Soviet experts in State and the CIA"" were entirely wrong and of indescribable incompetence.
This, of course, Schlesinger will not say, even tho his writing says it for him, for the alternative is to say that the_ entire United States administration was wrong, both in its understanding of ^hryshchev&s intention and its pretenses to legality.
Nonetheless, when a U~2 flight on August 29 showed clear evidence of SAM sites under construction, the President decided to put Moscow on notice.
On September 4, the Secretary of State brought over a draft of the warning.
The President showed it to the Attorney General, who recommended stiffening it with an explicit statement that we would not tolerate the import of offensive weapons.
The draft as revised read that, while we had no evidence of ""significant offensive capability either in Cuban hands or under &o vie t dire ctio n, "" should it be otherwise, the gravest issues would arise.
First, B c tilesinger does not say how the ""clear evidence"" was ""of SAM sites"" and not any other kind of missile site.
By this time Schlesinger has become so skillful in his evasive writing that his language doesn't even say that the President ever issued the warning that had been drafted.
But perhaps most dishonest of all is the last sentence quoted above, ^'The Soviet leader pledged in effect that he would stir u;^ no incidents before the congressional elections in November.
A similar interpretation is given by Sorensen who vies wlth ochlesinger in his deification of the President and undeviating devotion to the fact that the President never erred.
Neither Sorensen nor Schlesinger quotes Dobyynin's language, nor do they quote the Atty Gen.
They just say that from the kindness of his heart, this old monster and troublemaker, Khrushchev, this Machi avelli in an Astrakhan, told the President, ""don't worry, we're not going to make any trouble for you, especially not in Cuba.
Uninn would create no trouble for the United States _ in Berlin or Southeast Asia _ during the election campaign,' 1 Note 'in Berlin or Southeast Asia"" set off jBy dashes for emphasis.
B 0 whether or not Khrushchev was a troublemaking devil, he didn't exempt Cuba from his deviltry.
Because the administration mades such a big thing of this Khrushchev message, which certainly is taken out of context and ±kis misrepresented, it is very strange that nodi one of the three major writers, all of whom drew upon official information, two of whom were participants, found it possible to fruote a single word that the Soviet ambassador spoke to the Atty Gen.
They all paraphrase it and unless Apel is entirely wrong, which is hard to believe since his book was exclusively on the subject of this crisis and his emphasis is unmistakable, it can only be concluded that both Sorensen and S c hlesinger intended nothing less than a major deception because the entire administration case hinged upon 2 propaganda devices; first, that Khrushchev had deceived the ^resident, and second, that the missiles were offensive.
Next Schlesinger quotes an unidentified ""Moscow"" statement as saying ""flatly that the 'armaments and military equipment sent to Cuba are designed exclusively for defensive purposes,'"" Again Schlesinger forgets bis own dissertation on the Ameri can missiles in Turkey where he carefully points out that the only purpose of identical missiles is a first-strike capacity.
At no point does Schlesinger or any other administraton spokesman, including the President, ever say that, upon the completion of the Cuban missile installation, the Soviet Union planned an attack upon the Ug.
Because, as Schlesinger points out, if these missiles are not to be used in a first strike, they serve only a ""deterrent"" function, without arguing that the Soviet Union intended to initiate a nuclear attack upon the uB, it cannot be argued that the missiles when installed served anything other than a defensive purpose.
Schlesinger also quotes the exact language used by the others and, as a matter of fact, used by the other side, at the Un, that the B C viet Union said it had all the missiles and all the power it needed on its own territory.
Earlier Schlesinger had said virtually the same thing in pointing out that, when the Soviets had enough intercontinental missiles installed, they installed no more, allowing the United States to go ahead without making any effort to catch up with them in the^ total number.
While it was nojJ secret that preparations were going forw ard fo r an attack on Cu ba, Schlesinger then says; p .799 The statement continued truculently accusing the United States of ""preparing for ageression^agalnst Cuba and other peace.lvoing states, T concluding that ""if the aggressors unleash war our aimed formes must be ready to strike a crushing retaliato ry blow at the aggressor.
Of course his purpose here is to show the Russians are a bunch of nasty, warmongering propagandists.
The Soviet Union accused the United States of ""preparing for aggression against Cuba"" and warned that, in that event, ""our armed forces must be ready to strike a crushing retaliatory blow In short, the Soviet Union, even at the cost of war, was going to keep its pledge to Cuba.
Abel also does not identify the source is 'Moscow"" ofothis statement but dates it as of Sept 11.
The president's knowledge of an offensive capability or a suspicion so strong tKat he had to run the great risk, both domestically, especially immediately before an election, and internationally, where the fever readings would go higher on the thermometer.
How many before he doubled and how many after he doubled Schlesinger sees unworthy of mention.
This gradually increased as the crisis Increased in intensity to 6-7 a bay.
Abel says until late August there were 2 flights monthly, stepped up after Aug 29 discovery of SUM sites to 7 flights by Oct 7.
Abel's version ^ is similar to Schlesinger' s but not identical; ""They had overflown on September 5,17,26,29 and October 5 and 7 , without discovering anything beyond SAM sites, MIGfighter^p lanes on various Cuban airfields, and Komar torpedo boats armed with short-range ^rockets.
All but the September 5 flight, however, had limited their photographic sweeps to that portion of Cuba lying east of b av ana.
Bad weather held up flights between September 5 and 26 and made the September 11 photography unusable.
Two^U-2 incidents elsewhere in the world, also led to a high level examination of that airplane's use and some delays in flights.
The entire administration position, aside from the fiction of ""offensive"" weapons, had to do with Khrushchev's deceit, stealth, etc., the fact that the administration did not know of cthe introduction of missiles into Cuba.
Therefore, the exact date of the flight and the circumstances is of great importance.
And if on such an important thing any of the authors is wrong, or especially if Sorensen or Schlesinger I s wrong, all of their""in formation"" is thereby suspect.
It is the kind of thing that, in the context of the Cuba missile crisis, permits no error of any kind.
Then there is the vast difference between Schlesingsr* s statement, which, like most of his writing, is quite tricky, of the indication of ""a continuing military build-up large in its proportions"" but which he may evade by saying it came ""from other sources"", #nd Sorensen's statement.
Without the evasion, what S chlesinger says is essentially what Abel says, and Abel's sources obviously could be nothing but official sources.
Schlesinger' s very next sentence is The government saw no reason as yet to believe that Khruschev intended anything beyong this; he had not, so far as we knew, lost his mind.
This is £n direct contra, diction to any reason Kennedy could have had in the last sentence of the previous paragraph of^chlesinger 1 s writing in asking for stand-by authority to call up the reserves.
It is further directly contradicted by the very opening of Sorensen's chapter on this subject, an unmistakable and unforgettable incident which Schlesinger could not have omitted from his book as he does completely by accident.
And at this meeting Sorensen says he took^notes at the ambassador's suggestion.
The UN debate reveals an administration communication to an its Latin American allies, leaked to Cuba whose Raul Roa used it at the UN debate, of the definite statement by the United States of the presence of missiles in Cuba.
The use of the word ""nuclear"" here is an obvious device that assumes greater point in the total absence of any nuclear warheads in Cuba.
The fact is that Khrushchev denied their presence in the letter Abel quotes and offered a search of the ships which was not accepted.
He could hope"" that the hurricane season might interfere with the U-2 overflights and that the fall political campaign might inhibit the administration from taking drastic action.
Imagine such a tough, gruff guy as Khrushchev basing everything he did upon the hope of a hurricane] What is"" important, however, is something Schlesinger does not intend, something that is ignored in all the other writing and presumably will be in his, and that is that Khrushchev knew of U_2 overflights.
S 0 , Zn the abaance ofpany even rudimentary effort to disguise any of the construction work in Cuba is clear evidence of an incontrovertible nature that Khrushchev intended this construction to be de tected.
Again without intending to, Schlesinger gives us a real insight into the conduct of the govt on the highest level, the cliffhanging fear of the President and his close counsellors, of the dire threat to the national security really the national survival that hung over the country and the world.
Lacking ohotographic verification, the intelligence community treated the information with reserve. ->-n the meantime, it recommended on October ij. a U-2 flight over western Cuba, The recommendation was approved, on October 10, and from the eleventh to the thirteen o Sn the pilot and plane Waited for the weather to break.
On 0 ctober 9 the President whose personal authorization was required for every TF_2 flight and who throughout this period had authorized all flights requested of him approved a mission over the western end of Cuba ... delayed by bad weather until October ll;, the U_2 flew in the early morning hours, 11 etc.
Sorensen's reference to bad weather, and he makes reference to it, relates only to Sept.
Abel's version is that when McCone returned from his honeymoon, ""ta. s ,discover that western Cuba had not been overflown for a month"", ''immediately suggested ""$<[at a special conference on October k, that the whole island be photographed at once with special attention to ifos western end.
Western Cuba, the most likely place for the installation of ‘'offensive"" missile s,""had not been inspected from the air since September Here we have another glimpse in the same kaleidoscope of the CIA director who had and continued to hold {see Abel) the belief that Soviet activity was intended for the installation of ""offensive"" missiles, off on a 3-week honeymoon.
But according to Abel and this is not indicated in either Sorensen or Schlesinger McCone was fretting and bombarding his deputy.
General Marshall S Carter, with telegrams, president Kennedy never saw the so-called honeymoon telegrams, sent on September 7, 10, l5 and 16.
But it would not seem to be for A bel quotes the issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology dated Oct 1 as saying, ""'pentagon strategists consider the present aims build-up in Cuba the first step"" toward eventual construction of intermediate-range ballistic missile emplacements, 1 ' Nor is this all.
Col John Ralph Wright, Jr., of the Defense Intelligence Agency, studied the results of unspecified Sept overflights ""with meticulous care"", according to Abel and notice the odd trapeaoidal pattern near S an Cristobal which ""resembled the placement of missile installations photographed repeatedly by pilots like Gary Powers over the Soviet Union.
His citation says that it was he who recommended the coverage of Oct 14.
Be turning to Schlesinger and the Oct lip flight, he fails to say when the flight was made.
In thishe is consistent with his further comment on its results, but his language about uhe ^ flight is merely ""Sunday the 14 th dawned beautiful and cloudless.
Sorensen says that” the U -2 flew in the early morning hours of that cloudless Sunday Abel has more detail.
He begins by saying that at the suggestion of MclTamara, the CIA pilots were canned.
Majors Rudolph Anderson Jr and Pachard S Heyser, took over on the 14 th.
General Carter, in McCone's monthlong absence/ , had appealed to the White House, arguing that intelligence was properly the CIA's business and that it had its own control center* to go with the planes, the trained pilots, and the experience.
But the implication of Abel is there were 2 planes and 2 pilots /on the one flight.
Schlesinger 1 sattack on Sen Keating is the sneaky thing in which he is a specialist.
He saysKeating ""had also been receivthe refugee reports, and he treated them with no reserve at all.
At the end of August he began a campaign to force the government into some unspecified fohn of action.
He In general, without saying where the laboratory was, says the negatives were ""swiftly"" sent there ""then to the interpretation center, where specialists pored over the blown-up photographs frame by frame.
It Is with this event, the informing of ^undy, that Schlesinger begins subsection 3 of this chapter.
But according to Sorensen , ""between 8 and 10m,, the top CIA officials were notified and they notified in turn the Defense and State intelligence chiefs a n d, at his home.
With all the information coming from a single source, those few in the govt privy and with both Schlesinger and Sorensen among those both privy and closest to the President, there should be no discrepancy of any kind, nor should there be any question about the time, even to the extact minute, especially when dealing with intelligence and of such a nature.
Schlesinger, Sorensen and Abel agree that Bundy decided not to tell the President that night since he had nothing with which to brief him and wouldn't until the morning.
There is on3.y a 15-minute difference between Sorensen's ""about 9m,"" time and Schlesinger' s 8:45m.
Abel adds details that a -a 8 o'clock Bundy was briefed by an intelligence officer with twopho toanalysts.
He studied the photographs and accompaniying intelligence r reports, then went to Kennedy's living quarters where, according to ^bel, the President was sitting on the edge of the bed looking at the morning papers , Schlesinger wanaidxKnaixS does not quote Bundy's reason for not Informing the President immediately.
The meeting, beginning at eleven forty-five that morning, went on with intermissions for the rest of the week.
The group soon became known as the Executive Committee, presumably of the National Security Council; the press later dubbed it familiarly ExCom, though one never heard that phrase at the time.
It carried on its work with the most exacting secrecy} nothing could be worse than to alert the Russians before the Dpi ted States had decided on Its own course.
Of course, the pretense that the Russians had to be ken t from knowing that we knew is little short of childish.
Just 2‘pages"" earlier Schlesinger has sought to explain Khrushchevas action in the light of the American official line by saying he had pinned his hopes on the hurricane season interfering with the TT-2 flights, so there was no doubt that everybody knew the Russians knew all about the U-2 flights.
The ExCom considered ‘‘every alternative” ranging ""from living with the missiles to taking them out by surprise attack, from making the issue with Castro to mak_ iit wi th Khrushchev.
According to Schlesinger, this ""meant that the response/could not, for example, be confided to the United Nations, where the Soviet delegats^ would have xesm ample opportunity to stall action until the nuclear weapons were in"" place and on target.
It meant that we could not evenrisk the delay involved in consulting our allies.
What it really meant was the United States had no intention of abiding by its commitment to the UN, to the Charter of the UN, and to international law.
Unless, of course, it could convert the UN to its own purposes, to make it an adjunct of United States policy.
As did others writing on the same subject, Schlesinger says that at the beginning of the discussions because the President ""made clear that acquiescence was impossible"" there seemed to be nothing possible except an airstrike which impelled the Atty Gen to scribble a wry note ""’I know now how To jo felt when he was planning Pearl Harbor.
The amphibious task force was built up to include ij.,000 Marines and i there were 5,000 more in Guantanamo.
The Army prepared its 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions for immediate deployment and soon altogether gathered ’’more than / 100,000 troops in Florida.
SAC bombers left Florida airfields to make room for tactical fighter aircraft flown in from bases all over the country, Air defense facilities were stripped from, places outside the range of the Cuban missiles and re_installed in the Southeast.
Meanwhile the Pentagon had undertaken a ""technical analysis of the requirements for a successful strike"" With typical propaganda purposes in midd that could certainly have deceived the President, this was formulated as ... / a ""surgical"" strike confined to the nuclear missile bases alone would leave the airports and IL-28 s untouched; moreover, we could not be o sure in advance that we had identified or could destroy /all the missile sites.
A limited strike therefore might expose the United States to nuclear retaliation.
Anything less, the military urged, would destroy our credibility before the world and leave our own nation in intolerable peril.
Moreover, this was a heaven-sent opportunity to get rid of the Castro regime forever and re-est ablish the security of the hemisphere.
The Soviet experts pointed out that even a limited strike would kill the Russians manning the missile sites and might well provoke the Soviet Union into drastic and unpredictable response, perhaps nuclear war.
The Latin American experts added thata massive strike Would kill thousands of innocent Cubans and damage the United States permanently in the hemisphere.
The Furopeanists said the world would regard a surprise strike as an excessive response.
She next isXhkk Sec McNamara ""advanced an idea which had been briefly mentioned the day before and from which he did not thereafter deviate""/, a ""naval blockade designed to stop the further entry of offensive weapons into Cuba and hopefully to force the removal of the missiles already there.
In KeKamara's mind and Schle singe r* s and everybody else's this was a blockade, illegan and an act of war.
It was not until later that it was dignified with the euphemism ""quarantine"" As the discussions in the BxSom proceeded thru Thursday, airstrike supporters said a blockade would not neutralize the weapons already within Cuba"" and ""that it could not possibly, bring enough pressure on Khrushchev to remove those weapons, that it would peniit work to go ahead on the bases and that it would mean another Munich. "" {p.o5) They feared a retaliatory blockade on Berlin.
J The arguments of the airs trike advocates are cogent and should have been and still mu&t be considered in any analysis.
It certainly could not neutralize^ he weapons already in Cuba’ nor, unless h® he were willing to be pressured, could it in any way cause Khrushchev to remove the weapons and they would remain as the threat which caused all of Kennedy's excessive reaction.
So, without Khrushchev* s cooperation, a blockade was meaningless and if he were going to cooperate a quid pro quo of some kind was an essential for him.
It is beyond credibility that this thought did not occue to the Pres or his advisers.
Yet they do not, ’from the writings of hie singer, Sorensen and Abel, seem to have ever considered this.
The Russians had publicly done everything except say they had installed such missiles in Cuba.
They had been careful to explain their purposes in diplomatic language and they had done nothing to camouflage the work done in Cuba.
Wisely, Schlesinger pays but slight attention to this meeting so that he can more readily ignore what other writers have pointed out, that when the Pres read the ""key sentences from, his statement of September 13"" Gromyko held his ground and made a very forceful response.
The intellectual tone and level of Schlesinger* s writing is illustrated by his account of the evening meeting of the ExCom Thursday, Oct 18, at which he said the Pres ""was evidently attracted by the idea of the blockade"" because. ""it avoided war ..."" and could be ""carried out within the framework of the Organization of American States and the Rio Treaty.
Hence, it did not avoid war but shifted the choice 01 *“ the initiation of hostilities to the Russians.
The Pres ordered preparations for a weaoons blockade to go into effect on Mon morning the 22nd 1 There seems to be a conflict with Sorensen here, but in fact there is not.
This is not the version ^orensen gives but it is not in contradiction to it because Sorensen does not say whether or not he protested this effort.
A gain the lack of morality and the lack of any interest in or concept of legality.
McNamara remained strongly opposed to an airstrike and in support of the blockade.
In a footnote to that he describes as an ExCom meeting ag 4 o'clock Fri the 19 th, ""for a discussion of the competing see. ' narios"" Schlesinger goes into the defense Sec of State Rusk made to Ap State Dept correspondent John M Hightower, whose article appeared on Aug 22, 1965.
Ate this meeting, Sc hie singer. says, ""the balance of opinion clearly swung back to the blockade (though, since a blockade was technically an act of war, it was thought better to refer to it as a quarantine),"" Ignoring that he had just said the the blockade might prevent war, with only the flimsy figleaf of the worl 'technicality”, Schlesinger here does admit it js an act of war.
And he admits the use of the word ""quarantine"" was but a propaganda device, .there is a reflection in what follows of what may have been ulterior motives on the part of ihhe military in arguing against the blockade, which at this point Schlesinger begins to refer to without quotation marks as a quarantine.
The clear inference is that they were actively seeking the means of starting a war.
They may have had illusions about whether or not the Russians would enter such a war, but they could have been nothing but illusions.
Someone observed that the United States would have to pay a price to get them out; perhaps we should throw in our now obsolescent and vulnerable Jupiter missile bases in Italy and Turkey, whose removal the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy as well as the Secretary of Defense had recommended in 1961.
After a couple of hours, Adkai Stevenson, who had had to miss the day's meetings because of UR commitments, arrived f 10 in.
He expressed his preference for the quarantine over the strike but wondered whether it might not be better to try the diplomatic route also.
We must, he said, start thinking about our negotiating position; for example, a settlement might include the neutralization of Cuba under international guarantees and UR inspection; demilitarization Would, of course, include our own base at Guantanamo as well as the Soviet installations.
The use of the word ""Someone"" cannot reflect Schlesinger' s inability to find out who the person was.
When Stevenson ""spoke with force about the importance of a politiaal program"", the Pres ""agreed in principle but disagreed with his specific proposals.
At this meeting the pres ""issued orders to get everything ready"" for the blockade.
The Crisis Schlesinger knew nothing about what was going on, nothing about the secret discussions in the White House, until}, informed §at morning by -kdl&l Stevenson who had obtained the Pres's permission to tell Schlesinger.
His purpose was to ask Schlesinger 1 s help with his speech he Would make early in the week at the Security Council.
Sat night ""a sense of premonitory excitement began to engulf Washington""af ter the Pres returned unexpectedly from his political tour and Rusk canceled a speech he had been to make.
On Fri a British delegation for intelligence conferences with the CIA deduced from suspicions based, according^/ to Schlesinger, on things other than either Abel or Sorensen wrote about, Mklsk such as their observation of beds being moved into Pentagon offices, deduced something was afoot in Cuba.
Schlesinger describes essentially what Stevenson ultimately proposed at the UN, saying it ""centered on the removal of Soviet military equipment and personnel"" which fasm the United States point of view perhaps it did.
But from the Soviet point of view the ""non-invasion guarantee ‘ was undoubtedly its center.
Stevenson also wanted to promise withdrawal from Guantanamo and removal of United States missiles from Turkey and Italy.
The Pres, however, ""rightly"", according to Schlesinger, ""regarded any political program as premature.
He wanted to concentrate on a single issue the enormity of the introduction nf the missiles and the absolute necessity for their removal.
The fact is that within just a few days Stevenson made just such proposals and the solution was just such a solution.
But the ExCom was consistent* It was almost without exception wrong in not understanding, in what it wanted to do, and in what it did not want to do.
Working all day and well into the night at the State Dept on the speech with Schlesinger were Harlan Cleveland, Joseph Misies Sisco and Thomas Wilson.
It was strange, he said, how no one in the intelligence community had anticipated the Soviet attempt to transform Cuba into a nuclear base; everyone had assumed that the Russians would not be so stupid as to offer us this pretext for intervention.
He said that, first, it might draw Russia and China closer together, or at least strengthen the Soviet position in the communist World, by showing that Moscow was capable of bold action in support of a communist revolution; second, that it would radically redefine the setting in which the De r i_i n problem could be reopened after the election; third, that it would eal the United States a tremendous political blow.
When I remarked that the Russians must have supposed we would not respond, Kennedy said, ""They thought they had us either way. if / we did nothing, we would be dead.
So apparently the Pres also had no understanding of what the Soviets were aiming for.
Apparently Schlesinger from what follows did draft a speech Stevenson was to make.
We will have to make a deal at the end, but we must stand absolutely firm now.
Schlesinger* s version of the 5 o'clock briefing of Congressional leaders, many of whom had been flown in by the Air Force, etc., is essentially that of the others.
Sen Russell of Ca disagreed with the blockade and said the only solution was invasion.
After Russell spoke, no one wanted to you can talk to them individually, they are is that, when you get a dominated by the man who is what happened the other take issue with him.
Schlesinger begins this subsdction with a plaint against the XTH ; ""...like a permanent political convention: so many people to be considered and cajoled, so many issues going at once, such an inherent unpredictability about the parliamentary sequence.
There were too many things that had to be done before the United States got its way; and of coi rse the UN should work automatically^ behalf of the United States administration.
By pre~ arrangement Edwin Martin notified Harlan Cleveland when the OAS Resolution passed, and Cleveland called Sisco in HY. hatching Stevenson on television, Cleveland could see Sisco leave the ^ chamber to take the call, then in a moment return and place the text of the resolution on the desk in fmnt of Stevenson. (p,dl4/ Either this ; was a very short resolution or, what is more likely, it was passed in exactly the United States form, word for word, and Sisco had an advance copy.
Again the novelist in Schlesinger replaces the hi s tori sn in his dramatic account of workmen in Cuba ^laboring day and night to complete the bases.
He refers to Ache son's trip to De Gaulle, quoting the general, there is a war, I will be with you* Bui, there will be no war* * T . , Without elaboration Schlesinger says.
According to Schlesinger, ""The President, no doubt"" detected ""an element of reserve in Macmillan* s tone..."" and the Pres says ifcxixKksiistahsjixlsxJix of Khrushchev his ""action had so contradicted all the Kremlinclogists had prophesied that it was necessary to revise our whole estimate of his desperation or ambition or both, 11 The one thing that never occurred to the President or anybody. else that had to be revised was the ""Kremlinologists"" who understood propaganda but not the Kremlin.
But British reaction was much less favorable than Schlesinger wants to indicate, aitho he does quote ^some.
The Manchester Guardian said on 'Tuesday that, if Khrushchev had really brought in nuclear missiles, ""he has done so primarily to demonstrate to the United States and the world the. meaning of American bases close to the Soviet frontier.
Taylor, Richard Titmuss and others attacked the quarantine and ^advocated British neutrality.
He brackets this with an excerpt from Russell's cable to Kennedy, ""Your action desperate — (omissions in original) No conceivable justification, We will not have mass murder ... end this madness/' To be certain there is emphasis on ^ertrand Russell who is singled out a n d the well poisoned against him by Schlesinger* s out_of-context quotation of his having called ""Kennedy 'much more wicked than Hitler'"", both telegrams are separated by conspicuous areas of blank space on the page and are set in small caps.
The followers of Stuart Hugheses peace party denounced the quarantine, sought excuses for Khrus hchev and prayed for American acceptance of the missiles.
He singles Hughes out for ridicule on seven different occasions in this book, in itslef a piece of uninhibited dis_ honesty for there was no opportunity for answer.
One of his techniques is to call Hughes the radical left equivalent of Barry Goldwater and the Bircher3 on the right and to pretend that Hughes was a Communis t of some kind, a statement he didn* fc dare make outright.
He had just been to seem -Ambassador Dobrynin in an effort to find out whether the Soviet ships had instructions to turn back if challenged on the hi£h seas.
The Soviet Ambassador, the Attorney General said, seemed very shaken, out of the picture and unaware of any instructions.
This meant that the imposition of the quarantine the next day might well bring a clash.
This, bracketed with what at least here Schlesinger chooses to ignorfce, a similar plight for Soviet UH Ambassador Borin, is indicative of exactly what the Atty Gen A feaeta thought, that he was ""out of the picture"" and this in turn is indicative of anything but what the official American interpretation of the entire Soviet ploy was.
It was indicative of the tightest and most explusive kind of control exercised on his project by Khrushchev.
But again, had Schlesinger gone off into such an analysis, j*fhe well knew the potential and he is not about to admit the truth.
Ke called McNamara a n d /in Schlesinger* s words ""over emotional Navy protests, issued the approrpiate instruction.
Nor had those in the Pentagon and in each case the reason for not giving the pres this only too obvious counsel is highly suspect and indicative of a desire for an aimed clash.
Schlesinger makes no effort to underestimate the serious possibilities of the Cuban missile crisis.
He devotes a few pages of the following chapter to the e ending of the crisis.
The Russians had obviously anticipated neither the qjixk quick discovery of the bases nor the quick imposition of o the quarantine.
Their diplomats across the world were displaying all the symptoms of improvisation, as if they had been told nothing of the placement of the missiles o and had received no instructions what to jzf say about them, Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin himself gave every indication of ignorance and confusion.
There undoubtedly was confusion in the diplomatic corps which clearly and highly unusually had not been informed by Khrushchev.
Everything Schlesinger has had to say on this subject, as well as what Sorensen and Abel say, makes sense only if the Russians depended upon ""quick discovery of the bases"", which they had made not even the most rudimentary effort to conceal.
Khrushchev accepted this thought at once and with evident pleasure; but, from our viewpoint, it equated aggression and response, said nothing about the missiles already in Cuba, permitted work to go forward on the sites and contained no provisions for verification.
Still, while Mew York and Washington agreed in rejecting U Thant's proposal, the manner of the rejection caused debate.
Some in Washington appeared to fear any response which would 'entrap' us in a negotiating process; it seemed to us in Hew *ork that they mutt be bent tl clear the road for an air strike and an invasion.
Stevenson and HcCloy strongly recommended a response to U Thant which would keep the dip lomatic option alive.
Speaking with unusual urgency, he said that Khrushchev was desperately signaling a desire to cooperate in moving toward a peaceful solution.
Khrushchev’s suggestion of a summit meeting in his reply to -bertrand Russell; his wellpublicized call on the American singer Jerome Hines the night a fx&xxa before after a Moscow concert; his amiable if menacing talk with an American businessman, William Knox of Westinghouse International; the indications that afternoon that the nearest Soviet ships were slowing down and changing course.
This was not the behavior of a man who wanted war, Harriman said; it was the behavior of a man who was begging our help to get off the hook.
Khrushchev had sent up similar signals after the U-2 affair in i960, Harriman continued, and Eisenhower had made the mistake of ignoring him; we muit not repeat that error now.
The ridiculousness of this is clear in the second sentence where Schlesinger said ""Khrushchev had sent up similar signals after the U-2 affair in i960"" where . clearly it was not Khrushchev who was ""desperate"" or trying to get himself off the hook.
He did not seek the audience with Khrushchev and was surprised when summoned to the Kremlin.
Krhushchev confirmed to him that he did indeed have missiles in Cuba and further would, if necessary, use them.
He also tried to explain the difference between ""offensive"" and ""defensive"" as he saw it.
But in any event his message to Know was hardly the signal of desperation; nor was the ""slowing down and changing course"" of those Soviet ships nearest Cuba because this was in response to U Thant's request.
This unending self-righteousness, the unceasing straining to represent the American govt top echelon and its policies as invariably right, undeviatingly omniscient and holier than the pope is demeaning to the country; and the fawning, sycophantic, tortured effort to deify the president for his godly calm and understanding, his flawless thinking and planning, his inevitable rightness, in a caiyeful reading is denigrating to him.
No man is that wise, that never wrong, that all-seeing, that completely perfect.
Schlesinger, perhaps more than Soresen, succeeds in dehumanizing Kennedy, but he does not make him god.
The above excerpt is one of countless ones scattered throughout the entire opus.
To almost everybody else, he iso the outstanding American expert on Russia.
But if we deny bim an out, then we will escalate this business into a nuclear war.
Harriman told Schlesinger the State oept never asked my aci vice about anything outside the Far East.
At least by inference, Schlesinger in this paragrapa attributes weight in the President's decision to Harriman s observations.
Again it would seem thao Schlesinger iind so-r^e significance and it is a very obvious thing in the apparent complete lack of any Soviet diplomatic sajjsxax preparaSL for thU c risis.
It could mean only that the very highest echelon of the Soviet govt had elected no.i. to imoim d ^ lo ~ mats what was about to happen.
And despite the excess of amer-can Preoccupation from Berlin which did not originate with the missile crisis, Schlesinger points out that ""the Russians appeared uo be engaged in a studied effort to disassociate merlin from Cuba . b He finds ""the essence of the emerging pattern seems ^to be concern for a peaceful settlement"" and the statements 01 che Soviet ambassadors in London and Bonn were saying this.
To strengthen the case, Schlesinger dredges up h ity of Capt Ivanov _a n a Stephen *ard in^ritain ignoring the previous paragraph ana previous references to the total unpreparedness of the highest i n ovie diplomacy.
The Ivanov activity, trying to qiests for a summit meeting, would seem ro have been a fpon^eous amateur/6ffort.
Any place in the world there was anxiety, at least where rational men lived.
As Schlesinger very well knew, Khrushchev stated to Kennedy all the intended missiles were in Cuba and, in the can text of oU Thant's suggestion, inspection of the ships would show none on them.
So again, as so often before, Schlesinger is indulging in juvenile fiction.
Of Khrushchev Schlesinger next says, ""He knew by now thathis essential gamble had failed.
There is no evidence that either of these things is true, and an the evidence is to the contrary.
But significantly Schlesinger quotes Khrushchev as having told the Supreme Soviet in December that ’on the morning of October 27 we received information that the invasion wovild be carried out in the next two or three days.
This Khrushchev said would have given a choice between using the pockets or abandoning Cuba.
This satisfaction"" that he gave the Africans really was the only purpose for introducing the missiles.
Sorensen barely mentions it in less than half of a paragraph from which anne of the important or specific contents"" of the iSJ&aiisaxjti&BK proposition made by Fomin is made clear.
Schlesinger says ttiat,7Iwhen Scali said he did not know, Fomin begged him to find out immediately from his State Department friends.
Then, reaching for a pencil, he wrote down his home telephone number; •If I'm not at the Embassy, call me here.
Once this happened, Fomin ""rose £ anc^ in his haste to gee the word oack, tossed ^:owo a five-doliar bill for a thirty-cent check and speeded off without waiting for the change.
Ofothis Sorensen said on]y that it arrived in the evening and is careful to avoid a time relationship that has meaning between it and S c ali 1 s reply to Fomin.
The Soviet leader started by insisting that the weapons shipments were complete and that their purpose was aefen-^ sive.
Then he declared his profound longing for peace; let us, he said with evident emotion, not permit this situation to get out of nand. ine enforcement of the quarantine would only drive the Soviei; union to ta^e necessary measures of its own.
But if the United states would give assurances that it would not invade Cuba nor permit others to no so ana if it would recall its fleet from the quarantine, this would immediately change everything.
Together with the Scaii proposal, it promised %% light at the end of the cave.
And in He w York on Friday we heard whxis that 2 0 rin had advanced the same proposal to U Thant, and that the Cubans at the UK were beginning to hint to unaligned delegates that the bases might be dismantled and removed if the United States would guarantee the territorialinteg rity of Cuba/ l'he President probably had his first good night' s o sleep for ten days; certainly the rest of us did.
Of course, with the full test of the letter never having b been made public and Abel having had it leaked to him with only part of it in quotation, it is not possible to completely analyze Schlesinger's version.
Some things, however, are clear; Schlesinger cites no evidence _ not even a legitimate suspicion that '’the weapons shipments” were not complete, and having already addressed himself to the question by means of propaganda, ignores Khrushchev's statement ""that their purpose was defensive” as Schlesinger paraphrased it.
A-bel devotes pages to a discussion of paraphrasing of and quotation from this letter.
Without Abel’s version to refer to, it would be certain that the language used by Schlesinger, that the Soviet Union would ""take necessary measures of its own"" in opposl tion to enforcement of the blockade, is a tremendous understatement.
The part about the knot Abel quotes directly and again it was Khrushchev's emphasis that the pursuance of the -American blockade would lead"" to a nuclear war.
At this point and not at the only point in the letter Khrushchev spoke with rare ^ severity to the head of another state.
And a moment may come when the knot will be tied so tight that evenhe who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, and then it will he necessary to cut that knot; and what that would mean is not for me to explain to you, because you yourself understand perfectly o of what terrible iorces gs our countries dispose.
He referred to their Vienna meeting and said that, in effect, Kennedy had deceived him in assuring Khrushchev that the Bay of Pigs had been a mistake, an explanation that Khrushchev accepted, the implication being it would not be repeated.
Schlesinger is quite correct in saying a) that the letter was not, and b) was subsequently described as, hysterical.
Where Schlesinger says that ""together with the Scan proposal"" it seemed to propose a solution, he is indulging the official administration line, the purpose of which it is to hide the stupidity of the state Dept and other ExCom people for not correctly reading the intent of the letter.
This was the strongest possible language permitted by diplomacy for first he had no control over Castro as subsequent events showed, and second, he couldn't even pretend to have any control.
A prelude, an introduction, to the coming letter, to give the United States a chance to consider its essentials be fume receipt of the i entire text.
As events were immediately to show, this misreading, if that is in fact what it was, forced Khrushchev to take a more direct path.
What follows in Schlesinger 1 s inadequate summary of the letter actually should have been at the beginning because it too was prelude.
It was ead. ier that day ""that ^orin had advanced the same proposal to u Thant"" and earlie r that same day ""that the Cubans"" at’ the UN were beinning to hint ... that the bases might be dismantled and removed if the United States ^would guarantee the territorial integrity of Cuba.
It would never bo gathered from a reading of this KhrushchevSchlesinger or Abel text that the Pres did not have a f j ii I % I P*827 I $ ■wxi monopoly on a firm grasp of the incalculable potentialities of his action, Khrushchev, who had precipitated them, was at least as thoroly seized by the impending horror.
Like an the other apologists for the administration's blunders and policies, Schlesinger seeks to excuse them MXiJn which demands of him, as of an the others, a misrepresentation of Khrushchev's o subsequent communication.
The Soviet Union now said it would remove its missiles from Cuba and offer a nonaggression p&jsi; pledge to Turkey if the United States would remove its missiles from Turkey and offer a non-aggression pledge to Cuba.
The notion of trading the Cuban and Turkish bases had been much discussed in England; Walter Lippmann and others had urged it in the United States.
But Kennedy regarded the idea as unacceptable, and the swap was promptly rejected.
The bases were becoming operational, and the Russians were evidently determined to use force to maintain them.
Vie had no choice, it was argued, but a military response; and our tactical analysis had already shown that strikes at the bases would be little use without strikes at the airfields, and strikes at the airfields of little use without further supporting action, so, once the process began, it could hardly stop short of invasion.
Second, it was not Kennedy but Khrushchev who was permitting no dawdling.
Making it public made it even tougher because everybody knew about it the entire world as fast as Kennedy did, Khrushchev preempted him.
So while it was '‘an entirely different proposition"", it was the same kind, only very tough, not at all"" conciliatory, a nd to everybody except the United States administration, a very reasonable proposal.
But it was one which Khrushchev knew Kennedy would not accept because, had it been acceptable, Kennedy would have voluntarily before this seen to the removal of the missiles from Turkey.
Schlesinger studiously avoids reflection of the severity of the letter as, for example, when saying, ""if the United States would remove its missiles from T u rkey"" r efcc.
Where properly Schlesinger says the coniron -cation was entering its military phase"", what he fails to say is that Khrushchev was giving Kennedy the choice of accepting either his first or his second proposal or ox nuclear war.
It was not entering its military phase from any timidity on the Soviet part.
Their threat of force, which was so clear, was an alternative to an acceptable and immediate solution.
Consistent with this necessity is Schlesinger s handling of the shooting-down of the U_2 plane which is not only separated from its true meaning which was obvious, but in turn requires a misrepresentation of what follows in terms of what Kennedy's reaction and justification were for Kennedy did not react to the shooting down of the U_2 and the loss of the --meriaan life involved.
U_2a had be enf lying over Cuba lik® water over Niagara without molestation.
The Khrushchev order his own demonstration of just how tough he was prepared to be The SAM that shot down Major Anderson tola Kennedy loud and clear vhis is it.
Take it or leave it now \ "" The United States and Pres Kennedy accepted the shooting-down oi the TJ-2.
Obviously, if they shot down TJ_2s, we would have to react _ but not necessarily at once.
But his failure to react immediately in the face of all of his uough talk, all of his threats, in the fac& of his instituti on Oi the blockade, was a clear signal to Khrushchev that Kennedy had at loop last recognised the potentiality ox the danger point ^ really the flash poiirtit of the exp&osifve situation, in t<n,e context of this situation, consistency on Kennedy's para calls for an immediate reaction.
P.828 There remained the Khrushchev letters, and the Executive Committee turned to them again with bafflement and something close to despair.
It was noted that Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky had mentioned Cuba and Turkey together jrfas early as Tuesday, and that Red Star , the army paper, had coupled them again on Friday.
Scali, fearful that he had been used to deceive his own country, upbraided Fomin, accusing him of a double cross.
The Russian said miserably that there must have been a cable delay, that the Embassy was waiting word from Khrushchev at any moment.
These conjectures are, of course, valid but they are not the central point.
Sorensen deals with this period on pp,7l3-if without reference to the Scan mission.
Abel's commentary on the reaction^to the public Khrushchev letter is lengthy and begins onl88.
He also dwells at length on an important item both Schlesinger and Sorensen choose to^ignore, the President's reaction to the continued presence of American caissiles in Turts y which he had wanted to remove immediately upon his inauguration l (3b£ij£§ A^lo9-9w That both Schlesinger and Sorensen ignore it is a further reflection of their self-appointed roles of apologists ior their associates and their hero.
Uespite the picture they paint in such bold strokes and radiant colors of Kennedy ""on top"" of everything, here was a warand-peace, life_and-death issue that he did not stay ""on top"" of.
Elsewhere, Schlesinger concedes {see earlier notes) these missiles really served no essential function in Turkey.
Sorensen's text is equally devoid of any indication of the dire meaning of the timing of the shooting down of Major Anderson's 5F_ 2 , also reports con jeettwra about whether ""Khrushchev's hardliners"" had ""once again taken the lead' (p.l2j.
And, of course, Fomin's lack of information from Moscow^ was a further evidence that; all three writers should have ^±ound a significant documentation of the crucial ^central fact that^ Khrushchev himself was staying in personal control of everything and letting nothing go to anybody that did not serve tne central purpose he had in mind.
