ADVANCING PEOPLE-DRIVEN CHANGE Since the end of the Cold War our policy toward Cuba has remained static, reactive and focused on responding to developments following the demise of Fidel Castro.
That policy, in our opinion, does not advance or promote the best interests of the United States or of the Cuban people; it relegates the U.S.’s role to that of passive observer rather than active supporter of the process of democratization for one of our closest hemispheric neighbors.
The recommendations listed herein chart a new direction for U.S.-Cuba policy, one that is guided by a deep understanding of the Cuban people, the impact of five decades of totalitarian rule, and a firm belief that the tides of change are swept in by the grass roots efforts of common people who have acquired confidence in their abilities and feel empowered in their responsibilities.
Our recommendations are a break from the past because they seek to adapt to the realities of the present, which require a measured and incremental path that allows for adjustments along the way based on empirical evidence and evolving dynamics on the ground in Cuba.
That path is not one that can be assumed or applied solely by the United States.
It requires Cuba’s present rulers, or their successors, to understand that irrespective of changes to U.S. policy, the incorporation of grassroots reforms demanded by the Cuban people, are absolutely essential to the nation’s future prosperity and stability.
The Cuban American National Foundation stands ready to contribute our best effort in support of a new U.S.-Cuba policy that advances the interests and security of the United States and helps the Cuban people in their quest for democracy and prosperity.
From 1959 until about 1964, United States policy was centered on regime change.
Early on, the Administration of President John F Kennedy was focused on the removal of Fidel Castro from power and to this end, provided United States support for the Bay of Pigs invasion and later approved a series of covert actions under Operation Mongoose, directed at destabilizing the regime.
The pact brought an end to the policy of regime change and as a result a policy of containment was instituted which remained in place until the presidency of Jimmy Carter in the late 1970’s.
President Carter quickly embarked on a policy of rapprochement towards Cuba, an effort which complemented his attempt at extending a new kind of détente with the Soviet Union and its allies.
Yet despite his extensive efforts to reach out to Cuba’s leadership, and through direct engagement curb Cuban foreign intervention, inevitably those efforts proved fruitless as Cuba, in turn, increased its presence and military cooperation with the Soviet Union in various countries in Africa including Angola and Zaire.
Subsequent administrations have limited U.S.-Cuba policy to little beyond posturing for domestic electoral purposes or periodically responding to Castro’s continuing efforts to undermine United States international objectives.
Although President Ronald Reagan signed Radio Marti into existence and invaded Grenada where Cuban troops were stationed, his administration’s efforts were mainly punctuated by a return to the containment strategy of the Cold War.
During President Bill Clinton’s tenure, there was an attempt to increase people-to-people contact as a vehicle to influence democratic change in Cuba, yet executive action under that administration was overwhelmingly characterized by cautious reaction to legislative initiatives and unforeseen international events.
The 1994 Cuban rafter crisis and resulting wet foot-dry foot policy and the 1996 Brothers to the Rescue shoot-down led to the signing of the Helms-Burton bill, which codified significant portions of Cuba policy, such as the United States economic embargo, into United States law.
Under the Administration of George W Bush, Cuba policy was defined by the desire to placate perceived domestic political interests, leading to the enactment of policies that lacked strategic thought or benefit and that ignored Cuba’s increasingly influential role in Latin America and its active support for anti-American leadership in the region.
Following the mass crackdown on the democratic opposition in Cuba in 2003, rather than increase direct aid to Cuba’s opposition groups to counter the regime’s attempt to obliterate their efforts, the Bush Administration instead enacted regulations which had the converse effect of cutting off vital Cuban-American remittances and the flow of support and humanitarian aid made possible by their remittances and travel to the island-nation.
The Bush Administration often took to the bully pulpit to criticize the Cuban regime; however, its actions were not consistent with the rhetoric.
Instead, the establishment of entities such as the Commission on Assistance for a Free Cuba 6 and government positions like that of a Cuba Transition Coordinator, which were ill-defined and directed, became “achievements” it could point to on Cuba policy though in reality they were merely symbolic gestures with no meaningful effect on precipitating democratic change on-island.
With an ailing figurehead, a cadre of aging hard-liners thwarting any movement toward significant reform, and a mounting sense of desperation among a Cuban population increasingly unable to meet its basic needs, the results of the long term absence of a forward-looking U.S.-Cuba policy may soon become painfully obvious.
Rather than the peaceful democratic transition we all desire, events may thrust the Cuban people into chaos thereby forcing the United States to take unilateral actions, at the very least in securing its own borders.
Frechette Office of Cuban Affairs Department of State 6 White House transcript of President’s remarks establishing Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba, , October 10, 2003 3 laying the groundwork for a peaceful transition to democracy via support for the development of a strong and vibrant independent civil society in Cuba.
Both President Obama and Vice-President Biden have made it abundantly clear that there will not be any unilateral lifting of the embargo absent significant moves on the part of the Castro regime towards freedom and democracy for the Cuban people.
The Cuban American National Foundation concurs with the Obama Administration’s position.
To unilaterally lift the embargo without any significant evidence of irrevocable change in Cuba would be tantamount to sentencing the Cuban people to the continuation of the deprivation of economic, civil and human freedoms they have endured for the past five decades, and would continue to negatively affect the long term strategic interests of the United States in the region.
A change in course can only be achieved by bolstering the resolve of the Cuban people so that they may achieve the prosperity, social and political stability that the Castro regime is incapable of delivering.
Nevertheless, the Castro government will not unilaterally and freely initiate a path toward democratic rule.
External and, more importantly, internal factors are critical in creating that demand for change.
The Cuban people, supported by United States policy, must be empowered to speak out, organize, and peacefully enact democratic change.
The Cuban American National Foundation believes that the President has the authority and prerogative to initiate the necessary changes in U.S.-Cuba policy within the parameters provided by current statutes.
Objectives for a New U.S.-Cuba Policy United States-Cuba policy should focus on advancing United States interests and security in the region and empowering the Cuban people in their quest for democracy and prosperity.
These two objectives are intricately intertwined and one cannot be individually accomplished without the other.
The United States has direct national and security interests in promoting a peaceful transition to democracy in Cuba.
The resurgence of anti-American forces in the hemisphere that view Cuba as their ideological paradigm has led to increased tensions between the United States and several of its Latin American counterparts.
Most evident is that of the growing tensions between the United States and Venezuela and Hugo Chavez’s increasing collaboration with rogue 4 nations like Iran that are potential threats to United States national security and the overall security of the region.
In addition, a stable and democratic Cuba will avoid a possible chaotic mass exodus of refugees that could cause significant disruptions in affected United States communities, and will promote lawful and controlled migration between the two nations.
Further, a stable, democratic and prosperous Cuba will create the benefit of a regional partner in promoting democratic values, the rule of law, international human rights, and global prosperity.
Both countries would have enhanced opportunities to cooperatively address common threats such as drug trafficking, international terrorism, organized crime, human smuggling, and environmental degradation.
Such benefits and interests have not and will not be attained by maintaining the status quo.
To proactively and creatively support the Cuban people in their quest for democracy and prosperity, U.S.-Cuba policy must empower the Cuban people by encouraging independence from the State, self-sufficiency, and entrepreneurship.
A vibrant civil society is the cornerstone to any successful democracy8 and is certainly a precursor to a peaceful and lasting democratic transition.
By shifting United States focus onto the Cuban people, our commitment to them will match the robust and direct support previously extended to people suffering under repressive regimes, such as those in Eastern Europe, South Africa, Chile, and other countries where democratic change was achieved from the ground up.
Recommendations Increase Support for the Development of Cuban Civil Society It is a well established fact that Vaclav Havel’s Charter 77 in Czechoslovakia and labor union movements like Solidarity in Poland gave rise to the creation of independent civil society groups which eventually mounted successful challenges to their respective authoritarian regimes.
In an Eastern Europe under communism, these independent civil society groups built islands of independent thought and action; they created popular movements that were well organized and became effective purveyors of truth and information to the general population.
Their success was largely a result of their brave and determined efforts and a confluence of both internal and external political factors; yet without the determined support of nations like the United States, their triumph may have been delayed.
The Cuban dissident 7 CNN, April 10, 2008, United States terror report cites Venezuela, Iran 8 International Peace Academy, April 2005, Civil Society and Democratic Transitions in the DRC, Burundi and Rwanda, Mashood Issaka and Batabiha Bushoki 5 movement has proven to possess the same determination, courage and skill as their Eastern European counterparts; they only lack the effective, direct, and coordinated support the Europeans received.
It was likewise critical in the late 1990’s and early 2000 in supporting efforts to topple Slobodan Milošević by infusing opposition groups such as the student movement Otpor and the Democratic Opposition of Serbia with significant direct aid.
United States government assistance to these groups increased from $10 million in 1999 to $31 million in 2000, the year Milošević was ousted.
Much of these funds were distributed by the United States Agency for International Development Office of Transition Initiatives , and in great part, were in the form of direct cash assistance.
Today, USAID-based assistance for democracy promotion in Cuba is crippled by several factors, the most critical being a banning of cash aid or remittances to opposition groups on island.
In 1997, a mid-level Clinton Administration official arbitrarily imposed a ban on cash aid claiming he was fearful the funds might be used to try to assassinate Fidel Castro.
The obviously flawed thinking that led to this department-level policy has gone unchallenged through the last two presidential administrations, even though Administration officials have recognized the counterproductive nature of such a policy.
First, once a democratic transition begins to take place, civil society organizations are critical in representing mass interests and affecting government decisionmaking.
Secondly, these organizations act as important conduits for the interpretation of information controlled and disseminated by the new government to the general populace and at the same time exerting some influence over the public.
And finally, they are critical actors in helping to implement the decisions, policy and directives of a government embarking on a democratic process.
Cuba’s independent civil society and opposition groups, as well as the Cuban populace in general, are in dire need of our support in order to continue to build a parallel society and institutions that are critical to pressing for democratic change and for ensuring an enduring democratic transition.
Cuban-Americans are in the best position to assess the needs of Cubans on the island and can most efficiently direct essential remittances to them.
Not only will such a policy provide increased humanitarian aid but it will also permit the Cuban people to become more independent from the State in meeting basic needs and in creating and developing civil society.
An increase in the level of remittances is critical at this juncture due to the impact of last season’s hurricanes and the dire humanitarian situation on the ground in Cuba.
In 2004, the Bush Administration restricted personal hygiene items, seeds, fishing equipment, and soap-making equipment from allowable humanitarian gift parcel items.
The real effect of these measures has been to deprive Cuban-Americans the ability to send basic needs items to their family members in Cuba.
The humanitarian crisis on the ground in Cuba today in the wake of last season’s hurricanes makes the reversal of these additional restrictions all the more critical at this stage.
The internal ban imposed in 1997 has remained and is perhaps the greatest obstacle to delivering efficient and substantive support to Cuba’s opposition and independent civil society groups.
Eliminating this ban would allow Cuban groups to receive direct aid in a much more expeditious manner and would also curtail the instances of abuse and misappropriation of funding that has been alleged with some U.S.-based NGOs receiving USAID grants.
Impose a Cost-Share requirement for U.S.-based NGOs—USAID should implement and enforce a cost-share requirement for all U.S.-based non-profits seeking to obtain funding for Cuba democracy programs.
Many of USAID’s recipient organizations, the majority of which are located in Miami, have relied almost exclusively on government grants either through USAID or NED for their existence.
This has created a situation where many grantees spend the majority of the government funds on salaries and overhead costs here in the United States and use very little in direct support of Cuban groups.
Allow sub-granting to Cuba-based Independent Civil Society Organizations— USAID should allow and encourage sub-granting to independent civil society groups in Cuba by USAID-Cuba grantee organizations.
The process of sub-granting to independent groups in Cuba will truly help build organic NGOs in Cuba—a vital part of establishing a functioning civil society that can take on the grass roots responsibilities of a democratic transition.
It also provides for a more effective system of support delivery that would allow opposition or civil society groups to grow and carry out their programs.
Require USAID-Cuba grantees to spend at least 70% of the funds in programs directed to aid Cuban Civil Society.
A minimum of 70% of government funding received by grantee recipients should be dedicated to direct aid to the Cuban people.
Promote the development and growth of microenterprises in Cuba by permitting private micro-loans.
The growth of Cuba’s independent economic sector is vital to the growth of an independent civil society as a whole and is critical to preparing and training Cubans for a post-Castro, democratic era.
Permitting Cuban-Americans and others, under license, to send cash, building materials, agricultural implements and provide services to independent, private entrepreneurs not affiliated with the regime for the establishment of micro-enterprises, such as artisans and family-owned small businesses, and the building and repair of private family residences affected by last season’s hurricanes would have an indelible and immediate impact on the growth of Cuba’s independent economic sector and civil society as a whole.
Increase People-To-People Exchanges During the Carter and Clinton Administrations, people-to-people exchanges to Cuba were expanded, though for very different strategic reasons.
In 1977, President Jimmy Carter announced the opening of general license travel to Cuba as a sign of rapprochement.
In 2004, the Bush Administration further restricted Cuban-American humanitarian gift parcels, prohibiting the inclusion of such items as toothpaste, soap, and clothing.
Rather than opening up avenues for the delivery of aid and information, we have managed to make it increasingly more difficult to get help to even those brave dissidents who risk their lives.
A prime example of this is the restriction placed on limiting the types of aid allowed to be sent in gift parcels to the Cuban people.
Communist regimes have frequently used the deprivation of food and basic necessities as a way to control the masses.
We have seen many examples throughout history, including the Serbian regime under Milosevic, the Iraqi regime under Sadaam Hussein, the North Korean regime under Kim Jong-Il, and the Cuban regime under the reign of Fidel and Raul Castro.
In Cuba, the black market for goods and services has become increasingly important.
Following last season’s hurricanes, the regime’s inability to provide enough to meet even the most basic demands has become much more evident.
United States policy should then allow for direct support to the Cuban people with the purpose of assisting Cubans in meeting their most basic needs and equally as important, helping to break their dependency on the State.
Purposeful travel to Cuba is also an important element in transferring news and information as well as providing a means with which to deliver direct aid and support.
Purposeful travel differs from other types of travel, such as commercial tourism, in that it explicitly seeks to put Cubans in contact with those interested in helping the development of an independent Cuban civil society and encourages the type of exchange that is both mutually beneficial and free of State control and manipulation.
These measures have limited the ability for Cuban-American family members to deliver humanitarian aid and to act as important conduits for objective news and information to the island.
Now, more than ever, we need to provide effective vehicles of support and communication—Cuban-Americans are undoubtedly our greatest ambassadors of freedom to the Cuban people.
We believe, however, that it is important to ensure that safeguards are in place to limit the abuse by individuals who may utilize the accessibility of frequent travel to Cuba for illicit purposes that circumvent United States law.
Support for the Cuban People, Humanitarian Support, Academic Study, and Cultural Exchange.
Encouraging and increasingly purposeful people-to-people exchanges promote the ability to exchange information in a way that is beneficial to the development of Cuba’s independent civil society.
The ability for American institutions to travel to Cuba to provide support and training are critical in laying the groundwork for a civil society that is equipped to take on the responsibilities of an open and democratic system.
Improve Communication to Advance Freedom of Information Western broadcasts into the former Eastern European bloc were significant in helping to deliver a message of hope and solidarity.
They provided a vehicle for objective news and information to those living under the cloak of communist censorship.
Radio Free Europe was perhaps one of the most successful examples of how the free flow of news and information can have an indelible impact on supporting a transition to democracy.
RFE’s programming content focused on issues that pointed out the clear contradictions of communist practices with the exercise of individual freedoms.
The discussion of topics ranged from the negative experiences of farmers with agricultural collectivization and the persecution of those attempting to exercise their right to practice a religion of their choosing to the government’s restrictions over reading material and suppression of culture.
Radio Free Europe boasted a huge audience throughout the Eastern bloc particularly in Poland where RFE played a critical role in “bringing down at least three party leaders and was instrumental in sustaining the Solidarity trade union when it was forced underground by martial law.
It would be a huge effort for police to control the channels you get on TV or the phone numbers you are allowed to dial.
Radio Marti was established by President Reagan in 1983 at the urging of this institution’s founder and former Chairman, Jorge Mas Canosa, and began transmitting a signal to Cuba in 1985.
The purpose was to emulate the work of RFE and VOA in the communist bloc by providing a source of news and information to the Cuban people.
The television station has never been able to transmit to a wide audience because the Cuban regime expends extensive resources in blocking its signal while the United States has failed to counter by employing technological advances in trying to overcome the jamming.
Radio and television transmissions to Cuba have a critical role to play in helping to precipitate democratic change.
Yet through successive Administrations, a lack of proper oversight has allowed the Office of Cuba Broadcasting to veer off course.
The General Accounting Office recently documented some of the serious flaws that have led listenership ratings in Cuba to drop from a once impressive 70% to today’s dismal 3% figure.
Prominent Cuban dissidents who represent an umbrella group called the “Agenda for a Transition” recently documented their own complaints regarding the content of programming and the quality of leadership at the Marti’s.
As the recent GAO Report explains, change at Radio and TV Marti is needed.
These critical communication tools must return to their original purpose of disseminating truthful and balanced information and promoting democratic ideals to the people of Cuba.
Just as Radio Liberty and Radio Free Europe, with the direct support of the United States, played a key role in delivering freedom to Eastern Europe, Radio and TV Marti are essential to achieve freedom in Cuba.
According to OCB reports, at one point nearly 70% of the Cuban population tuned in to Radio Marti.
However, for the last several years the audience has been diminishing due to programming and management deficiencies.
Now is the time to act to save and improve this immensely valuable tool in promoting democracy.
Telecommunications upgradesThe United States government should allow for the improvement, upgrading, and installation of telecommunications equipment that will facilitate increased telephone traffic between the United States and Cuba.
Currently, calls to Cuba are subject to some of the highest international rates.
We need to extend and improve all methods of direct communication that undermine Cuban regime-imposed censorship and that expose Cubans to news and information from abroad.
Apply Targeted Bilateral and Multilateral Diplomatic Efforts Reestablish semi-annual migration talks.
In 2004, the Bush Administration suspended semi-annual migration talks with the Cuban regime.
The migration talks allowed for an opportunity to broach a wide range of issues that went beyond the discussion of visa allocation.
The limited contact that has existed since then has been counterproductive in several ways.
It has negatively impacted our ability to influence events; however limited that influence might be, it has closed down one of the few formal conduits of information that existed, and it has sent the wrong message to the international community.
Remove restrictions on CUBINT travel within the United States, contingent upon the Cuban government doing the same with USINT personnel inside Cuba.
In 2004, the Bush Administration imposed restrictions on the travel of CUBINT and Cuba United Nations Mission personnel to a 25-mile radius surrounding their respective offices.
The Cuban regime reciprocated by limiting USINT personnel movements to a 25mile radius around USINT in Havana.
The unintended consequence of this action has been that it has severely impacted the ability of USINT personnel to engage with the Cuban people, particularly those in the democratic opposition outside of the capital.
Their interaction with members of the Cuban opposition and with the Cuban population as a whole is limited to those residing in Havana.
This has resulted in the inability to provide adequate analysis of the situation on the ground.
In order to provide a powerful incentive to reformers within the regime to push for change,e.
Government officials and members of the Cuban military who have not participated in crimes against the Cuban people, they must understand that the United States encourages their participation in a post-transition government.
Such a clear message of support and friendship from the United States government will undoubtedly assist in strengthening any existing attempts at reform and promoting the emergence of new efforts.
Encourage, and develop international cooperation in support of Cuban civil society.
Multilateral efforts by the international community will serve as additional sources of support to the Cuban people in building a civil society.
Such cooperative international efforts resulted in successful peaceful transitions to democracy in Eastern Europe, South Africa, and Chile.
