IT LASTED 45 YEARS, BUT — sit for photographers at the Yalta Conference, February 1945.
After the Japanese attack on Pearl Eastern European nations as long as operate from within to gain control Harbor in 1941, the United States refree elections were held. of the powers of government. alized that the Atlantic and Pacific In April 1945, Roosevelt died and In March 1946, Winston Churchill oceans could no longer protect the naHarry Truman, the United States vice presidelivered a speech in the United tion from an enemy’s air and sea dent, became president.
American leaders concluded American and British leaders met idly transforming the Eastern Eurothat the United States must have a military deagain with Stalin, this time in Potspean countries into communist fense superior to all other nations and dam, Germany.
He said, “an iron curtain has never again permit a hostile power to manently weaken Germany to ensure descended across the continent” that dominate Europe or East Asia. it would never again invade the Soseparated Europe between the demoWhen the Germans invaded the viet Union.
The three leaders agreed cratic and capitalist West from the toSoviet Union in 1941, it lost more to divide Germany and Berlin into talitarian and communist East. than 20 million soldiers and civilians.
American, British, French, and Soviet In early 1947, a Greek communist Russia had also been invaded by occupation zones. minority was fighting a guerilla war Napoleon early in the 19th century The next month, the United States dropped against Greece’s government, which and by the Germans in World War I atomic bombs on two Japanese cities, the British had long helped to defend.
Soviet leaders concluded they must which quickly led to Japan’s surrenThe British informed President Trusecure their national borders and der.
Stalin believed that the United States used man that they no longer could afford never again suffer an invasion. the atomic bombs to intimidate the to provide military and economic aid The capitalist United States and commuSoviet Union after the war.
But their conflicting world Truman and Churchill soon woron the role of defending Greece and views and national security concerns ried that Stalin wanted to expand SoTurkey in order to block possible Sosoon drove them into a Cold War. viet power and communism into viet control of this strategic area near Western Europe.
The Soviets occuStalin believed that communism leader of neighboring Yugoslavia, pied the Eastern European countries would eventually overcome capitalwas their chief supporter. of Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, ism.
His top priority, however, was to In March 1947, Truman adBulgaria, Romania, and the eastern secure the Soviet Union’s borders dressed Congress and asked for milipart of Germany. from attack.
The chief Allied leaders (Franklin border, he wanted not only a weak troops, for Greece and Turkey to preRoosevelt, Winston Churchill, and Germany but pro-Soviet Eastern Euvent them from falling under Soviet Joseph Stalin) met in the Crimean reropean governments. control.
Roosevelt and communist and non-communist port free peoples who are resisting atChurchill agreed to recognize procoalition governments.
West Germany, democratic and independent; East Germany, communist and controlled by the Soviet Union.
Communists won the Chinese Civil War in 1949, but Stalin had done little to help them.
The Soviets aided the communist side in each case, but did not send any troops as the Chinese did in the Korean War.
The world divided along ideological lines into the communist bloc and the Western bloc.
A number of unaligned nations, mostly Truman seemingly committed the Stalin viewed the Truman Docin the developing world, declined to United States to help defend “free peoples” trine and Marshall Plan as a threat. side with either superpower in their anywhere with aid and possibly even He feared these policies were an atcontest between capitalism and comtroops.
Such a commitment had never tempt by the United States to draw Soviet-ocmunism.
But the superpowers often before been made by a United States president. cupied Germany and Eastern Europe used economic and military aid in A few months later, United States diplomat toward Western Europe and away these countries to gain their support. and Soviet expert George F Kennan from Soviet control. gave a name to the policy Truman had Stalin reacted by forbidding any Nuclear Arms Race announced.
In a magazine article, Kenof these countries, soon called “SoThe Soviet Union successfully nan analyzed Soviet behavior.
He also abandoned his polAmericans and then the Soviets devel“it is clear that the main element of any icy of favoring coalition governments oped a more powerful hydrogen bomb.
Truvakia’s coalition government, leaving Each carried one or more warheads man’s “containment policy” also beonly communists in power.
Several many times more powerful than the came known as the Truman Doctrine. months later he blocked all ground atomic bombs dropped on Japan.
In 1959, Fidel Castro led a sucEurope to include Germany and even Truman countered with an airlift of cessful communist revolution in Cuba. the Eastern European countries occufood and supplies that within a year The United States trained anti-communist pied by the Soviets.
Cuban exiles to invade Cuba and overnamed after Secretary of State George In 1949, the U.S., Canada, and throw Castro, but this operation failed.
C Marshall who proposed it, had two countries in Western Europe created Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet purposes.
One was to assist Europe’s NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organileader, believed the attempt to invade recovery from the destructive war.
Cuba was a new American strategy other was to strengthen Western EuroStalin then formed his own military to overthrow existing communist pean governments, threatened by comalliance of Eastern European Soviet governments.
He decided to counter munists who appealed to many with satellites called the Warsaw Pact. this by secretly placing nuclear mispromises of a better life.
During several tense days in October 1962, nuclear war became a The history of past centuries and millennia has been a history of almost ubiquitous wars and sometimes desperate battles, leading to real possibility.
The Process of the aimed at the Soviet Union. emergence of a mutually connected and integral world.
In 1968, the Soviets sent Warsaw Pact troops and fighters in Afghanistan, Nicaragua, and competitive elections.
He proposed the Strategic policy, he was ready to pull out of press a popular movement for Czech Defense Initiative, called “Star Wars” Afghanistan and negotiate an end to freedoms and restore Soviet control. by critics, which would provide a the nuclear-arms race.
The Soviet leader, Leonid Brezhspace-based nuclear missile shield Thus, in the mid-1980s, both sunev, announced that any attempt to against a Soviet attack. perpower leaders were ready to talk. overthrow existing communist govReagan backed the biggest peaceIn 1986, they met for a summit meeternments would result in Soviet miltime military spending build-up in ing at Reykjavik, Iceland.
His goal was miliproposed a 50 percent reduction in known as the Brezhnev Doctrine. tary superiority over the Soviet Union.
Reagan shocked everyone, inperiod of better relations and negotiReagan backed away from his hardcluding his own advisers, when he ations between the superpowers line positions.
Detente views of some of his advisers, he said phase out all nuclear missiles. led to the first treaty that limited nuhe wanted to negotiate with the SoThe two leaders failed to reach a clear missiles. viet Union.
Reagan had experienced “grand bargain” due to Reagan’s inDétente began to collapse in 1979 some scary moments in 1983 when sistence on building his Strategic Dewhen Brezhnev sent Soviet military the Soviets mistook a NATO nuclear fense Initiative, the space-based forces into a “hot war” in Afghanistan to weapons training exercise for a defensive missile shield.
Gorbachev rescue a communist regime, fighting preparation for an actual attack. was concerned that such a “Star Muslim rebels.
President Carter believed In 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev was Wars” shield would enable the U.S. this was a new phase of Soviet commuappointed the new Soviet leader. to attack the Soviet Union without nist expansion toward the oil-rich Persian Gorbachev recognized that the Soviet fearing retaliation.
He responded by greatly ineconomy, especially the civilian secBut the ice had been broken.
The creasing United States military spending. tor, had been weakening for a next year, Gorbachev and Reagan In December 1979, NATO installed decade.
This was largely due to the signed a treaty to destroy all internew intermediate-range nuclear misenormous cost of military spending mediate nuclear missiles in Eastern siles in Western Europe that targeted and subsidizing the economies of the and Western Europe.
This was Eastern European satellites, Cuba, gotiated a system of mutual inspecin response to the Soviet Union’s earand other communist countries. tions, prompting Reagan’s famous lier upgrading of Warsaw Pact missiles Gorbachev’s “new thinking” recaution, “trust, but verify.” that targeted the NATO countries. sulted in his introducing radical After the intermediate missile ‘The Evil Empire’ economic and political reforms that treaty, things began to move fast.
GorRonald Reagan was elected presihe hoped would save the commubachev ordered the complete withdent in 1980 and immediately launched nist system.
He had in mind such drawal of Soviet troops from an aggressive foreign policy against the things as private ownership of busiAfghanistan.
He aided anti-communist consumer goods, and multi-party fighting in Africa and other places.
Russia and the other military takeover of Crimea, a part of dressed the United Nations.
He inSoviet republics like Ukraine then beUkraine heavily populated with Rusformed the world that the Soviet Union came independent countries that sians.
In the past, he has complained was going to reduce its armed forces by began to adopt democratic governabout Poland and three former Soviet a half-million troops.
Putin views Soviets planned to withdraw 50,000 In his resignation speech, Gorbachev this and attempts to draw Ukraine troops and 5,000 tanks from East Gerdeclared, “An end has been put to the and other Eastern Europe countries many, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary.
Explain. governments of Poland, Hungary, Vladimir Putin, the current leader of 2.
He was tracked down, given a quick In 2014, Putin ordered Russia’s trial, and shot by firing squad.
Free multi-party elections soon followed, ACTIVITIES even in the Soviet Union itself.
Each group will write a single sentence thesis statement in answer to Eastern Europe surprised everyone. the question.
Finally, each group will present its thesis statement and evidence to many, which had been the core of the rest of the class.
In March 1946, Winston Churchill, no longer prime minister of Great Gorbachev agreed that the reuniBritain due to Parliamentary elections, delivered his “Iron Curtain” speech fied Federal Republic of Germany in the United States A few days later, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin responded to could become a NATO alliance memChurchill’s speech in an interview published in a Soviet newspaper. ber.
He concluded Germany would be Each student should have a copy of Churchill vs.
Using the documents as your source, explain how Churchill and The Soviet Union consisted of 15 Stalin have answered the following questions.
Answer separately for “republics,” all controlled by the ceneach leader.
Specifically cite passages from the documents as evitral government in Moscow, Russia. dence for your answers.
Be prepared to report your answers, with reasons and evidence, to the class.
The Germans were able to make their invasion through 9 ... 9 these countries because, at the time, governments hostile 10 10 A shadow has fallen upon the scenes so lately lighted by to the Soviet Union existed in these countries.
Nobody knows what Soviet Russia and 11 of the German invasion, the Soviet Union has irrevocably 12 its Communist international organisation intends to do in 12 lost in battles with the Germans, and also during the Ger13 the immediate future, or what are the limits, if any, to 13 man occupation and through the expulsion of Soviet citi14 their expansive and proselytising tendencies.
I have a 14 zens to German slave labor camps, about 7 million people. 15 strong admiration and regard for the valiant Russian peo15 In other words, the Soviet Union has lost in men several 16 ple and for my wartime comrade, Marshal Stalin.
There is 16 times more than Britain and the United States together. deep sympathy and goodwill in Britain . . . towards the 17 peoples of all the Russias and a resolve to persevere 17 It may be that some quarters are trying to push into obliv18 through many differences and rebuffs in establishing last18 ion these sacrifices of the Soviet people which insured the 19 ing friendships.
We understand the Russian need to be 19 liberation of Europe from the Hitlerite yoke. 20 secure on her western frontiers by the removal of all pos20 But the Soviet Union cannot forget them.
We welcome Russia to her 21 therefore, what can be surprising in the fact that the So22 rightful place among the leading nations of the world.
We 22 viet Union, in a desire to ensure its security for the future, 23 welcome her flag upon the seas.
How 25 ian people and our own people on both sides of the Atlantic. can one, without having lost one’s reason, qualify these It is my duty however, for I am sure you would wish me to peaceful aspirations of the Soviet Union as “expansionist 26 26 state the facts as I see them to you, to place before you certendencies” of our Government?. . . 27 27 tain facts about the present position in Europe.
The growth of the influence of com30 30 line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and munism cannot be considered accidental.
Athens alone . . . is free to decide its future at 37 37 mon people from small houses, patting them on the shoulan election under British, American and French observa38 38 der in a lordly manner and pretending to be their friend. tion.
The Russian-dominated Polish Government has been 39 39 But these people are not so simpleminded as it might apencouraged to make enormous and wrongful inroads 40 40 pear at first sight.
Common people, too, have their opinupon Germany, and mass expulsions of millions of Ger41 41 ions and their own politics.
And they know how to stand mans on a scale grievous and undreamed-of are now takup for themselves. 42 ing place.
The Communist parties, which were very small 42 43 in all these Eastern States of Europe, have been raised to 43 It is they, millions of these common people, who voted Mr 44 pre-eminence and power far beyond their numbers and 44 Churchill and his party out in England, giving their votes to 45 are seeking everywhere to obtain totalitarian control.
