In doing so, the essay finds that Cold War scholars described Khrushchev's decision making as calculated, reasonable, and justifiable but post Cold War scholars described his decisions as risky.
Such differing assessments are likely due to the significantly greater material available to post Cold War scholars; a number of U.S., Soviet and Eastern European sources have been declassified.
Kennedy and his fellow American citizens, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had his nation’s military deploy nuclear tipped missiles to Cuba.
After a United States imposed naval blockade of Cuba and negotiations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the U.S., the crisis ended.
It was a peaceful settlement that primarily involved the removal of missiles from Cuban soil, the removal of United States missiles from Turkey, and a United States non-invasion pledge of Cuba.
His decisions have been continually debated, especially whether he made a sound decision to deploy the missiles in the first place.
Generally, historians writing from the 1960s to the 1980s appear to believe that the USSR’s move in placing missiles on Cuban soil was relatively calculated, reasonable, and justifiable.
Further highlighting this belief of caution, scholars also believed that the Soviet Union’s assessment was that such a deployment would not result in a strong reaction from the United States.
Moreover, they tended to see Khrushchev’s decision as a means to provide the USSR with a strategic military advantage and to maintain the status quo of other nations not having nuclear weapons.
However, the assessment of Khrushchev’s decision-making drastically changes following the end of the Cold War in the early 1990s.
Scholars began to show that the Soviet Union’s deployment decision was risky, especially since there is recently unearthed evidence to suggest that the Soviets believed that it would prompt a strong American reaction.
Further lending credence to this idea is that Secretary Khrushchev may have been emotional in defending Cuba, especially since he suffered humiliation by having the United States place missiles in Turkey, directly pointed at the Soviet Union.
Unless the author pointed out otherwise and with Secretary Khrushchev being a clear and undisputed leader of the Soviet Union, the USSR and the Secretary’s decision-making are seen as synonymous within this paper.
The available evidence shows that Khrushchev’s decision to place nuclear missiles on Cuba in 1962 was a much riskier and emotional move than previously understood by historians of the Cold War.
From the 1960s to 1980s, many scholarly articles indicate that Secretary Khrushchev’s decision to deploy nuclear missiles was not a particularly radical move.
One author implies that the missile’s presence in Cuba was a natural non-aggressive military decision from the Soviet Union’s perspective; after all, USSR missile placement in Europe already threatened Western European nations with little resistance.
There seemed to be little reason for Secretary Khrushchev's decision for USSR missile placement in Cuba, which threatened the United States, to be any different.
This was further supported by then National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy who believed that Khrushchev might have decided to deploy missiles to Cuba to counterbalance the United States weapons in Europe.
Further reinforcing the belief that the Soviet Union acted cautiously was the USSR’s belief, prior to the crisis, that the United States would also see the deployment as a moderate move and unworthy of reaction.
From the Soviet Union’s perspective, they believed that the United States would not interfere based on a lack of American actions during and after the disastrous U.S. sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion.
During the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, the Soviet Union saw the United States as reluctant to commit its own forces; most crucially, during the invasion, the United States did not provide air support as originally planned.
Even after the failed invasion, the United States did not interfere with USSR military assistance to Cuba.
Even though military assistance was relatively substantial; one author writes, “large shipments of tanks and artillery accompanied by several thousand technicians and military adviser” were sent to Cuba.
An Analysis of Soviet Calculations and Behavior,” World Politics 16, no. , doi:10.2307/2009577.
Legacies and Lessons,” The Wilson Quarterly 6, no. , 149. the USSR would deploy their nuclear missiles to the island.
In sum, the USSR partly made their decision to deploy nuclear missiles based on seemingly sound history of U.S.-Cuban relations.
For any reaction to be made by the Americans, a multitude of events would have to occur, and, by then, nuclear missiles would be firmly employed.
American decision-making, especially on such a significant matter, and actual implementation of such decisions would take time.
It was immaterial whether Secretary Khrushchev knowingly committed a radical or non-radical decision to deploy missiles to Cuba, since the United States would simply be too slow in reacting.
One author writes that the Soviet Union decided to place nuclear missiles on Cuban soil because it provided them with an advantage in nuclear parity that they needed.
This reinforces the idea that Secretary Khrushchev was acting relatively cautiously; if it was a significant strategic benefit, the move could be more readily classified as radical or risky as radical moves typically enjoy significantly higher rewards.
Another set of advantages for a deployment of missiles to Cuba would have included areas of Soviet foreign policy, especially as it pertained to China at a time of strained Sino-Soviet relations.
One scholar points out that the Soviets hoped that their success in Cuba would cause the Chinese to trust the Kremlin in its nuclear defense and not develop nuclear missiles of their own.
This would boost the USSR’s sense of security since China, a bordering nation to Russia, would not one day threaten the USSR with nuclear weapons.
Alternatively, the Soviets may have hoped that their missiles being stationed in Cuba would have resulted in a Western and USSR signed peace treaty denying Western Germany to develop nuclear missiles of their own in return for removal of USSR missiles from Cuba.
Again, in the same described manner as China, this would boost the USSR’s sense of security.
This basic rationality of maintaining the status quo reinforces the idea that Secretary Khrushchev was acting in moderation.
In a roundabout fashion, this partially falls in line with the USSR acting cautiously.
If the Soviet Union had acted radically, it stands to reason that they would have had significant potential gains and/or significant potential losses.
On the other hand, if the Soviet Union had acted reasonably, they would have had moderate gains and/or moderate potential losses.
The Soviet Union lost their missiles in Cuba (a moderate loss as it simply maintained the status quo of Cuba being non-nuclear) and gained moderate results in lowering Cold War tensions.
Finally, other scholars point out that Secretary Khrushchev had won moderately favorable results.
Specifically, those scholars argue that fear caused the USSR to back out of its decision to deploy missiles in Cuba.
One author argues that Khrushchev did not make a cautious move at all, and, in fact, he argues quite the opposite.
In direct contrast to previous authors, he argues that the potential benefits of having missiles deployed in Cuba were very high, and the risks were also qualified as being very high.
Moreover, the chances of war with the United States or having to remove the missiles under American pressure were deemed higher than the potential benefits.
Welch, “Crisis Decision Making Reconsidered,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 33, no.
As opposed to previous discussion that centered around time being on the side of the USSR due to the American decision-making process, one scholar has pointed to the length of time for nuclear weapons setup as a hindrance to the Soviet efforts.
The missiles did stand a strong chance of being discovered by the Americans, due to the time/effort required for transporting and setting up such a large-scale nuclear missile deployment along with its associated equipment.
Secretary Khrushchev himself even believed that such a large-scale operation would be detected by Americans and was informed as such by several advisors.
It was only due to the pressures from the Soviet Ministry of Defense that the operation proceeded as planned.
In this context, Khrushchev’s decision to move nuclear weapons to Cuba was a risky gamble, especially due to his fears of detection.
Evidence of Khrushchev’s doubts was likely unavailable and/or classified so it is unlikely that scholars writing between the 1960s and the 1980s could account for this in their assessments.
Moreover, evidence suggests that many in the Soviet leadership, including Khrushchev, believed that President Kennedy would aggressively react to the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
American officials informed Soviet leaders via private and public channels that a crisis would develop if the USSR placed nuclear missiles on Cuban soil.
Therefore, the available evidence suggests that Khrushchev was acting relatively recklessly; he was not only making a gamble but it was a gamble that he knew he might lose.
Such highly classified information regarding public and private channels between the United States and the Soviet Union was likely unknown to scholars writing between the 1960s and the 1980s.
The view of the Soviet need to gain an advantage in nuclear parity is also presented in a different light by historians writing since the end of the Cold War.
Unlike the authors before them, those historians use a broader context; they explain why the Soviet Union needed the advantages, focusing primarily on the USSR losses.
These losses include, but are not limited to, the largest United States military buildup during peacetime and the belief that the United States would attack Cuba.
Further adding to these losses was the suffered humiliation from President Kennedy’s administration at the proclamation that the long-believed missile gap between the USSR and the United States was a myth.
The USSR not only underwent this humiliating statement but it was also true; American satellites could determine that they had four times the number of land-based ICBMs, in comparison to the Soviets.
Secretary Khrushchev even believed that the United States had the upper hand domestically.
This is why Secretary Khrushchev had to do something to preserve the USSR and cut back on its losses.
The Americans had stationed missiles in Turkey, which had enough range to directly threaten several Soviet Union cities.
The missiles became operational in April of 1962 and, likely not coincidentally, this was the same time that Secretary Khrushchev decided on deploying USSR missiles in Cuba.
On one occasion, Secretary Khrushchev even went so far as declaring Turkey as an American puppet; this highlights his views of the United States having unfair strategic benefits well beyond its own territorial limits.
Unlike others in the Soviet leadership who saw SovietCuban relations as a lost cause, Khrushchev was adamant about supporting Castro’s government and even encouraged other Soviet bloc nations like Czechoslovakia to provide military aid to Cuba.
This helps to support the argument that Secretary Khrushchev did not act in a cautious or calculated manner and may have acted more out of emotion and affinity for a new communist regime in Latin America.
Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Missiles of November, ed.
The fact that such important quotations come from Chinese sources indicates that scholars of today have greater access to materials unknown to scholars of the past.
As mentioned above, a successful deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles to Cuba could change the worsening position of the USSR to its benefit in the Cold War competition with the United States.
A deployment of missiles would aid in a worldwide buildup of the USSR’s own forces, which would address its concern of the American military buildup and the missile gap.
Plus, the USSR’s concern of an invasion of Cuba could be thwarted by a nuclear deterrent.
Thirdly, the Soviet concern of an attack on its soil could be mitigated by having a nuclear deterrent so close to the United States homeland.
Moreover, it is possible that a nuclear presence in Cuba could present enough of a victory to distract Soviet citizens from their low standards of living.
Finally, just as nuclear missiles stationed in Turkey would threaten USSR cities, it would be a balance to have nuclear missiles stationed in Cuba threatening American cities.
A reasonable move would not alleviate these concerns; radical action was needed.
Perhaps most radical of the USSR’s decisions was the amount of authority that the local Soviet commander had in Cuba.
He was authorized to launch nuclear missiles at the United States without additional authorizations or codes from Moscow.
Considering that such a launch would likely ignite into a full-blown nuclear conflict between the USSR and the United States, a more cautious move would certainly have not provided the local commander such authority.
In his writings after the Cold War, he argued that humans are too fallible and nuclear weapons are too dangerous for a hair trigger alert policy to be in place.
Considering that a singular individual from the Soviet Union, the local commander in Cuba, had such a power as mentioned above, strongly suggests that the USSR acted rashly.
There is even evidence to suggest that Secretary Khrushchev acted rashly during the crisis.
Soviet weaponry on the island for defense, or allow Soviet troops stationed at Cuba to be granted the authority to defend themselves with short-range nuclear weapons.
All three of these options express very little hope for diplomatic measures to take effect, as all options could have easily escalated into nuclear warfare.
This is yet another clear example that scholars writing between the 1960s and the 1980s would not have been able to make assessments on the whole picture for lack of evidence.
The Russian Protocol 62, previously classified, provided the evidence that it was Secretary Khrushchev, not hawkish Kremlin officials, who upped the ante of diplomatic stakes.
This evidence describes Secretary Khrushchev as the one who increased his demands for the United States to remove its bases in Turkey and Pakistan.
This rash boldness of defending Cuba at whatever the cost, and not including diplomatic options, was also reflected before the crisis.
Finally, it seems that Secretary Khrushchev was determined to make the deployment decision, regardless of the risk.
He received advice from several advisors stating that Fidel Castro may not even desire such weapons.
After all, the last military aid request from Cuba asked for conventionally armed missiles and a 10,000 Soviet troop deployment.
Reinforcing the idea that the deployment of missiles was a rather bold decision, Secretary Khrushchev painted the deployment of missiles as an “offensive policy”; this was not a defensive or a moderate policy.
It should be noted that, ultimately, Secretary Khrushchev took the more diplomatic approach towards the end of the crisis by agreeing to withdraw missiles from Cuba, much to the displeasure of many fellow communist nations, including Cuba and China.
Moreover, despite Castro urging Secretary Khrushchev to start a nuclear war in the event of an American attack on Cuba, the Soviet leader ultimately chose a less aggressive path.
However, this article is primarily concerned with analyzing Khrushchev’s decision-making in planning the crisis and partly during the crisis.
As such, there were relatively few scholarly works on Secretary Khrushchev’s decision-making.
Surprisingly, historians and other scholars writing between the 1960s and the 1980s often included the mention of the USSR gaining benefits but gave little consideration of the possible negatives to such a deployment.
The positives primarily reference the moderate gains to be expected from the deployment; this includes a strategic military boost of having missiles that could easily strike the United States homeland and maintaining the status quo of China and West Germany not having nuclear weapons.
These studies therefore characterize Khrushchev’s decision-making in deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba as moderate, cautious, and calculated.
These studies emphasize that Khrushchev had knowledge that the Soviet missiles placed on Cuba had a strong chance in being detected and that he understood that such a deployment decision was fraught with risks.
They also show that Khrushchev’s bold move was driven by his desire to protect Cuba against all odds and to change the status quo of the Cold War competition with the United States.
This article has argued that the disparity of views between Cold War scholars and postCold War scholars regarding Khrushchev’s decision-making towards Cuba is primarily due to the lack of primary sources that produced such different assessments.
They all helped present a view of Khrushchev who was much more risk prone, emotional, and rash in his decision to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba than previous historians, who saw him as cautious and moderate, have ever been able to piece together.
