The precise location of the Soviet nuclear storage bunkers at Bejucal and Managua is revealed for the first time in a new book by Washington Post reporter Michael Dobbs based on interviews with Soviet veterans and raw United States intelligence film obtained from the National Archives.
Declassified CIA documents show that United States intelligence analysts at the time concluded that the sites could not be used for the storage of nuclear weapons because of the lack of visible security measures such as guard posts and extra fencing.
One of the biggest remaining mysteries of the Cuban missile crisis has now been solved.
After learning about the existence of medium-range Soviet missiles targeted on the United States on October 16, 1962, President Kennedy repeatedly pressed the CIA for information on the warheads in order to be able to gauge the scope of the threat.
The intelligence community made numerous attempts to locate the warheads, but was unable to do so.
While the CIA suspected that the Soviets had brought nuclear warheads to Cuba, it lacked conclusive evidence until after the missile crisis was over.
In January 1963, the CIA succeeded in tying a Swedish-built Soviet freighter, the Aleksandrovsk, to the transportation of nuclear weapons to Cuba.
Analysts showed that the Aleksandrovsk had sailed to Cuba from a nuclear storage depot near the Soviet Navy port at Severomorsk with specially configured vans on deck used for the transportation of nuclear warheads.
The subsequent reconstruction of the movements of the Aleksandrovsk is available here.
The Alapyevsk, sister ship of the Aleksandrovsk The Aleksandrovsk was meant to dock in Mariel, Cuba, but it was diverted to the port of La Isabela on the morning of October 23 after President Kennedy declared a naval blockade around Cuba.
Its cargo included 24 1-megaton warheads for the intermediate range R-14 missile and 44 14-kiloton warheads for the FKR cruise missile.
The R-14 warheads remained on board the ship, while the FKR warheads were sent to Oriente province for targeting on Guantanamo.
Another Soviet ship, the Indigirka, had previously arrived in Mariel on October 4.
Its cargo included 36 1-megaton warheads for the medium-range R-12 missile, 36 14-kiloton warheads for FKR missiles, twelve 2-kiloton warheads for Luna/FROG tactical missiles, and six 12-kiloton atomic bombs for IL-28 bombers.
View Larger Map Details of the movement of all the warheads are provided in One Minute to Midnight.
The R-12 warheads offloaded from the Indigirka were taken to the nuclear storage center near Bejucal, according to Soviet veterans interviewed by Dobbs.
The Soviets had built an underground ammunition storage facility at Bejucal in late 1961, according to this declassified CIA memo.
The lack of significant security at the Bejucal site—it was protected by only one fence—caused CIA analysts to revise their assessment.
A detailed re-examination of the raw intelligence photographs, combined with interviews with Soviet officers handling the warheads, proves that Bejucal was the central nuclear warhead storage depot.
The single security fence, circular road, and remains of the bunker facility are visible in Google Earth, and on Satellite view on the Google Map version above.
Key to the identification of Bejucal is the presence of nuclear storage vans, similar to those transported to Cuba on board the Aleksandrovsk.
The vans were photographed by low-level United States reconnaissance missions on October 23, October 25, and October 26.
The San Cristobal MRBM Site Nr 1 in 1962 and in 1992 The Soviets were building bomb-resistant nuclear storage facilities at all the missile sites, but these structures were still incomplete by the end of October.
On the afternoon of October 26, the Soviet commander on Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, decided to send a consignment of warheads from Bejucal to the R-12 missile sites around Sagua La Grande.
The warheads for the tactical Luna/FROG missiles were stored at another underground facility, near Managua, five miles to the northeast of Bejucal.
United States intelligence planes also took photographs of this site, but the lack of obvious security measures again confused the analysts.
As soon as the missile crisis was over, Khrushchev ordered both the Aleksandrovsk and the Indigirka to return to the Soviet Union with the warheads.
The United States apologized for the incident, without suspecting that the nuclear arsenal was on board the Soviet vessel.
More information on the nuclear storage sites, including the atomic bombs stored in a seaside property previously used by Fulgencio Batista, is available in One Minute to Midnight, available through Amazon.com.
