The missiles were placed to protect Cuba from attacks by the United States.
The placement was rationalized by the Soviets as retaliation for the United States placing deployable nuclear warheads in the United Kingdom, Italy and most significantly, Turkey.
The crisis started on October 16, 1962, when United States reconnaissance was shown to United States President John F Kennedy revealing Soviet nuclear missile installations on the island, and ended twelve days later on October 28, 1962, when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev announced that the installations would be dismantled.
Background Fidel Castro took power in Cuba after the Cuban Revolution of 1959.
Soon afterwards, he took actions harmful to American trade interests on the island.
In response, the United States stopped buying Cuban sugar and refused to supply its former trading partner with much needed oil.
The United States government became increasingly concerned about the new regime.
This tension became a major focus of the Kennedy administration when it first took office in January 1961.
In Havana, fear erupted that the United States might intervene against the Cuban government.
This fear materialized in later 1961 when Cuban exiles, trained by America's CIA, staged an invasion of Cuban territory at the Bay of Pigs.
Although the invasion was quickly repulsed, it intensified a buildup of Cuban defense that was already under way.
United States armed forces then staged Operation Ortsac, a mock invasion of a Caribbean island in 1962.
The purpose of the invasion was to overthrow a leader whose name was in fact Castro spelled backwards.
Although Ortsac was a fictitious name, Castro soon became convinced that the United States was serious about invading Cuba.
Shortly after the Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro declared Cuba to be a socialist state and entered close ties with the Soviet Union.
To Soviet leaders, the missile deployment was a necessary response to desperate military situations.
The Soviets had been cornered by a series of remarkable American successes with military equipment and military intelligence.
For example, by the close of 1962 the United States had a dramatic advantage in nuclear weapons with more than three hundred land-based intercontinental missiles and a fleet of Polaris missile submarines.
The Soviet Union had only four to six land-based ICBMs in 1962, and about one hundred short-range V-1 type missiles that could be launched from surface submarines.
Few in Washington seriously believed that a few dozen ballistic missiles in Cuba could change the essential strategic balance of power.
The prevailing sentiment in Washington was that the Soviet Union was hopelessly outgunned.
By the fall of 1962, America’s arsenal contained three thousand nuclear warheads.
Before his arrest on the first day of the Cuban missile crisis, Colonel Oleg Penkovsky had served as an intelligence agent for the Americans and British.
Melman argues that top officers in the Soviet Union concluded ""that the United States then possessed decisive advantage in arms and intelligence, and that the USSR no longer wielded a credible nuclear deterrent.
In 1961 the United States started deploying 15 Jupiter IRBM nuclear missiles near Izmir, Turkey, which directly threatened cities in the western sections of the Soviet Union.
President Kennedy regarded these missiles as being of questionable strategic value; an SSBN was capable of providing the same cover with both stealth and superior firepower.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had publicly expressed his anger at the Turkish deployment.
The deployment of missiles in Cuba—the first time Soviet missiles were moved outside the USSR—is commonly seen as Khrushchev's direct response to the Turkish missiles.
Soviet Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles on Cuban soil, with a range of 2,000 kilometers , could threaten Washington, D.C. and nearly half of the U.S.'s Strategic Air Command bases , with a flight time of under twenty minutes.
In addition, the U.S.'s radar warning systems oriented toward the USSR would have provided little warning of a launch from Cuba.
Missile deployment Khrushchev devised the deployment plan in May of 1962.
By late July, over sixty Soviet ships were en route to Cuba, some of them carrying military material.
While there, he had been told by French Intelligence that the Soviets were planning to place missiles in Cuba.
He warned President Kennedy that some of the ships were probably carrying missiles.
However, the president, Robert Kennedy, Dean Rusk, and Robert McNamara concluded that the Soviets would not try such a thing.
Kennedy's administration had received repeated claims from Soviet diplomats that there were no missiles in Cuba, nor any plans to place any.
The Soviets claimed they were not interested in starting an international drama that might impact the United States elections in November.
The U-2 flights A photograph of the San Cristobal MRBM launch site taken from a Lockheed U-2 reconnaissance aircraft.
A Lockheed U-2 flight in late August photographed a new series of Surface-to-air missile sites being constructed.
In spite of this, on September 4, 1962 Kennedy told Congress that there were no offensive missiles in Cuba.
On the night of September 8, the first consignment of SS-4 MRBMs was unloaded in Havana.
The planned arsenal was forty launchers, an increase in Soviet first strike capacity of 70 percent.
Perhaps as many as a thousand reports about the missile installations reached Miami.
The reports were evaluated and then considered spurious by United States intelligence.A number of unconnected problems meant that the missiles were not discovered by the United States until a U-2 flight on October 14 clearly showed the construction of an SS-4 site near San Cristobal.
Initially, the United States government kept the information secret, telling only the 14 key officials of the executive committee.
In a televised address on October 22, President Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations.
He proclaimed that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union and would be responded to accordingly.
He also placed a naval ""quarantine"" on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments of military weapons from arriving there.
Kennedy's Options After the Bay of Pigs disaster, the USSR sent conventional missiles, jet fighters, patrol boats and five thousand soldiers and scientists to Cuba, but it was still unclear to the United States whether or not nuclear weapons were based on Cuba.
This group later became known as the ExComm, or Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
Beginning the morning of October 16, this group met frequently to devise a response to the threat.
An immediate bombing strike was dismissed early on, as was a potentially time-consuming appeal to the United Nations.
They eventually rejected a diplomatic solution, narrowing the choice to a naval blockade and an ultimatum, or a full-scale invasion.
A blockade was finally chosen, although there were a number of conservatives who pushed for tougher action.
Soviet and Cuban troop number estimates on Cuba were around 10,000 and 100,000.
Also, United States intelligence was unaware that 12 kiloton-range nuclear warheads had already been delivered to the island and mounted on FROG-3 ""Luna"" short-range artillery rockets.
These missiles could be launched on the authority of the Soviet commander on the island, Issa Pliyev, in the event of an invasion.
An invasion would probably have precipitated a nuclear strike against the invading force, with catastrophic results.
As Fidel Castro noted, there was nothing illegal about the missile installations.
There was concern of the Soviets’ reaction to the blockade, as it had the potential to turn into escalating retaliation.
Kennedy spoke to the American public and the Soviet government in a televised address on October 22.
The United States was surprised at the solid support from its European allies, particularly from the notoriously difficult President Charles de Gaulle of France.
Nevertheless, the British prime minister, Harold Macmillan—as well as much of the international community—did not understand why a diplomatic solution was not considered.
The case was conclusively proved on October 25 at an emergency session of the UN Security Council.
Upon Zorin's refusal, Stevenson produced photographs taken by United States surveillance aircraft showing the missile installations in Cuba.
Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy on October 23 and 24 claiming the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the peaceful intentions of the Soviet Union.
However, the Soviets also delivered two different options for resolution to the United States government.
On October 26, they offered to withdraw the missiles in return for a United States guarantee not to invade Cuba or support any invasion.
The second deal was broadcast on public radio on October 27, calling for the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey in addition to the demands of October 26.
The crisis peaked on October 27, when a U-2 was shot down over Cuba, killing pilot Rudolph Anderson, and another U-2 flight over Russia was almost intercepted when it strayed over Siberia.
This was after Curtis LeMay had neglected to enforce presidential orders to suspend all over-flights.
Kennedy responded by publicly accepting the first deal and sending Attorney General Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to accept the second in private.
The fifteen Jupiter missiles near Izmir, Turkey would be removed six months later.
Kennedy also requested that Khrushchev keep this second compromise out of the public domain.
Some accounts downplay the significance of the removal of the missiles in Turkey as something that President Kennedy had already previously ordered due to their obsolescence.
On October 28, Khrushchev announced that he had ordered the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Satisfied that the Soviets had removed the missiles, President Kennedy ordered an end to the quarantine of Cuba on November 20.
Aftermath The compromise satisfied no one, but it was a particularly sharp embarrassment for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey was not made public.
The USSR gallantly saves the world from nuclear holocaust by not insisting on restoring the nuclear equilibrium.
Khrushchev's fall from power two years later can be partially linked to Politburo embarrassment at both Khrushchev's eventual concessions to the United States and his ineptitude in precipitating the crisis in the first place.
United States military commanders were not happy with the result either.
For Cuba, it was a betrayal by the Soviets whom they had trusted, given that the decisions on putting an end to the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev.
In early 1992 it was confirmed that key Soviet forces in Cuba had, by the time the crisis broke, received tactical nuclear warheads for their artillery rockets, and IL-28 bombers.
General Anatoly Gribkov, part of the Soviet staff responsible for the operation, stated that the local Soviet commander, General Issa Pliyev, had pre-delegated authority to use them if the United States had mounted a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
Other accounts show that Pliyev was given permission to use tactical nuclear warheads only in the most extreme case of an American invasion during which contact with Moscow is lost.
However, when American forces seemed to be readying for an attack , Khrushchev rescinded his earlier permission for Pliyev to use the tactical nuclear weapons, even under the most extreme conditions.
The purpose of this undersea line was to have a way the leaders of the two Cold War countries could communicate directly to be better able to solve a crisis like the one in October 1962.
In the Essence of Decision, Graham T Allison and Philip D Zelikow use the crisis to illustrate multiple approaches to analyzing the actions of the state.
In addition, it is an excellent case study for analysis of success in resolving a military-type standoff without resorting to military aggression.
In October 2002, McNamara and Schlesinger joined a group of other dignitaries in a ""reunion"" with Castro in Cuba to continue the release of classified documents and to further study the crisis.
It was during the first meeting that Secretary McNamara discovered that Cuba had many more missiles than initially thought.
McNamara realized that, Castro and Khruschev, viewed then by the White House inner circle as 'rational men' had been perfectly willing to start a nuclear war over the crisis.
It was also revealed at this conference that an officer aboard a Soviet submarine, named Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov, may have single-handedly prevented the initiation of a nuclear catastrophe.
See also Cold War Cuba John F Kennedy Nikita Khrushchev Soviet Union United StatesNotes ↑ National Security Archive.
Reading on the Cuban missile crisis Allison, Graham T and Philip Zelikow.
Credit is due under the terms of this license that can reference both the New World Encyclopedia contributors and the selfless volunteer contributors of the Wikimedia Foundation.
