Students will outline and define the events that led to both the United States and U.S.S.R. being on the brink of nuclear war.
This will highlight major global policies and negotiations that took place to avoid conflict and nuclear destruction.
In addition, this will help summarize the growing tensions that existed between the United States and U.S.S.R. when Kennedy took office, and elucidate how the Cold War was a continuous ideological conflict.
For an alternative to the timeline layout, have students create a timeline poster to incorporate into a presentation or gallery walk.
Extended Activity Have students create a timeline of events affecting the relationship between the United States and Cuba, led by Fidel Castro.
This will highlight America’s sour relationship with the small, communist nation and how the United States responded over the years.
Students should try to also connect to current day events,e. the Cuban embargo being lifted and improved relations with Cuba in 2015.
Create an image in each cell that depicts the events, using appropriate scenes, characters, and items.
Timelines Copy Activity* Rubric Timeline Create a timeline of important events and people, and explain their significance.
Make sure the dates are correct, and the Photos for Class pictures are historically accurate or significant.
Proficient 33 Points Emerging 25 Points Beginning 17 Points Events and Dates The events chosen for the timeline are significant and important to the overall understanding of the time period.
Most of the events chosen for the timeline are significant and important to the overall understanding of the time period.
Explanations/Descriptions The explanations or descriptions provided for each event are accurate and provide insight into the significance of the events.
The explanations or descriptions provided for each event are mostly accurate and attempt to provide insight into the significance of the events.
There are several glaring inaccuracies in the explanations or descriptions of the events.
There may be little or no insight int the significance of the events, or the information provided may be too limited or missing.
English Conventions There are 0-2 mistakes in spelling, grammar, and mechanics.
Free Edition All storyboards are public and can be viewed and copied by anyone.
Personal Edition The author can choose to leave the storyboard public or mark it as Unlisted.
Unlisted storyboards can be shared via a link, but otherwise will remain hidden.
Teachers can view all of their students’ storyboards, but students can only view their own.
