The Soviet position seemed to be hardening with the arrival of a letter Saturday morning from Khrushchev demanding that the United States remove its Jupiter missiles from Turkey as a condition of Soviet removal of the missiles in Cuba.
In 1953, Stalin died and there was a struggle for leadership of the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev prevailed, becoming party leader on September 7 of that year, and on December 7th of that year he had his main rival, NKVD chief Lavrenty Beria, executed.
Khrushchev's leadership marked a crucial transition for the Soviet Union.
The speech was typical Khrushchev, shrewd and reckless at the same time.
In the summer of 1956, he had to go to Warsaw to personally oversee a crackdown in order to save his own skin.
On March 27, 1958, Khrushchev became Premier of the Soviet Union and established himself as head of both the state and the party.
He began a reform of the economy, stressing the production of consumer goods over heavy industry.
His view of the West as a rival rather than an evil entity alienated China's leadership and led to the Sino-Soviet split in 1960.
Khrushchev was regarded by his political enemies in the Soviet Union as a boorish, uncivilized peasant, with a reputation for interrupting speakers to insult them.
He once interrupted British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan during a speech at the United Nations The Politburo accused him once of hare-brained scheming referring to his erratic policy.
This was the leader of the Soviet Union as major changes were occuring in Cuba.
Following a six-year battle that ended with the toppling of Cuban dictator General Fulgencio Batista on January 1, 1959, Fidel Castro assumed power in Cuba.
The following year, in February, Soviet Deputy First Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan visited Cuba with the intent of moving Cuba away from economic dependence upon the United States This was not the first contact between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
In April 1959, Raul Castro, Fidel's brother and an admitted communist, contacted Moscow with a request for military advisors to help him consolidate his hold over the Cuban military.
Several months after the visit by Mikoyan, on May 7, 1960, Cuba and the Soviet Union officially established diplomatic relations.
On August 28, the United States imposed a trade embargo on Cuba, who in turn, countered by nationalizing about one billion dollars of United States investments in Cuba on October 8.
In September 1960, the first Soviet military assistance arrived on Cuban soil.
By the end of 1960, relations between the United States and Cuba had seriously deteriorated.
On December 19, Cuba and the Soviet Union issued a joint announcement that Cuba would hereafter align itself with the domestic and foreign policies of the Soviet Union and committed itself to solidarity with the Sino-Soviet bloc.
On January 2, 1961, Khrushchev told a gathering at the Cuban Embassy in Moscow, ""alarming news is coming from Cuba at present, news that the most aggressive American monopolists are preparing a direct attack on Cuba.
What is more, they are trying to present the case as though rocket bases are being set up or are already established in Cuba.
The next day, the United States and Cuba severed diplomatic relations, the United States turning over the handling of its affairs to Switzerland and Cuba to Czechoslovakia.
In a message to Kennedy after the outcome was assured, he said, ""aggressive bandit actions cannot save your system.
He had assumed that the United States would land American troops after the initial invasion began to run into trouble, using Marines, and bombing the island with their own planes to ensure an exile victory.
Khrushchev decided that Kennedy had been seriously weakened by the failed invasion and decided it was time to meet with him.
On May 12, he accepted a long-standing invitation to meet with Kennedy and talks were scheduled for June 3-4 in Vienna.
Khrushchev certainly believed that the Bay of Pigs had weakened Kennedy enough that he could take the bold step of placing offensive weapons in Cuba.
Kennedy later told the press that Khrushchev's demands had made the prospects for war very real.
Khrushchev himself was pleased with the outcome and told associates later that he felt Kennedy was someone he could bully.
But if Kennedy displayed weakness toward Khrushchev, he was showing strength toward Castro.
On November 30, 1961, he authorized ""Operation Mongoose,"" a major covert action aimed at overthrowing the Castro government.
