This is history and a historical speech that only proves the Castro regime’s lifelong dream of destroying America.
These missile silos would have been built anyway and how the Castro regime were able to get so deep into construction without the United States knowledge, still baffles the mind.
Many people have forgotten the Missile Crisis because of time but for those Castro adoring so-called Americans who are in favor of lifting the embargo, amnesia takes over.
It’s the same Castro regime that is still controlling Cuba right now, there hasn’t been any change at all, the threat is always there.
They actually feel the Castro regime is changing their ways, turning towards a democracy.
They should pickup their history books and/or start by watching this video.
Nothing in Cuba has changed and nothing will, as long as the same Castro regime depicted in this video is still around.
In exchange, he allowed a Soviet combat brigade to remain in Cuba indefinitely and under “Operation Pot Pie” quietly withdrew 64 United States nuclear missiles from Great Britain, 30 from Italy and 15 from Turkey.
Kennedy publicly promised that the United States would never invade Cuba and applied the Neutrality Act against Cubans fighting against the Castro dictatorship.
The “Kennedy-Khrushchev Understandings” of 1962, that served as the basis for this betrayal of Cuban freedom, is still a partially classified document. firefly July 19, 2012 at 6:21 PM Folks, Cuban exile, Eugenio de Sosa Chabau, who fled Cuba after two decades as a political prisoner ADVISED President John F Kennedy about Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Cuban exiles, while risking their lives, gathered enough information in Cuba to present to the United States government about the missiles arriving in Cuba from Russia.
It wasn’t until October 1962 that flying U-2 planes confirmed the truth.
The Kennedy administration could have saved itself a lot of griefs if they had only taken ACTION when first advised about the missile build up in Cuba from JUST other Cuban exiles.
Cuban exile advised the United States about Cuba’s electronic spying facility at Lourdes, Cuba.
It wasn’t until Stanislas Lunev, a former colonel in the Soviet military intelligence agency GRU, brought it up that the United States started to take notice.
Juan Vivés, “a former Cuban intelligence officer who defected, claims that, for several years after the missile crisis, Castro unsuccessfully tried to build his own missile capable of carrying nuclear weapons.
For the ultra secret project he recruited military engineers and professors from Cuban universities.
The missile, a sort of primitive V-1 bomb similar to the one developed by the Nazis, would use a MiG-21 jet motor.
General Rafael del Pino Díaz, the highest ranking Cuban defector advised the United States in 1983 of castro’s plan to bomb Turkey Point Nuclear Plant.
These are just a few bits of information JUST another Cuban exile has passed on to the United States.
Many in the United States government and the MSM just choose to ignore it.
Rayarena July 19, 2012 at 7:16 PM I believe that for whatever reason–that I cannot fathom–the United States wants castro in power.
As firefly pointed out, castro’s ceaseless hostility to the USA spams decades.
Yet, the United States does not consider castro a threat and every time that Cuban exiles have warned the United States government, they have ignored the warnings.
One thing makes sense, if one continues to make the same mistake over and over again then one is either stupid or simply not forthright.
I don’t think that the United States government and its intelligence forces are stupid.
I think that they are not forthright. asombra July 19, 2012 at 8:07 PM JFK was a disastrous mix of delusional arrogance, inexperience, ignorance, ineptitude and a VERY twisted moral compass, based on a sense of absolute entitlement to whatever he desired, whether that was sexual gratification or political elevation.
It absolutely did not matter what means had to be used to achieve his ends; he was simply entitled to get what he wanted because he was JFK, regardless of what harm that might entail for other people, even for an entire country like Cuba.
We are talking about a very severe and advanced case of hubris, which would have seemed even more grotesque and repulsive if it had not been wrapped in youth, superficial physical and personal appeal, noble-sounding rhetoric and fawning adoration from a besotted media and an infatuated public.
He does to Kennedy mythology pretty much what the Romans did to Carthage. asombra July 19, 2012 at 8:43 PM Kennedy mythology, like Che mythology, only goes to show how easy it can be to manipulate and deceive HUGE numbers of people who are presumably adults of normal intelligence, tolerable education and more or less decent morality.
The older I get, the more it strikes me how very, VERY weak-minded FAR too many people clearly are.
The problem is, I’m not sure that can be remedied. mattmurphy July 19, 2012 at 9:13 PM The really interesting matter is to note the prevalence of extraordinarily silly notions among people of very high intelligence.
Some of those people are certainly immune, but the sheer number of individuals with impressive IQs who nonetheless talk utter malarkey is startling.
To complete the irony lap, many such people pride themselves on not accepting popular “superstitions” like religious faith or patriotism.
Perhaps some average schmo believes in UFOs, but the average sociology professor believes in some variant of socialism.
The premise that human beings, including ourselves, are basically not rational and have to work at intellectual coherence is an admittedly tough conclusion, but I think it’s altogether warranted.
Rayarena July 19, 2012 at 11:10 PM Asombra, Great description and analysis of the JFK–may he burn in Hell for all eternity.
By the way, if I hear “Camelot” mentioned one more time in relationship to his name, I’m going to regurgitate whatever I ate. firefly July 19, 2012 at 11:45 PM Things would have been very different for Cuba if Richard Nixon had won the presidential election in 1960.
We can all thank the Mayor of Chicago, Richard Joseph Daley and Chicago Mob boss Sam Giancana for stealing Illinois and giving it to Kennedy.
By the way, the former Mayor of Chicago, Richard M Daley – and Obama’s buddyis the son of Richard Joseph Daley.
Exactly 48 hours later U-2 photos sat on the President’s desk revealing those “refugee rumors,” complete with nuclear warheads, and pointed directly at Bundy, JFK and their entire staff of sagacious Ivy League wizards.
Until today, the United States has complied with her promise to not interfere with Castro and to not allow anyone else to interfere with Castro” Unreal Jose ""Cubanology"" Reyes July 20, 2012 at 1:58 AM Very Unreal Humberto, what about operation mongoose, CIA blunders galore.
Nixon, who lost by a mere 1%, would have supported and aided the Bay of Pigs invasion.
But this is what happened and why I placed the video there, it’s history.
If the Castro regime is presented with this golden opportunity again, they will take it in a heartbeat.
Afterwards Johnson sends American soldiers half way around the world to defend South Vietnam and Cuba is 90 miles away.
