At any time before your due date you can extend or purchase your rental through your account.
He argues, using a wealth of newly uncovered information, that JFK had become a major threat to the burgeoning military-industrial complex and had to be eliminated through a conspiracy planned by the CIA – “the CIA’s fingerprints are all over the crime and the events leading up to it” not by a crazed individual, the Mafia, or disgruntled anti-Castro Cubans, though some of these may have been used in the execution of the plot.
Horrified by the specter of nuclear annihilation, Kennedy gradually turned away from his long-held Cold Warrior beliefs and toward a policy of lasting peace.
But to the military and intelligence agencies in the United States, who were committed to winning the Cold War at any cost, Kennedy’s change of heart was a direct threat to their power and influence.
Kennedy’s saving grace was that unlike Truman he recognized the evil of nuclear weapons.
Kennedy resisted the Joint Chiefs of Staff and most of his civilian advisers, who pressured him for a preemptive attack on Soviet missile sites in Cuba.
Thanks to the sheer grace of God, to Kennedy’s resistance to his advisers, and to Nikita Khrushchev’s willingness to retreat, humanity survived the crisis.Kennedy, however, survived it for only a little more than a year.
As we shall see, because of his continuing turn from nuclear war toward a vision of peace in the thirteen months remaining to him, he was executed by the powers that be.Two critical questions converge at Kennedy’s assassination.
The second question may be key to the first, because there is nothing so threatening to systemic evil as those willing to stand against it regardless of the consequences.
So we will try to see this story initially through the life of John Kennedy, to understand why he became so threatening to the most powerful military-economic coalition in history that its wielders of power were willing to risk everything they had in order to kill him.In assessing the formation of John Kennedy’s character, biographers have zeroed in on his upbringing as a rich young man in a dysfunctional marriage.
Seen through that lens, Kennedy was a reckless playboy from youth to death, under the abiding influence of a domineering, womanizing father and an emotionally distant, strictly Catholic mother.
They do not explain the later fact of President Kennedy’s steely resistance to the pressures of a military-intelligence elite focused on waging war.Kennedy’s life was formed, first of all, by death—the hovering angel of death reaching down for his life.
He saw death approach repeatedly—from scarlet fever when he was two and three years old, from a succession of childhood and teen illnesses, from a chronic blood condition in boarding school, from what doctors thought was a combination of colitis and ulcers, from intestinal ailments during his years at Harvard, from osteoporosis and crippling back problems intensified by war injuries that plagued him the rest of his life, from the adrenal insufficiency of Addison’s disease2 … To family and friends, Jack Kennedy always seemed to be sick and dying.Yet he exuded an ironic joy in life.
Both the weaknesses and strengths of his character drew on his deeply held belief that death would come soon.
By smiling at his own death, he was free to resist others’ deaths.John Kennedy’s World War II experience was characterized by a willingness to give his life for his friends.
Two years before the Hiroshima bombing, Kennedy was a PT boat commander in the South Pacific.
On the night of August 1–2, 1943, he was at the wheel of his PT 109, patrolling Blackett Strait in the Solomon Islands, a corridor of water used by Japanese destroyers.
There was a terrific roar, as the gasoline aboard went up in flames.The section of the boat Kennedy was on stayed afloat.
Kennedy, who had been on the Harvard swimming team, swam through the dark to shouts, finding his badly burned engineer, McMahon.
He coaxed and cajoled others not to give up, then towed McMahon a hundred yards back to the floating hulk identified by a crew member’s blinking light.
All the survivors in the water reached the tilted deck and collapsed on it.
They wondered how long it would take for them to be rescued by PTs from their base on Rendova Island, forty miles away.When daylight and noon came with no rescue, the group abandoned the sinking hulk.
They swam to a small, deserted island, in the midst of larger islands with Japanese soldiers.
Nine of the crew held onto a two-by-six timber and kicked and paddled their way to the island.
Kennedy again towed McMahon, holding a strap from McMahon’s life preserver in his teeth.Kennedy would swim in ten-minute spurts, then pause to rest and check on McMahon.
A chronicler of this episode described it from McMahon’s point of view:“Being a sensitive person, McMahon would have found the swim unbearable if he had realized that Kennedy was hauling him through three miles or so of water with a bad back.
Floating on his back with his burned hands trailing at his sides, McMahon could see little but the sky and the flattened cone of Kolombangara.
He could not see the other men, though while all of them were still together, he could hear them puffing and splashing.
The swim seemed endless, and he doubted that it would lead to salvation.
He was hungry and thirsty and fearful that they would be attacked by sharks.
The awareness that he could do nothing to save himself from the currents, the sharks or the enemy oppressed him.
They staggered up the beach and ducked under trees, barely avoiding a Japanese barge that chugged by and failed to see them.When early evening came with no sign of help, Kennedy told the crew he would swim from the island out into Ferguson Passage, a mile and a half away, where the PT boats usually patrolled after dark.
He took the 109’s lantern, wrapped in a life jacket, to signal the boats.
Kennedy swam for half an hour, forded a reef, then swam for another hour, reaching his intended point of interception.
After a while, he saw the flares of an action beyond the island of Gizo, ten miles away.
The PT boats had taken a different route.Kennedy tried to swim back to his men.
He dropped his shoes, but he held onto the heavy lantern, his symbol of contact with his fellows.
A few hours before he had wanted desperately to get to the base at Rendova.
Now he only wanted to get back to the little island he had left that night, but he didn’t try to get there; he just wanted to.
The tide shoves and sucks through the islands and makes the currents curl in odd patterns.
His mind was blank, but his fist was tightly clenched on the kapok around the lantern.
The current moved in a huge circle—west past Gizo, then north and east past Kolombangara, then south into Ferguson Passage.
Early in the morning the sky turned from black to gray, and so did Kennedy’s mind.
The natives carried Kennedy’s SOS message, scratched on a coconut shell, to an Australian Navy coastwatcher, Reg Evans, who was working behind enemy lines.
Evans radioed the United States Navy for assistance.In the meantime, Kennedy and fellow officer Barney Ross, not realizing the nearness of their rescue, almost died in another failed effort to signal PTs at night in Ferguson Passage.
They found a dugout canoe, and paddled it into high waves in the darkness.
The waves threw the two men against a reef, but they again survived.Kennedy’s crew never forgot his commitment to their lives.
What Kennedy took first from his war experience was a heightened sense of the precious value of his friends’ lives.
Among the wartime deaths he mourned besides the PT boat casualties were those of his brother Joe Kennedy, Jr., and brother-in-law Billy Hartington.
As we have seen, since childhood chronically poor health had brought him near death many times.
He had scarlet fever when he was very young, and serious back trouble when he was older.
When we were growing up together we used to laugh about the great risk a mosquito took in biting Jack Kennedy—with some of his blood the mosquito was almost sure to die.
He was in Chelsea Naval Hospital for an extended period of time after the war, had a major and painful operation on his back in 1955, campaigned on crutches in 1958.
I never heard him say anything that would indicate that he felt God had dealt with him unjustly.
Those who knew him well would know he was suffering only because his face was a little whiter, the lines around his eyes were a little deeper, his words a little sharper.
What is infinitely far worse is that we have a world which has unleashed the terrible powers of atomic energy.
Above all, day and night, with every ounce of ingenuity and industry we possess, we must work for peace.
After his bad back and colitis had forced his discharge from the Navy, Kennedy had attended the San Francisco conference that founded the United Nations in April-May 1945, as a journalist for the Hearst press.
On July 1 in London, he had dinner with William Douglas-Home, a former captain in the British army who had been sentenced to a year in jail for refusing an order to fire on civilians.
Kennedy observed in his diary, “prowess in war is still deeply respected.
His more bellicose views in the fifties reflected the book he had written in 1940, Why England Slept, an expansion of his Harvard senior thesis.
Kennedy’s book found Britain too slow in rearming to resist Nazi Germany.
Kennedy’s amendment failed, but his commitment to a “flexible” Cold War strategy emphasizing conventional forces and “smaller” nuclear weapons would be carried over into his presidency.
It was an illusory policy supported by Democrats that could easily have led to the same global destruction threatened by the Dulles doctrine.In 1958, Senator John Kennedy delivered a major speech attacking the Eisenhower administration for allowing a “missile gap” to open up between allegedly superior Soviet forces and those of the United States.
Kennedy repeated the charge of a missile gap in his successful 1960 presidential campaign, developing it into an argument for increased military spending.
Whether or not Kennedy already suspected the truth, he had taken a Cold War myth, had campaigned on it, and now partly on its basis, was engaged in a dangerous military buildup as president.
Even in his years espousing Cold War principles of defense, Senator Kennedy had occasionally broken ranks with the West on its colonial wars, particularly in Indochina and Algeria.
Speaking in the Senate on April 6, 1954, Kennedy critiqued predictions of a U.S.-sponsored French victory in Vietnam over Ho Chi Minh’s revolutionary forces.
That spring he talked with Algerians who were seeking a hearing at the United Nations for their national liberation movement.
His biographer, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., wrote of the episode, “Even Democrats drew back.
Ordeal in Africa.Equally overlooked, and in tension with his campaign claim of a missile gap, was Kennedy’s renewal of his purpose in entering politics: the attainment of peace in the nuclear age.
As the 1960 primaries increased his presidential prospects, Kennedy told a journalist visiting his Senate office that the most valuable resource he could bring to the presidency, based on personal experience, was his horror of war.
Kennedy said he “had read the books of great military strategists—Carl Von Clausewitz, Alfred Thayer Mahan, and Basil Henry Liddell Hart—and he wondered if their theories of total violence made sense in the nuclear age.
For example, emerging nonaligned leaders, some of whom received Kennedy’s support in the Senate, heard this pledge:“To those new states whom we welcome to the ranks of the free, we pledge our word that one form of colonial control shall not have passed away merely to be replaced by a far more iron tyranny.
What to an American audience was a cunning communist tiger was to nonaligned listeners at least as likely to have capitalist as communist stripes.
That would prove to be the case in Kennedy’s presidency by his support of United States counterinsurgent warfare in South Vietnam, where a client government would then wind up inside the United States tiger it had been riding.One of Kennedy’s worst decisions as president would be to develop the role of counterinsurgent warfare by enlarging the United States Army’s Special Forces, then re-baptizing them as the Green Berets.
Kennedy promoted the Green Berets as a response to communist guerrillas, failing to recognize that counterinsurgent warfare would turn into a form of terrorism.
The idea that the United States could deploy Green Beret forces in client states “to win the hearts and minds of the people” was a contradiction that would become a negative part of Kennedy’s legacy.In his inaugural address, the new president recognized no such conflict.
What is noteworthy about John F Kennedy’s Inaugural Address is that it reflects accurately the profound tensions of his political philosophy.
From the lives he had seen lost in World War II, Kennedy had envisioned in 1945 “the day of the conscientious objector,” with an international relinquishing of sovereignty and the abolition of war by popular demand.
Moreover, John Kennedy remained a Cold Warrior in his understanding of the means needed to resist tyranny—armaments that had now gone beyond all measure of destruction.
For the sake of both peace and freedom, he therefore had no way out except to negotiate a just peace with the enemy, within the context of the most dangerous political conflict in world history.
He would learn just how dangerous it was, from his own side of that conflict, to push through such negotiations.As the reader knows from the introduction to this book, my perspective on the assassination of President Kennedy comes from the writings of the Trappist monk Thomas Merton, perhaps an unlikely source.
While John Kennedy in 1943 was being carried by the movements of a Pacific current, Thomas Merton was a novice monk at the Abbey of Gethsemani in the hills of Kentucky.
Yet one can discern a providential hand saving each of their lives for a further purpose.
What Kennedy half-dreamed that night in the Pacific in relation to the little island his men were on could be said also of Merton’s spiritual journey to Gethsemani.
He just wanted to, in a heartfelt prayer that had no fixed attachment to its goal.
Merton arriving at Gethsemani was like Kennedy stumbling up on the beach and collapsing in the arms of his crew.In the early sixties, Thomas Merton began responding to the imminent threat of an inconceivable evil, total nuclear war.
His writings on the nuclear crisis, which drew him into what he called “the Unspeakable,” are an illuminating context in which to view the presidential struggles and Cold War murder of John F Kennedy.
As Merton wrote impassioned articles protesting the nuclear buildup, he became a controversial figure.
His alarmed monastic superiors ordered him to stop publishing on peace.
Merton was obedient, yet deeply determined to keep articulating a gospel truth, if not in a forbidden format.
Even before he experienced the inevitable crackdown on his published work, he had already found another way to follow his conscience—by writing a voluminous series of letters on peace.For a year at the center of the Kennedy presidency, from October 1961 to October 1962 , Merton wrote letters on war and peace to a wide circle of correspondents.
They included psychologists Erich Fromm and Karl Stern, poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Archbishop Thomas Roberts, Ethel Kennedy, Dorothy Day, Clare Boothe Luce, nuclear physicist Leo Szilard, novelist Henry Miller, Shinzo Hamai, the mayor of Hiroshima, and Evora Arca de Sardinia, the wife of a Cuban exile leader in the CIA-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion.
Merton collected over a hundred of these letters, had them mimeographed and bound, and sent them out to friends in January 1963.
It was “not merely against physical destruction, still less against physical danger, but against a suicidal moral evil and a total lack of ethics and rationality with which international policies tend to be conducted.
True,” he added, “President Kennedy is a shrewd and sometimes adventurous leader.
Too much the Time and Life mentality, than which I can imagine nothing further, in reality, from, say, Lincoln.
Maybe,” Merton speculates in an inspired insight, “Kennedy will break through into that someday by miracle.
As she started to clear the table, Lincoln noticed a little slip of paper that had fallen on the floor.
The revelation of a storm coming had occurred at the end of the meeting, as the two men faced each other across a table.
Kennedy’s gift to Khrushchev, a model of the USS Constitution, lay between them.
Kennedy pointed out that the ship’s cannons had been able to fire half a mile and kill a few people.
But if he and Khrushchev failed to negotiate peace, the two of them could kill seventy million people in the opening exchange of a nuclear war.
Kennedy was shocked at what he felt was his counterpart’s lack of response.
The result of their unsuccessful meeting would be an ever more threatening conflict.
Thomas Merton in his initial sense of Kennedy had doubted if JFK, by falling short of Lincoln’s character, was capable of weathering a storm.
The president’s friend Paul Fay, Jr., told of an incident that showed JFK was keenly conscious of the peril of a military coup d’État.
One summer weekend in 1962 while out sailing with friends, Kennedy was asked what he thought of Seven Days in May, a best-selling novel that described a military takeover in the United States.
The next day Kennedy discussed with his friends the possibility of their seeing such a coup in the United States.
It was a covert project initiated by his predecessor, President Dwight D Eisenhower.
By late summer 1960, when Kennedy became the Democratic nominee for president, the CIA had already begun training fifteen hundred Cuban exile troops at a secret base in Guatemala for an invasion of Cuba.
The CIA’s covert-action chief, Richard Bissell, reassured him there would be only a minimum need for air strikes and that Cubans on the island would join the brigade in a successful revolt against Castro.At dawn on April 15, 1961, eight B-26 bombers of the Cuban Expeditionary Force carried out air strikes to destroy the Cuban Air Force on the ground, achieving only partial success.
Premier Castro then ordered his pilots “to sleep under the wings of the planes,” ready to take off immediately.
More than one thousand members were taken prisoner.The new president had bitterly disappointed the CIA and the military by his decision to accept defeat at the Bay of Pigs rather than escalate the battle.
Kennedy realized after the fact that he had been drawn into a CIA scenario that was a trap.
As Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., observed, “the Joint Chiefs of Staff had only approved the Bay of Pigs.
In these handwritten, coffee-stained notes, Dulles explained how CIA advisers who knew better drew John Kennedy into a plan whose prerequisites for success contradicted the president’s own rules for engagement that precluded any combat action by United States military forces.
Although Dulles and his associates knew this condition conflicted with the plan they were foisting on Kennedy, they discreetly kept silent in the belief, Dulles wrote, that “the realities of the situation” would force the president to carry through to the end they wished:“ did not want to raise these issues—in an discussion—which might only harden the decision against the type of action we required.
Four decades after the Bay of Pigs, we have learned that the CIA scenario to trap Kennedy was more concrete than Dulles admitted in his handwritten notes.
When the four anti-Castro brigade leaders told their story to writer Haynes Johnson, they revealed how the Agency was prepared to circumvent a presidential veto.
Kennedy’s NSAM 55 informed the Joint Chiefs of Staff that it was they who were his principal military advisers in peacetime as well as wartime.
Director Allen Dulles, Deputy Director Richard Bissell, Jr., and Deputy Director General Charles Cabell.
But Kennedy’s firing of Dulles, Bissell, and Cabell, his reduction of the CIA budget, and his clear determination to deal with the Agency placed him in direct conflict with a Cold War institution that had come to hold itself accountable to no one.After John Kennedy’s assassination, Allen Dulles returned to prominence in a curious way.
However, far from being considered a suspect, one week after the assassination Dulles was appointed by the new president Lyndon Johnson to serve on the Warren Commission.
He thus directed an investigation that pointed toward himself.Allen Dulles’s own closely guarded feelings toward John Kennedy were revealed years later in a remark to a prospective ghostwriter.
In one discussion they had about President Kennedy, Dulles stunned Morris with an abrupt comment.
The words pouring out of Merton’s typewriter were spilling over from unpublished manuscripts into his Cold War letters.
As he wrote in one such letter to antinuclear archbishop Thomas Roberts, “At present my feeling is that the most urgent thing is to say what has to be said and say it in any possible way.
She wrote to Merton saying that her husband, a leader of the anti-Castro forces in the invasion, had been taken prisoner in Cuba.
It was addressed to Clare Boothe Luce, the wife of Time-Life-Fortune owner Henry Luce, a Cold War media baron whose editorial policies demonized the communist enemy.
Clare Boothe Luce, celebrated speaker, writer, and diplomat, shared Henry Luce’s Cold War theology.
In 1975 Clare Boothe Luce would lead investigators into the JFK assassination, working for the House Select Committee on Assassinations , on a time-consuming wild goose chase based on disinformation.
HSCA analyst Gaeton Fonzi discovered that Luce at the time was on the board of directors of the CIA-sponsored Association of Former Intelligence Officers.
Even in the early sixties, Merton with his extraordinary sensitivity may have suspected Luce’s intelligence connections.
In any case he knew her as one of the wealthiest, most influential women in the world, with a decidedly anti-communist mind-set.
He welcomed her, as he did one and all, into his circle of correspondents.In his New Year’s Eve letter to Clare Boothe Luce, Merton said he thought the next year would be momentous.
Our sudden, unbalanced, top-heavy rush into technological mastery,” Merton saw, had now made us servants of our own weapons of war.
They give us our living, they sustain our economy, they bolster up our politicians, they sell our mass media, in short we live by them.
However, he had far-flung correspondents and spiritual antennae that were always on the alert.
Hence the weapons keep us in a state of fury and desperation, with our fingers poised over the button and our eyes glued on the radar screen.
This was the period in which Merton still had little confidence in John Kennedy.
He was nevertheless beginning to catch glimpses of a man who, like himself, was deeply troubled by the prevailing Cold War atmosphere.
Besides praying, Merton was doing more than writing words of protest on the backs of envelopes.
He was appealing to the president, through Ethel Kennedy, for a courageous stand in conscience.
In the thirteen days from October 16 to 28, 1962, as the Soviet Union installed nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba, President Kennedy demanded publicly that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dismantle and withdraw the missiles immediately.
Kennedy also set up a naval “quarantine” that blockaded Soviet ships proceeding to the island.
In a struggle between good and evil involving world-destructive weapons, the installation of Soviet missiles ninety miles from Florida brought home to Washington the temptation to strike first.
Merton’s warning to Clare Boothe Luce about a preemptive strike that year was coming true.
As the construction of Soviet missile sites in Cuba accelerated, the pressures on President Kennedy for a preemptive United States strike became overwhelming.
The tapes were declassified, transcribed, and published in the late 1990s.
The transcripts reveal how isolated the president was in choosing to blockade further Soviet missile shipments rather than bomb and invade Cuba.
Nowhere does he stand more alone against the pressures for a sudden, massive air strike than in his October 19, 1962, meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
A historian who has studied the missile crisis tapes for over twenty years, Sheldon Stern, has noted a pause in the conversation at this point, during which the Joint Chiefs “must have held their collective breath waiting for a reaction from the President.
The general had gone well beyond merely giving advice or even disagreeing with his commander-in-chief.
General LeMay breaks in, reminding Kennedy of his strong statements about responding to offensive weapons in Cuba.
General LeMay, Army Chief of Staff General Earle Wheeler, and Marine Corps Commandant General David Shoup remain.
One statement by Robert Kennedy that may have strengthened the president’s resolve against a preemptive strike is unheard on the tapes.
On Wednesday, October 24, a report came in that a Soviet submarine was about to be intercepted by United States helicopters with depth charges, unless by some miracle the two Soviet ships it was accompanying turned back from the United States “quarantine” line.
The president feared he had lost all control of the situation and that nuclear war was imminent.
Robert looked at his brother:“His hand went up to his face and covered his mouth.
Inexplicably, I thought of when he was ill and almost died; when he lost his child; when we learned that our oldest brother had been killed; of personal times of strain and hurt.
The voices droned on …”89The miracle occurred—through the enemy, Nikita Khrushchev.
Khrushchev ordered the Soviet ships to stop dead in the water rather than challenge the United States quarantine.
The incident goes unmentioned in his memoirs, as does another, hidden chapter of events that may help to explain it—Nikita Khrushchev’s secret correspondence with John Kennedy.In July 1993, the United States State Department, in response to a Freedom of Information Act request by a Canadian newspaper, declassified twenty-one secret letters between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev.
These private, confidential letters between the Cold War leaders, begun in September 1961 and continued for two years, will be examined here for the bright light they shed on a relationship critical to the world’s preservation.Khrushchev had sent his first private letter to Kennedy on September 29, 1961, during the Berlin crisis.
The secrecy was at least as much to avoid Soviet attention as American.
As presidential aide Theodore Sorensen said three decades later, Khrushchev was “taking his risks, assuming that these letters were, as we believe, being kept secret from the military, from the foreign service, from the top people in the Kremlin.
While the Berlin crisis was still not over, the Soviet premier began the correspondence with his enemy by meditating on the beauty of the sea and the threat of war.
As a former Naval officer you would surely appreciate the merits of these surroundings, the beauty of the sea and the grandeur of the Caucasian mountains.
Now as the threat of war over Berlin continued, Khrushchev expressed a regret about Vienna.
He said he had “given much thought of late to the development of international events since our meeting in Vienna, and I have decided to approach you with this letter.
The whole world hopefully expected that our meeting and a frank exchange of views would have a soothing effect, would turn relations between our countries into the correct channel and promote the adoption of decisions which would give the peoples confidence that at last peace on earth will be secured.
Khrushchev continued with deepening respect:“I listened with great interest to the account which our journalists Adjubei and Kharlamov gave of the meeting they had with you in Washington.
They gave me many interesting details and I questioned them most thoroughly.
Again Khrushchev mentioned Vienna, this time as a backdrop to his decision to write such a letter:“My thoughts have more than once returned to our meetings in Vienna.
I remember you emphasized that you did not want to proceed towards war and favored living in peace with our country while competing in the peaceful domain.
And though subsequent events did not proceed in the way that could be desired, I thought it might be useful in a purely informal and personal way to approach you and share some of my ideas.
If you do not agree with me you can consider that this letter did not exist while naturally I, for my part, will not use this correspondence in my public statements.
As you see,” he added apologetically, “I started out by describing the delights of the Black Sea coast, but then I nevertheless turned to politics.
Even though in the process Khrushchev forgot his Black Sea calm and argued his points with a vengeance, he was as insistent on the fundamental need for peace as Kennedy had been in Vienna.
Khrushchev liked, he said, the comparison of their situation “with Noah’s Ark where both the ‘clean’ and the ‘unclean’ found sanctuary.
He began in a similar vein:“My family has had a home here overlooking the Atlantic for many years.
My father and brothers own homes near my own, and my children always have a large group of cousins for company.
So this is an ideal place for me to spend my weekends during the summer and fall, to relax, to think, to devote my time to major tasks instead of constant appointments, telephone calls and details.
Their private letters should supplement public statements “and give us each a chance to address the other in frank, realistic and fundamental terms.
Neither of us is going to convert the other to a new social, economic or political point of view.
Neither of us will be induced by a letter to desert or subvert his own cause.
Their mutual respect had given way to mistrust, counter-challenges, and steps toward the war they both abhorred.
In the weeks leading up to the crisis, Khrushchev felt betrayed by Kennedy’s contingency plans for another Cuba invasion, whereas Kennedy thought Khrushchev was betraying him by sneaking nuclear missiles into Cuba.
Both were again acting out Cold War beliefs that threatened everyone on earth.
Nevertheless, as they faced each other and issued potentially world-destructive orders, it was still thanks to the Vienna meeting and their secret letters that each knew the other as a human being he could respect.
They also knew they had once agreed warmly that the world was a Noah’s Ark, where both the “clean” and the “unclean” had to keep it afloat.
It was in just such a world, where “clean” and “unclean” were together under a nuclear threat, that Khrushchev stopped his ships dead in the water and the Ark remained afloat.However, the crisis was not over.
Pentagon and ExComm advisers increased their pressures on the president for a preventive strike.On Friday night, October 26, Kennedy received a hopeful letter from Khrushchev in which the Soviet premier agreed to withdraw his missiles.
However, on Saturday morning, Kennedy received a second, more problematic letter from Khrushchev adding to those terms the demand for a United States commitment to remove its analogous missiles from Turkey.
However, Kennedy felt he could not suddenly surrender a NATO ally’s defenses under a threat, failing to recognize for the moment that he was demanding Khrushchev do the equivalent with his ally Castro.While the Joint Chiefs pressed their demands on the president for an air strike on Monday, an urgent message arrived heightening those pressures.
Early that Saturday morning, a Soviet surface-to-air missile had shot down a U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba, killing the Air Force pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr.
The Joint Chiefs and ExComm had already recommended immediate retaliation in such a case.
They now urged an attack early the next morning to destroy the SAM sites.
Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen then drafted a letter accepting Khrushchev’s first proposal, while ignoring the later demand that the United States withdraw its missiles from Turkey.As the war currents swirled around the White House, John and Robert Kennedy met in the Oval Office.
Robert described later the thoughts his brother shared with him.He talked first about Major Anderson and how the brave died while politicians sat home pontificating about great issues.
He talked about miscalculations leading to war, a war Russians didn’t want any more than Americans did.
He wanted to make sure he had done everything conceivable to prevent a terrible outcome, especially by giving the Russians every opportunity for a peaceful settlement that would neither diminish their security nor humiliate them.
But “the thought that disturbed him the most,” Robert said, “and that made the prospect of war much more fearful than it would otherwise have been, was the specter of the death of the children of this country and all the world—the young people who had no role, who had no say, who knew nothing even of the confrontation, but whose lives would be snuffed out like everyone else’s.
It was this,” wrote Robert in a work published after his own assassination, “that troubled him most, that gave him such pain.
Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs what he thought Robert Kennedy told Dobrynin, who had relayed it to Khrushchev:“‘The President is in a grave situation,’ Robert Kennedy said, ‘and he does not know how to get out of it.
In fact we are under pressure from our military to use force against Cuba … We want to ask you, Mr Dobrynin, to pass President Kennedy’s message to Chairman Khrushchev through unofficial channels … Even though the President himself is very much against starting a war over Cuba, an irreversible chain of events could occur against his will.
However, his friend and biographer Arthur Schlesinger says, whatever the Attorney General said to Dobrynin, RFK was himself of the opinion there were many generals eager for a fight.
Robert thought the situation could get totally out of control.2In any case, Khrushchev felt the urgency of the pressures on the president.
According to political scientist Scott Sagan in his book The Limits of Safety, the United States Air Force launched an intercontinental ballistic missile from Vandenberg Air Force Base on October 26, 1962, the day before the U-2 was shot down.
The ICBM was unarmed, a test missile destined for Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands.
Three days before, a test missile at Vandenberg had received a nuclear warhead, changing it to full alert status for the crisis.
By October 30, nine Vandenberg “test” missiles were armed for use against the Soviets.
At the height of the missile crisis, the Air Force’s October 26th launch of its missile could have been seen by the Soviets as the beginning of an attack.
Had the Soviets been suckered into giving any sign of a launch of their own, the entire array of United States missiles and bombers were poised to preempt them.
Fortunately the Soviets didn’t bite.President Kennedy had reason to feel he was being circumvented by the military so they could win a nuclear showdown.
Kennedy may also have recalled that Khrushchev, in his second secret letter to the president, on November 9, 1961, regarding Berlin, had hinted that belligerent pressures in Moscow made compromise difficult from his own side.
Neither side revealed that, as part of the agreement, on the analogous issue of United States missiles in Turkey Robert Kennedy had in fact promised Anatoly Dobrynin that they, too, would be withdrawn but not immediately.
Six months later the United States took its missiles out of Turkey.Twenty-five years after the missile crisis, Secretary of State Dean Rusk would reveal that President Kennedy was prepared to make a further concession to Khrushchev in order to avoid war.
However, when Khrushchev accepted Robert Kennedy’s promise to Dobrynin that the Jupiter missiles would be removed, Kennedy’s further readiness for a public trade mediated by U Thant became unnecessary.
The president’s willingness to go that extra mile with Khrushchev, at a heavy political cost to himself, shocked the former ExComm members to whom Rusk revealed it for the first time at the Hawk’s Cay Conference on March 7, 1987.
The extent to which Kennedy’s willingness to trade away missiles with Khrushchev was beyond political orthodoxy at the time can be illustrated by my own experience.
In May 1963 I wrote an article on Pope John XXIII’s encyclical Pacem in Terris.
It was published by Dorothy Day in her radically pacifist Catholic Worker newspaper.
The more critical strategic fact, unknown to the United States at the time, was that these weapons were ready to be fired.
On October 26, 1962, the day before the U-2 was shot down, the nuclear warheads in Cuba had been prepared for launching.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff were outraged at Kennedy’s refusal to attack Cuba and even his known concessions to Khrushchev.
McNamara recalled how strongly the Chiefs expressed their feelings to the president.
They would witness a Cold War president not only refusing their first-strike mandate but also turning decisively toward peace with the enemy.On Sunday morning, October 28, after Kennedy and Khrushchev had agreed mutually to withdraw their most threatening missiles, JFK went to Mass in Washington to pray in thanksgiving.
We excel in getting ourselves into positions where we ‘have to’ press the button, or the next thing to it.
I realize more and more that this whole war question is nine-tenths our own fabricated illusion … I think Kennedy has enough sense to avoid the worst injustices, he acts as if he knew the score.
I say in the circumstances, because only a short-term look at it makes one very happy.
It was a crisis and something had to be done and there was only a choice of various evils.
Nevertheless, in the process of turning from the brink, Kennedy seemed unable to begin walking in a new direction.In the aftermath of the missile crisis, he was alternately hopeful and frustrated.
The imminence of holocaust had pushed him and Khrushchev toward a new commitment to negotiations.
Yet in the months following the crisis, the Cold War opponents seemed unable to seize the moment.They agreed that a ban on nuclear testing was a critical next step away from the brink.
Yet both men had a history of conducting nuclear tests that contaminated the atmosphere and heightened the tensions between them.
In response to the Soviet Union’s nuclear tests in the summer of 1961, Kennedy had resumed United States atmospheric tests on April 25, 1962.
The United States then carried out a series of twenty-four nuclear blasts in the South Pacific from April to November of 1962.126In the context of their precarious resolution of the missile crisis and their tit-for-tat nuclear testing, Kennedy and Khrushchev struggled to agree on a test ban.
For the sake of peace, he had already agreed to the United States position of three annual inspections, only to see the Americans suddenly demand more.
Kennedy said Khrushchev had mistaken the original United States position.
Khrushchev replied pointedly through an intermediary:“You can tell the President I accept his explanation of an honest misunderstanding and suggest that we get moving.
By the empathy he expressed toward the Russian perspective, Kennedy created a bridge to Khrushchev.
They would then have five and a half months left to make peace before JFK’s murder.
At the same time as Kennedy’s speech reached out to Khrushchev, it opened a still wider chasm between the president and his own military and intelligence advisers.
We have already seen how President Truman exulted at the bombing of Hiroshima.
From a failure to internalize the suffering beneath the mushroom clouds at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Truman administration began an era of atomic diplomacy based on hubris.
Truman, supremely confident because he had unilateral possession of the atomic bomb, tried to dictate postwar terms in Eastern Europe to the Soviet Union.
A month after Hiroshima, the Soviets rejected United States demands backed by the bomb at the London Council of Foreign Ministers.
John Foster Dulles, who attended the London meeting, regarded it as the beginning of the Cold War.
President Truman then announced in September 1945 that he was not interested in seeking international control over nuclear weapons.
He felt he did so successfully in Iran just seven months after Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The Russian army was prolonging a wartime occupation in northern Iran, seeking Soviet oil leases like those of the British in the south.
Truman later told Senator Henry Jackson that he had summoned Soviet Ambassador Andrei Gromyko to the White House.
The president demanded that the Russian troops evacuate Iran within forty-eight hours or the United States would use the atomic weapon that only it possessed.
The troops moved in twenty-four hours.0On a wider front, the United States enforced a Cold War strategy of containing the Soviet Union.
The containment policy was formulated by State Department diplomat George Kennan, writing as “X” in the July 1947 Foreign Affairs.
Although Kennan said the purpose of containment was more diplomatic and political than military, the Pentagon carried it out by encircling the U.S.S.R. with United States bases and patrolling forces.To match the efficiency of a totalitarian enemy, United States military leaders urged legislation that would mobilize the nation to a state of constant readiness for war.
It marked the creation of a Frankenstein monster.Plausible deniability encouraged the autonomy of the CIA and other covert-action agencies from the government that created them.
In order to protect the visible authorities of the government from protest and censure, the CIA was authorized not only to violate international law but to do so with as little consultation as possible.
And the less consultation there was, the more creative CIA authorities could become in interpreting the mind of the president, especially the mind of a president so uncooperative that he wanted to splinter the CIA in a thousand pieces and scatter it to the winds.At the 1975 Senate hearings on United States intelligence operations chaired by Senator Frank Church, CIA officials testified reluctantly on their efforts to kill Fidel Castro.
In late 1960, without the knowledge of President Dwight Eisenhower, the CIA had contacted underworld figures John Rosselli, Sam Giancana, and Santos Trafficante, offering them $150,000 for Castro’s assassination.
The gangsters were happy to be hired by the United States government to murder the man who had shut down their gambling casinos in Cuba.
If they were successful, they hoped a U.S.-sponsored successor to Castro would allow them to reopen the casinos.In the spring of 1961, without the knowledge of the new president John Kennedy, the CIA’s Technical Services Division prepared a batch of poison pills for Castro.
The murder plot failed because the CIA’s Cuban assets were unable to get close enough to Castro to poison him.
The CIA’s purpose was to kill Castro just before the Bay of Pigs invasion.
As Bay of Pigs planner Richard Bissell said later, “Assassination was intended to reinforce the plan.
Helms testified to the Church Committee that he never informed either the president or his newly appointed CIA director John McCone of the assassination plots.
Helms said he sought no approval for the murder attempts because assassination was not a subject that should be aired with higher authority.
The startled Szulc said he was against political assassination in principle and in any case doubted if it would solve the Cuban problem.
The president leaned back in his rocking chair, smiled, and said he had been testing Szulc and agreed with his answer.
I’m glad you feel the same way,” Kennedy told Szulc.3Richard Helms, however, did not feel the same way.
Helms was known as “the man who kept the secrets,” the title of his biography.
He was a master of the possibilities beneath plausible deniability, exemplified by his command and control of the CIA’s plots to kill Castro.
As Helms demonstrated in his Church Committee testimony, he and other CIA Cold War veterans thought they knew the president’s mind better than the president did himself.
He first joined British Prime Minister Harold MacMillan in proposing to Khrushchev new high-level talks on a test ban treaty.
They suggested that Moscow be the site for the talks, itself an act of trust.
Khrushchev accepted.To reinforce the seriousness of the negotiations, Kennedy decided to suspend United States tests in the atmosphere unilaterally.
Surrounded by Cold War advisers, he reached his decision independently—without their recommendations or consultation.
He knew few would support him as he went out on that limb; others might cut it down before he could get there.
He had seen United States belligerence toward the Russians build to the point of Pentagon pressures for preemptive strikes on the Cuban missile sites.
In his decision in the spring of 1963 to turn from a demonizing Cold War theology, Kennedy knew he had few allies within his own ruling circles.He outlined his thoughts for what he called “the peace speech” to adviser and speechwriter Sorensen, and told him to go to work.
The total influence—economic, political, even spiritual—is felt in every city, every State house, every office of the Federal government …”“In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex.
That Pax Americana policed by the Pentagon was considered the system’s indispensable, hugely profitable means of containing and defeating Communism.
Some say that it is useless to speak of world peace or world law or world government—and that it will be useless until the leaders of the Soviet Union adopt a more enlightened attitude.
On October 31, 1959, Lee Harvey Oswald, who had been discharged two months earlier from the United States Marine Corps in California, presented himself at the American Embassy in Moscow to Consul Richard E Snyder.
Oswald said his purpose in coming was to renounce his United States citizenship.
From September 1957 to November 1958 Oswald had been a Marine Corps radar operator at Atsugi Air Force Base in Japan.
Atsugi, located about thirty-five miles southwest of Tokyo, served as the CIA’s main operational base in the Far East.
It was one of two bases from which the CIA’s top-secret U-2 spy planes took off on their flights over the Soviet Union and China.
The U-2 was the creation of the CIA’s Richard Bissell, also the main author of the Bay of Pigs scenario.
Bissell worked closely on the U-2’s Soviet overflights with CIA director Allen Dulles.
Radar operator Oswald was a small cog in the machine, but he was learning how it worked.
Oswald continued to have access to secret information that would have been of interest to a Cold War enemy.
Former Marine Corps Lieutenant John E Donovan, who was Oswald’s officer in the Santa Ana radar unit, testified to the Warren Commission that Oswald “had the access to the location of all bases in the west coast area, all radio frequencies for all squadrons, all tactical call signs, and the relative strength of all squadrons, number and type of aircraft in a squadron, who was the commanding officer, the authentication code of entering and exiting the ADIZ, which stands for Air Defense Identification Zone.
The lawyer said, “We asked you exactly what we wanted to know from you and we asked you everything we wanted for now and that is all.
The downing of the U-2, piloted by Francis Gary Powers, wrecked the Paris summit meeting between President Eisenhower and Premier Khrushchev.
Gary Powers later raised the question whether his plane may not have been shot down as a result of information Oswald handed over to the Soviets.
It reinforces the case that Oswald’s volunteering all the information he had as a Marine radar specialist to the Soviets was an apparently criminal act.Yet when Oswald returned to the United States Embassy in Moscow after working for over a year at a Soviet factory in Minsk, he was welcomed back by American officials with open arms.
Not only did the United States make no move to prosecute him, but the embassy gave him a loan to return to the country he had betrayed.
The toleration of Oswald’s apparent treason extended to his later obtaining a new passport overnight.
On June 25, 1963, Oswald was miraculously issued a passport in New Orleans twenty-four hours after his application.
There Oswald would be arrested and killed quickly, before he could say what he knew of the president’s murder.
In Dallas whatever light Oswald might cast on the assassination would be switched at once into darkness.The Warren Commission dealt with the United States government’s odd toleration of the apparently treasonous Oswald, first of all, by a selective reading of his history.
When the authors of the Warren Report mentioned Oswald’s work in the Marine Corps as a radar operator, they neglected to point out that the future defector had a “Crypto” clearance, which was higher than “Top Secret,” and that his work immersed him in information about the CIA’s super-secret U-2 flights.
Whereas in Dallas Oswald would be arrested and murdered before we knew it, on his preceding odyssey as a traitor in and out of Russia and back to the United States he overcame government barriers with an almost supernatural ease.
A solution to the mystery was suggested by former CIA agent Victor Marchetti, who resigned from the Agency in disillusionment after being executive assistant to the Deputy Director.
The CIA fought a legal battle to suppress Marchetti’s book The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence.
It provides an explanation for the United States government’s indulgence of his behavior.
That Oswald was in fact a participant in such a program was the belief of James Botelho, his former roommate in Santa Ana.
Botelho, who later became a California judge, stated in an interview with Mark Lane that Oswald’s Communism was a pose.
Then, when no real investigation occurred at the base , I was sure that Oswald was on an intelligence assignment in Russia … Two civilians dropped in , asked a few questions, took no written statements, and recorded no interviews with witnesses.
It was a cover-investigation so that it could be said there had been an investigation … Oswald, it was said, was the only Marine ever to defect from his country to another country, a Communist country, during peacetime.
Among them would be Lee Harvey Oswald, a young man on assignment in Russia for American intelligence.
Oswald’s trajectory, which would end up meeting Kennedy’s in Dallas, was guided not by the heavens or fate or even, as the Warren Report would have it, by a disturbed psyche.
Oswald was being moved square by square across a giant board stretching from Atsugi to Moscow to Minsk to Dallas.
For the sake of victory in the Cold War, the hands moving Oswald were prepared to sacrifice him and any other piece on the board.
I remember well the United States’ warring spirit when President Kennedy said those words.
Our deeply rooted prejudice, cultivated by years of propaganda, was that peace with Communists was impossible.
In the nuclear age, that meant being prepared to destroy the world to save it from Communism.
In spite of our warring ideologies, peace could become visible again by our acting in response to particular, concrete problems that stood in its way.As JFK was learning himself from his intense dialogue with Khrushchev, the practice of seeking peace through definable goals drew one irresistibly deeper.
Peace need not be impracticable, and war need not be inevitable,” he said in reference to his own experience.
With these words President John Kennedy was echoing a theme of Pope John XXIII’s papal encyclical Pacem in Terris , published two months earlier on April 11, 1963.
In response to the threat of nuclear war, Pope John had issued his hopeful letter to the world just before he took leave of it.
He was already in friendly communication with Nikita Khrushchev, sending him appeals for peace and religious freedom.
His unofficial emissary to the Soviet premier, Norman Cousins, had delivered a Russian translation of Pacem in Terris personally to Khrushchev, even before the encyclical was issued to the rest of the world.
Kennedy knew from Cousins the details of his meetings with Khrushchev on behalf of Pope John.
Kennedy’s answer was that when we felt the enemy’s pain, peace was not only possible.
It was as necessary as the life of one’s own family, seen truly for the first time.
For, in the final analysis,” Kennedy said, summing up his vision of interdependence, “our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet.
If we could accept such compassion for the enemy, Kennedy’s third, most crucial appeal for self-examination could become more possible for his American audience.
When the missile crisis was resolved, the president stringently avoided, and ordered his staff to avoid, any talk of victory or defeat concerning Khrushchev.
Yet for Khrushchev’s critics in the Communist world who could tolerate no retreat from the capitalist enemy, the Soviet premier had suffered a humiliating defeat.
Kennedy moved on to concrete steps, already in progress, toward realizing his vision of world peace.
He announced first the decision made by Macmillan, Khrushchev, and himself to hold discussions in Moscow on a test ban treaty.
He then proclaimed his unilateral initiative, a suspension of atmospheric tests, with the explicit hope that it would foster trust with the enemy:“To make clear our good faith and solemn convictions on the matter , I now declare that the United States does not propose to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere so long as other states do not do so.
As we shall see, Kennedy meant what he said, and United States intelligence agencies knew it.
So did the corporate power brokers who had clashed with him the year before in the steel crisis, an overlooked chapter in the Kennedy presidency that we will explore.
He would say more on this subject the following night in his groundbreaking civil rights speech.
In an ironic turn of events, the Soviet Union became its principal venue.
JFK’s identification with the Russian people’s suffering penetrated their government’s defenses far more effectively than any missile could have.
Sorensen described the speech’s impact on the other side of the Cold War:“The full text of the speech was published in the Soviet press.
After fifteen years of almost uninterrupted jamming of Western broadcasts, by means of a network of over three thousand transmitters and at an annual cost of several hundred million dollars, the Soviets jammed only one paragraph of the speech when relayed by the Voice of America in Russian —then did not jam any of it upon rebroadcast—and then suddenly stopped jamming all Western broadcasts, including even Russian-language newscasts on foreign affairs.
Equally suddenly they agreed in Vienna to the principle of inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency to make certain that Agency’s reactors were used for peaceful purposes.
For the first time Americans had less opportunity to read and hear their president’s words than did the Russian people.
Whereas nuclear disarmament had suddenly become feasible, Kennedy’s position in his own government had become precarious.
However, Kennedy’s rejection of Cold War politics was considered treasonous by forces in his own government.
President Kennedy’s June 10, 1963, call for an end to the Cold War, five and one-half months before his assassination, anticipates Dr.
King’s courage in his April 4, 1967, Riverside Church address calling for an end to the Vietnam War, exactly one year before his assassination.
Each of those transforming speeches was a prophetic statement provoking the reward a prophet traditionally receives.
Instead Oswald was welcomed by order of the United States government, as he and his Russian wife Marina disembarked with their infant daughter June from the ocean liner Maasdam in Hoboken, New Jersey.
The Warren Report tells us that, on the recommendation of the State Department, the Oswalds were greeted at the dock by Spas T Raikin, a representative of the Traveler’s Aid Society.
The Warren Report does not mention, however, that Raikin was at the same time secretary-general of the American Friends of the Anti-Bolshevik Nations, an anti-communist organization with extensive intelligence connections178—like the American government, an unlikely source of support for a traitor.
The Warren Report does say that, with Spas T Raikin’s help, the Oswald family passed smoothly through immigration and customs.In the summer of 1962 the Oswalds settled in Fort Worth, Texas.
They were welcomed by a local White Russian community characterized by its pronounced anti-communist view of the world.
Lee was befriended by George de Mohrenschildt, the son of a czarist official.
De Mohrenschildt felt he was being primed.In the summer of 1962, de Mohrenschildt said, he was handed Lee Harvey Oswald’s address in Fort Worth by “one of Moore’s associates,” who suggested that de Mohrenschildt meet Oswald.
De Mohrenschildt then phoned Moore to confirm such a mission and set up another mutually beneficial relationship.
He told Moore he would appreciate help from the United States embassy in Haiti in arranging approval by Haitian dictator “Papa Doc” Duvalier for an oil exploration deal.
Moore then gave de Mohrenschildt the go-ahead to befriend the Oswalds, which de Mohrenschildt promptly did—with the firm understanding that he was carrying out the CIA’s wishes.
Oswald took him so seriously that the next day he quit his job at a Fort Worth welding company and made the move.
The Baron’s wife and daughter said it was he who organized Oswald’s securing a new job, four days after his move, with a Dallas graphic arts company, Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall.
The official record is that Louise Latham of the Texas Employment Commission sent Oswald to the firm.
Latham, who denied that de Mohrenschildt got the job for Oswald.5Whoever was responsible for Oswald’s immediate hiring, it was a remarkable achievement.
Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, described by the Warren Commission simply as “a commercial advertising photography firm,”186 had contracts with the United States Army Map Service.
Its classified work connected with Oswald’s history as an apparent traitor.
According to Oswald’s co-workers, some of them were setting type for Cuban place names to go on maps188—probably for the same spy planes whose radar secrets the ex-Marine had already offered to the Soviet Union.
Oswald was once again, through the intervention of undercover angels, defying the normal laws of government security barriers.As it turned out, in mid-March 1963 George de Mohrenschildt did receive a Haitian government contract for $285,000.189 In April he left Dallas, and in May he met in Washington, D.C., with CIA and United States Army intelligence contacts to further his Haitian connections.
He never saw Oswald again.None of George de Mohrenschildt’s extensive United States intelligence connections are mentioned in the Warren Report, which describes him vaguely as “a highly individualistic person of varied interests” who befriended Oswald.
Both de Mohrenschildts, Garrison said, were vigorous in their insistence to him that Oswald had been the assassination scapegoat.4On March 29, 1977, three hours after his revelation of the CIA’s sanctioning his contact with Oswald, George de Mohrenschildt was found shot to death in the house where he was staying in Manalapan, Florida.
His death also occurred on the day Gaeton Fonzi, an investigator for the House Select Committee on Assassinations, left his card with de Mohrenschildt’s daughter and told her he would be calling her father that evening for an appointment to question him.
Soon after de Mohrenschildt took the card and put it in his pocket, he went upstairs, then apparently put the barrel of a .20-gauge shotgun in his mouth and pulled the trigger.5Though he had been Oswald’s CIA-approved shepherd in Dallas, George de Mohrenschildt had no “need to know,” and thus probably no understanding in advance of the scapegoat role that lay ahead for his young friend.
In the years after John Kennedy and Lee Oswald were gunned down, the de Mohrenschildts seemed to grow in remorse for the evil in which they had become enmeshed.
Meanwhile, the Atomic Energy Commission was pushing Kennedy to schedule another series of atmospheric tests.
In response, Khrushchev made preparations to welcome the United States test-ban negotiators to Moscow.
Kennedy saw the moment was ripe for at least a partial test ban, bypassing the negotiators’ impasse on inspections.
The Joint Chiefs and CIA were adamantly opposed to Kennedy’s turn toward peace.
Cold War influences so dominated the United States Congress that the president felt getting Senate ratification of a test ban agreement would be “almost in the nature of a miracle,” as he described the task to advisers.
That process, miraculous or not, was engineered humanly by a president committed at all costs to seeing it accomplished.Kennedy named Averell Harriman, former ambassador to the U.S.S.R., his top negotiator in the Moscow talks.
Known as a tough bargainer, Harriman was liked and respected by the Russians.
They saw his appointment as a sign of the president’s seriousness in wanting a test-ban agreement.Kennedy personally prepared the negotiators.
He emphasized the importance of their mission—perhaps a last chance to stop the spread of testing and radioactive fallout.
If they were successful, it would mean a concrete step toward mutual trust with the Russians.
In both literal and symbolic senses, they stood to achieve a more peaceful atmosphere in the world.
Their head negotiator would be, in effect, not Harriman but the president himself.
No one outside a tight circle of officials personally approved by him was to know any of the details.5During the negotiations, Kennedy spent hours in the cramped White House Situation Room, editing the United States position as if he were at the Moscow table himself.
Soviet ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin was astounded at the president’s command of every stage of the process.
Against the advice of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Kennedy had decided to take the issue of ratification immediately to the people.
He wanted to do everything he could to turn public opinion around as quickly as possible.
