On the morning of October 16, CIA imagery analysts brief the president on the results of U-2 photo reconnaissance overflights of Cuba on Sunday that had discovered the existence of Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
The briefing begins with an interpretation of the images by Arthur Lundahl from CIA's National Photographic Interpretation Center , who speaks loud and clearly, with supporting analysis from the CIA's Acting Director Marshall Carter, whose voice is low and often difficult to hear.
Lundahl then introduces Sidney Graybeal (""our missile man"") who shows the president photos of similar weapons systems taken during Soviet military parades.
Obviously concerned, the president then asks Graybeal when the missiles will be ready to fire.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara then joins the discussion, adding that he doubts that the missiles are yet ready to fire since there is no indication that nuclear warheads are present.
Following the CIA briefing, McNamara and then General Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, brief the president on his military alternatives.
Rusk's voice is faint, but he warns the president that an air strike on the missile installations may actually trigger a ""general nuclear war"" if the event that they are in fact armed and the Soviets decide to launch them before they are destroyed on the ground.
The president then questions the Soviet motive for establishing the missile sites, with subsequent comments from McNamara and then Taylor.
National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy then asks whether a military strike on Cuba would include all airfields.
Rusk is then faintly heard asking again about the Soviet motive, suggesting that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev may want the United States to ""live under the fear"" of Soviet nuclear weapons the same way the Soviets live with missiles in Turkey.
The clip ends with the president asking how many missiles are in Turkey.
His brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, adds that a full invasion is also an option, but warns that this would probably provoke a response from the Soviets.
A short conversation then ensues in which McNamara and Taylor explain how much time is needed to prepare for a full invasion of Cuba.
He is not yet sure, however, whether to proceed with a larger air strike or an invasion.
Bundy then asks whether they have ruled out a political solution, and discussion then ensues about various tracks that could be followed.
Bundy and the president then discuss the importance of keeping the plans secret.
The president then asks how long it will be before preparations for air strikes are complete.
Carter and Lundahl respond that cloud cover makes the reconnaissance mission difficult.
Near the end of the clip, Robert Kennedy inquires as to how long it would take invading United States military forces to gain control of Cuba.
By the morning of October 18 CIA analysts had discovered that, in addition to the medium-range missiles spotted two days earlier, the Soviets were also installing intermediate-range ballistic missiles on the island, with twice the range of the MRBMs.
This clip begins with a discussion between Ball and McNamara about the consequences of an unannounced United States air strike on the military installations.
Ball argues that they need to consider the consequences of such an attack and the likely reaction of Khrushchev in Turkey or elsewhere.
The president replies that Khrushchev will ""take Berlin"" whether or not the strikes are announced ahead of time.
After an unidentified speaker mentions that a blockade might buy some time, the president again asserts that Khrushchev will ""grab Berlin"" over missiles that do not even threaten the NATO allies.
Discussion then turns to the option of a blockade of Cuba, and the president asks whether this would require a declaration of war.
On the evening of October 22 the president publicly announced that Cuba would be subject to a United States naval blockade.
The next evening, shortly after the signing of the blockade order, the president met with his advisers.
At the end of this meeting the president and his brother are left alone for a private discussion.
The recording is of very poor quality, but the conversation is notable for its intimacy and candor.
If he's going to get this mean on this one, in our part of the world , no choice.
Then he came back to see me, and he said Khrushchev had a message for you.
On the early afternoon of Saturday, October 27, as the Soviet freighter Grozny approached Cuba toward the now inevitable confrontation with the blockade force, an American U-2 spy plane was reported overdue from a reconnaissance flight over Cuba.
With these issues impending, the president and his advisers grappled with how to respond to conflicting messages from Khrushchev; one received the night before and another received that morning.
The first indicated that Khrushchev would be willing to remove the missiles in exchange for Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba.
The second, however, proposed that the removal be contingent upon the removal of similarly placed United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The president begins with a discussion of NATO and concerns that European allies might have with the removal of the Jupiters from Turkey.
Ball then proposes that they simply ignore Khrushchev's second letter and simply respond to the first.
As guidance for Thomas Finletter, United States ambassador to NATO, the president suggests that he tell them, if they don't support the removal of the Jupiters, to prepare for some retaliatory action from the Soviets in Berlin or Turkey.
Rusk raises the possibility that the missiles be turned over to the United Nations for destruction.
The president is most concerned with the reaction of the Turks to which McNamara responds.
Several more issues are raised, and Bundy at one point suggests an enlargement of the blockade.
At the end of the clip, in response to a point raised by Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, the president warns of what might happen if an invasion takes place.
Saturday, October 27, 10:00 P.M., Oval Office and Cabinet Room, The White House.
On Saturday evening, October 27, with the Soviet freighter Grozny rapidly approaching the blockade, the president sent off a letter to Moscow accepting the terms of the October 26 letter, the removal of the missiles in Cuba in exchange for a United States non-invasion pledge.
At the same time, the president instructed his brother to privately assure Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be removed but that this pledge could not be made publicly.
Dillon: You have to pick out the things they might-McNamara: Well, I think, that's right.
