It is with great satisfaction that I studied your reply to Mr U Thant on the adoption of measures in order to avoid contact by our ships and thus avoid irreparable fatal consequences.
This reasonable step on your part persuades me that your are showing solicitude for the preservation of peace, and I note this with satisfaction.
I have already said that the only concern of our people and government and myself personally as chairman of the Council of Ministers is to develop our country and have it hold a worthy place among all people of the world in economic competition, advance of culture and arts, and most necessary field for competition which will only benefit both the winner and loser, because this benefit is peace and an increase in the facilities by means of which man lives and obtains pleasure.
In your statement, you said that the main aim lies not only in reaching an agreement and adopting measures to avert contact of our ships, and consequently, a deepening of the crisis, which because of this contact can spark off the fire of military conflict after which any talks would be superfluous because others forces and other laws would begin to operate--the laws of war.
You have been worried over our assisting Cuba with arms designed to strengthen its defensive potential--precisely defensive potential--because Cuba, no matter that weapons it had, could not compare with you since these are different dimensions, the more so given up-to-date means of extermination.
Our purpose has been and is to help Cuba, an no one can challenge the humanity of our motives aimed at allowing Cuba to live peacefully and develop as its people desire.
It is good, Mr President, that you agreed for our representatives to meet and begin talks, apparently with the participation of the United Nations Acting Secretary General U Thant.
Consequently, to some extent, he assumes the role of intermediary, and we believe that he can cope with the responsible mission if, of course, every side that is drawn in to this conflict shows good will.
Then people would heave a sigh of relief, considering that the statesmen who bear the responsibility have sober minds, and awareness of their responsibility, and an ability to solve complicated problems and not allow matters to slide to the disaster of war.
Your representatives will make a statement to effect that the United States, on its part, bearing in mind the anxiety and concern of the Soviet state, will evacuate its analogous weapons from Turkey.
After this, representatives of the United Nations Security Council could control on-the-spot the fulfillment of these commitments.
Apparently, it would be better if these representatives enjoyed the trust of the Security Council an ours--the United States and the Soviet Union--as well as of Turkey and Cuba.
It will declare that the United States will respect the integrity of the frontiers of Cuba, its sovereignty, undertakes not to intervene in its domestic affairs, not to invade and not to make its territory available as a place d'armes for the invasion of Cuba, and also will restrain those who would think of launching an aggression against Cuba either from United States territory or from the territory of other states bordering on Cuba.
Of course, for this we would have to reach agreement with you and arrange for some deadline.
Let us agree to give some time, but not delay, two or three weeks, not more than a month.
These mean are stationed in Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government and only in defensive aims.
The greatest pleasure for all the peoples would be an announcement on our agreement, on nipping in the bud the conflict that has arisen.
I attach a great importance to such understanding because it might be a good beginning and, specifically, facilitate a nuclear test ban agreement.
However, it is important to reach an understanding to both these problems in order to make a good gift to the people, to let them rejoice in the news that a nuclear test ban agreement as also been reached and thus there will be no further contamination of the atmosphere.
These problems have not yet been solved, but they wait from an urgent solution which would clear the international atmosphere.
