Drawing on recently declassified KGB files, Serhii Plokhy, will transport us back to the Cuban missile crisis and the brink of nuclear Armageddon.
Ash and cinder, famine and fallout; nuclear war between the two most-powerful nations on Earth.
In conversation with Matthew d’Ancona, Harvard historian and award-winning authority on Eastern Europe Serhii Plokhy will tell the riveting story of those weeks, tracing the tortuous decision-making and calculated brinkmanship of John F Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro, and of their advisors and commanders on the ground.
More often than not, Plokhy will argue, the Americans and Soviets simply misread each other, operating under mutual distrust, second-guesses and false information.
Drawing on the impressive array of primary sources, including the recently declassified KGB files, Plokhy will illustrate the drama of those tense days.
Authoritative, fast-paced and unforgettable, don’t miss this powerful new account of the Cold War’s most perilous moment.
In gripping, granular detail, he shows us just how close the United States and the Soviet Union came to Armageddon” – Anne Applebaum, author of Twilight of Democracy “If you think the story of the Cuban missile crisis has been told so often that nothing remains to be learned, think again.
Drawing on KGB documents preserved in Ukrainian archives and Soviet military memoirs, as well as American documents and Cuban materials, Serhii Plokhy’s almost hour-by-hour account freshly illuminates mistakes by the Kremlin and the White House that triggered the crisis, and snafus at sea and in Cuba that almost sparked a nuclear war” – William Taubman, author of Gorbachev “An excellent overview of the Cuban missile crisis from one of America’s leading Cold War historians.
Price Individual tickets are £10-15, or free for subscribers to How To + Replay A link to replay the event will be made available 48 hours after the event is over to enjoy without a time limit.
History of a Tragedy, Lost Kingdom, The Gates of Europe and The Last Empire.
Matthew d’Ancona Award-winning journalist and author Matthew d’Ancona is an award-winning journalist and author.
Events Masterclass Podcasts Gifts Video Library Join How To + Sign in Events Masterclass Podcasts Gifts Video Library Join How To + Sign in Sign up to our Newsletter Be the first to hear about How To Academy’s forthcoming live talks, masterclasses, conferences, festivals, and free digital content.
