The editor-in-chief of HNN, Rick Shenkman, asked me recently if I would write a critique of the account of the Cuban missile crisis in Robert Caro’s The Passage of Power, Volume 4 of his authoritative biography of Lyndon B Johnson.
Shenkman felt that Caro had utilized “myths that you debunked years ago on HNN” -and, unfortunately, he was right.
Myths versus Reality, to be published in September, deals explicitly with the issue of what really happened in the White House in October 1962.
He likewise declares that RFK revealed himself to be “a master of compromise of diplomacy with a moral element, of diplomacy that was, in fact, in some ways grounded in ‘the moral question’” that a sneak attack was not in the American tradition.
However, the ExComm tapes demonstrate conclusively that RFK’s claim that the moral argument dominated the first week’s discussions is absolutely false -it was not even one of the dominant themes in the discussions.
A full invasion was the only choice, he argued, that justified the military and political costs resulting from so much destruction and loss of life.
From these early remarks through the entire thirteen days of deliberations, RFK never seemed to connect the dots between United States military action against Cuba and the real possibility of escalation to full-scale nuclear war with the Soviet Union.RFK, in short, was a hawk from the start.
In June 1961, after the assassination of the Dominican Republic’s brutal strongman Rafael Trujillo, RFK, still smarting from the Bay of Pigs disaster, pressed for American intervention to prevent a Castro-inspired communist takeover of the Dominican government.
He had even suggested blowing up the United States consulate to create a pretext for sending in American troops.
Now, in urging the president to invade Cuba, he argued that a blockade could become “a very slow death” over a period of months and would still require dangerous military steps such as “the examination of Russian ships, shooting down the Russian planes that try to land there.
He also urged the president to revive the bombing option that had been discussed but rejected during the first week of meetings.
The administration, he reasoned, should put the air strikes back on the table in order to demonstrate “that we’re not backing off and that we’re still being tough with Cuba.
And finally, when McNamara demanded dramatic military escalation late on that final Saturday evening, RFK did not object.
That would be nice.” -are hardly the sentiments of a catalyst for moral-based compromise and diplomacy.
Notwithstanding RFK’s perceptive behavioral insight, his assertion about President Kennedy’s presence at the ExComm meetings is demonstrably false.
The president did not deliberately stay away from any of the White House meetings when he was in Washington.
Robert McNamara, for example, one of the most strident ExComm hawks and RFK’s ally at the meetings, demanded on the final day that the United States should be “damned sure they understand it’s coming.
Nonetheless, within a year, McNamara had already begun to finesse his role in the ExComm discussions.
In the fall of 1963, he told JFK about a recent conversation with Admiral Hyman Rickover, in which the latter claimed that Admiral George Anderson, chief of naval operations in October 1962, had been “absolutely insubordinate” and had tried to subvert the president’s orders on the blockade.However, McNamara himself had actively supported Robert Kennedy’s hard-line stance on enforcing the blockade.
RFK had insisted that it would be “a hell of an advantage” to seize a ship in order to examine and get photos of their nuclear weapons.
In fact, in sharp contrast to his brother, RFK was one of the most persistently hawkish members of the ExComm and his views were all but identical to those of LBJ on Black Saturday, October 27, 1962.
He fails, however, to mention the fact that the committee’s conclusion was based on the sudden appearance of a Dallas police dictabelt that supposedly “proved” that four shots were fired in Dealey Plaza -and everyone agreed that one gunman could not have fired all four shots.
The dictabelt was subsequently analyzed by acoustic experts chosen by the National Research Council and conclusively shown to be worthless and immaterial; the alleged “fourth shot” was actually background noise and occurred a full minute after the fatal shots were fired.
The Passage of Power, Robert Caro includes a poignant chapter, “Defeating Despair,” about Robert Kennedy -LBJ’s bête noir.
Caro’s argument, backed up by many citations and anecdotal examples, is hardly new -namely, that RFK became a changed man in the wake of his brother’s assassination.
But now, after the assassination, the evolution from Kennedy’s old Manichean ‘black and white’ view of life became, suddenly, much more noticeable.
It cannot be stressed strongly enough that this ubiquitous view of RFK’s role in the ExComm meetings is false -essentially invented by Bobby Kennedy himself in the draft of Thirteen Days and enshrined in the 1969 published version edited and completed by Ted Sorensen.One additional example should suffice to nail down this point.
Khrushchev had agreed publicly on October 28 to remove the missiles from Cuba; on November 20, JFK was preparing to announce the lifting of the naval quarantine around Cuba.
Hours before the statement to the nation, RFK urged his brother to resist giving any public assurances that the United States would not invade Cuba.
With the quarantine removed, he argued, a potential invasion was the only remaining lever for putting pressure on Khrushchev.
But, JFK continued to speculate about whether a United States noninvasion promise would also strengthen Khrushchev’s political position in the Kremlin and perhaps make it easier for him to eventually withdraw his conventional forces from Cuba as well.
