From after Fidel Castro’s overthrow of Batista in January 1959 until 1961, typically less than 5 percent of the public considered Cuba to be the “most important problem” facing the country.
After that small peak concern steadily subsided until, in August 1962, less than 2 percent of mentions dealt with Cuba.
In late August there were a series of attacks on Cuba by exile groups and increasing news reports on the Soviet military build-up in Cuba.
On September 4, President Kennedy revealed the presence of groundto-air antiaircraft missiles in Cuba and warned the Soviet Union not to install offensive weapons in Cuba.
The president again spoke publicly about the Cuba situation on September 13, and on September 20 the Senate passed a resolution authorizing the use of force to counter a Soviet military threat in Cuba. awareness of the crisis In response to these developments, Cuba became a top worry of the U.S. people.
Then, on October 22, President Kennedy addressed the nation, announcing that the Soviet Union had installed long-range nuclear missiles in Cuba and demanding their withdrawal.
He indicated that the United States would enforce a blockade of offensive weapons to Cuba until the missiles were removed.
A Gallup poll in the field from October 19 to 24 showed that concern over Cuba remained high at 25 percent, but not higher than in late September.
After compliance was verified, President Kennedy ended the blockade on November 21.
In the immediate aftermath of the settlement, but before the crisis completely subsided, public concern over Cuba stood at 31 percent.
By September 1963, only 3 percent said Cuba was the most important problem, and only once in the next 3 years did as many as 5 percent mention it.
The Cold War From the end of World War II until the fall of communism in the late 1980s, the Cold War rivalry between the Soviet Union and the United States dominated international relations.
Worries then waned to just 19 percent expecting a war within 5 years in August 1959.
The U-2 incident, the Berlin crises of the early 1960s, and other events pushed concern back up to 53 percent in September 1961.
In the spring, “the atomic bomb or fallout” had been on the minds of 28 percent of residents during the previous week, while during the crisis 65 percent had thought of it.
But even during and immediately following the peak of the crisis, fear of war was far from rampant.
In NORC’s Illinois study, 45 percent said that “the chances of war between the United States and Russia” had decreased “because of the Cuba situation,” with only 28 percent saying that it had increased.
Thus, while war was in early 1963 the public’s number two concern among items on the list, less than a quarter saw it as the top problem, and almost no one saw fallout shelters as the most pressing issue. u.s.-soviet relations Concern over war and peace can also be tracked by the public’s outlook about good versus bad relations between the Soviet Union and the United States.
People in December 1962 were less sanguine about whether the coming year would be one of peace or conflict.
However, this was the second most optimistic assessment from 1959 through 1977.
People saw the outcome of the crisis as a U.S. victory and as an advantage that they expected to continue into the new year.
John F Kennedy presidential job approval Of all post–World War II presidents, Kennedy ranks as the most popular.
During his term in office, he had a higher average job approval rating than any other president.
Public assessments of the job approval of past presidents are higher than their average ratings while they were in office for presidents deemed successes and lower for those considered failures.
President Kennedy’s handling of the Cuban missile crisis significantly contributed to his strong overall job approval scores.
They then slowly, but steadily, subsided, dropping to a low of 61 percent in mid-October 1962.
Approval then again waned, falling to the upper fifties in the fall of 1963 immediately before his assassination.
Besides increasing public approval of the president, the Cuban missile crisis also dramatically changed the public’s basis for evaluating his performance.
Just 9 percent mentioned foreign policy as positive remarks, and only 8 percent had heard negative comments on his handling of international 3.
Thus, after the crisis foreign policy in general and Cuba in particular dominated people’s evaluations of President Kennedy, and those evaluations were positive by about five to one.
In September 1962, after public concern over Cuba had already sharply increased, only 10 percent endorsed invasion, bombing, or other belligerent action.
Likewise, state polls by Harris in late September and early October indicated opposition to going to war with Cuba.
In the spring of 1963, 6–7 percent supported military action, 6 percent wanted to “get Russian troops, missiles, etc. out of Cuba,” and 1–2 percent favored getting rid of Castro.
Sentiment did shift as United States policy in response to the disclosure of offensive missiles changed.
In September 1962, 22 percent wanted the United States to “keep out, hands off,” and 25 percent did not know what action should be taken toward Cuba.
Only 3 percent still endorsed a hands-off policy, and uncertainty dropped to 17 percent.
Both noninvolvement and uncertainty increased again in the spring of 1963.
Also, the public quickly and strongly endorsed President Kennedy’s call 4.
While the questions asked in the four surveys from September 1962 to May 1963 were identical, different open-ended codings used hamper comparisons.
A special Gallup poll taken within hours of his address to the nation found that 84 percent approved of the blockade decision, 4 percent disapproved, and 12 percent “withheld judgment” (Gallup Organization 1962).5 Overall, during Kennedy’s presidency, the public consistently rejected invading Cuba and instead favored less extreme measures.
He warned that it was “a difficult and dangerous effort on which we have set out.
But the NORC Illinois study suggests that there was much less anxiety and panic than these accounts portray.
First, most people reported no notable disruptions in their lives during the crisis.
Likewise, when asked directly if they had made any changes because of the Cuban situation (something that they “did or did not do because of it”), only 11. percent reported such changes.
Moreover, of those having changed their normal patterns because of the crisis, only onethird engaged in any safetyor survival-related activities.
Second, even during the height of the crisis, Cuba did not dominate people’s concerns.
Thoughts about the “world situation” were even more widespread, on 93 percent of people’s minds.
But all other topics from money to health occupied fewer people’s thoughts during the Cuban missile crisis than during the previous spring.
Moreover, it is particularly notable that thoughts about death fell from 37 percent in the spring to 29 percent during the crisis.
Likewise, the Cuban situation was a major, but not obsessive, topic of conversation.
Three measures of psychological response—affect balance, psychosomatic symptoms, and changes in various behaviors—reveal the complex mixture of responses to the Cuban missile crisis.
First, as table 29 shows, feelings of positive affect were down during the crisis period compared with the spring.
Yet despite this clear drop in positive affect, assessments of overall happiness rose during this same period.
In the spring, 23 percent rated their lives as very happy, while during the Cuban missile crisis, 28 percent said they were very happy.
Of the eight symptoms, four were more common during the crisis and four were less frequent.
However, this item did not refer to either changes because of the Cuban missile crisis or specifically during that period, so it may reflect more nostalgic beliefs that things were easier in the past.
More focused were items about changes in problematic activities during 6.
Overall, while the Cuban missile crisis was on most people’s minds, the public was not overwhelmed by worries and did not dwell on concerns about death and nuclear survival.
Positive affect was down, general happiness was up, and negative affect changed little.
Likewise, measures of stress and anxiety showed little alteration and clearly presented no evidence that people were traumatized or debilitated by worries over the crisis.
People did, however, report slight gains in some problematic activities and a larger increase in drinking.
In sum, the public did not panic, was not overcome by nuclear anxiety, and remained psychologically intact during the crisis.
Thirty-eight percent mentioned the Cuban missile crisis compared with 29 percent selecting the Bay of Pigs invasion, 25 percent his stand on Civil Rights, and 22 percent his inauguration speech.
Less that 20 percent mentioned other events like the Berlin crisis, the Peace Corps, or the nuclear test ban treaty.
It is likely that the Cuban missile crisis received these mixed ratings because many saw it as both a proud and dark moment in the recent history of the United States.
While the particulars of the two events are quite different, they were both events of enormous importance that involved a clear and present danger to the country, galvanized the populace, and propelled the political leadership into decided and forceful action.
Politically and psychologically the United States people were resilient in the face of these confrontations.
They absorbed the shock, backed their leaders, and carried on with their lives.
This may be the hallmark of the United States people in times of greatest challenge.
The percentage mentioning Cuba is included in the total mentions in the first column.
Most Least Important Important Communism in the United States 31.2 5.6 Danger of a world war 23.7 3.8 Juvenile delinquency 15.9 2.0 Education 15.7 1.6 Race relations 8.0 10.3 Taxes 2.0 17.5 Fallout shelters 1.6 40.5 Slums .6 13.4 Don’t know 1.1 4.8 7.
A peaceful year, more or less free of international disputes, or a troubled year with much international discord.
Some people say that the United States should send our armed forces into Cuba to help overthrow Castro.
Agree Disagree No Opinion Date N 4/28–5/3/61 24 65 11 … 9/20–9/25/62 23 61 15 1,701 2/7–2/12/63 20 63 17 1,661 Note.—The April–May 1961 Gallup poll is not archived at the Roper Center.
The Gallup Organization believes that its sample size was around 1,600.
Agree Disagree No Opinion N Work with United Nationsa 70 15 15 … Trade embargob 63 23 14 … Aid to anti-Castro forcesc 44 41 15 … United States invasiond 24 65 11 … a Some people say that the United States should work with Central and South American countries—through the United Nations—to decide what policy we should follow with regard to Cuba.
Some people say that within the next 2 or 3 years the people of Cuba will overthrow Castro and the communists.
People Mentions National or international political situation 6.8 4.5 Health 26.7 17.5 Interpersonal relations 12.4 8.2 Changes in family status 13.5 8.9 Job changes 13.0 8.5 Finances 14.1 9.3 Other 40.2 26.4 Nothing 22.1 14.5 Missing 3.5 2.3 Total 152.3 100.1 26.
More worried now 5.7 Same 38.9 Less worried 54.5 Missing/don’t know .9 28.
I am going to show you a card which describes some of the ways people feel at different times, and you tell me whether you felt like that during the past week.
The following list describes some of the ways people feel at different times.
Let me read you a list of things some people have said they remember most about President Kennedy.
The missile crisis in Cuba 38 The Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba 29 His stand on civil rights 25 His inauguration speech 22 The first Catholic elected to the White House 15 His winning the 1960 election 12 His standing firm on the Russia threat to Berlin 11 The way he handled live new conferences 11 His starting the Peace Corps 11 His negotiating first nuclear test ban treaty 7 Other 5 Nothing 4 Not sure 3 34.
Here is a list of international events that the United States has been involved in in recent history.
For each, please tell me whether you think it was a proud moment in United States history, a dark moment, or neither a proud moment nor a dark moment.
For each one, please tell me if you feel we should have or should not have used our military the way we did.
