Cuba Crisis Week of the Brink Dobbs Archive | Trotskyist Writers Index | ETOL Main Page Farrell Dobbs The Cuba Crisis The Week of the Brink From International Socialist Review, Vol.
The transcript of the tape recording is published here substantially unchanged.
COMRADE Chairman, comrades and friends, if there are any of you here tonight who did not live with fear during the period of extreme tension following Kennedy’s nuclear war threat, then I can only say you must have been on the granddaddy of all drunks.
Throughout the world, attention was focused on the Soviet ships sailing toward Kennedy’s naval blockade around the embattled revolutionary island of Cuba.
It was as though an announcement had come from the astronomers that a fiery object from outer space was heading toward us and the people of the world were watching with fear and horror to see if it was on a collision course with our planet, and would incinerate us all.
The threat of nuclear war, which had seemed somewhat remote, suddenly and dramatically exploded into an immediate danger.
The people of the United States became vividly aware that this country won’t be exempt in a nuclear war.
Never again will a general war be fought in which people in other lands will be destroyed wholesale, civilians and all, their cities leveled, their country ravished, while the United States experiences no destruction within its boundaries.
The people of America are aware that we, like the rest of the world, will be the victims of a nuclear war, and they’re aware that there is no place to hide.
A most meaningful manifestation of that realization occurred in Washington during the crisis.
At one point he came to the question of civil defense, whereupon the hardbitten, cynical reporters laughed in his face.
So they lived with fear and they lived with hope that maybe the threat would go away.
Kennedy kept the brutal pressure on, hour by hour, and day by grueling day, until Khrushchev, acting under the pressure of Kennedy’s threats, stated that the Soviet Union would withdraw the missiles that Kennedy held to be offensive weapons.
But nobody was quite the same as they were before that grim speech of Kennedy’s on October 22.
There is a new consciousness in people’s minds that nuclear war is a clear and present danger.
Some new thoughts are percolating as to why there is the war danger and new and more intensive searches are going on among people to try to determine what can be done to prevent war.
I won’t try tonight to deal with the tactical issues at the peak of the crisis, although they have a certain importance in probing into the full meaning of the crisis.
I won’t do that because that is not the real key, in my opinion, to an analysis of the lessons of the crisis.
Let me say first that the main, immediate fact that emerges from the crisis is that nuclear war has been averted — only temporarily—but it has been averted, and that means we have gained precious time in the fight for world peace.
To use that time effectively we need to analyze the fundamental lessons of the Cuban crisis.
Discussion of these questions and the arriving at common conclusions by more and more people will have to develop as a process.
All I propose to undertake tonight is to make a start in the discussion of some of these basic factors.
The Cubans were defending their sovereign right to make social changes within their country that they thought would better serve the welfare of the population.
The right of a people—as it’s written in our own Declaration of Independence proclaiming the American Revolution of 1776—to take affairs into their own hands and reshape things in whatever way they see fit to make a better life for themselves.
That was a progressive act and they are to be commended for that act, because it was in keeping with the rights of the Cuban people.
It was Kennedy, who precipitated the nuclear war crisis and used the issue of Soviet aid to Cuban self-defense as his pretext.
That was Kennedy’s line, and he is going to stop such interferences with his imperialist aims if he has to bomb every Latin American from 90 miles off our shores to the southern tip of South America.
The imperialist ruling class of the United States stands as the only governing power in the world that has ever used nuclear weapons against other human beings.
The Soviets are removing their missiles from Cuba and Kennedy is still on the prod.
He is now broadening his definition of what he calls “offensive” weapons.
If defense is aggression, then so long as the Cubans have any arms with which to defend themselves against attack, they have “offensive” weapons that “threaten” the United States.
Cuba will possess “offensive” weapons so long as there is a zip gun in a back alley in Havana.
Because the imperialists are preparing new violations of Cuban sovereignty.
They are determined to turn back the clock and restore exploitation of Cuba by American monopoly corporations.
That is why the Cuban revolution still remains in grave peril of United States aggression.
It is our duty to defend from within this country the rights of the Cubans.
Back them in their demand that the United States withdraw from Guantanamo.
Kennedy wants to dictate what weapons the Cubans can have because they are “threatening” the United States from 90 miles away, and he has a military base right on Cuban soil.
It is our duty to support the demands of the Cubans that Kennedy call off that naval blockade, that he call off his violations of Cuban air space, that he quit arming counter-revolutionary gangs to help overturn the Cuban revolution and that he lift the economic embargo against Cuba.
These are points stressed by the Cubans as just minimum assurances it would be necessary to have before they could put an ounce of trust in any promise Kennedy might make that he would not invade Cuba.
We should demand that the Kennedy administration restore diplomatic relations with Cuba.
Let the people of this country go down there and see for themselves what it is all about.
Give the Cubans economic aid and pay them reparations for the damage that has already been done to them by the United States.
NOW look at the lessons of the Cuban crisis from another point of view.
Ever since people began to grasp what the horror of nuclear war would probably be, there has been a notion advanced that the imperialists would not risk nuclear war in trying to maintain their rule.
It has been argued that they would hold back because they would risk their own destruction in a nuclear war.
This contention has been counterposed to the Marxist analysis of the historic role of ruling classes.
Marxists hold that the whole history of class struggle demonstrates that no ruling class will peacefully yield up its privileged minority rule upon demand from the majority.
The ruling class will try by all available means, through force and violence, to impose its minority will on the majority in order to preserve its privileged position.
The father of Caroline Kennedy is prepared to risk the death of his daughter in nuclear war in order to preserve the capitalist system and maintain imperialist exploitation over peoples in other countries.
These facts, and the surrounding circumstances in the crisis, offer fresh proof that the war danger stems from the basic nature of capitalism.
The roots lie in class exploitation within a capitalist country, in our case the United States.
Capitalist exploitation breeds social injustice, creates class inequities within our society.
Madison Avenue describes us as a society of equals, but it just happens that the capitalists are more equal than workers, and that is built into the capitalist system, and that’s the way it is going to remain under capitalism.
Out of this class inequality a surplus accumulation of capital becomes amassed in the hands of our native capitalists and they have to do something with it, in order to make more money for themselves.
This thirst for new riches impels the capitalist ruling class into a drive toward exploitation of peoples abroad.
An intricate network of imperialist oppression develops, imposed by a combination of political trickery and military force.
The consequent social injustices, in turn, provoke class struggles on a world scale that lead to colonial revolutions for independence from imperialism and to social revolution to overturn the whole capitalist system and lay a foundation through workers’ states for an advance to a socialist society.
The imperialists, and before all others, the imperialist rulers of the United States, are striving desperately to stem and reverse this revolutionary tide.
Their immediate aim in the case of Cuba is to proscribe social revolution from the Western Hemisphere, to keep it a private preserve of capitalism.
It says right in the constitution of the United States that the Cubans can’t do that.
They intend to put an end to this business in which racial discrimination and segregation are actually outlawed to unite all workers and enable them better to act in common to improve their conditions.
They intend to restore discrimination and segregation in order again to split the Cuban workers and enable the imperialists to exploit them.
Throughout this whole crisis it has been asserted over and over again that there is no change in the basic policy of Washington with respect to Cuba.
And by that they also mean there is no change in their aim to smash all revolutionary gains made by working people throughout the world.
They are girding for nuclear war precisely for the purpose of restoring imperialist supremacy over the world.
Their aim is to make the world safe for the investments of the Rockefellers and the Kennedys.
War can be prevented only by stripping the imperialists of their ability to make war.
That can be accomplished only by political class struggle to abolish capitalist rule wherever it still holds sway, including in the United States.
All the workers states that have come into being since October 1917 have the same inalienable right as the Cubans to prepare the strongest possible military defense of their countries.
But military defense, vital though it is to them, is not the primary key to world peace, to holding back the imperialist war drive.
Reasonable though it would be to have peaceful coexistence between nations; reasonable though it would be to let the different social systems engage in orderly competition to prove which is the superior system—the imperialists won’t go for that.
They won’t go for it because they are wholly aware that they would lose in peaceful competition between the rival social systems.
The imperialists won’t agree to peacefully coexist a minute longer than they absolutely have to with countries having a non-capitalist social system.
A serious question therefore arises as to whether one can fight for peace under a slogan of peaceful coexistence with capitalism.
The policy based on that slogan was first shaped by Stalin as the head of the Soviet Union and it has been continued in all its main essentials by the Khrushchev regime.
To touch briefly on some of its basic aspects, the policy assumes that Soviet military power can serve as a key deterrent against imperialist war with nuclear arms.
On that key premise, the anti-capitalist, antiwar masses of the world are diverted from class struggle opposition to imperialism into pressure groups supporting Soviet diplomacy.
More concretely, within capitalist countries such as ours, rebels against capitalist policies are diverted from independent working class political action into support of so-called “peace loving” capitalist politicians.
Within the framework of this basic policy the Soviet leaders have sought to assert unquestioned authority over all anti-imperialist forces in carrying out their international line.
Repeatedly, they have acted unilaterally in taking important steps touching the interests of working people in other countries, in other workers’ parties.
That has been part of the history of Kremlin policy, and it appears to have been repeated in Moscow’s negotiations with Washington concerning the Cuban crisis.
It also appears that the Cubans are asserting their right to be consulted and to have a voice in any negotiations, as shown by their opposition to Khrushchev’s offer to allow United Nations’ inspection of Cuban military installations.
In the first place the Cubans have a sovereign right to have any kind of arms they want.
The Cubans have a right to whatever weapons they can get to defend themselves.
Why, it would be no less unjust if he would demand that Castro take the top Pentagon brass on a tour of the Cuban defenses so they could better prepare an invasion.
It is an outrage and the Cubans are right in standing their ground on this.
At the same time Castro spoke correctly when he told the Cuban people in his speech a week ago last night that the inspection issue is not a question to be discussed with the imperialists.
There remains an unbreakable alliance between the Cuban and Soviet states, he said, and these are things they will discuss and work out among themselves.
We can expect more to be said on the subject in due course by the Cubans, if not by Moscow.
And people who are seriously interested in the question of worker’s democracy, should pay close attention to what is said.
The disagreement poses the question of democracy in relations between workers’ states, as a corollary to the issue of democracy within revolutionary parties.
Worker’s democracy on both counts is vital to the forces fighting against imperialism and for world peace.
I HAVE described briefly the policy of peaceful coexistence and popular frontism, as developed by Stalin and continued by Khrushchev.
It didn’t prevent the imperialists’ intervention in Korea, nor is it preventing the present intervention in Vietnam.
It hasn’t stopped Kennedy from threatening nuclear war in his attempts to overturn the Cuban revolution.
Of course, it’s true that the Soviet retreat on the missile issue under pressure of Kennedy’s threats warded off the immediate danger of nuclear war.
It’s true that Khrushchev has stripped Kennedy—for the moment—of a phony pretext for an invasion of Cuba.
But there are also other facts that we should keep in mind in analyzing the lessons of this latest war crisis.
Popular front politics within the United States didn’t get to first base in stopping Washington from shaping its nuclear war policy.
Soviet military power didn’t stop Kennedy from threatening a nuclear attack.
They once again call into question the international policy of the Soviet leadership.
They compel serious thought about the need for class struggle opposition to imperialism.
Military self-defense by the revolutionary countries, as I said, is important to their security.
But class struggle action is the key to the fight against imperialist war.
In that connection I want to call your attention to Castro’s speech on the issue of UN inspection.
That headline pinpoints the essence of what Castro has to say in his speech.
It pinpoints the fact that the Cubans, learning as they struggle and learning their lessons well — because they know imperialism won’t allow them time for second guesses — are shaping a policy increasingly permeated with the concepts of class struggle defense against imperialism.
You’ll find at the literature table back there a Pioneer pamphlet containing the Second Declaration of Havana.
It’s worth your while to study the speeches and documents put out by the Cuban revolutionary movement.
They are thinking out loud, learning the lessons of the struggle as they go forward, and we have something to learn from them.
They have generally supported the Democrats, usually by campaigning against the Republicans.
You will recall that they supported Kennedy in 1960 by calling for the defeat of Nixon as the main danger.
Well, Nixon is no prize package, and on top of everything else, he just proved he is also a sore loser.
But, as the record shows, the “peace loving” Henry Wallace backed Truman in the Korean War.
Yet they repeatedly prove that they learn nothing and they forget nothing.
They simply turned from Wallace back to support of Stevenson and Kennedy by opposing Eisenhower and Nixon.
TODAY Kennedy’s party has decisively proved where it stands on the burning question of war and peace, and his nuclear war threat had bipartisan support, all the way.
As I said, no sane person could but welcome peaceful relations between nations.
Again the familiar Stalinist technique, twist and distort things so that to disagree with a certain policy of Khrushchev’s becomes anti-Soviet.
It contributes nothing but confusion to the search for effective ways to fight against imperialist war.
The CP leaders resort to this simply as a cover for continuing their same old bankrupt policy.
They smear the pro-Cuba, pro-Soviet SWP, and at the same time they continue to seek political coexistence with the anti-Soviet, anti-Cuba, Social Democrats—people who could not even make a demonstration against Kennedy’s nuclear war threat without having at the top of their banners a blast against the Soviet Union and a disclaimer on Cuba where they call for a “democratic” counterrevolution.
They find there are two power centers down in Washington, one in the White House, and the other in the Pentagon.
The Pentagon gang, they say, are in a coalition with the ultra-right, the Republican leaders and Wall Street.
They are acting independently of the White House in moving to aggravate the crisis.
We must save him from this Pentagon cabal so that he can show his better self and really be Caroline’s daddy again.
The Worker has also opened a polemic against the SWP over the peace question.
But we regret the factional distortions that have been introduced by the Worker.
That statement simply takes facts and turns them upside down and inside out.
The purpose of it is, of course, to oppose a class struggle political policy and try to defend their class collaborationist line.
We recognize—we’re not entirely stupid, you know—we recognize that people cannot be expected to leap in one stride to socialist conclusions when they set out to do something to stop a nuclear war.
We support all partial steps going in the direction of opposition to the imperialist war policy.
We support, for example, the demand for unilateral action by the United States in ending nuclear tests.
We believe all tests should be stopped, but we also think people fighting against nuclear tests from within the United States should concentrate on demands that the United States government stop them.
We favor demands to withdraw all American troops from abroad, to dismantle all military bases.
Let the people of the rest of the world run their own affairs as they see fit, while we concentrate on clearing up the social mess created by the capitalists here in our country.
As is the duty of all socialists, we campaign day in and day out for independent working class political action.
We seek constantly to explain why working class political action must lead to adoption of a socialist program.
Because of the brutal truths about imperialist policy revealed in the Cuban crisis, new fighters for peace are bound to be aroused.
If socialists advance a class struggle program to them, more headway can be made in the fight for peace.
We can make progress in explaining to American workers the need for our country to follow the revolutionary example of the Russian, Chinese and Cuban workers.
Well, I’m not going to try to guess what Khrushchev had in mind, or what Castro had in mind, or what the circumstances were in their mutual relations.
I do not know, but I would take it for granted that the facts will slowly come to light in the next period.
I am quite confident that there will be more information coming from the Cubans, because one of the things you will notice in Castro’s speech is that it sets a new and very good example in moving away from the practice of secret diplomacy between governmental powers behind the backs of the people.
In reporting his discussion with U Thant, Castro gives a refreshing view of a revolutionary leadership telling the workers the truth.
It’s not a very wise thing to make snap judgements on tactical questions without having all the facts.
There is an expression for that here in the United States—drug store quarter-backing.
On Monday at the drug store lunch counter the experts decide what mistakes the quarterbacks and the coach made in the football game the previous Saturday.
Anybody who has had trade union experience will recognize that it is a chancy thing to be too categoric from too far away about a tactical move made in a given struggle.
We should study this aspect of the Cuban question, as we dig more deeply into the lesson of the crisis, in a sense similar for instance to the problem that arose over the question of Soviet resumption of nuclear tests.
The Soviet Union had the right to resume nuclear tests as it did, after the tacit ban on tests which had come about, you will recall, when the Soviets unilaterally declared a moratorium.
Our party felt that, even though the Soviet Union had this right, its breaking of the moratorium on tests gave propaganda advantage to the imperialists among people who were strongly opposed to nuclear testing and who had been bringing more and more pressure to bear on the United States government over the issue.
In short, you come down to a question of the strategic interrelationship between military defense and political defense of the workers states against imperialism.
From that point of view, there is a real question as to whether the missile issue involved tactics which put military above political considerations in the defense of Cuba.
Since so many of you are preoccupied with the question here tonight, that in itself is objective testimony to the fact that revolutionary leadership has to be sensitive about taking military defensive steps which may interfere with the mobilization of political defense.
It is true that the more the imperialists get crowded, the more likely they are to take long chances, as they just demonstrated in the Cuban crisis.
But without the strongest class struggle opposition to stay their hand, the imperialists will become bolder in their drive to overturn all past revolutionary conquests and will throw the world into war anyway.
Imperialism is either going to be defeated everywhere or it’s going to make war.
But the imperialists are not entirely free agents in deciding when they can make war.
At the same time the foreign minister spoke at a street meeting of Brazilian workers and students where he admitted the right of the Cubans to establish a socialist regime within the Western Hemisphere.
It means that the pressure of class struggle was impeding the firm mobilization of a capitalist government behind the imperialist attack on Cuba.
The wider the class struggle, the greater will be the mobilization of humanity on the side of revolution, and the lesser will be that portion of the human race that remains under the influence of imperialism.
Let me try to make that concrete in United States’ terms by one simple example.
You all know that not a single Democrat or Republican politician in Congress said one word in opposition to Kennedy’s line in the Cuban crisis.
Let’s assume that there had been just one actual representative of the working class to speak within Congress against Kennedy’s policy and tell the class truth about the Cuban crisis.
It would have had a very significant effect on the minds of the American people.
As it was, though, nowhere in the councils of government, nowhere in the top leadership of the unions was there a voice speaking out against Kennedy’s line.
People were subjected day in and day out a drum fire of propaganda in support of Kennedy all during the crisis.
I happened to get the call at the office from a woman who said, “I want to tell you that I listened to your Mr Feingold last night, and my eyes remained glued to that television screen.
Her example shows that insofar as we can mobilize forces to break through the curtain of lies drawn around the American people by the imperialists, it can have an effect.
For the moment a lot of people have been taken in by the way Kennedy was able to utilize the missile issue.
Missiles or not, Kennedy did provoke quite a few protest actions in the capitalist sector of the world.
You’ll find in the Militant a round-up on some of these protest actions in various countries, including a very interesting one.
Suppose there were tactical errors on the military defense side involving the Soviet Union and perhaps involving the Cuban leadership.
Well, if that was the way things worked out in the class struggle, you wouldn’t have a single trade union in the United States today, because our boys at the top of the union movement don’t need to take a backseat for anybody when it comes to making blunders.
In fact Kennedy will succeed for a while in doing a snow job on the American people precisely because the leaders of the mass organizations in this country are truckling to him.
But he won’t fool the world, and he won’t change the relationship of forces in the world revolutionary struggle through his propaganda.
ON THE question of what independent socialists can do within the peace movement, this is a big subject in itself, and I can only briefly touch on it in passing.
A big problem in the first hours after Kennedy’s speech was not what kind of protest action to mobilize but how to impel the people heading the so-called “respectable” peace organizations into calling any demonstrations at all.
They wanted to take ads in the newspapers and start firing telegrams to Kennedy.
It constitutes a good starting point to examine the peace movement in terms of the Cuban crisis.
These questions require study, particularly since a lot of young people turned up in the demonstrations where they occurred around the country, young militants who wanted some fighting leaders.
One of the most important things that socialists can do—independent socialists about whom the question was asked, and organized socialists as well — one of the most important things they can do is to work in the peace movement to help these young people to develop a class struggle policy and to effectively employ the kind of energy, the kind of courage, the kind of determination that they bring to the fight for peace.
I come now to the last question, the problem of speaking to audiences that aren’t sympathetic to the Cuban Revolution as is the audience here tonight.
I would suggest to you that things are a little different than they were before October 22, even with an unsympathetic audience.
There is better than an even chance that Kennedy is going to overreach himself concerning the momentary propaganda advantage he has gained in this country on things like the missile issue.
There is a whole series of questions that will arise as he presses his offensive against Cuba.
For instance, I would suggest one question to put to your audience that helps introduce a new dimension into the Cuba discussion.
I am speaking in the terms now of cutting through his missile propaganda which won’t stand up indefinitely.
Now is the time, more than ever, to go back and explain carefully to people what they are doing in Cuba, what they are trying to accomplish.
Put it in terms of the things that the working people of this country are struggling for.
They are doing the same things in Cuba that the NAACP is organized to do in the United States.
They are doing the same things in Cuba that organizations in this country fighting for higher old-age pensions, better medical care, more schools, adequate housing are trying to do.
Of course, the imperialists still harp on the question of Cuban elections.
I thought Dick Garza handled that matter well in a discussion with a radio commentator.
He brought out that the United States, after it won independence from England, went quite a few years longer than the Cubans have yet gone before they had what passed for elections here.
It is entirely possible, you know, that there would be some changes made in this country.
