Daryl.Press@Dartmouth.Edu Prepared for delivery at the 2001 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Hilton San Francisco and Towers August 30 – September 2, 2001.
Almost every year, Americans are told that their country's reputation is on the line.
If we did not set a precedent in the Persian Gulf, we were warned, aggressors everywhere would swallow up their neighbors; if we did not accomplish our mission in Somalia, everyone would believe that the United States would flee if its military forces suffered casualties; and if we did not carry out air strikes against the Serbs, no one would believe NATO's commitments.
Each of these claims rests on the hypothesis, which I call the “reputation hypothesis,” that tomorrow's enemies will assess America's credibility on the basis of United States actions today.
The reputation hypothesis is widely believed by American decision makers and, as a result, the United States has paid a high cost in dollars and lives to protect America's reputation for resolve.
The United States has fought wars over issues of little immediate importance in order to build or preserve credibility for the future.
If the reputation hypothesis is true, but reputations are short-lived, or if they only apply in a narrow set of future cases, then decision 2 In this paper I test the reputation hypothesis against what I call the power/interests hypothesis.
The ""power/interests hypothesis"" posits that decision makers assess the credibility of their adversaries’ threats by evaluating the current balance of power and interests, without reference to the adversary's history for keeping or breaking commitments.
If the power/interests hypothesis is correct then countries do not need to take costly actions today in order to generate credibility for the future.
Future commitments will be credible if and only if they are tied to real interests and backed by sufficient power.
This paper uses words which are used frequently in everyday discussions of politics and which, therefore, have multiple meanings.
A country's credibility is the perceived likelihood that it will carry out its threats and promises.
One factor which may contribute to a country's credibility is its reputation.
A country's reputation is the perception, held by others, of the state's pattern of past behavior.
The ""reputation hypothesis"" links the concept of reputation to credibility.
The reputation hypothesis posits that a country's reputation has a significant effect on its credibility.
In other words, according to the reputation hypothesis, when a country tries to assess the likelihood that an adversary will carry out its commitments (i.e. when a country tries to assess the credibility of an adversary) it bases its analysis on that makers should not invest much in reputation.
Only if reputations last a long time or apply broadly will it pay to invest much in reputation.
Different observers can assign different values to the likelihood that a country will carry out each of its threats and promises, so a country can have different amounts of credibility on each issue with each observer.
I look for evidence that United States decision makers were influenced significantly by a Soviet reputation for keeping or breaking past commitments, and for evidence that decision makers assessed Soviet credibility strictly on the basis of the balance of power and interests.
For several reasons, the CMC provides an excellent test for the reputation and power/interests hypotheses.
The reputation hypothesis predicts that Soviet credibility during the missile crisis should have been low; the CMC erupted soon after a series of unfulfilled Soviet threats.
In the years leading up to 4 In this project, I focus on the way countries assess credibility during a crisis.
This might be different than the way they assess credibility during periods of low tension.
I also focus on the way that countries assess the credibility of their adversaries.
This may or may not be the same way that they assess their allies' credibility.
Focusing on the effects of reputation on one’s adversaries makes sense because the likely effects of losing credibility with adversaries is probably much worse than losing credibility with one’s allies.
In order for it to be costly to have a reputation for irresolve in the eyes of one’s allies, not only must the reputation hypothesis be true, but balance of threat theory must be false.
Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2001. 4 the missile crisis, America’s military trump card—its superiority in nuclear forces—had disappeared for all practical purposes.
The thousands of pages of declassified documents on American decisions, as well as the audio tapes of the key meetings, allow scholars to develop very reliable, high-resolution picture of the decision making process.
Finally, for reasons described in detail below, the crisis presents a very easy test for the reputation hypothesis.
Given that the reputation hypothesis has fared poorly in previous empirical tests,6 it makes sense to construct easy tests for the hypothesis.
If it fails these tests, too, we should discard the hypothesis, at least in its current form.
The CMC provides strong evidence against the reputation hypothesis, and it lends support to the power/interests hypothesis.
Snyder and Diesing find little evidence to support the reputation hypothesis.
Paul Huth and Bruce Russett did find empirical support for the reputation hypothesis in their early statistical analyses of deterrence outcomes and reputation.
But in their later analyses, the statistical significance of a country’s past actions on future deterrence success disappeared.
There is no evidence that years of bluffs and unfulfilled threats had damaged Soviet—or Khrushchev’s—credibility.
Consistent with the predictions of the power/interests hypothesis, the senior members of the Kennedy Administration thought the Soviet commitment to defend Cuba was credible because the strategic balance of power had shifted to favor the Soviets.
In the first section I develop the reputation and power/interests hypotheses, and I discuss research methods and case selection criteria.
In the second section I briefly describe Soviet behavior in a series of crises prior to the Cuban missile crisis, the events of the missile crisis itself, and the balance of power between the two superpowers in 1962.
Then, I use the information about past Soviet behavior and the balance of power to derive predictions from the reputation and power/interests theories about United States decision making during the missile crisis.
At the same time, the case is neither a particularly easy nor hard test of the power/interests hypothesis, so the evidence supporting this theory is only suggestive.
Many more cases should be studied to determine the power of the power/interests theory.
Some of the necessary empirical work on the power/interests hypothesis has been conducted and is in Press, “What Causes Credibility?”, PhD Dissertation, 2001.
Reputation Hypothesis The reputation hypothesis posits that a country's credibility depends on its history for fulfilling, or breaking, past commitments.
A state which consistently keeps its promises and carries out its threats will gain a reputation for resolve and its current commitments will carry weight.
On the other hand, a state with a history of breaking promises and not carrying out its threats will gain a reputation for irresoluteness and its future commitments will not be believed.
One version holds that a state’s actions in one crisis have a long-lasting and broad effects on its credibility.
In this formulation, today’s actions affect credibility long into the future, in crises that occur anywhere around the world, and in situations which involve very different issues and stakes.
But other versions of the reputation hypothesis posit that reputation has a 8 I use the words ""theory"" and ""hypothesis"" interchangeably throughout the paper.
This theory—which I call the “Never Again” theory—is tested in the book manuscript, but is not covered here.
Some of his arguments appear to support the broad version of the reputation hypothesis.
But much of his discussion of manipulating reputation explicitly argues that a country’s commitments fall into different “sets” and that a country needs to convince its adversary that the interests which it intends to defend are in the set of primary national 7 narrower effect on credibility.
According to a narrower version of the reputation hypothesis, today’s actions may affect credibility in future crises, but only for a short period of time, and only if those crises are similar to the situations in which the reputation was earned.
These conditions can be combined to create many variations of the reputation hypothesis, any of which might be correct. interests.
He writes that the United States must make the Soviets believe that Europe is like Florida or California; in other words, make them believe that Europe is in the same category of interests as parts of the continental United States.
When foreign policy makers argued that United States abandonment of South Vietnam would shatter United States credibility across the globe in the higher-stakes conflict with the Soviets over Europe, they were using a very broad version of the reputation hypothesis.
When they argued that the credibility of United States commitments around the world depended on defeating Serbian terror operations in Kosovo, they were claiming that America’s reputation would 9 translate across the globe, across issues, into conflicts with different adversaries involving different stakes.
But there are two shortcuts which can reduce the work required to evaluate this theory.
If studies show that the broadest version of the reputation hypothesis is true—that actions today continue to affect credibility long into the future, across a broad range of conditions—it will be unnecessary to test each narrower version because they are almost certainly correct.
It is hard to imagine why decision makers might systematically use a country’s actions from the distant past, and from dissimilar crises, to assess its credibility while ignoring more recent evidence from more similar crises.
Conversely, if even the narrower version of the reputation hypothesis is false—if decision makers do not assess credibility by looking at their adversary’s recent actions in similar cases—it is hard to imagine that they will use evidence from the adversary’s distant past.
Power/interests Hypothesis The power/interests hypothesis posits that a country’s credibility is not tied to its history of keeping commitments; a country’s credibility to carry out a threat or fulfill a promise is a function of the current balance of power and interests.
If the adversary can successfully do what he threatens, and pay low costs, the adversary’s threats will be credible.
If the adversary lacks the power to do what he threatens, or would probably pay a large cost, the threats will be less credible.
Next, decision makers consider the interests that the adversary has at stake in the crisis.
The more that the adversary has at stake and stands to gain by carrying out its threats—or to lose by not carrying out its threats—the more credible that these threats will be.
With much at stake, an adversary’s threats should be relatively credible even if carrying them out entails substantial risks and costs.
On the other hand, in crises involving trivial interests, even threats which involve high probabilities of victory and relatively low expected costs might not be credible.
The reputation and power/interests hypotheses appear to overlap when decision makers look at an adversary's past actions to assess that adversary’s power and interests, but a clear line can be drawn between the two hypotheses.
If the decision maker uses an adversary’s history of military competence to assess the adversary’s current power, and uses this assessment of power to assess credibility, the decision maker is acting the way that the power/interests hypothesis predicts.
The question at the heart of this thesis, and the heart of important foreign policy debates, is whether countries need to keep their commitments in order to build or preserve their credibility.
If countries use their adversary’s history of keeping or breaking commitments to assess their credibility then countries should worry that breaking commitments might damage their future credibility.
But if countries do not use the history of keeping commitments to assess credibility, there is no reason to keep commitments for the sake of credibility.
Whether or not past military performance is used by countries to assess their adversary’s power has no bearing on the question of whether or not it is important to keep one’s commitments; it merely suggests that if one fights, one should fight effectively, not simply to win the battle at hand but to look powerful in the future.
In sum, if countries use their adversaries’ history for keeping commitments to assess their credibility, the reputation hypothesis is correct.
But if countries assess their adversary’s credibility by evaluating the current balance of power, even if that requires looking at the adversary’s past military competence, the power/interests hypothesis is correct.
The size of the costs that decision makers ought to be willing to pay to build or maintain a reputation, if reputation does affect future credibility, depends on the ""amount"" of reputation that one can buy, the costs of generating each increment of reputation, the ""life span"" of the reputation and the breadth of its applicability.
If reputations in international politics tend to be very specific, decision makers should be willing to pay less to build or protect them.
In other words, even if the reputation hypothesis is correct, this does not imply that every opportunity to build reputation will be worth the costs.
Second, there are substantial risks of selection effects in data from crisis behavior.
In this section I describe the approach adopted throughout this project for overcoming the first obstacle; the issue of selection effects is the subject of a separate paper.
The dependent variable in this study, credibility, is invisible; it exists in the minds of decision makers.
To test the reputation theory, therefore, I use observable indicators to estimate the credibility that decision makers give to an adversary's threats.
The first of these indicators is the private statements that decision makers make about their adversary's credibility.
As decision makers debate and formulate policies during a crisis, they frequently make explicit assessments of the likelihood that an adversary will carry out its threats and promises.
I use these statements to track a country’s credibility throughout a crisis.
Second, I look for evidence about the type of reasoning that decision makers used to assess the adversary’s credibility.
If an adversary's past actions affect its credibility, I should see decision makers discussing the adversary’s past actions during their deliberations.
Public assessments are more likely to be made for political purposes and are more likely to differ from actual beliefs about the adversary's credibility. 13 their the current balance of power and interests, I should see decision makers discuss the current balance of power and interests.
Finally, I use the policies that the decision makers adopt during a crisis as an indicator of how they assess their adversary’s credibility.
Because the credibility of an adversary's threats affects the policies that decision makers adopt, these policies can be used to reason backwards about the decision makers’ perceptions of the adversary's credibility.
I assume that a state’s willingness to accommodate an adversary’s demands depends on the seriousness of the threat it faces.
Holding other things constant, the more credible an adversary’s threat is, the more accommodations a state will make.
If decision makers advocate making substantial concessions in the face of a threat, this is a sign that the threat is credible.
If decision makers adopt hard-line policies, this is evidence that the threat is not credible.
This third measure of credibility—the policies adopted during the crisis—is less reliable than the other indicators because many things besides the adversary’s credibility affect a state’s choice of policies during a crisis.
Nevertheless, looking at the policies which decision makers adopt during a crisis helps ensure that the statements I use in the first test are not cheap talk.
If decision makers say they do not believe an adversary’s threats, but they act with extraordinary caution, this raises a cautionary flag that the statements may be misleading.
And if decision makers’ statements suggest that a threat is believed but the policies seem to disregard the threat, this would raise the same cautionary flag.
First, it would permit a test of a very narrow version of the reputation hypothesis.
Given the reputation hypothesis’ poor performance in previous tests, research should focus on the narrowest versions of the hypothesis.
If the narrow versions pass several tests, further research should seek to identify whether broader versions of the theory are also true.
Second, an ideal case will present an “easy test” for the reputation hypothesis.
An ideal case would be one in which the reputation hypothesis should be right, if it is ever right.
A significant problem with case studies is that the small number of cases makes it hard to determine whether the sample of cases being studied is representative of the total population of cases.
Large-N studies either study an entire population of cases or a statistically representative sample of the population.
Results which are true of the sample should, therefore, be generalizable to the population.
But in projects that use case studies there is no reason to believe that the cases are representative of the population of cases.
By testing theories against a sample of cases which present either very easy or very hard tests for a theory, we can draw inferences about how the theory would fare in the population of cases.
If the theory passes a set of hard tests, we can infer that it would do well in the population of cases; if the theory fails a set of easy tests, we can infer that 17 The policies a state adopts in response to a threat may be greatly affected by the expected consequences if the threat was carried out, as well as the credibility of the threat.
Other factors may affect a state’s response to a particular threat, like alliance politics and domestic politics. 15 it would do poorly in the population of cases.
On the other hand, failing hard tests or passing easy tests tells us little about the general strength of a theory.
Cognitive psychologists argue that people are most likely to use history to draw lessons for the present if that history is easily recalled by them.
According to the “availability heuristic”, historical lessons are easy to recall if the historical episode is recent, and if it has surface similarities to the present case.
Decision makers are, therefore, most likely to use an adversary’s reputation to assess its credibility if there are recent past actions by the adversary in circumstances which share surface similarities to the present circumstance.
An easy test of this theory would be to arrange a series of chess matches between the President and several 6th-grade dropouts.
This would be an easy test because the President would be expected to beat most of the dropouts whether or not he was one of the smartest people in America.
If the President played five of these dropouts and lost to all of them, the theory would have failed a set of easy tests, and we could reasonably infer that the President is not one of the smartest people in the United States without having him play many more games against a statistically representative sample of Americans.
On the other hand, if this theory passed a very hard test—if the President beat five Nobel prize winning physicists in chess—we could draw a strong inference that he is very smart even without a more extensive set of tests against a representative sample of Americans.
First, I set up a set of tests that may tell me a lot about all the versions of the reputation hypothesis; if the reputation hypothesis fails the tests, I can infer that broader versions of the theory are probably not right, either.
Second, by selecting the easiest cases for the theory, I create a test which may tell me about more than just the cases I study.
If the theory fails the easy test I can infer that it is very weak and would perform badly against the population of cases.
The Missile Crisis followed right on the heels of a series of superpower standoffs over Berlin , so United States decision makers had recent Soviet behavior to use to assess Soviet credibility.
In fact, United States decision makers were convinced throughout the CMC that the missile crisis was simply the opening move in the next crisis over Berlin.
If the United States adopted an overly conciliatory policy in Cuba, Khrushchev would be emboldened to attack Berlin.
But if the United States attacked Cuba, 21 There are innumerable papers, memos, and conversations which connect the missile deployment with the Berlin situation.
The CIA believed, even after the crisis, that the standoff had been started by Khrushchev to get leverage over Berlin.
In the minds of United States leaders, the “issues” involved in the Berlin crises and the CMC were inextricable.
In fact, Khrushchev had been the Soviet leader throughout the past four years of Berlin crises.
The risk in all of these crises was the possibility of escalation to global nuclear war.
The only criterion by which the CMC was not an easy test for the reputation hypothesis is that the CMC occurred in a different part of the world than the Berlin crises.
In every other criteria it qualifies as an easy test for the reputation hypothesis, and it tests a very narrow version of the theory.
Soviet Past Actions and the Balance of Power In the following section I briefly describe the crises that led up to the Cuban missile crisis, the events of the missile crisis, and the balance of power between the two superpowers.
Then, I use the information about Soviet behavior prior to the CMC, and about the balance of power, to derive predictions from the reputation and power/interests theories about American decision making during the crisis.
The only way for the West to avoid this chain of events would be to turn West Berlin into a demilitarized city.
If the Soviets signed their peace treaty, the Allies would have three unpalatable options.
They could give in to Soviet demands and pull their forces out of West Berlin.
The second option was to let the deadline pass and, after the Soviets signed their treaty with the East Germans, negotiate with the GDR for continued access to Berlin.
The third option was to refuse to deal with 23 Berlin is located in the center of what was East Germany.
The Western Allies used road, rail, and air corridors to cross East German territory and supply their garrisons in West Berlin.
For example, the West could launch an airlift, like they did in 1948, to maintain access to West Berlin.
Alternatively, Allied ground forces could try to push their way through East German checkpoints to forcefully reestablish contact with West Berlin.
They certainly did not want to pull out of Berlin, especially in the face of Soviet threats.
The second option—negotiations with the East Germans—was unattractive, too.
The GDR might restrict the times and frequency of Allied traffic as a way of slowly squeezing the West out of Berlin.
The most critical political issue in NATO at the time of the Berlin crises was to convince the West Germans that their best long term prospects for security and reunification were through membership in NATO.25 West German leaders warned NATO that negotiations with the East Germans over access to Berlin would amount to de facto recognition, and this could force West Germany to consider “other approaches” for making progress toward reunification.
At the time, however, this was a very serious concern for United States decision makers.
The West, therefore, did not want to negotiate with the East Germans for continued access to Berlin.
The third option, supplying West Berlin without dealing with the East Germans, was dangerous.
The Soviets threatened to shoot down any aircraft that violated East German airspace without East German permission.
Forcing their way down the ground access routes could easily escalate to war.
The Western Allies did not want to deal with the GDR, but neither did they look forward to risking war with the Soviets over Berlin.
American decision makers expected Khrushchev to sign the peace treaty and place the Allies in the difficult diplomatic position that he promised,27 but they did not expect him to allow the East Germans to cut access to Berlin because that step would likely start a war.
The Allies decided to warn Khrushchev that they refused to recognize East Germany, and that cutting the access routes would cause war.
Again there was an ultimatum; again the West had six months to negotiate an end to their occupation of West Berlin; again Khrushchev threatened to sign his peace treaty and defend East German borders if 26 As it turns out, the United States and the Soviet Union both feared this possibility.
This time, however, United States decision makers were somewhat more worried that Khrushchev might take significant risks to squeeze the West out of West Berlin.
Nevertheless, the United States held its ground, the deadline passed, and the Soviets backed down.
Soon after the Kennedy Administration took office in January 1961, the Soviets trotted out their familiar threats over Berlin.
In June 1961, at a summit meeting in Vienna, Khrushchev gave Kennedy a note that re-issued the same ultimatum, reestablished a six-month deadline, and said he would sign a treaty with the East Germans and give them control of the Allies’ access routes to Berlin.
Again he warned dire consequences if the West did not either pull their troops out of West Berlin or recognize the East German regime.
Again, the Allies expected Khrushchev to sign the peace treaty,30 and this time United States decision makers worried even more than in 1960 about Khrushchev’s willingness to risk war over Berlin.
Khrushchev let the deadline pass; he raised the Berlin Wall, but never signed the peace treaty with the GDR, and he did not cut Western access to Berlin.
By October 1962, when the Kennedy Administration discovered that Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles were being secretly installed in Cuba, the U.S. had plenty of experience with Khrushchev’s threats.
Three times in four years, Khrushchev had issued ultimatums, threatened nuclear war, and each time he had backed down.
For nearly a week, an ad-hoc group of advisors, later designated the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , met in secret to formulate a response to the Soviet deployment.
Facing the fact that East Germany would have to live with West Berlin in its midst, Khrushchev decided to build the Wall to help East Germany staunch the flow of talented workers from East Germany into the West.
For tests of these hypotheses using American and British decision making, see Press, “Testing 23 to “squeeze” the missiles out; a limited air strike against the missile sites to destroy them in a fait accompli; a large air strike that would hit a broad set of Cuban military targets; and a large air strike followed by an invasion.
But the next day, on October 27, three ominous events occurred in rapid succession.
First, the Ex Comm received another note from Khrushchev recanting his earlier offer.
Khrushchev’s price was now higher; he would remove the missiles from Cuba only if the United States removed its Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Second, reports arrived that an American reconnaissance plane had strayed into Soviet airspace, triggering the launch of Soviet and American fighter aircraft.
Third, air defense sites in Cuba shot down an American reconnaissance plane flying over the island, killing the pilot.
American and British Decision Making During the Berlin Crises of 1958-61,” chapter 4.
Fortunately, they did not arrive until the U-2 had left Soviet airspace and was safe.
RFK was authorized to accept the second Soviet offer—the United States would trade the Jupiters to get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
Publicly the United States agreed to Khrushchev’s first letter; privately they agreed to the second.
Possibilities include the conventional military balance in the Caribbean, the conventional balance in Europe, and the strategic nuclear balance between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The military balance in the Caribbean was important, because it determined whether the United States could blockade or attack Cuba.
The military balance in Europe was important because United States decision makers expected any Soviet retaliation for United States attacks on Cuba to occur in Europe.
Finally, the strategic nuclear balance was important, because the United States relied on its nuclear forces to deter attacks on its European allies and to defend NATO and West Berlin from the Soviets.
While all three of these military balances were relevant to the crisis, the balance of strategic nuclear forces was the paramount issue in the balance of power.
Questions about the nuclear balance of power trumped considerations of the local military balances in the Caribbean and Europe.
The United States enjoyed substantial conventional military superiority in the Caribbean.
Naval forces could control the seas surrounding Cuba, or that aircraft flying from the southern United States would control the skies in a battle in the Caribbean.
Berlin is located deep within what was once East German territory and was defended by symbolic “tripwire” forces from the United States, Britain, and France.
There was no way for NATO to defend Berlin using conventional military forces, or to retake Berlin if it was seized by the Scholars.
These articles contain the text of both RFK’s and Dobrynin’s memoranda recording the content of their meetings.
During the CMC, like in the Berlin crises that preceded it, the only United States hope for deterring a Soviet attack on Berlin—or for fighting a successful war to protect Berlin—was through the threat of nuclear war.
If the United States had superiority in the strategic nuclear balance, it could coerce the Soviets in Cuba and still deter Soviet retaliation against Berlin.
But if the United States did not have nuclear superiority, or if the Soviets were superior at the level of strategic nuclear forces, the United States would have no way of preventing a damaging Soviet counterstroke in Berlin if the United States used force against Cuba.
The links between American military superiority in the Caribbean, Soviet strength in Berlin, and the role of the strategic nuclear balance as the final arbiter, were understood by the Kennedy Administration.
On October 18, in an Ex Comm meeting, the President and his advisors talked through the likely Soviet reaction to a United States blockade of Cuba.
Kennedy and his advisors assumed that the Soviets would likely retaliate by overrunning Berlin.
This is not to say that NATO’s conventional forces in Europe were weak in 1961.
In fact, they may have been sufficient to defend NATO from a conventional Soviet attack.
But they were inadequate for launching an offensive to retake a city deep within East German territory.
Whether or not the United States could deter an attack on Berlin, or defeat the Soviets in a conflict over Berlin, would ultimately depend on the strategic nuclear balance.
If United States decision makers were thinking about Soviet credibility the way that the power/interests hypothesis suggests—if they were assessing Soviet credibility on the basis of the balance of power—the balance that they should have focused on was the strategic nuclear balance.
I think that “they’re just going in and taking Berlin by force” makes more sense and would sound identical on tape.
There has been controversy about the accuracy of the May and Zelikow transcripts.
The text from The Kennedy Tapes quoted throughout this article is from the first edition of the book.
I am in the process of checking these quotes against the latest edition, which has been updated to fix many errors.
If one country can launch a successful disarming strike against its adversary’s nuclear forces, it has nuclear superiority in a very real sense; if war came, it could strike first, disarm its adversary, and win.
But if neither country can launch a successful disarming strike, then neither side has superiority, even if one side has significantly more nuclear warheads than the other.
This way of thinking about nuclear forces and deterrence is based on the observation that nuclear weapons are different from most other weapons.
Most conventional military forces can only be evaluated in relative terms; ten armored divisions are powerful compared to two divisions, but they are weak if the opponent has fifty.
Their power is absolute rather than relative, because they terrorize by threatening to destroy the enemy’s cities rather than his military forces.
This would present the least stable of all deterrent situations because both sides would have incentives to strike first in a crisis.
In this situation, neither side would have “superiority;” the advantage would go to whichever side attacked first.
Assessing the the strategic nuclear balance between any two countries simply requires understanding the survivability of each country’s nuclear forces in the face of an enemy’s disarming strike, and the ability of each country to deliver its nuclear forces to its enemy’s cities.
As long as the nuclear forces of two countries are survivable and deliverable they are in a condition of nuclear stalemate.
Nuclear superiority only exists when one country can destroy virtually all of its enemy nuclear forces before they are launched.
The Strategic Nuclear Balance of Power During the CMC The CMC occurred during a period of strategic transition.
The decade prior to the crisis was characterized by United States nuclear superiority.
During the mid-to-late 1950s the United States had a nuclear first strike capability against the Soviet Union, while the Soviets had neither an assured retaliatory nuclear force, nor a first strike option against the United 46 It is very unusual for countries to have high confidence that they can destroy all of their enemy’s deliverable nuclear forces.
Because nuclear weapons are relatively small they can be easily hidden.
Most nuclear balances will, therefore, quickly move into nuclear stalemate, in which numerical advantages are essentially meaningless.
XX-XX; 47 The framework I use to assess the nuclear balance of power simplifies a complicated set of issues in a useful way, but important ambiguities remain.
One can answer this by saying that a first strike capability is the ability to destroy enough of an opponent’s deliverable nuclear forces such that the remaining arsenal is too small to inflict unacceptable retaliation.
But when defending less-important national interests, the chance that 1-5 nuclear weapons might fall on one’s cities would probably deter any decision maker from considering a nuclear first strike.
In this project I allow the decision makers in the cases to determine for themselves whether they had a reasonable first-strike option which promised them victory at acceptable levels of risk and cost.
In the cases I describe the “actual” nuclear balance of power, based on my 30 States.
But by 1962, American nuclear superiority had eroded considerably and the superpowers were entering an age of mutual assured destruction.
In a first strike, the U.S. could have quickly launched between 1,000 and 2,000 nuclear warheads at the Soviet Union.
A United States first strike would have attacked other targets too, but the critical targets—those which might house nuclear weapons capable of striking the United States—numbered only about 200. retrospective analysis, as well as the decision makers’ assessments during the crises of whether or not they have reasonable nuclear options if it comes to war.
The exact total would depend on the alert level of United States forces at the time of the attacks; putting too many American nuclear forces on alert prior to a first strike could have tipped off the Soviets.
Reliability +/Pretty good accuracy Total 2,200 • Not all of these warheads would have been on alert at any given time For several reasons, simply counting the number of United States warheads and Soviet targets does not give a realistic picture of the United States ability to conduct a first strike on Soviet nuclear forces.
Other B-52s existed, but they were assigned to training units or were undergoing maintenance work.
In the early 1960s, United States nuclear war plans were not optimized for a disarming strike against the Soviet nuclear arsenal.
But United States plans in the early 1960s called for an enormous strike, first hitting air defense sites in Eastern Europe, and then attacking targets further east in subsequent waves.
But the plan had not been fundamentally revamped since then to give the United States more ability to rapidly strike Soviet long-range nuclear forces.
However, ICBM technology was not mature in 1962, and the missiles were relatively unreliable and inaccurate.
Bombers, especially the new B-52s, provided a much more reliable way of delivering nuclear weapons against Soviet targets than ICBMs, but they are slow and—if detected as they approached Soviet air space—would allow the Soviets to launch air defense aircraft as well as launch or disperse their nuclear forces.
Another source of uncertainty was the reliability of United States intelligence on Soviet nuclear weapons and their operating bases.
We now know that American leaders had very good intelligence in 1962 about the location of Soviet strategic nuclear weapons systems, 63 but in 1962 American leaders did not know whether their intelligence had missed a Soviet bomber base, ICBM battery, or submarine pen.
Innovation in the United States Navy’s Silent Cold War Struggle with Soviet Submarines,” manuscript, March 2000, 46.
Finally, a first-strike against Soviet nuclear forces would hinge entirely on the ability of the United States to conduct the attack in complete surprise.
If the Soviets somehow learned of the attack a few hours before the strike, they could have taken emergency measures to reduce the vulnerability of their forces.
The United States could have developed better nuclear war plans, but any attack on a nuclear force of this size would have been an extraordinary gamble.
United States Perceptions of the Strategic Nuclear Balance in the CMC In 1962, senior American decision makers understood that their nuclear first strike capability was either disappearing fast or had already disappeared.
They were no longer confident that the United States could strike first at the Soviet Union without receiving unacceptable levels of retaliation from the Soviets.
But the intelligence community had also failed in the other direction, failing to anticipate the speed of development of the first Soviet atomic bomb, hydrogen bomb, or the launch of Sputnik.
The Kennedy Administration had also had its own recent unhappy experiences with United States intelligence.
A year before the CMC the U.S. intelligence community had given the Bay of Pigs operation a good chance of success; Kennedy felt betrayed by his military and intelligence advisors.
More recently, the intelligence community had assured the President that the Soviets would not put missiles into Cuba.
Our forces are so deployed and protected that a sneak attack could not effectively disarm us…”67 The Gilpatric speech has been misinterpreted by some historians as a statement of confidence by the Kennedy Administration that the United States still had a nuclear first strike option if it came to war.
To determine whether the Kennedy Administration felt they had nuclear superiority one needs to know whether the Administration felt they had any reasonable nuclear options if a crisis escalated to the verge of general nuclear war.
The United States military did not give President Kennedy reason to be confident that the United States could launch a successful nuclear first strike.
A year before the CMC, President Kennedy was briefed by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on United States nuclear war plans; he was told that if war came, the United States would “prevail” but “under any circumstances—even a preemptive attack by the U.S.—it would be expected that some portion of the Soviet long-range nuclear force would strike the United 67 May and Zelikow, The Kennedy Tapes, 33.
In other words, a year before the CMC, the JCS told the President that he had a viable first strike option, though this still meant some nuclear weapons would probably hit the United States.
By September 1963—a year after the CMC—even the dubious achievement of “prevailing” with only a few nuclear weapons hitting American soil was no longer achievable.
The military was not alone in their doubts about United States ability to conduct a successful nuclear first strike.
As he explained in 1989, “…there was no reasonable chance that we could get away with a first strike unscathed.
The words are quoted from General Lemnitzer’s briefing notes for the President.
He has written since the CMC about his conviction during the crisis that the United States had no meaningful nuclear superiority.
Like McNamara, Bundy’s comments during the CMC on the strategic nuclear balance of power were rare.
In his recent book on the Cold War, John Lewis Gaddis agrees with my assessment of McNamara’s views during the crisis.
On Bundy’s views about U.S. chances for a disarming strike during the CMC, see McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival, 448.
On October 19th the President met with the JCS to explain the reasons he was leaning toward a blockade rather than an air strike on Cuban missile sites.
But you get to put them on a city, whether it's 80 or 100, you're talking about the destruction of a country, so that our problem is that we begin to duplicate that here.
More revealing is that the President wasn’t comparing the number of Soviet warheads to the number of U.S. warheads – a meaningless numerical comparison.
Later in the conversation the President explains why he doesn’t believe, from a strictly military sense, that the Soviet missiles in Cuba mattered much; his explanation gives another glimpse into his assessment of the nuclear balance of power.
Kennedy’s statements about the balance of power are reinforced by what is known about his relationship with his military and intelligence advisors in 1962.
The CMC happened only 18 months after the most embarrassing foreign policy defeat of his Administration—the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
Kennedy felt that he had been let down by the military who had not been frank with him about the serious risks of failure at the Bay of Pigs.
Before the operation, JFK had asked the JCS for their assessment of the chance that the operation would work.
May and Zelikow put these brackets into the text to make the converstation easier to follow.
Other evidence gives another glimpse into United States beliefs about the nuclear balance, and again it suggests that the United States did not believe that it had any meaningful first strike options during the crisis.
During the crisis the Kennedy Administration tried—successfully—to conduct coercive diplomacy.
What is striking about the threats conveyed during the crisis is that the United States never warned the Soviets that the United States had nuclear superiority, or that the United States could prevail in a nuclear war.
To the contrary, the Kennedy Administration repeatedly told the Soviets—publicly and privately—that the United States could not win a nuclear war.
In the President’s October 22 televised speech about the missiles in Cuba, Kennedy never reassured the American public that the United States could prevail in a nuclear war, nor did he warn the Soviets that they better back down because the United States knew it could win if the crisis escalated.
The Kennedy Administration was putting tremendous pressure on the Soviets to get them to accept the latest United States proposal ,87 and RFK warned Dobrynin that an agreement must be reached immediately because an American strike against Cuba was imminent.
If the crisis escalates “A real war will begin, in which millions of Americans and Russians will die.
RFK conveyed the President’s counter-proposal, which was a secret trade.
The secret trade would appear to the world like another Soviet withdrawal under American threats.
If this hypothesis is correct, three things should emerge from the evidence on United States decision making.
First, United States assessments of Soviet credibility should have been low throughout the crisis.
Second, United States decision makers should have discussed the pattern of Soviet withdrawals as they discussed their assessments of Soviet credibility with each other during the crisis.
The Soviets, after all, would buckle in response to a blockade or a direct American attack on Cuba.
The power/interests hypothesis predicts a very different set of events.
Years ago the United States could calmly threaten that Soviet attacks on NATO—including attacks on Berlin—would provoke American nuclear escalation, but the nuclear balance of power was no longer favorable.
By 1962 the United States had no good response to Soviet attacks on Berlin.
Specifically we should observe three things in the records from the 44 case.
First, the private assessments of Soviet credibility during the crisis should have been high.
Second, decision makers should explain their assessments of Soviet credibility to each other during the crisis by referring to the shifts in the balance of power.
Finally, United States leaders should have adopted conciliatory positions in the crisis.
Testing the theories against United States Decision Making in the CMC In the following section I test the reputation hypothesis against the power/interests hypothesis using United States decision making during the Cuban missile crisis.
The two theories make conflicting predictions about 1) the assessments made by United States decision makers of Soviet credibility, 2) the reasoning United States decision makers used as they explained their assessments of Soviet credibility, and 3) the policies selected by United States decision leaders during the crisis.
United States Assessments of Soviet Credibility During the CMC At various points in the crisis, the Ex Comm considered a range of possible policies to get the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba.
From least escalatory to most escalatory they were 1) an ultimatum to Khrushchev and Castro, demanding that the missiles be removed; 2) a blockade of “offensive” military equipment into Cuba—“offensive” being defined as anything involved with nuclear weapons or means of delivering them; 3) a small air strike directed at the missile sites; 4) a larger air strike, hitting the missile sites, air defense sites, and bomber aircraft; and 5) a large air strike followed by an invasion.
There was no 45 significant discussion about allowing the missiles to stay.
Fears about the loss of U.S. credibility, concerns over the effect of the missiles on the strategic balance of power, and some concern about Kennedy’s domestic political position, pushed the entire committee to agree from the outset that the goal was the elimination of the missiles.
The only questions were how the United States could get the missiles out and what price they would have to pay.
Soviet credibility to resist any of these United States approaches was very high.
In one version, the United States would approach Khrushchev privately, let him know that the missiles had been discovered, and tell him that unless they were immediately dismantled and removed, the United States would enforce a naval blockade around Cuba.
A second version would threaten that, unless Khrushchev removed the missiles, the United States would destroy them with air attacks.
On the first day of the crisis, McNamara laid out a list of United States alternatives and made it clear that he did not expect an ultimatum to work.
This option, McNamara said, was “likely to lead to no satisfactory results…”.90 This pessimistic assessment was never seriously challenged.
The United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union and most respected Soviet expert in the room, Llewellyn Thompson, shared the skepticism.
Even Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State, and George Ball (from the State Department), who both favored the ultimatum, expected it to fail.
Rusk said that “we have no reason to expect that” Khrushchev would back down, but the effort to find a peaceful solution will strengthen the American public’s support for future military actions.
George Ball, the most frequent advocate of making an ultimatum to Khrushchev, did not expect the Soviets to back down.
Future citations to the Kennedy Tapes will be made by simply indicating the page number of the citation in parentheses in the text.
The most optimistic assessment of the ultimatum approach was made by McNamara.
The Ex Comm disagreed among themselves in their evaluation of the wisdom of an ultimatum but they all agreed that the ultimatum would likely fail.
Soviet credibility has high; no one expected them to fold in the face of American threats.
Everyone—even those who advocated the blockade—expected the Soviets to resist and probably retaliate with military force elsewhere.
McNamara, the loudest and strongest advocate of the blockade did not expect it to bring Khrushchev to his knees.
McNamara did not expect the Soviets to attack United States ships enforcing the blockade, but the missile construction, he argued, would continue with supplies already in Cuba.
In fact, the general view was that a blockade had a good chance of triggering Soviet escalation, probably against West Berlin.
Thompson said that he preferred a blockade to immediate air strikes on Cuba because, he warned, air strikes would provoke Soviet retaliation and increase the risks of war.
Instead he would use the blockade as a pretext to “precipitate the real crisis,” over Berlin.
He was sure, by the 18th, that Khrushchev would not pull out the missiles or even stop building the sites because of a United States blockade of Cuba.
McNamara asked the President what he meant—whether he expected that Soviet troops would invade West Berlin.
A day later JFK explained to the Joint Chiefs of Staff why each of his options was bad.
Another day later, on the 20th, 49 JFK reaffirmed that he expected that the blockade would provoke Soviet military retaliation—possibly a blockade of Berlin.
On the 21st, the day after the President had decided on the blockade option, he was still highly skeptical that it would work.
For a group of men who had, just the previous day, adopted the blockade as their preferred course of action, there was not a lot of confidence that a blockade would precipitate any Soviet concessions.
President Kennedy grew no more confident about the prospects for the blockade as the crisis continued.
Talking to members of the Ex Comm on the 24th, he predicted that if, in the course of enforcing the blockade, the United States has to sink a ship heading to 91 The President’s skepticism about the blockade remained until the end of the crisis.
Throughout the 26th, during the morning and afternoon Ex Comm meeting, he stated repeatedly that the blockade would never get the missiles out of Cuba.
For example, in the morning session on the 26th he stated emphatically, “The only thing that I am saying is, that we’re not going to get them out with the quarantine.
I’m not saying we should lift the quarantine or what we should do about the quarantine.
We’re either going to trade them out, or we’re going to have to go in and get them out ourselves.
This was typical of several similar statements by the President on the 26th and 27th.
The clearest view of the Ex Comm’s assessment of Soviet credibility to resist a blockade came during a meeting at about midnight on the 18th.
Bundy argued against the blockade or any other option because “inevitably” the Soviets would retaliate against West Berlin.
Revealingly, no one on the Ex Comm—most of whom supported the blockade—disagreed.
In other words, Soviet credibility in the face of a blockade was very high.
Most members of the Ex Comm supported the blockade because they feared that a weaker response would just delay the conflict a few months—and it would occur on even less favorable terms.
Everyone agreed that the Soviets would not intentionally start a nuclear war over Cuba.
If some nuclear missiles survived an air strike, the Soviets would not authorize a nuclear attack from Cuba against the United States At the 51 same time, the Administration was virtually unanimous that the Soviets would retaliate with military force, and that the risks of general war would be grave.
Everyone agreed that the Soviets would not authorize nuclear attacks, and begin World War III, in retaliation for United States attacks on Cuba.
But everyone also agreed that the Soviets were very likely to retaliate against United States allies somewhere.
Most importantly, JFK fully expected the Soviets to retaliate to an American attack on Cuba.
As Kennedy explained to congressional leaders on the 22nd, “If we invade Cuba, we have a chance that these missiles will be fired on us.
An invasion would be even more dangerous because it would involve attacks on 7-8,000 Russians.
The ever-confident LeMay answered, “I don’t think they’re going to make any reply if we tell them that the Berlin situation is just like it’s always been.
I don’t think it changes the Berlin situation at all…” The members of the Ex Comm did not share the General’s confidence.
Interestingly, LeMay was also the only one of the group who believed that the United States had a clear first-strike capability.
In other words, the one person who thought that the United States had the Soviets decisively outgunned was also the only one 93 Kennedy’s views on this did not change.
The Ex Comm agreed in their assessments of likely Soviet responses to an air strike or invasion of Cuba; no one really disputed the point that an air strike would very likely lead to retaliation against Turkey or Berlin.
Those who advocated the air strike option did it because they felt that the blockade would be ineffective and that it would come down to war in either case.
The historical record from the crisis does not confirm the prediction of either theory in this regard.
United States decision makers very rarely explained the reasons that they believed what they believed about Soviet credibility.
The transcripts of the Ex Comm meetings and the thousands of other documents in the archives show that decision makers talked frequently about their beliefs about Soviet credibility (usually agreeing that the Soviets were highly credible) but were almost never explicit about the evidence which 55 they used to formulate or support these views.
United States decision makers were nearly unanimous in their expectation that that Soviets would not give in to a blockade, but they were never very explicit about why they believed this.
They were also nearly united in their belief that the Soviets would retaliate if the United States launched airstrikes against Cuba, but they never made their reasoning explicit on this, either.
The Crisis offers little direct evidence to evaluate this prediction of the reputation and power/interests hypotheses.
What is interesting about the documents, however, is that in more than six hundred pages of transcripts from Ex Comm meetings, and thousands of pages of other documents from the archives at the Kennedy Presidential Library, I could only find three statements in which decision makers referred to past Soviet actions as they discussed what the Soviets would likely do in the future.
All three of these instances occurred in a single conversation between the President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
At another point in the same discussion the President said the Soviets were likely to retaliate to any hostile United States steps, and he referred to the recent tit-for-tat expulsions of suspected Soviet and American spies from the two 95 This is consistent with my findings from the Berlin Crises.
There were very few times when United States or British decision makers explicitly tied their assessments of Soviet credibility to either past Soviet actions or to the balance of power.
He argued that the Soviets backed down when the United States showed resolve in the past over Lebanon, and argued that the United States should take a hard-line over Cuba.
The striking thing about these examples is how much these quotes stand apart from the rest of the statements preserved in thousands of pages of documents on the crisis.
No other discussions revealed the decision makers trying to use history like this.
Furthermore, these examples—Soviet actions in Suez, in Lebanon, and the expulsion of suspected spies—were not mentioned in any context in other discussions by senior American leaders during the Crisis.
There are hundreds of references to Berlin in the Ex Comm transcripts and most of these statements explicitly connect Berlin with the issues of reputation and credibility.
Remember that LeMay was also unique in his conviction that the United States had a good first strike capability during the Crisis.
Seemingly any action (or 57 these statements always revolved around the feared effect of United States actions in the current crisis on America’s future credibility in Berlin.
They never reversed the formulation, as the reputation hypothesis would predict, and explored what Soviet past actions in Berlin suggest about Soviet future behavior in Cuba.
In other words, United States leaders were obsessed with concern about America’s reputation, but they never looked at past Soviet actions in Berlin to evaluate their adversary’s reputation.
For years the Soviets had blustered and threatened the United States with war, each time backing down when the U.S. demonstrated resolve.
If the reputation hypothesis is correct, the United States should have adopted hard-line policies throughout the crisis.
On the other hand, if the power/interests hypothesis is correct, United States decision makers should have viewed the new Soviet threats with substantial concern.
The balance of power had shifted and the U.S. non-action) that the United States might choose in the Crisis, they believed, would cripple United States credibility in Europe.
Letting the missiles stay would undermine United States credibility, United States decision makers believed, but so would trading away the Jupiters deployed in Turkey.
Attacking the missile sites would also throw United States alliances into question, because the United States would appear to reckless in its willingness to use force.
The President is clearly 58 no longer had a good nuclear first strike option.
According to the power/interests hypothesis, United States decision makers should have looked for compromises and conciliatory steps that would defuse the crisis.
United States policies should have been on the “soft-line” end of the policy continuum.
The first major decision was made in the first week of the standoff when the United States selected the blockade as its initial United States policy.
With the crisis apparently spinning out of control, United States leaders had to decide how to respond to the two Soviet notes as well as the attack on United States reconnaissance planes over Cuba.
At the second decision point, the United States made two very conciliatory steps to try to end the crisis without further escalation.
During the first week of the CMC, the Ex Comm debated five options, but really six routes were possible.
United States Options at Start of CMC More Invasion escalatory Invasion Large Largeairairstrike strike Small Smallairairstrike strike Blockade Blockade Ultimatum Ultimatum Less Do escalatory Donothing nothing The United States adopted option #3 – the blockade.
The blockade option was a middleof-the-pack option—neither one of the most conciliatory nor the most hard-line policies.
The selection of the blockade, therefore, does not provide strong confirming evidence for either hypothesis, but it is consistent with my analysis that United States leaders believed that the Soviets were highly credible.
In other words, the policy chosen does not raise a cautionary flag to suggest that the statements in which United States leaders proclaimed high Soviet credibility were cheap talk.
The blockade was adopted because the Kennedy Administration believed it was the most-conciliatory position possible which would not destroy United States credibility.
October 27th: On October 27th, the United States had an important decision to make.
The Soviets had offered to remove their missiles in Cuba if the United States promised not to invade the island.
But then the Soviets apparently withdrew their offer and introduced a second proposal which raised the price for a deal.
The Soviets, according to the second offer, would withdraw the missiles from Cuba only if the United States withdrew the Jupiters missiles from Turkey.
This second letter arrived amid other events that suggested that the crisis was escalating—most serious was the attacks on United States reconnaissance planes over Cuba.
The United States had eight main options at this stage in the crisis, all of which were considered.
United States Options, offer to the Soviets, and fall-back position Hard-line Invasion Invasion Air strikes Air strikes Strengthen blockade Strengthen blockade Continue blockade Continue blockade Non-invasion pledge Non-invasion pledge Secret trade for Jupiters Deal to end crisis Secret trade for Jupiters Soft-line Open trade for Jupiters Fall-back position Open trade for Jupiters Of these eight options, the United States chose the second most-conciliatory.
The President, and the secret subgroup of the Ex Comm sent Robert Kennedy to meet Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin on the night of the 27th to work out a deal and end the crisis.2 The United States, RFK told Dobrynin, would accept the second Soviet offer, but with one condition—the trade of the Jupiters for the missiles in Cuba had to be a secret.
The Soviets would remove the Cuban missiles immediately and then, within a few months, the United States would remove the missiles from Turkey.
The next morning the Soviets announced that they accepted the deal , and the crisis was over.
It’s hard to make the case that the United States actions on the 27th were hard-line policies.
The United States gave the Soviets almost everything that they demanded.
Evidence suggests that the United States would have given the Soviets an open trade of the Jupiters for the missiles in Cuba if the Soviets had pressed a bit harder.
The note to Cordier was actually the text of a proposal designed to be made by U Thant.
In this proposal, the UN Secretary General would suggest that, in the interest of world peace, the United States and Soviets agree to remove both the Jupiter missiles and the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Cordier was only authorized to give the text to U Thant if Rusk specifically asked him to do so.4 The implication is that once U Thant made this proposal, the United States could accept the open trade under the guise of respecting the wishes of the United Nations.
The Soviets accepted the “secret trade” deal so Cordier was never asked to convey the message to U Thant.
This evidence, by itself, does not prove that the United States was willing to openly trade the Jupiters to remove the MRBMs from Cuba.
The fact that the President established a contingency plan does not mean that he had decided to execute it, but it does show that the “open trade” was, at least, being considered.
A second piece of evidence suggests that the United States was willing to accept the open trade, if pressed a bit harder by the Soviets.
This evidence is in the transcripts of the Ex Comm meetings around the peak of the crisis.
Time and again he is told by a few of his advisors that trading away the Jupiters would be too damaging to United States credibility, but each time the President came right back to this idea.
Finally, by the 27th, several members of the Ex Comm had come around to the President’s view about trading the missiles.
By the 27th the President was not alone in his willingness to compromise; several members of the Ex Comm seem to have shifted to much more conciliatory policies than they had held only a day before.
As described earlier, the policies that the United States adopted during the CMC offer somewhat weaker evidence than the direct assessments of Soviet credibility discussed by United States decision makers.
Many factors affected the choice of United States policies during the crisis, only one of which was the credibility of Soviet threats.
Nevertheless, the second major decision by the Kennedy Administration—the decision to be conciliatory and trade the Jupiter missiles away —was clearly on the conciliatory end of the spectrum of options and, as such, is much more consistent with the predictions of the power/interest hypothesis than the reputation hypothesis.
Gaddis agrees with my interpretation that the Cordier letter, along with the evidence from the tapes of the Ex Comm meetings, show that the President was repeatedly pushing for the trade, suggests strongly that he would have done the public trade if necessary.
See Gaddis, We Now Know, 271. 64 have had little credibility left when the CMC began.
Bluffing and backing down during crises had been Khrushchev’s modus operandi since 1958.
But when United States decision makers assessed Soviet credibility during the missile crisis, they were united in their conviction that the Soviets were quite resolved.
In fact, American decision makers considered the Soviet threat to risk a major war in 1962 to be more credible then Soviet threats to do this in any of the recent Berlin Crises.
In direct contrast to the predictions of the reputation hypothesis, and in line with the predictions from the power/interests hypothesis, Soviet credibility grew from 1958-62.
First, throughout the crisis, United States leaders were focused on Berlin and obsessed with U.S. credibility and reputation, but they never connected past Soviet actions in Berlin with Soviet reputation.
The Ex Comm worried constantly about how United States actions in Cuba would affect United States credibility in Berlin, but no one ever asked what past Soviet actions in Berlin revealed about Soviet credibility in Cuba.
Second, United States decision makers were remarkably unified in their assessments of Soviet credibility throughout the crisis.
There were plenty of disagreements among the members of the Ex Comm—some decision makers favored more hawkish policies than the group selected, and others wanted the United States to adopt even more-dovish policies than they did.
But despite the differences within the group, they shared a common view that the Soviets were highly credible, were unlikely to bend to United States coercion, and would retaliate against United States allies if the United States used force against Cuba.
I wouldn’t be talking to anybody about it.” . 65 virtually no dissent against this view.
