PRATT United States Declaration ( In letter of President Kennedy on Ootober 27 and of Presiisr Khrushchev and President Kennedy on October 28, 1962, firxa undertakings were iscde regarding the settlemnt of the Cuban crisis.
The USSR would agree to renove from Cuba, under appropriate United Hations observation and supervision, all weapons systems capable of offensive use and would undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba.
The President also expressed his confidence that other nations of the Western Hemisphere would bs prepared to do likewise.
To* United States notes the statement made by the Soviet Union that all msdiun and intermediate range missiles, all nuclear weapons *u.i components have been removed from Cuba,"" that all IL-28 bomber aircraft will be removed by December 20th, and that all sites for ( edium range and intermediate range missiles have been disn^antled.
It notes also that the USSR has stated its intention to withdraw all military units and personnel plaoed there for the servicing or guarding of these weapons systems.
The United States notes further the Btatehients of the USSR that no weapons capable of offensive use will be introduced into Cuba in the future.
The undertakings in the President's letter of Ootober 21, thsrt the United lationa wcaLd be enabled to verify the removal of missiles and bombers and the destruction of sites, and that United Hations safeguards would be agreed upon to ensure against further introduction into Cuba of weapons systems capable of offensive use, have not been fulfilled.
The undertakings u 'kThe undertakings stated herein do sot alter or impair the rights and obligations contained in the United nations Charter, £p£J the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, or other treaties to ^B*oth off which the United States is a party.
United Nations obaarvation and supervision, all '^sapcna zj^:-:u3 capable of offensive U38 end would undertake, with, suifcabla aafaguarda, to halt tha further introduction of auch vacpona aystoos into Cuba.
DECLASSIFY ■ <>0 EXCISE 00 DECLASSIFY In PAI^ \ ).02NY Non-responsive Info.
A niniaua inspection procedure ::as. however, arr*"" f ;.->o]-.eratica vlth thj US3H, undav :z\v* ur.i:ad St^o naval '•• . n#&V ttfflS 53** ^ 3 hava -.--scsivad j)\:~r. v-:.n •';!-'. 1 vorifiaa""«:ior. that Soviet vassals leaving Cuba fcavs j-r-.ried wvsav t-ie ^-""aber of aissil33 which the USSR had certified to the United States is adding been in Cuba.
