PUB TYPE Guides Classroom Teacher EDRS PRICE EDRS Price MF01/PC01 Plus Postage.
Both countries feared that one would target the other with atomic warheads placed on missiles.
Fear of a nuclear holocaust occupied the thinking of many people as they went about their daily activities.
As a member of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council during President John F Kennedy's administration, you are familiar with these fears that U.S. security could be so compromised or even lost by the presence of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles in the hands of enemies and possibly targeted at United States cities.
Today, October 16, 1962, you receive a memo from the President's office that a U-2 airplane flyover has provided aerial photographs of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Your task is to advise President Kennedy about an appropriate and effective United States response to the apparent Soviet missile installation in Cuba.
Your duty is to prepare a policy brief with recommendations for United States reaction to the news from the U-2 airplane.
A policy brief contains background information to support a particular position which you recommend to the President.
This activity plan outlines the process for implementing the task; provides an extensive resource list; gives learning advice; discusses evaluation; and presents reflection and conclusion questions.
The teacher notes give grade level/unit; discuss California history/social studies standards; state a lesson purpose; suggest length of class periods; and list teacher resources.
The plan also outlines detailed teaching steps and suggests lesson extensions.
Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made from the original document.
TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION CENTER 2 Points of view or opinions stated in this document do not necessarily represent 1 official OERI position or policy.
OR NOT TO BE:"" THE United States RESPONSE TO THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Introduction During the post-World War II era, the relationship between the former Allies and now superpowersth( States and the Soviet Union--has grown increasingly strained.
Both countries fear that the other will tar, enemy with atomic warheads placed on missiles and perhaps launch those weapons at the slightest prov American civilians are engaged in sky watching to provide warning that missiles are on the way.
Schoo are taught to ""duck and cover"" to ""protect"" themselves from an attack.
The generation born in the late 1 in the 1950s has become known as the first atomic or nuclear generation.
Fear of a nuclear holocaust oc thinking of many people as they go about their daily activities.
Some individuals and families even are l costly fallout shelters in cellars or backyards.
As a member of EX -COMM, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council during Preside Kennedy's Administration, you are very familiar with these fears that United States' security could be s( compromised or even lost by the presence of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles in the hands o ""enemies"" and possibly targeted at United States cities.
Now that the 1960s have arrived, you have noticed that international incidents such as the seizure of the government of Cuba by Fidel Castro, The Bay of Pigs 3 BEST COPY AVAILABLE the construction of the Berlin Wall seem to be occurring frequently.
It, together with the rumors circulating in Washington convince you that something very significant is afoot.
Aerial photographs of U-2 flyover Cul provide compelling evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Declassified January 15, 1989, this document reveals details of a proposed overthrow of Castro. htfi:/lwww:gwu.editY416-diChii4nsa/publications/cmc/cmcdocl.html 4 The Task You are a member of EX-COMM, the Executive Committee of the United States National Security Council (NC including members of the upper echelon of the intelligence community.
Your task is to advise Presideni about an appropriate and effective United States response to the apparent Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
TI President will address the nation and the world on Monday, October 22, 1962, revealing the existence Soviet missile capacity in Cuba and detailing the United States response.
Your duty is to prepare a policy brief your recommendations for the United States reaction to the U2's news.
A policy brief contains background infon support a particular position which you will recommend to the President.
You will read from this I important meeting, or possibly a series of meetings, in which you make the President aware of the resul research.
You and the other members of EX-COMM will present your briefs to President Kennedy on October 2( Following this presentation, there will be a debate on the primary and secondary issues involved in draf United States response to the potential missile threat.
For specific requirements the brief must meet, see Student Handout #2 which is at the end of the section of this lesson.
This committee is chaired by John F Kennedy, to discuss and list the information you need to know to properly address the task.
Since there is not enough time for each member of Ex-COMM to research everything, it will be necessary each member to do a piece of the research.
Then, EX-COMM will discuss the kinds of information that each member of EX-COMM brings to the table.
Include the information in your brief statements of the question involved in th crisis.
You should expect your perceptions of the question to change as more information become available.
This listing of Need-to-know Questions will form the first page of your brief.
Remember, you are arguing for an historical position from a particular point of view.
Ex-COMM will agree on a problem statement and then have a debate 6 the possible responses to the problem.
Organize and write the speech that the President will give to the nation on October 22,191 7.
Resources The following World Wide Web addresses will provide you with detailed and useful information to get started.
Remember that your research time is limited and that you may use search engines such as Yaho AltaVista to locate specific information beyond what is provided below.
You will learn much about team crisis-management, nuclear warheads and nuclear threats, damage control using careful writing and speaking, constructing a logical and cohesive argument and problem-solving.
Keep in mind that there is a deadline and that research time on the computer during class time limited.
Careful use of words and ideas must dominate your brief and your presentation/debate to the committee.
Your opinion means very little unless it is supported with solid evidence/reasoning.
If you are new to the Internet, and especially to computers, ask questions of teammates who ha some of this knowledge.
Your teacher is also playing a role in this simulation--the role of observer/coach/advisor.
Feel I to ask for help, especially with the Internet, but not for solutions.
The Ex-COMM will develop a rubric to evaluate each member's contribution to advising President.
The students in the class will also use the rubric to assess each team's contribution to the fina President Kennedy's speech.
Reflection Now that we have simulated this most difficult period in history, it is time to reflect on our experience Ex-COMM member and to write some notes for our memoirs.
Describe the sequence of events during the last two weeks of October, 1962, in as much detail as : Describe the quality and quantity of your contribution to the team effort.
Background information from your perspective and relevant to the crisis at hand.
Your rating of the severity of the crisis and a rationale for your rating.
Include a Need-to-Know page and include various statements of the problem.
Students will simulate or at least complete some research on one of the most important two-week perio( American History.
Five to eight class periods of research and 4 class periods to simulate EX-COMM's meetings/debates/creation of speech for Kennedy.
Varying the team configuration from one committee members having research aides to multiple EX-COMMs will alter the time allotments needed.
If studen some or all of their research outside of class, the research time would be unnecessary.
The number of a( may also be changed in order to alter the time constraints.
This process could also be shortened to two ( students research out of class and if only the EX-COMM debate is performed.
The Missiles of October is a made-for-television drama of the actual EX-COMM meetings durir crisis.
It may be shown before or after the simulation or be assigned as homework and/or extra cr.
Teacher asks class to imagine the most horrible crisis the world might face.
Allow them to express their fears and to separate what they know about such from what they do not know.
Narrow discussion to the idea of a nuclear threat/end-of-world scenario.
F class consider how a government crisis management team might try to avert such a crisis.
Students should be familiar with the concept of War, the origins of the superpowers, communism and the Red Scare.
The student resources mentioned above are fairly equal beginning places for the students so they sho encouraged to start with them.
Because any class probably has students with a wide range of knowledge and abilities, groups should be formed by the teacher.
Take time to learn about student computer knowledge and usag( the World Wide Web.
At least one person in each group must be able to use Netscape Navigator Explorer to get around the Web.
Simply playing with the Web is very different from doing resear on-line.
Students may teach themselves much of this knowledge while doing this project, but the2 will not be efficient immediately.
Help them increase their ability to hit the needed targets by providing instruction in keyword and phrase searching.
Encourage students to take the time to re the search instructions that each engine requires.
Also try to place students with learning/language deficiencies with more capable students.
Ask them to use a scale of 1 to 4 with 1 being the lowest point and 4 the highest.
So, ask them to suggest what a student would do tc earn a 4 for historical research.
Focus on products since interior motivation cannot be observed al therefore evaluated by others.
Doing this step, though it will take some time, will most likely produce a higher quality product/performance than skipping it.
Be sure students have a provisional but clear understanding of what the problem is and what th need to know.
Help students to create a speech that is appropriate to the 1960s and that contains a clear Ameri response to the crisis.
Help the students work out an efficient way to write the speech their JFK will give.
Use the questions in the Reflection and Conclusion sections of this unit to discuss what student learned in terms of historical content and in terms of crisis management and team process.
Information Literacy Skills Students should have some computer literacy skills before attempting this unit or they will waste too ml valuable time learning to do the research component.
The teacher should alert the librarian to make available materials on this topic.
Specific skills addressed include defining a problem; planning a research strategy or strategies; judging the quality of information/resources located; organization of information into a position; creation of an argument or series of reasons to back up a position; use of information for persuasive purposes.
Lesson Extensions The following suggestions can be done by the entire class, by different groups, as extra credit or make-up assignments for students absent during the simulation.
They can be an addition to the simulation or can be performed afterward.
Have students conduct an oral history interview with one or more people who were of various agf this crisis.
It is important to instruct students in proper oral history techniques.
Have individuals or groups research the responses of other than intelligence community and/or governmental individuals and report to the class.
See the SCORE 10th grade Unit , World War II and its Consequences. after it is posted on the W4 mirror unit on the international responses of countries or individuals to the crisis.
Have the class discuss how a crisis like this, if it occurred today, would be similar or different.
Carol Krup Poly High School,Riverside Unified School District SCORE-CH/SSP Technology Academy 1997 Email: ckrupgs-net.com Reviewed for accuracy by Dr.
